REFLECTIONS UPON LEARNING, Wherein is shown the INSUFFICIENCY Thereof, in its
several Particulars.

In order to evince the Usefulness and Necessity, OF REVELATION.

The Second Edition Corrected.

By a GENTLEMAN.

LONDON, Printed for A. Bosvile, at the Dial against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. MDCC.

PREFACE.
A Work of this nature, that would so hardly find a Patron, will stand the more
in need of a Preface; Men that write in commendation of Learning, usually seek
out some great Genius to prefix to their Book, whom they make an Instance of
all the Learning and Perfections that are described in it; were I to choose a
Patron, consistently with my design, I must Compliment him with the weakness of
his Parts and shortness of his Understanding, which is such a Compliment, as I
presume I shall willingly be excused from. But th^n a Preface will be the more
necessary to give an account of my undertaking, which is rather to enquire into
the abuses, and to show the insufficiency of Humane Learning, than wholly to
descredit its use. No Man ever did this, without disp^raging his own
Understanding, nor decry'd Learning but for want of it; it having been an old
Observation, that will hold perpetually, That Knowledge has no Enemies except
the Ignorant. An attempt of this nature would be utterlly impracticabl^, for
either it would be well performed, and then it must be done by reasons borrowed
from the Stores of Learning, by which means by reasoning against Learning, we
must at the same time reason for it, and all our Arguments must return upon us;
or if the performance were unlearned, it would be to no purpose, and might as
well be let alone. This then is no part of my design.

All that I intend, is, to take it down from its supposed heights, by exposing
the vanity of it in several particulars, its Insufficiency in the rest, and I
believe I might say, its difficulties, in all: And there is the more need of
this in an Age, in which it seems to be too much magnified, and where Men are
fond of Learning almost to the loss of Religion. Learning is our great Diana,
nothing will pass with our Men of Wit and Sense, but what is agreeable with the
nicest Reason, and every Man's Reason is his own Understanding: For if you
examine them to the bottom, these mighty Pretenders have no truer grounds to go
upon than other Men, only they affect a liberty of judging according to
themselves, and (if they could be allowed it) of making their own judgment a
Standard of others. They plead for right Reason, but they mean their own, and
talk of a reasonable Religion, whilst their own false Notions are mistaken for
it; and while they seek the Goddess, they embrace a Cloud. In the mean time,
they take us of from our surest Guide, Religion suffers by their Contentions
about it, and we are in danger of running into Natural Religion.

Where these things will end, God only kmows, it is to be suspected, they may
at last end in the thing we fear, and may bring us about to that Religion, for
which of all others, we have the most abhorrence: For after Men have tried the
force of natural Reason in matters of Religion, they will soon be sensible of
its weakness, and after they have run themselves out of breath and can center
no where, they will be glad of any hold where they think they can find it, and
rather than be always wandering, they will take up with an Infallible Guide. I
am unwilling to entertain such hard Thoughts of a Neighboring Church, as to
think they are sowing Discord among us to that purpose, but I much fear, we are
doing their Work for them, and by our own Divisions, are making way for a Blind
Faith, and Implicit Obedience; And may it never be said, That as Learning was
one great Instrument under God, to bring about a Reformation, so the Abuse of
it, by the Divine Permission, has brought us back to the same place from whence
we came, and that our Enemies have done that by secret Engines, and Domestic
Distractions, which by open A^tempts they were never able to do. It is the
sense of such Dangers and such Abuses ^ha has drawn from me these Reflections,
and has inclined me to harder Thoughts, and possibly, to say, harsher things of
some parts of Learning, than will be agreeable to the Humor of the Age, and yet
if any one who thinks thus of me, will ^nly suspend his Censure so long, till I
draw my Conclusion, I am willing to hope, that the goodness of the End will
a^one for the hardest things, that shall be said in the Book.

I am sure I am not singular in this Design, one of the first Restorers of
Letters, Ple. Mirand. Exam. Van. Doct. Gent. Op. vol. 2. p. 467.
A Man noted for his Piety as well as Parts, has writ a Book to this purpose,
but it having been principally levelled against Aristotle's Philosophy, which
is now so much out of Credit, that it rather wants an Advocate to defend it,
than a new Adversary to run it down, the Book it self is as much out of use, as
the Philosophy is, that it designs to decry. He was followed in his Design by
Lodovicus Vives De Corrupt. Art. Op. vol. 1. p. 221.
in better Latin, and with greater Eloquence, but Vives's main Talent having
been in Philology, and having been less conversant in Philosophical Matters,
his Book is both very defective as to the Particulars it treats of, and being
suited to the Ancient Literature, is less agreeable to the Genius of our Age.
What Cornelius Agrippa De van. Scient.
has writ upon this Subject is chiefly declamatory, and fitter for Schoolboys,
than of any just Moment or Consideration in a serious Enquiry. And a French
Book La vanite des Sciences, Ams. 88.
lately published upon the same Subject and with the same Title, though well and
piously Writ, yet has nothing in it of what I expected, and is rather a Sermon,
than a Treatise of Science. None of these Authors, nor any other I have yet met
with, have come up full to my purpose, nor have I been able to borrow much help
from them; where I have, I have quoted them, and if in any other things we
happen to agree, without remembering them, it is a fault of Memory, and I make
this acknowledgement once for all.

Sir W. Temple, and Mr. Wotton, have turned their Pens the other way, and have
been so much taken up with describing the Beauties and Excellencies of
Learning, as to have less occasion to discover its Faults; though it was scarce
possible, whilst they crossed one another's Opinion, either to commend Ancient
Learning, without entering into the Defects of the Modern, or to prefer the
Moderns, without censuring the Ancients; so that by consequence though not
professedly, they have fallen into this Controversy. I have, as far as
possible, avoided saying any thing that has been observed by them already,
(though perhaps this may be thought my fault, and I may thereby have said worse
things of my own) and if in any other things I have contradicted them, I have
done it in so tender a manner, as neither of them could blame, were they yet
both Living. I have treated all Men with Decency and Respect, except Mons. Le
Clerc, who has not deserved such Treatment. I have seen little of Monsieur
Perault, and a considerable part both of his and Mr. Wotton's Books, come not
within my Account of Learning; for I have nothing to say to Sculpture,
Painting, Architecture, Gardening, Agriculture, etc. which I take to be more
properly of Mechanical Consideration. But if Learned Men will needs include
these likewise within the compass of Learning, it shall give me no disturbance:
The Bounds of Learning are of late wonderfully enlarged, and for oug^t I know,
Mr. H's Trade Papers may pass in time for a Volume of Learning.

Not that there is any need of swelling the Account, for Learning is already
become so Voluminous, that it begins to sink under its own weight, Books crowd
in daily and are heaped upon Books, and by the Mul^itude of them, both distract
our Minds, and discourage our Endeavors. Those that have been writ upon
Aristotle, are almost innumerable; In a very few Centuries, from Albertus
Magnus, till a short time after Luther, there have been Twelve Thousand
Authors, that have either Commented upon his Books, or followed him in his
Opinions: This we have from good Authority, though the Author that reports and
censures it, had surely forgot, that he himself has strengthened the Objection,
by publishing a gross Volume, only to give an Account of Aristotle, his
Writings, and Followers. V. Pr. Patric. Discus. Peripat. ^. 10. p. 145. Bas.
Fol.
But however their Number may be in the Old Philosophy, I believe we may reckon
by a modest Computation, that since that time to ours, we may have had double
the Number of Authors in the New; which though some may look upon as an Argument
of Learned Times; for my part I have quite different Thoughts of Things, and
must needs esteem it the great Mischief of the Age we live in, and cannot but
think we should have more Learning, had we fewer Books.

I have notwithstanding adventured to throw in one to the Account, but it is a
very small one, and writ with an honest design of lessening the Number: I
propose neither Credit nor Advantage, (for I hope to take effectual care to be
in the Dark) if I may do some little Service to Religion, and no Disservice to
Learning, I have my End. I am inclined to hope, the Treatise may be of some
use, as an Historical Account, in observing the Defects, and marking the Faults
that are to be avoided by Beginners, and, possibly, it may afford some Hints to
Wiser Men. As it is, I offer it to the Public, if it proves useful, I shall
have much Satisfaction in my self, and if otherwise, I shall be very willing to
be made a fresh Instance of that which I pretend to prove, The Weakness of
Humane Understanding.

CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. INtroduction P. 1 2. Of Languages 7 3. Of Grammar 19 4. Of Rhetoric
and Eloquence 32 5. Of Logic 51 6. Of Moral Philosophy 64 7. Of Natural
Philosophy 76 8. Of Astronomy 87 9, Of Metaphysics 99 10. Of History 106 11. Of
Chronology 121 12. Of Geography 135 13. Of Civil Law 146 14. Of Canon Law 160
15. Of Physic 172 16. Of Critical Learning 187 17. Of Oriental Learning, Jewish
and Arabian 204 18. Of Scholiastic Learning 215 19. The Conclusion 228 20. The
Appendix 239
Books Printed for A. Bosvile at the Dial against St. Dunstan's Church, in
Fleet Street.
THe History of Portugal, from the first Ages of the World, to the late
Revolution, under King John IV. in the Year 1640. Written in Spanish by Emanul
de Faria ^ Sousa, Translated and continued down to the Year School. By Captain
John Stevens. In 8 vo.

Letters of the Cardinal Duke de Richlieu, great Minister of State to Lewis
XIII. of France, wherein is contained several Secret Memoirs and Instructions
relating to our late Civil Wars in England, in particular, as well as to the
Affairs of Europe in general. Never before Printed. Translated from the French
by Mr. Thomas Brown.

The Memoirs of the Count de Roc^fort, containing an Account of what past most
considerable under the Ministry of Cardinal Richlieu, and Cardinal Mazarine.
Made English from the French. The second Edition.

The Life of Cornelius Van Tromp Lieutenant Admiral of Holland and
West-Friesland, containing many remarkable Passages relating to the War between
England and Holland.

The Christian Belief, wherein is Asserted and Proved, that as there is nothing
in the Gospel contrary to Reason, yet there are some Doctrines in it above
Reason; and these being necessarily enjoined us to believe, are properly called
Mysteries, in answer to a Book entitled, Christianity not Mysterious. The
second Endition. Price 2 s.

The Ground and Foundation of Natural Religion, discovered in the Principal.
Branches of it, in opposition to the prevailing Notions of the Modern
Scepticks, and Latitudinarians. With an Introduction concerning the necessity
of revealed Religion. These two last by Tho. Beconsal, B. D. and Fellow of
Brasen-Nose-College, Oxford.

A Discourse of Conscience, showing what Conscience is, and what are its Arts
and Offices, Published ^hiefly for the benefit of the unlearned, though it may
also be useful to others.

REFLECTIONS UPON LEARNING, etc.
CHAP. I.
SInce I first begun to think, I have always had a mean opinion of two things,
Humane Understanding, and Humane Will; The weakness of the latter is a
confessed thing; we all of us feel it, and most Men complain of it, but I have
scarce yet met with any, that would own the weakness of his Understanding: And
yet they both spring from the same corrupt Fountain; and the same cause, that
has derived Contagion upon the Will, has spread Darkness upon the
Understanding; and however Men may please themselves with an opinion of their
own Wisdom, it is plain, the wisest Men know little, and they that are fullest
of themselves and boast the highest, do usually see least, and are only wise
for want of thinking.

We have had a mighty Controversy of late betwixt the Old and New
Philosophers, and great inquiry has been made, whether the preference is to be
given to the Ancient or Modern Learning; For my part I will not venture to
engage in so warm a Controversy, but it is some argument to me, that we have
not over much of the thing, otherwise we should know better where to find it,
and if I would say any thing, I should be of opinion, that neither side has
reason to boast. What the Wisdom of the Ancients was, is not so easily known at
this distance, by those Specimens of it that are left us, it does not appear to
have had any thing in it very extraordinary, or which might not be attained to
by their Posterity without standing upon their Shoulders; Have not some dark
and oracular expressions been esteemed enough to entitle a Man to the
Reputation of Wisdom? And was not any odd and sometimes extravagant opinion, if
subtilely maintained, sufficient to set a Man at the Head of a Party, and make
him the Author of a Sect of Philosophers? The most Ancient Philosophy was
usually wrapped up and involved in Symbols and Numbers, which as far as they can
be explained, do not contain any thing very mysterious, but it was the interest
of these Great Men to keep a distance and be always in the Clouds, that they
might be thought profound and procure a veneration by the obscurity of their
Writings. They that have writ more plainly, have (at least some of them) been
plain to an objecti^n, and have said little more, than what good Sense improved
by Observation and Thought, would suggest to most Men without reading; To say
nothing here of the vast variety of Opinions amongst them, which will fall in
more properly in the thread of my Discourse; they did not agree in the first
Criterions of Truth, which they have made as many and as different as could
possibly be thought of and carried their differences so far, that it put the
Scepticks pretty early upon doubting of every thing, and at last brought them
to deny; that there was any such thing as Truth in the World.

The moderns have not yet gone so far, but they have made some advances, and
seem by pretty easy consequences to be leading us toward it: For since
Aristotle's Philosophy has been exploded in the Schools, under whom we had more
peace, and possibly almost as much Truth as we have had since, we have not been
able to fix any where, but have been wavering from one Opinion to another. The
Platonic Philosophy was first introduced with the Greek Learning, and
wonderfully obtained for some time, among the Men of Polite Letters; but
however Divine it might seem at first and for that reason was entertained more
favorably, it was found upon a short trial to lead to Heresy, and so went off
again under a Cloud. The moderns were now wise enough to set up for themselves,
and were more pleased with their own inventions, than with the dry Systems of
the Old Philosophers. Several attempts were made unsuccessfully, nor had they
set out long or done much, till they had run themselves into such a maze, That
M. Des Carts thought it necessary to sit down and doubt, whether they were not
all out of the way: His doubts increased upon him by doubting, and he must have
continued under them, had he not by a strange turn of Thought struck Evidence
out of Uncertainty; for he found such strength and conviction in doubting, that
he brings an Argument from it to prove a first Truth, The reality of his own
Existence: He likewise borrowed great light from Ideas, which have been since
improved, by comparing their agreement and disagreement with one another, and
with the Reality of things; and since that conformity has not been evident
enough, we have been consulting the Divine (...) or Ideal World, to fetch
thence more perfect Ideas, and are at last come to see all things in God; A
way, which could it be as easily made out, as it is asserted, I do not see,
what we could desire further, for we shall hardly see more clearly in a state
of Glory: But all these particulars we shall meet with, as we go along.

What has been said of Philosophy, is true in other sorts of Learning, and
however we may be puffed up with vain conceits, and may flatter our selves with
discoveries of New Worlds of Learning, and fancy there is little bid from the
profound Search and accurate Enquiries of so learned an Age, to me it seems we
are yet much in the Dark, that many of our discoveries are purely imaginary,
and that the state of Learning is so far from perfection, much more from being
the Subject of Oftentation, That it ought to teach us Modesty and keep us
Humble. To this end, I propose to trace it in its several Branches; and were
the management of my Argument answerable to the truth of it, I should not doubt
of giving satisfaction to impartial Readers.

CHAP. II.
Of Languages.
LAnguages being the Channels by which most of our Learning is conveyed, it is
necessary to the attaining of Knowledge, that these should be kept clear and
open; if the Streams in these run muddy, or are corrupted, all the knowledge
that is conveyed by them, must be obscure: words at the best are no very
certain signs of things, they are liable to ambiguity, and under that ambiguity
are often subject to very different meanings; and though this, as far as it is
the common condition of Speech must be submitted to, and is no objection in
plain Laws and easy Precepts, that are intelligible enough in any Language,
yet in matters of Science, it is much otherwise; these are nice things; the
strict meaning is to be observed in them; nor can we mistake a word without
losing the Notion.

The first Language, the Hebrew, was very plain and simple, (a good Argument of
its being an original) consisting of few Roots, and those very simple and
uncompounded: it seems fitted for the purposes, for which it was designed,
which was not so much to improve Men's knowledge, as to better their lives, and
this end it did perfectly answer: Indeed the Ancient Tongues are generally the
most uncompounded, and consequently more plain and easy; but then whilst
things continue thus, as Languages were easy, so they were defective, and
therefore as from necessity Men were put upon improving Speech; so particularly
as Arts increased, Languages grew up with them, and Men were put upon coining
new words to express the new Ideas they had of things. This has enlarged the
Bounds of Language, and swollen it to such a height, that its Redundancy is now a
greater Inconvenience, than the defectiveness of it was before.

The Inconveniences from Languages are chiefly two, First, Their variety, and
Secondly, Their mutability. 1. Were there only one Language in the World,
Learning would be a much easier thing, than it now is; Men might then
immediately apply to things, whereas now a great part of our time is spent in
Words, and that with so little advantage, that we often blunt the edge of our
understanding, by dealing with such rough and unpleasant tools: For however apt
Men may be to overvalue the Tongues, and to think they have made a
considerable progress in Learning, when they have once overcome these, yet in
reality there is no internal worth in them, and Men may understand a thousand
Languages without being the wiser, unless they attend to the things, that they
deliver: It is in order to this that they are to be learnt, and it is the hard
condition of Learning, that in this respect, it cannot be without them; This
labor must necessarily be devoured in our way to Knowledge, and every Man must
dig in this Mine, that hopes to be Master of the Treasure, it conceals; much
dross is to be separated, and many difficulties to be overcome.

When I speak of the variety of Languages, I do not mean that all of them are
necessary, at least not to all sorts of Learning, were this our case, we could
have few complete Scholars; but though all of them be not necessary, yet some of
them are allowed to be so, particularly such as are styled Learned; and there
is such a connection among most Tongues of the same kind, that it is hard to
excel in any one, without some tolerable skill in the rest. This is pretty
plain in the Greek and Latin, and the reason is clear in the Eastern Tongues,
where the affinity is greater. Two of the Languages that in their different
kinds pretend to most Learning, (I do not here inquire, how truly) are the
Arabic and Greek, and it happens not well, that these two are the most copious
and difficult. They that have skill V. Walt. Proleg. 14. 6.
in the first assure us, that it abounds in Synonymous Words, that it has five
hundred words for a Lion, and almost a thousand for a Sword, which are enough
to make an entire Language, and almost as many as all the Radicals in the
Hebrew Tongue. And as for the Greek, which is uncontestedly Learned, most know
how copious it is, for though its Radicals are not so many as might be imagined,
which some have computed not much to exceed three thousand, Wilk. R. Chapter cap.
ult.
yet this is abundantly made up in its Compositions, and however simple it may
be in its Roots, it spreads very widely in its Branches: If we add to this, its
many different dialects, and all the various Inflections of Nouns and Verbs,
which diversifie words, and distinguish them from themselves, this will swell
the account much higher, and make it almost an Infinite thing. So that what
from the variety of Languages, and the Copia of those that are reputed Learned,
one great obstruction lies in the way of Learning.

The other inconvenience is from their mutability, for whatever their number
may be, yet were their nature fixed and their condition stated, the measures
that are taken from them might be more steady; but when to the multitude of
them, we add their mutability, we are still under greater difficulties. Words,
like other things, are subject to the common Fate of vicissitude and change;
they are always in Flux, ebbing and flowing, and have scarce any fixed period:
for being governed by Custom, which it self depends upon one of the most
unconstant things in the World, the humor of the People, it is scarce possible
it should be otherwise: no Prince ever gave Laws to these, Caesar who gave Laws
to Rome, could give none to its Language, and it was looked upon as the height
of flattery in that Sycophant, that offered to Complement him with such an
extravagant Power; in this Custom is only absolute. We can scarce have a better
instance of this, than in the Tongue we are now speaking of, the Latin; that
Language that was spoke soon after the Foundation of Rome, was perfectly
unintelligible in the Age of Augustus; nay, some hundred years after that
period, and not 150, before Cicero's time, the Tongue that was then vulgar, can
hardly now be understood without a Comment. This is evident from the
Inscription on the Columna Rostrata, that is yet in being, and a Copy of which
has been given us by Bishop Walton Proleg. p. 5.
. In Cicero's Age, that Tongue was in its full height, it had been growing up
till then, ever after it was declining, and had only one short Stage of
Perfection. They that came after were observed to write with some mixture, even
Livy had his Patavinity, which is most probably understood of a tincture from
his Country Education.

Successively on, they were more corrupt, Paterculus, Seneca, etc. still writ
with a greater mixture, till at last either by mixing with Foreign Nations, in
sending Colonies, or by the breaking in of Barbarous People upon them, the
Language sunk into decay and became utterly Barbarous.

The Greek Tongue had the same Fortune with the Latin, though it continued
vulgar longer; for as Greece did assist the Romans in giving perfection to
their Speech, (they having not begun to cultivate Arts, or polish their
Language, till they had subdued Greece) so they received a great tincture and
corruption from their Conquerors, either first, when they became an accession
to their Empire, as appears from those that writ in that Tongue after the
reduction of Greece; or after, when the Empire was translated to
Constantinople, and that City became new Rome, and the Seat of Empire. From
that time, the Greek sunk apace, as must needs be expected, where the Latin
was the Court Language, and made use of in their Laws and Courts of Judicature,
and the Greek in a manner confined to the vulgar. In Iustinian's time, who was
not very long after Constantine, it is plain, it was much corrupted, as is
evident, from the Acts of the Councils of these times, and the Acclamations of
the People and Clergy on such occasions, Instances whereof are given by Du
Fresne, in his Learned Preface to his Greek Glossary. 7.
. As we descend lower the corruption is greater, as is shown by the same
Learned Person: The reduction of Constantinople by the Franks was one other
great blow, the last and fatal stroke was given by that Deluge of Barbarism, in
the Inundation of the Turks, who bore down all before them. What the condition
of it now is, may be seen in Crusi^s, Turcograe. p. 99. 224, etc,
whence will appear not only the present corrupt State of that Tongue, but also
the Reasons from which it proceeds, either from the mixture of the Latin, the
Turco-Arabic, and other foreign Tongues; or by dividing Words that should be
conjoined, or running two Words into one that should be divided, or by other
faults in Orthography, that is now in great neglect among them. And what is
most melancholy in the account, is, That even at Athens, that was once Renowned
for Learning and Eloquence, their Tongue is now more corrupt and barbarous,
than in any other part of Greece; to that degree, as is there taken notice of,
that it would draw tears from any one to observe ib. p. 99.
the miserable change. In all parts of Greece, their Speech is so far
degenerated from its ancient purity, that as a Learned Greek cannot thoroughly
understand the modern vulgar Tongue, much less is the Ancient Greek understood
by the moderns.

Now under this great multiplicity, as well as change, what difficulties are we
to struggle with, and what uncertainties are to be overcome? Our Words are so
many, and so uncertain, that there is both great difficulty in becoming Masters
of them, and after that in fixing and determining their Sense: We are to trace
them up to their first Originals, and afterward to pursue them down to their
last Decay, to mark their several times and periods, in all which they much
vary, and are often capable of different meanings, or their true meaning is
very obscure. There is only one way of coming at their meaning, after they
become dead Languages and cease to be vulgar, by the Books that have been writ
in them; but besides the want we are in of some of these, and defects in those
we have, though they might serve well enough for common ends and uses, yet the
things we are now enquiring after, are matters of Science, which are abstruse
things, and not so easy to be expressed in such proper terms, as are not liable
to be mis-understood; Such particularly are Terms of Art, that must needs be
obscure as being too comprehensive, and taking in more notions than one under
the same Word: Which though of good use, as being designed to make knowledge more
compendious, yet have frequently turned the other way, by requiring large
Comments, that have been often writ upon a single word, and perhaps after all,
have left it more doubtful than it was before.

Dictionaries indeed have been called in to our assistance, which have been
compiled with much pains and in great plenty, not only for Words, but for
Sciences and Arts, but besides the no great agreement that is among them, they
are swollen to such a height, and become so numerous, that those very Books that
were designed as helps, now breed confusion, and their Bulk and Number is
become a Burden. Such alone as have been composed for the French Tongue (which
as yet is no Learned Language, though it bids pretty fair for it) would fill a
Library, and only one of those, and that not the largest, has been the work of
forty Years, though it was carried on by the united labors of the French
Academy; after all which care, it has not escaped censure but has been thought
to want Correction; and does thereby show how impossible it is to set Bounds,
or give a Standard to Language, for which purpose it was designed: Not only
every Tongue, but every Faculty has met with this help, Dictionaries are become
a great part of learning, and nothing remains, but that as it has fared with
Bibliotheques, which were grown so numerous, that V. Ant. Teisser. v. Ph. Lab.
a Bibliotheca Bibliothecarum was thought a necessary work, so Dictionaries
should have the like service done them; a Dictionarium Dictionariorum, might be
a work of some use, I am sure of great Bulk, and I wonder it has not been yet
undertaken.

To redress and heal all these inconveniences, an universal Remedy has indeed
been thought of, a Real Character and Philosophical Language, a work that has
been pursued of late with great application, and with some expectations of
success and advantage; But however plausible this may seem at a distance, it is
to be feared, it is only so in Theory, and that upon Trial, it will be found an
impracticable thing. For this Language being designed not to express words but
things, we must first be agreed about the nature of things, before we can fix
Marks and Characters to represent them, and I very much despair of such an
agreement. To name only one, when Bishop Wilkins first undertook this design,
Real. Char. Par. 2. v. 1.
Substance and Accidents were a received Division, and accordingly in ranking
things, and reducing them to Heads, (which is the great excellency of this
Design) He proceeds according to the order they stand in, of Substance and
Accidents, in the Scale of Praedicaments; but were he to begin now and would
suit his design to the Philosophy in vogue, he must draw a new Scheme and
instead of Accidents must take in Modes, which are very different from
Accidents both in Nature and Number. Bishop Wilkins was an extraordinary
Person, but very projecting, and I doubt this design may go along with his
Daedalus and Archimedes, and be ranked with his flying Chariot and voyage to
the Moon. The Divisions of Tongues was inflicted by God as a Curse upon humane
Ambition, and may have been continued since for the same reason; and as no
Remedy has been yet found, so it is most probable, it is not to be expected,
nor are we to hope to unite that which God has divided. The Providence of God
may have so ordered it for a check to Men's Pride, who are otherwise apt to be
building Babels, were there no difficulties to obstruct and exercise them in
their way.

CHAP. III.
Of Grammar.
THOUGH Grammar be looked upon by many as a trivial thing, and only the
Employment of our Youth, yet the Greatest Men have not thought it beneath their
care; Plato and Aristotle among the Greeks, and Caesar and Varro among the
Latins have treated of this Subject. In our times the Common Grammar that goes
under the name of Mr. Lily was done by some of the most considerable Men of the
Age; The English Rudiments by Dr. Colet Dean of Paul's, with a Preface to the
first Editions, directing its use by no less Man than Cardinal Wolsey; The most
Rational part, the Syntax, was writ or corrected Op. Tom. 1. p. 141.
by Erasmus, and the other parts by other hands: So that though Mr. Lily now
bears the name, which while living, he always modestly refused, yet it was
carried on by the joint endeavors of several Learned Men, and he perhaps had
not the largest share in that work.

Were there more of Caesar and Varro extant, they might be of good use to us in
our Enquiries, but all Caesar's Book on this Subject being lost, and only some
parts of Varro left, we want two good Helps: Tho from those short Specimens we
have of Caesar, we were not to expect too much from him; he has been quoted by
L. 19. c. 8.
A. Gellius with a doubtful Character, and twice or thrice L. 1. p. 69. 214.
Ed. Putsch.
by Chari^ius an Ancient Grammarian, and always to correct him, as he will seem
to deserve to any one who will take the pains to consult the particular places:
And as for Varro, his Books are chiefly about the Etymologies of words, which
are of no great use, being obscure and uncertain.

The following Grammarians are yet more defective, we have a large Collection
of them put out by Putschius, who (against the custom of most Editors, that
seldom used to speak disparagingly of their Authors) ingenuously confesses,
that some of them were scarce worth an Edition. And most of them having been
writ, either when Learning was low, or after Barbarism had begun to overflow
the Empire, it is no wonder, that they do not rise above their Level, or that
while they lay down Rules in this Art, they scarce write in tolerable Latin:
Priscian himself will be no exception to this, who notwithstanding his
strictness in giving Rules and severity in censuring others, has much ado to
preserve himself from Barbarism: Let any one read some of his first lines, he
will need go no farther to make a judgment.

Some of our Modern Critics have deserved well of this Art, who as they have
used more perspicuity, so they have writ with much greater Purity, than most of
the Ancient Grammarians have done: Valla, Erasmus, and our Linacer have taken
much pains and shown great Judgment in this matter; and yet after all, as if
nothing had been done, arises Sanctius, and after him Schioppius, and Correct
all that had gone before them. Cicero and Quinctilian were blind with these
Men, who make such discoveries, as never had been thought of, by any of the
Ancients; all Grammar before them was, Cloacina, polluted and full of mistakes;
theirs only is the true way, which they pretend is highly Rational, containing
few and easy Rules, and under these scarce any exceptions. Tho if this new
method be examined, it will be found as fallacious, and they as fallible as
other Men: Sanctius's great principle on which he goes, is, That Languages, and
particularly the Latin, are not purely arbitrary, or depending barely on use
and custom, but that an Analogy has been observed, and a reason may be given of
the Idioms of Tongues, and upon this he builds a Rational Grammar. This perhaps
might hold in some measure in the Hebrew, as far as its words were imposed upon
just Reasons; but in the Latin Tongue which he treats of, that was first formed
and afterward grew up in confusion; and under a People, while they were yet
Barbarous, we are not to expect such mighty Regularity. The Romans knew nothing
of Grammar, till the times of Ennius, when that Tongue was pretty well grown,
and consequently could have no great regard to it in forming their Language,
and therefore for any one now, to pretend to fix the Analogy of words, or to
reduce all under strict Rule, is to set bounds where they were never intended,
and to find a Reason that was never meant. Had Grammar been as ancient as
Languages, we might have proceeded in this manner, but it being invented only
as a help, and not framed originally as an Immutable rule, we must suit it to
our business as well as we can, but are not to expect, it should be uniform and
not liable to many exceptions.

To take a short view of some particulars, 1. As to Letters, we are not yet
agreed about their Original, which might be of use in fixing our Alphabets, for
tho the Greek letters, and from them the Latin, seem derived from the
Phoenician and these again from the ancient Hebrew, as has been attempted to be
shown, not only from History, but from the affinity of letters, by turning the
Hebrew Characters toward the Right hand, according to our way of reading; yet
there lies one great objection against this, That Cadmus who brought the
Phoenician, letters among the Greeks, is only said to have brought sixteen, and
therefore must have left some behind him, for the Phoenician or Hebrew Alphabet
was always fixed, and of the same length as now, since we have had any writing,
a standing Evidence of which we have in several Alphabetical Psalms and
Chapters. Were this more certain, it would help to determine our Alphabets,
both as to their Numbers and Powers, whereas now we are uncertain in both, and
there are great disputes among the Critics, as to some of the Elements,
whether they be letters or no.

(2.) In the Etymological or Analogical part, we labor under the same
difficulties; nor can it be otherwise, where Languages were so much the effect
of chance, and were not framed by any settled or established Rules. When Varro
writ his Book, De Lingua Latina, it is plain this Analogy was a disputable
thing, he brings several objections against, as well as reasons for it, and his
Instances are so many, and his objections so considerable that he must needs be
allowed to have left it doubtful. In the same Age, when a question was put by
Pompey to most of the Learned Men in Rome, V. A. Gell. l. 10. cap. 1.
concerning the Analogy of a very common word, they could come to no resolution
about it, though Cicero was one of the number, and so it was left undetermined.
And if the thing were so much controverted among them, who had better
opportunities of enquiry, as living nearer the Original, when many monuments of
Antiquity were left, and the Latin yet a living Language, among them; it must
needs be much more so to us, who live at this distance, and want many of their
helps: Our greatest light must be borrowed from their Books, and we can be only
more happy in the application. Accordingly we follow them pretty close, and are
much more directed by the custom-of Ancient and Approved Authors, than by the
reason of words that is perpetually varying. How many words are there agreeable
enough with Analogy, and of Modern use among learned Men, which yet, because
they are not used by the Ancients, are not only disliked, but are looked upon
by the Critics, as vitia Sermonis? Innumerable instances may be had De vit.
Sermon. sparsim.
in Vossius: few Men would be afraid to use, Incertitudo, Ingratitudo, and
other words of the like nature; there is nothing disagreeable in them, or
disproportionable to Speech; and yet because they have not been used by the
best Classic Authors, but have been seemingly avoided, when they came in their
way, and either paraphrased, or Greek words put in their room, they have been
exploded by our Modern Criti^s. The Anomalisms in words have been so many, and
the differences yet more among those that have treated of them, that some have
gone so far as to deny the thing it self, and to allow no Analogy either in the
Greek or Latin Tongue.

3. Grammar has fared no better in the constructive part, whether we will be
guided by Rules, or Authority of Best Authors; the number of Rules is become a
Burden, and the multitude of exceptions is yet more vexatious: If we will
believe Schioppius, there are five hundred Rules in our Common Grammars, in the
Syntax only of Nouns and Verbs and Participles, and scarce any of those without
their exceptions, and so proportionably in the other parts of Syntax; all which
must employ a great part of our time. Or if we will be directed by Authorities,
the Critics have been so unmercifully severe, that we scarce know, which to
follow: Cicero tho the most unexceptionable has not escaped their censure, he
has been pelted by them, and Valla and Erasmus have charged him with
Soloecisms. Diutius commorans Athenis -- erat animus ad te scriber^; and Quum
in animo haberem navigandi, Vid. Eras. Ciceron. Dial. Op. Tom. 1. P. 823. v.
Valla, L. 1. Cap. 25.
are noted passages to this purpose. And indeed tho Cicero be looked upon as a
Standard of Language with us, yet he was not so to those of his own Age;
Atticus L. 7. Ep. 3.
in an Epistle to him, charge him with false Latin, and being put upon a
vindication, he defends himself by the authority of Terence; so that whatever
Cicero be to us, Terence was then the better Authority. Neither of them sure
are unexceptionable, nor any other that we can meet with, tho we should carry
our search through the whole Set.

4. Pronunciation has been the Subject of great Debates, especially in the
Greek Tongue, the pronunciation of which, has been more neglected: And tho at
first view, it may seem a light thing, and hardly worth a Debate, yet the
neglect of it, has been of very ill consequence to that Tongue. For while the
Modern Greeks had little regard to the powers of their Letters, and mixed and
confounded the sounds of their Vowels and Diphthongs, and run most of them into
one, in their pronunciation, they came at last in many words, to write as they
spoke, which was one great occasion of the corruption of their Tongue. This
vicious way of speaking was brought by the exiled Greeks into Italy, and from
thence together with Learning, spread over the greatest part of Europe, till it
met with a check here in England, from two very Eminent Men, both of them
successively Professors in the University of Cambridge, Sir Thomas Smith, and
Sir John Cheek. And because the Controversy is not much known, and may afford
some light to the pronunciation of the Greek, I will give a brief account of
this Grammatical War.

It was in the latter end of Hen. VIII's Reign, that Smith and Cheek began to
observe the inconveniences in this sort of pronunciation; they saw that not
only the Beauty of the Language was lost in this way, but likewise its very
Spirit and Life were gone, by the loss of so many Vowels and Diphthongs, and
the Language become jejune and languid: In this way of speaking it, nothing of
numerosity appeared in the Ancient Orators and Rhetoricians, nor those flowing
Periods, for which they had been renowned in Old Greece; neither could they
themselves show their Eloquence, in their Orations or Lectures, for want of the
Beauty and variety of sounds. This put them upon thinking of a Reformation, V.
Chek De ling. Gr. pronunt. Disput. cum Steph. Wint. spars. v. Smith De pronun.
Ling. Gr.
and having consulted most of the Ancient Rhetoricians, and other Greek
Authors, who had treated of Sounds and finding sufficient grounds from thence
for an alteration, with the consent of most of the learned Linguists in the
University, they set about the work, with some little* opposition at first, but
afterward with success, and almost general approbation. Cromwell was then
Chancellor of the University, under whom Reformations were not so dangerous,
but Gardener succeeding, who disliked all Innovations, a stop was put for some
time; This Man assumed a power, that Caesar never exercised, of giving Law to
Words, and having writ to Cheek then Greek Professor to desist from this new
method, which in reality was the Ancient and true way, and not meeting with a
suitable compliance, he sends out an Order in his own name and the Senate's,
which being too long to insert at large, I shall only mention two or three
Heads of it, as being somewhat extraordinary.

Quisquis nostram potestatem agnoscis, sonos literis sive Graecis sive Latinis
ab usu publico praesentis seculi alienos, privato judicio affingere ne audeto.

Diphthongos Graecas nedum Latinas, nisi id diaeresis exigat, sonis ne diducito
-- (...), sono ne distinguito, tantum in Orthographia discrimen servato (...),
uno eodemque sono exprimito --

Ne multa. In sonis omnino ne philosophator, sed utitor praesentibus --

After such a public Declaration, there was no farther room for private
judgment, an obedience was paid, and Gardiner's way prevailed, till a
Reformation in Religion, made way for a Reformation in Language, that has
obtained ever since. However, the Controversy was then managed with much
warmth and Learning; Gardener insisted principally upon Custom, and the
Authority of the present Greeks: on the other side they pleaded Antiquity, and
that drawn down from the most Ancient Authors; several of the Greek
Rhetoricians were brought into the Controversy, and other Authors that had
dropped any expression that looked that way, and a Man would wonder to see so
much Learning shown on so dry a Subject. Where the victory lay is pretty
visible, and so great a Man Glos. Gr. Praef. ^. 12.
as Du Fresne could not have been at a loss, how to determine the matter, had
he not been possessed with partiality for a Party, which he shows too plainly,
by blaming Bishop Godwin (though very unjustly) for leaving Gardener out of his
Catalogue of Bishops.

But I have run out too far in Grammatical niceties, whoever desires more on
this Subject, may meet with enough in Bishop Wilkins R. Char. L. 1. Chapter 4. etc.
and I have principally insisted on such particulars as have been neglected or
overlooked by him.

CHAP. IV.
Of Rhetoric and Eloquence.
AS Grammar teaches us to speak properly, so it is the part of Rhetoric to
instruct, how to do it elegantly, by adding Beauty to that Language, that
before was naked and Grammatically true. If we would be nice in distinguishing,
there is a difference betwixt Rhetoric and Eloquence, tho we treat of them
under the same Head; the one lays down Rules, the other practices them, and a
Man may be a very good Rhetorician, and yet at the same time a mean Orator:
Perhaps Quinctilian gives as good Rules as Cicero, I am sure in better method,
and with greater closeness; whereas the other is so much an Orator, that he
cannot forget it, whilst he acts the part of a Rhetorician, he dilates and
flourishes, and gives Example instead of Rule: And yet a Man that would form a
comparison betwixt Quinctilian's Declamations, (if yet they be Quinctilian's)
and the Orations of Tully, would be in great danger of forfeiting his
discretion.

The Ancient Romans had Orators among them and some Eloquence, Instances
whereof we have in their History almost as high as the Tarquins; but it was
then a chaste thing without Paint or Dress, Rhetoric was not yet known among
them, the name of it was not so much as heard of some hundred years after, they
wanting a word to express it by, which they were afterward forced to borrow
from the Greeks Quintil. l. 2. cap. 14.
. As soon as it came among them, we trace it in its effects, for as among the
Grecians, whence it was borrowed, it had occasioned Tumults and Concussions of
State, especially at Athens where it prevailed most, only Lacedaemon was more
quiet, from whence it was banished, and where a plain Laconic Style was in
vogue, so at Rome when once it had got any footing, and the Gracchi, the Bruti
and other Demagogues begun to harangue the People, there was no more Peace in
that State, nothing but continual Broils and intestine Commotions, till they
had fought themselves out of that liberty which they seemed to contend for, and
their heats ended in the ruin of their Commonwealth. The Roman Orator had seen
so much of this in his time, before things were brought to the last extremity,
that he begins his Book of De invent. Rhet. ^. 1.
Rhetoric with a doubt, whether that art had brought greater advantage or
detriment to the Commonwealth? And if an Orator where he is treating of
Eloquence, were so doubtful in the matter, we need not be at a loss on which
side to determine the Case.

To pass by consequences, that are not justly chargeable on things, which are
generally good or otherwise, according as the persons are that use them, we
will consider the art it self. If it be an advantage to any Art, to have been
treated of by Men that are skilful in it, this Art should have received greater
improvements and be nearer perfection, than most others, having been considered
by one of the greatest Masters that ever was. Cicero has composed pretty large
Treatises upon this Subject, that have been preserved and delivered down to us;
particularly two De Oratore, Orator sive Brutus.
, in the former of which, as he treats of the several kinds, and lays down such
Rules, as are necessary to be observed in our way to Eloquence; so in the
latter he delineates and gives us the Portraiture of a perfect Orator. I will
not pretend to judge of so great a Master; thus much may be said with modesty
enough, that as in the first Treatise, the Persons in the Dialogue differ from
one another; so in the latter the Orator seems to differ from himself; the
first he is doubtful, in the latter impracticable: In his Dialogue, (which has
so much the face of probability, that some among the Learned have mistaken it
for a real Conference). The Persons introduced are equally Great, and argue and
discourse with equal Learning, and he having assigned no part to himself,
consistently with his doubtfulness in this matter, a Man may sometimes be at a
loss, which side to close with. And his Orator is too great and inimitable an
example, perfectly imaginary, and consequently of no use in humane life, for
which Eloquence is designed. He himself gives him only an Ideal Being, and owns
that he is no where to be found but in the conceptions of our mind.

And indeed we must not expect to find him any where else, if all those things
be necessary to an Orator, that he seems to require. For first, Nature and
Genius are indispensibly necessary, without which the wheels being clogged and
under force, will drive heavily; our Orator must have a flowing invention to
furnish him with Ideas, a strong imagination to impress them, a happy memory to
retain, and a true judgment to dispose them in their due rank and order. He
must have Law, to lead him into the knowledge of the Constitution and Customs
of his Country, History to acquaint him with examples, Logic to supply him with
proper Topics, and morality to enable him to penetrate into, and apply to the
Manners and Passions of Men, the (...) and (...), which are the Springs of
Action, and sources of Persuasion: In short, being to treat of every thing, he
must be ignorant of nothing. He must be in Cicero's Language, a Wiseman, that
is a Man of universal knowledge, and what is more a Paradox, he must likewise
be a Good Man; a Quality that so rarely accompanied Heathen Eloquence, that
both Cicero and Quinctilian are much at a plunge in asserting it to the Greek
and Roman Orators. He must not only have a general knowledge of things, but
must have skill in adorning them, he must have the greatest Art, and yet at the
same time the skill to conceal it, for when ever Art appears, it loses its
effect, and nothing can please, much less persuade, but what is natural. The
most external things are necessary to his accomplishment, he must not only have
Eloquence in his words, but likewise in his looks, decent motions, and an air
of persuasion, that graceful action and pronunciation, which Demosthenes made
the first and second and third thing, and which had so great a share in his own
Composures, that we are not to wonder, that his Orations please less in the
reading, than they did in the deliverance, as wanting three parts of what they
had when they were spoke.

These being the qualifications that are necessary to a complete and perfect
Orator, it is next to impossible, there should ever be any such Man. If any
such were, in whom all these conditions met, it must have been he who requires
them, I mean Cicero, who had the happiest Genius, and that cultivated with the
greatest Art and Industry, that perhaps ever Man had; he whom Quinctilian ^.
10. cap. 1.
opposes to all the Grecian Orators, to whom he gives the Force of
Demosthenes, the sweetness of Isocrates, and the Copia of Plato; he whom he
styles the name not of a Man, but of Eloquence it self, and gives it as a Rule,
by which a Man may judge of his own Proficiency in Eloquence, if Cicero begins
to please him: yet this Cicero was so far from pleasing in his own Age, that as
he met with Detractors among his Enemies, one of which composed a Treatise
Largius Licinius ap Gell. l. 1. 17. cap.
against him, under a very disparaging title, so he did not satisfy Brutus
among his Friends, who taxes him with looseness in his composures, and charges
him with want of Nerves and Strength. And Quinctilian L. 12. cap. 1.
where he comes to explain himself tells us, that he styles Cicero a Complete
Orator only in the vulgar meaning of the word, for in the strict sense, he was
yet to seek, and does not only desire perfection in him, but acquaints us with
the faults he was charged with L. 12. cap. 10.
to wit, that he was turgid and swelling in his Expressions, too frequent in
repetitions, broken in his Composition, and not only easy in his Style, but
soft. In the last Age, and when Learning begun to revive, and Cicero was
studied almost to the neglect of our Bibles, yet one of our Great Critics in
the Latin Tongue, could never be reconciled to a Ciceronian Style, nor could
hear him read Certe Linacer -- Ciceronis dictionem nunquam probare potuit nec
sine fastidio audire. V. Guard. Epist. ad Chek. p. 176.
without weariness and somewhat of loathing.

It is not yet agreed among the learned, which of his Composures are the most
Elegant, otherwise it were easier to know where to make our Reflections. Sir
William Temple brings his Oration for Labienus, P. 313.
(whom by an error very pardonable among so many excellencies he mistakes for
Ligarius) as an Instance of the power of humane Eloquence. It must be confessed
this is a remarkable instance; here was the Greatest Orator and the Greatest
Judge, (for Caesar is allowed by Cicero to be one of the most Eloquent Persons
of his time) Caesar comes into the place of Judicature, breathing revenge
against Ligarius, and with an obstinate resolution to condemn him, but with
difficulty is prevailed with to hear Cicero in his Defense, which he gives way
to, rather as a thing of mere form, than with any thoughts of yielding to his
persuasion: However, no sooner is he heard, but he moves and affects, and when
he comes to touch upon Pharsalia, the Conqueror has no more Soul left, he takes
fire and is transported beyond himself, he shakes and trembles, and drops the
Paper that he held in his hand, and in spite of all his resolutions, absolves
the Criminal, whom he was determined to condemn. And now I think I have allowed
enough to Eloquence; but to deal impartially, the force of it is so great, and
the effect of it so wonderful in this Instance, that it would raise a Man's
curiosity to enquire into the Cause. Had this Oration been lost, we should have
had most terrible Outcries, and lamentable Complaints among the Learned, of
the loss that the world has sustained in so consummate a piece. Lo it is yet
extant! and although this, as every thing of Cicero's, be excellent in its kind,
yet so much will be granted, that it may be read without rapture and amazement.

But granting as much force to Eloquence as can be desired, how is it, it it
does persuade, in this and other instances? I am sure not from rational
arguments, which ought to be the proper means of convincing a reasonable Man,
but from quite different motives and Topics of persuasion: Caesar's deliberate,
and perhaps most reasonable resolution, was, not to pardon so great a Criminal,
an implacable wretch, that had afterward a hand in the Blood of his Deliverer.
The Orator does not so much seek to convince him of the unreasonableness of the
thing, as endeavor to prevail with him from other inducements, he applies to
his passions instead of his Reason, his weak and blind side, by putting him in
mind of the Pharsalian Field, of his glory in subduing, and the greater honors
he had acquired by pardoning; he styles him Father, tho at the same time he
thought him an Usurper, and bids him remember it was his People that begged
Ligarius of him, and that he could not do a more popular thing, than by
yielding to their requests and giving way to his usual Clemency. Such are the
Topics that are brought from Rhetoric! The truth of it is, our common Eloquence
is usually a cheat upon the Understanding, it deceives us with appearances,
instead of things, and makes us think we see reason, whilst it is tickling our
sense: Its strongest proofs, do often consist in an artificial turn of words,
and beautiful expressions, which if unravel'd, its strength is gone and the
reason is destroyed.

There are few that read Seneca, that do not imagine, he writes with great
force and strength, his thoughts are lofty, almost every line in him is a
Sentence, and every Sentence does seem a Reason, and yet it has been well
observed, by a Master in the Art of thinking Malebranch. Recherch. Par. 3. l.
2. chapter 4.
, who has taken some pains in unravelling some of his loftiest expressions,
that there is little more in him at the bottom, than a Pomp of Words. And the
same observation is made there, upon two other Authors, the one of whom is not
so proper to be mentioned, the other is not worth the mention: All of them are
known, and are as much quoted, and will go as far in popular discourses as
Authors of closer thought.

It is not enough to say, that this is the fault of these Authors and not of
Eloquence, for its end being to persuade, and the persons whom we are to deal
with, being usually the People, who as they are the most, are not generally the
wisest, if we would persuade them, we must suit our selves to their capacities,
otherwise we must be content to lose our end. An apposite Similitude is
argument with them, and a quaint saying will go farther than a substantial
Reason, for being guided by Imagination, they are most affected with sensible
resemblances, and not having capacity to penetrate into things, that which is
easiest and lies uppermost persuades them most: So that unless we could make
them wise, they will be easy and credulous, and will be lead by appearances
instead of Truth. And this is one reason, why Eloquence could never flourish,
at least not arrive to any considerable height, unless it were among a people,
that had understandings above the ordinary size, such as the Athenians once
were, and afterward the Romans: And for the same reason it is, that the wisest
Men are not always the best Orators, either at the Bar or in the Chair, for
they are too much above the People's level, their Artillery shoots over, and it
is no wonder if they miss their aim. And if it be yet said, there is
notwithstanding such a thing as true Eloquence, that will always have its force
with Wisemen; I grant there is, but besides that this is to restrain it to a
very narrow compass, Wise Men will be most guided by wise considerations, such
as are grounded upon close Argument and Rational Conclusions, which are more
properly the business of Logic than of Rhetoric and Eloquence.

Having gone thus far in my reflections, principally with regard to the Ancient
Orators, it is almost needless to examine the Moderns; some of their Patrons in
other sorts of Learning, have given up the comparison in this; so that if the
Ancients are found to be wanting in perfection, we are not to expect to find it
in the Moderns. However a Word or two of them. The French have shown most care
in this particular, among whom an Academy has been erected for the refining
their Language; the Members whereof have spent whole days in examining the
propriety of a word, and have been no less accurate in studying the Beauties
and Ornaments of Speech and Numerosity of their periods: But I doubt the
observation is true, that whilst they have been so scrupulously nice, they have
run into the fault of over much accuracy, and by adding Beauty to their
Language have broken its strength; by spining and refining it, and giving it
too much paint and flourish, much of its masculine strength is lost, and I have
sometimes thought, that it boded not well to that Society, that their first
Prize of Eloquence was given to a Woman Mad. de Scudery.
. It is certainly a fault in Oratory to be too curious in the choice of words,
a bold Period, though against Rule will please more, than to be always in phrase,
and a decent negligence is often a Beauty in expression, as well as Dress;
whereas by being over correct or always flourishing, our Periods become either
too luscious or too stiff. And yet though some Members of the French Academy have
pretty freely censured this fault, and have deservedly laughed at some
Gentlemen, that did not only mispend their time in studi'd Periods, but in
avoiding rough and unsounding words, it is plain some of their own Brethren
have run into the same fault, and have been curious and affected in their
Style, almost to a degree of superstition. For what can be said less of him who
composed M. de Gomberville v. Hist. Acad. Franc. p. 50.
a large Book in five Volumes, in all which he declined making use of a common
and almost unavoidable word Car.
, only because it did not please him? or did M. Vaugelas employ his time
better, who having undertaken the Translation of Quintus Curtius, no very great
performance, spent thirty years in translating his Author, and yet left it an
unfinished work? In which work it is very remarkable, that having left five or
six different Translations in the Margin of his Book, that which stood first
was generally approved of as the best ib. p. 213.
as containing his first and natural thoughts, whereas the others were probably
more forced and strained.

But Mr. Pelisson in his History of the Academy, has given us a Panegyric upon
the French King, which I suppose is designed as a Specimen of French Eloquence,
and being there in five different Languages, every Man may read it in a known
Tongue, and be able in some measure to judge, to what degree of perfection
Oratory has arrived among our Neighbors: Though the truth of it is, the English
Translation is wretchedly mangled, and so different from the Authors sense,
that it ceases to be his. However take it in the Original, I believe it will
not be pretended, that he has painted out his Hero, in such charming colors,
as either Pliny has done his Trajan; or Cicero, Pompey in one of his Orations
Pro lege Manilia. Pro Marcel. and Ligar.
, or Caesar in another. The Academies Rhetoric is yet wanting, which they have
given us an expectation of, both in the same History and in the Preface to
their Dictionary. But that work having cost them forty years, and a Grammar
being in order their next undertaking, if that likewise should employ them a
proportionable time, their Rules of Eloquence seem reserved for Posterity and
not for us.

The English as they have not taken the same pains nor pursued the design with
equal Industry with their Neighbors, by erecting Societies for the improvement
of Oratory; so whatever their performances have been, they have been more
modest in their pretensions: For though the French have composed large volumes
upon this Subject, with much Ostentation, yet I scarce know of any, that have
been published by the English, whether it be that there Genius inclines them to
strength rather than beauty, or that trusting to their native Force they
despise the fineness of Art. They have indeed been charged by their Neighbors
V. com. ap. Iourn. Des Scav. An. 65. p. 100.
with a sort of Eloquence that is not very charming, in beginning their
discourses generally with some Prophecy or surprising Story, which if it were
true, is not perhaps so much to be attributed to their want of skill, as to
their compliance with the humor of a People, that attend too much to
Prophecies, and are too much affected with stories: But however, it were 200
years ago, when the observation was first made, it is otherwise now, when
Oratory after the many changes, it has undergone, has put on a quite different
Face: though even from those frequent alterations, its instability is too
remarkable, and would tempt a Man to think, that in some measure it depends
upon humor, and has not so unmovable a Foundation as might be wished.

For to look back, a very little, in those dark^ times, it is not impossible,
that Eloquence was much about that pitch, the observation would have it, in a
blind age, when Legends were in fashion, and the People were kept in Ignorance
and led by Wonder; a Reformation in Religion brought with it an advancement in
Learning, and as Elegancy begun then to be restored to the Latin Tongue, so in
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, the Writers of that age, seem to have affected a
Ciceronian style in English, both in the length of their periods, and often by
throwing the verb to the end of the Sentence: The succeeding Reign degenerated
rather than improved, when the generality run into an affected way of writing
and nothing would please, without a fantastic Dress and jingle of Words. And
tho in the following Reign, this way of writing was much laid aside yet even
then they larded their Discourses so thick with Sentences of Greek and Latin,
that as things now are, it would be a hard matter to excuse them from Pedantry.
What sort of Oratory obtained in the late times of Confusion, is well known,
especially in the Pulpit: As if the observation of our Neighbors had been
calculated for them, little Similitudes and odd Examples, and a worse sort of
Cant, was the Eloquence of these times, which notwithstanding charmed the
People to that degree, that it hurried them besides themselves, and almost out
of their Wits. And tho Oratory may be thought to be now at its full height, and
we may flatter our selves, that nothing can be added to the Strength and
Solidity of those Discourses, that are published among us almost every day,
upon every Subject; yet I will not undertake but that somewhat may be produced
in the next Age, so much more perfect, at least more pleasing, than any thing
we yet have, that the present Eloquence shall be looked upon by our Posterity
with the same neglect, with which we now treat the performances of our
Forefathers. No doubt, what they writ, pleased their own age, as much as our
most boasted Pieces please now, and we ought not to be too confident in our own
performances, with dis-regard to other ages; unless we will make our selves the
Standard of Eloquence, and not give other Men leave to judge of us, as we have
done of those before us.

I know no reason, why it may not vary according to times as well as places,
which in the latter case it so evidently does, That, that which is looked upon
as Elegant in one Nation, would be laughed at by another People. The Eastern
Nations are so different from us in their style, that could our most Elegant
Composures be understood by them, they would be thought flat and insipid, they
being so accustomed to Sublime and Lofty Expressions, that nothing will affect
them, but what is fetched from the Sun and Moon and Stars. And nearer home,
where the difference ought not to be so considerable, the French and Italians,
who have taken such pains, and spent so much time in polishing their Style, yet
charge one another with imperfections in their way of writing, and both of them
differ from the English. Every Nation can discover faults in their Neighbors,
and do not consider that their Neighbors see the like faults to blame in them.

CHAP. V.
Of LOGIC.
LOgic in the Modern phrase is the Art of thinking, and being designed for a
help or Instrument of Reason, its very nature implies weakness in the
understanding; and therefore we ought not to value our selves too much upon our
ability, in giving subtle Rules and finding out Logical Arguments, since it
would be more perfection not to want them. God Almighty who sees all things
intuitively does not want these helps, he neither stands in need of Logic, nor
uses it; but we whose understandings are short, are forced to collect one thing
from another, and in that process we seek out proper Mediums, and call in all
other helps that may be subservient to Reason.

There was little considerable done in this matter before Aristotle, (for the
Eleatic Logic was only an Art of Wrangling, as the Academic, was of doubting)
He was the great advancer of this Art, insomuch that ever since his time, the
main grounds of reasoning have been borrowed from him, even by those that have
despised him. But as nothing can be begun and perfected together, so his Logic
has been charged with several defects; for whereas all Logic is properly
reduceable to the four principal operations of the Mind, the two first of
these, have been handled by Aristotle very perfunctorily, to say no worse, and
of the fourth he has said nothing at all: Most of his time has been spent upon
the third operation, of which he has treated so largely, that his Logic is in
effect, an Art of Syllogizing. In this he glories as his own invention, and has
been so much valued upon it by some, that it has been styled by a modern
Author, Rapin. Reflex surla log. p. 375.
the greatest effort of humane Wit. But tho the Invention be confessedly
extraordinary, to reduce our vague thoughts and loose reasonings, that are
almost infinite to certain Rules, and make them conclude in Mode and Figure;
yet whosoever considers the nature of a Syllogism, in how many things it may be
false in the Matter and peccant in Form, That not only the Terms and
Propositions must answer to one another, but must be adapted to the notions of
things, and that these two are hard to be connected; whilst every little slip
in a Proposition or Ambiguity in a word can spoil the Syllogism, will have a
less opinion of its conclusiveness and will find it a hard thing, to bind any
Syllogism so close upon the mind, as not to be evaded under some plausible
distinction.

Another Modern Bacon. Nov. Organ. p. 50, 132.
I am sure had this opinion of the matter, for which reason he thought it
necessary to seek out another sort of Logic.

I only hint at the principal operations of the Mind, for if I should descend
to less particulars, there are few things in Aristotle, that have not been
excepted against by Modern Authors; some of whom have gone so far as to
question the genuineness of his Books, because forsooth, they cannot discover
in them that Flumen Orationis, that Cicero speaks of. But tho there can be no
sufficient ground to think them spurious, notwithstanding better arguments have
been brought to that purpose by an Eminent Philosopher of these later ages Pic.
Mirand. Tom. 2. p. 668, etc.
, yet we have too much reason to believe they were much corrupted, from
Strabo's V. lib. 13.
account of their having been mutilated and consumed with moisture, by being
buried so long under ground in Greece after Aristotle's death; and after they
were brought to Rome, by having been again mangled by ignorant Transcribers: So
that it is hard to know, how much we have of Aristotle.

The Logic in use among the Romans was rather a sort of Rhetoric than Logic, in
which sense it is generally to be understood, where we meet with mention of it
among them: It was first borrowed from the Stoics, who were in vogue at Rome,
before Aristotle was much known there; and their Logic having been rather
Specious than Solid, as consisting much in pomp of words, and in giving
plausible colors to improbable things, was best fitted to that People, who
were little farther concerned for that Art, than as it was of use in point of
Eloquence. And tho Cicero takes in Aristotle, especially in the Topical part,
that has most affinity with Rhetoric, yet it is plain, he has likewise followed
the Stoics, tho it was not reputable enough to be owned. What the Romans have
done upon this Sbuject is not worth much notice, having had little occasion to
make use of this Art, and what they have of it to purpose being borrowed from
Aristotle; the active Life was their business, and disputing never seems to
have been much in fashion with them.

However when Cicero begun to revive in these later Ages, this sort of Logic
was again attempted; the Men of nice Palates could not relish Aristotle, as he
was dressed up by the Scholemen, and were so madly struck with Cicero, that they
thought all sort of Learning was to be borrowed from his Stores! Cicero is
drawn in beyond his Province, and his Topics ransacked to frame a Logic: But
tho these Men were extraordinary Persons, yet nothing shows more plainly, how
necessary it is for Men to keep within their proper bounds; For when they come
to treat of this matter, it is so ^oreign and unweildy in their hands, that
they make very ordinary work: They bring indeed some plausible objections
against Aristotle, and so far they are within their proper Sphere, but when
they should lay down somewhat new of their own, they either offer nothing, or
what they do, is so unsuccessfully, as only to show that they are out of their
Element, and that Logic is no^e of their Talent. I speak this of the first
Reformers of Learning, for tho Ramus run in with them, in his opposition to
Aristotle, yet he has outdone them in this, that he himself has given us a
plausible Systeme; (For I cannot look upon Valla's performance to be so much)
which tho it was much Read and Commented on, upon its first appearing in the
World, yet seems now to be dis-regarded, and in the next Age may probably be
forgot.

My Lord Bacon saw clearer into the defects of this Art, than most Men did, and
being neither satisfied with the vulgar Logic, nor with its Reformations that
were made, suitably to his vast and enterprizing Genius, attempted a Logic
wholly new, the Plan of which is laid down in his Novum Organum. The way of
Syllogizing seemed to him very fallacious and too dependent upon words, to be
much reli'd on, his search was after things, and therefore he brought in a new
way of arguing from Induction, and that grounded upon Observation and
Experiments: Tho this Plan as laid down by him, looks liker an Universal Art,
than a distinct Logic, and the design is too great and the Induction too large
to be made by one Man, or any Society of Men in one Age, if at all practicable:
For whatever opinion he might have of the conclusiveness of this way, one cross
circumstance in an Experiment, would as easily overthrow his Induction, as an
ambiguous word would disorder a Syllogism, and a Man needs only make trial, in
any part of natural History, as left us by my Lord Bacon, to see, how
conclusive his Induction was like to have been. To say nothing, that
notwithstanding his blaming the Common Logics, as being too much spent in
words, himself runs into the fault, that he condemns; for what else can we make
of his Idola Tribus, Idola Specus, Fori, Theatri; or of his Instantiae
Solitariae, migrantes, Ostensivae, Clandestinae, Constitutiv^, etc. but fine
words put to express very common and ordinary things?

After the way of free thinking had been laid open by my Lord Bacon, it was
soon after greedily followed, for the Understanding affects Freedom as well as
the Will, and Men will pursue liberty, though it ends in Confusion. The
Cartesians have been observed to be no friends to Logic, their Master has left
nothing extant upon that Subject, except some scattered expressions; unless a
Treatise of method must be interpreted a Logic, which notwithstanding is more
properly metaphysical. One of his first Principles of Reasoning, after he had
doubted of every thing, seems to be too circular to be safely built upon, for
he is for proving the Being of a God from the truth of our Faculties, and the
truth of our Faculties from the Being of a God; he had better have supposed our
Faculties to be true, for they being the Instruments that we make use of in all
our proofs and deductions, unless we suppose them to be true, we are at a
stand, and can go no farther in our proofs: So that the way of supposing seems
to be more rational than that of doubting.

The notion of perceiving things by Ideas is of a piece with this, which
however plausible it might seem when first started, after it came to be
examined Men's Ideas about the same objects happened to be so vastly different,
and that in things that were the most clearly and distinctly perceived, that it
was a great prejudice against this opinion. There are few of the first started
Ideas, that have not been examined, and many of them effectually confuted, by
the late Improvers of this way, and other Ideas substituted in their room,
which have given no more satisfaction to others, than the first did to them:
and till we can agree about some Rule or Standard, by which to measure and
adjust our Ideas, it is only a loose way of thinking, and there can be no end
of Controversy this way: Although there be little hopes of this, whilst we have
reason to believe, that nothing pleases more in this way, than the liberty it
gives, or which every Man takes of framing new and fine Ideas. I am no enemy to
free thinking, yet I must always wish, we might proceed by some Rule, (for a
Rule is no Bar but a perfection of freedom) otherwise I am sure, there is no
agreement to be expected, and it is to be feared we shall end in Confusion.
Clear and distinct perception has been given us for a Rule, and the conformity
of our Ideas with the Reality of things has been given as another; but it is no
good proof of either, that Men have differed much in some of those things, that
have been supposed to be the most clearly perceived, and most agreeably to the
nature of things. The great difficulty is, in discovering that Conformity, or
in clearing and distinguishing our thoughts; for every Man's Ideas are clear to
himself.

It would be looked upon as an omission to pass by the Art of thinking supposed
to be writ by M. Arnault L' Art de pens. Par. 68.
. The best part of it must be owned to be borrowed from Aristotle, only be
clothing old Terms, under new Ideas, which shows that it is not so easy to
frame a new Logic as a new Philosophy, and gives a ground of suspicion, that
this Philosophy is not at perfect amity with reason, otherwise they might more
easily be adapted to one another. One thing upon which this Author values
himself is, his substituting useful Instances, in the place of those trivial
common ones formerly in use with the old Logicians, which he makes an objection
to the old way: But can it be an objection to any thing, that it is suited to
the end, for which it was designed? the use of Instances is to illustrate and
explain a difficulty, and this end is best answered by such Instances as are
familiar and common: whereas the Instances which this Man brings, are usually
taken from other Sciences, and suppose Men to be wise already, contrary to the
intention of Logic, which is only an introduction to other Sciences, and being
fitted for Beginners, supposes our knowledge to be yet weak, and is designed
for an Instrument to help us forward. And yet there is a worse objection
against his Instances, that many of them being borrowed from an unsound and
corrupt Divinity, they can hardly be read by Beginners without danger of being
corrupted: For such false Opinions are never more contagious, than when they
are held forth to us under such plausible appearances, nor are their
impressions ever like to be more lasting, than when they are sucked in with the
principles of Reason. I will not say, that these opinions are sown there on
purpose, that they might grow up with our Reason, but where so much Divinity is
mixed with our Logic, it is very suspicious that it has a meaning.

The last Systeme of Logic that I have met with, is the Medicina Mentis which
has been esteemed the Best, and, for ought I know, may maintain that Character
till a new one appears: It is not safe to censure an Author of so established a
reputation, only thus much a Man may venture to say, That it seems to be too
strong Physic for most Men's Constitutions, and it looks so like a Mountebank
to boast of Infallible Cures Medicin. Meant. Praef.
that I could not but have a less opinion of this Author. He makes light
account of the former Logicians; and Perception which was thought to be so
clear a mark of truth, is shown by him to be often the effect of Imagination,
Ib. Par. 2. p. 43.
and therefore he fetches his Criterion higher, which he places in
Conception, or a yet higher degree of Cogitation. But whether knowledge be
grounded in Perception or Conception seems not very material, provided they
could s^ow us the way, how to find it: This is what we desire; and the telling
us, we must assent to nothing, of which we have not a Conception, does not seem
to further our search over much. It serves well to another purpose, to show us
the shortness of our Reach, for if we must assent to nothing without
Conception, we must needs know very little, there being few things, that we
conceive perfectly. I am apt to think Mr. T. has borrowed some Hints from this
Author, though he has applied them to purposes, the Author never meant, and
indeed flatly disavows: For the Author seems to mean well, only is too fanciful
a Man, to make an extraordinary Logician, and whoever reads his Medicina
Corporis will be confirmed in this opinion: If his Rules of Reason be not
better suited to the mind, than his Rules for Health are fitted to our Bodies,
he is not like to be much followed.

CHAP. VI.
Of Moral Philosophy.
MOrality may be considered two ways, as an Habit, or a Rule; either as it is
in us, 'or as an Art for the conduct of Life and a Doctrine of Manners: In both
respects, it is very imperfect, if considered only in its own strength, and
without the assistances of Revelation; Philosophy being as unable to give
Rules, as nature is to practice them. Most of the Philosophers and some of
grosser capacities were sensible of this, they were so far bewildred in their
search after Happiness, as to be able to perceive their own wanderings, and
could feel the disorders of their nature; But how to return into the way, or
remedy these disorders was beyond their Power.

Socrates was the first, who, after the Philosophers had tired themselves out
in the search of nature, with little success, observing the great uncertainties
and vanity of such enquiries, brought down Philosophy from fruitless
Speculations, to the uses of Life: His Opinions in Morality were clearer and
much better grounded, than those of most of the succeeding Sects; having had
truer notions of God, of the Immortality of the Soul and future Rewards, than
the rest had, without which all Virtue is a floating unstable thing, wanting
both its due end and sufficient foundation. But though he was clearer than most
of the rest were, yet he expresses himself too doubtfully, to be depended on:
Most of his Philosophy is in broken Sentences, delivered with much
doubtfulness, and his dying Words are well known, when he had least to fear,
which are so full of Diffidence, that they can give little encouragement to
others to follow him. He proposes his Sense, as a probable Opinion, of the
truth whereof, he had conceived good hopes, from its agreeableness with the
Divine Goodness, and the order of Providence; rather than built upon such solid
Principles, as would give assurance, and bear Men up in the discharge of their
Duty, where it meets with Reproaches and Discouragements, the usual attendants
of Virtue.

Plato does little more than Copy from his Master, and being awed by his hard
Fate, speaks yet with more reserve; his most Divine Dialogue, is chiefly a
relation of Socrates's Opinions, and an account of the Discourses he had with
his Scholars, sometime* before he died V. Platon. Phae. don.
. And both the Socratic and Platonic way having been enemies to dogmatizing,
and rather doubting and denying than asserting any thing; we are not to expect
certainty, where it is not pretended to.

Aristotle is more noted for his order, in bringing Morality into Systeme, by
treating of Happiness under Heads; and ranging it in Classes according to its
different Objects, and distinguishing Virtues into their several kinds, which
had not been handled Systematically before, than for any real improvement he
made in this sort of knowledge: which was a diviner thing in Plato's Dialogues,
although only Lax and Moral Discourses, than it was under all the advantages,
that Aristotle could give it, by reducing it into order; whilst he wanted the
only thing, that could render it amiable.

As for the rest of the Philosophers, they generally go upon false Principles,
That Sect of them, which was strictest in its Institution, and pretended to the
greatest Perfection, the Stoics, were more extravagant than most others were:
Their Rule was to live up to Nature, which as they understood it, was to divest
themselves of Hum^nity; for that was to be laid aside, and an absolute
unconcernedness to be embraced, in order to the happiness, they were to be
possessed of; Their Wiseman was to be Rich and Powerful, and every way Happy in
the midst of Torments: All good with them was equal and alike; only their
Wiseman was somewhat above the Gods V. Senec. Ep 53. Est aliquid quo Sapiens
antecedat Deum.
In short their Philosophy was all Paradox, it made a great show, and dazzled
those that looked no farther than appearance, but was nothing more at the
bottom, than an Ostentation of Wisdom.

It were tedious to recount the various Opinions of the Heathen Moralists,
which in short compass of time, were grown so numerous, that it gave occasion
to the Skeptics, to dispute the Truth of all, and to maintain that there was
nothing true or false, good or evil; and consequently to place their happiness
in a perfect indifference, an (...) in the understanding: and (...) in the will
V. Sext. Empiric. l. 1. c. 12.
. This was to go beyond the Stoics, who, as they could feel no pain, so these
Romantic Heroes could taste Happiness without being affected with Pleasure.
Their Master Pyrrhon, who flourished about the time of Zeno, was so struck with
this Principle, that if a Chariot or wild Beast came in his way, he scorned to
turn aside, and must often have perished, had he not been preserved by his
Friends. He was best answered by the Dog in Diogenes Laertius Lib. 9. vit. Pyr.
rhon.
which coming upon him by surprise, ere the Philosopher had time to consider,
made nature start back, and the Philosopher confess that such imaginary
principles will not hold.

In Varro's time the different Opinions were so extravagantly multiplied, that
in his Book of Philosophy V. Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 19. c. 1.
, he reckons up two hundred and eighty eight several Opinions, only concerning
the Summum Bonum. And if the difference were so great concerning the ultimate
end, which all Men desire, and in which, if any thing, the common sense of
mankind should seem to agree; we may easily imagine what agreement there was,
in other less Ends and particular Duties. I need not show it, it is a common
Theme, and may be seen in every Treatise of Morality.

But tho Morality may have been very imperfect amongst the Philosophers, it is
otherwise, I suppose with us, who have better light and a surer Rule for our
direction, than they had: It is true it is so, whilst we keep to our Rule, but
when we forsake that, we go astray like other Men. Our Modern Casuists,
especially the Jesuits, afford too clear an evidence of this, who by starting
nice Cases and Philosophizing upon them, have brought us back in some things to
the state of Philosophers; they have already given us a new Notion of
Philosophical Sin, which as stated by them has no such sting in it, as to deter
most Men from its Commission: Their Theses are Printed, that were to be
maintained by the Jesuits at Dijon, the first of which is, Peccatum
Philosophicum seu morale, est Actus humanus disconveniens naturae Rationali and
Rectae Rationi; Theologicum vero and mortale est transgressio libera legis
Divinae: Philosophicum quantumvis grave, in illo qui Deum vel ignorant, vel de
Deo actu non cogitat, est grave Peccatum, sed non est offensa Dei, neque
Peccatum mortale dissolvens amicitiam Dei, neque aeterna poena dignum: A Thesis
indeed very favorable to the Heathen Philosophers, but impossible to be
reconciled to the Principles of the Gospel. It has been reprinted at the Hague
Nouv. Her. dans la moral. Ala Hay 89.
, and sufficiently answered and exposed by a good hand, tho nothing can expose
it more than naming it.

This is only one of their Casuistical Decisions, a large Collection of which
may be had in the Jesuits Morals Morale des Ies. A Mons. 1667.
, which as represented by a Doctor of the Sorbonn, and he quotes their own
licensed Authors, is such a System of Morality, as the Heathen Philosophers
would blush to own. According to the Doctrine of that Morale, how many sins are
there, that may be committed, and what Duties that may not be evaded in some
degree, or under some distinction? Their one Doctrine of Probability, is a
ground of as much liberty, as an ordinary sinner can desire; for if a Man may
act upon a probable Opinion, and an Opinion becomes then probable, when it is
supported by one Reason, or maintained only by one Doctor V. mo^^l p. 148, 158.
, I will venture to affirm, there are few things so hard in morality, that have
been defended by the loosest Moralists, that have not been maintained by some
of the Jesuits, as cited in that Book. And yet this is not the utmost liberty,
these nice Casuists and Indulgent Fathers have allowed; they go farther, and
where there are two probable Opinions, a Man may act upon that which is less
probable, nay he may venture upon an Opinion that is only probably probable;
which is certainly as low a degree of probability, as can well be imagined; and
I do not see, how they can go lower, unless they would allow a Man to act upon
an Opinion that is improbable.

It might have been expected, that where so many hard Opinions have been
charged upon the Jesuits, as have been produced in the Jesuits Morals, they
should say somewhat in their own defense: Somewhat indeed they have said* and
one of the Pleas they insist upon most is, that many of the same Opinions are
maintained by the Scholemen, some of whom were canonized, and their Books
generally received in the Church of Rome: But whatever Opinion they may have of
such a defense, it is nothing to us, who bring the same charge against the
Scholemen, that we do against the Jesuits, as far as they maintain the same
Opinions, and we think them the more dangerous, if they have not only been
defended by Jesuits, but by such Men, as by having been received into the
Catalogue of Romish Saints, have in a manner canonized their Opinions, by being
canonized themselves, and made their Church in some measure answerable for
them: Tho to do that Church right, others of her Members have taken offense at
such Doctrines, particularly the Iansenists; and among the Benedictines, Father
Mabillon, tho otherwise reserved enough in his Censures, yet where such loose
Casuists come in his way, cannot forbear giving them a lash, and declaring it
his Opinion, that a Man may read Tully's Offices with more profit than he can
do certain Casuists Etud. monast. Par. 2. c. 7.
: which tho smart enough, as coming from a modest humble Man, yet another
Frenchman has said a severer thing, where he defines Morality as treated by the
Casuists, L' art de chichaner avec Dieu; and indeed in their way of handling,
it looks liker an Art to ease Men from the Burden of rigorous Precepts, by
showing them the utmost bounds they may go without Sin, than what it should be,
a direction for the ease of tender Consciences, by showing Men their duty in
particular Cases.

To speak the whole matter in one word, a good Conscience and an upright Man
will see his duty with only a moderate share of Casuistical skill, but into a
perverse heart, this sort of wisdom enters not: It is usually some lust to be
gratified or danger to be avoided, which perverts the Judgment in practical
Duties, but were Men as much afraid of sin as they are of danger, there would
be few occasions of consulting our Casuists.

CHAP. VII.
Of Natural Philosophy.
PHysical knowledge taking in the whole Compass of Nature, is too vast a
subject to be comprehended by humane Mind; it is an unexhaustible Mine, wherein
we may always dig and yet never come at the bottom: For tho the things it
treats of be material Objects, and as such sensible and easy, yet when we come
to treat of them in a Philosophical manner, they shun our Sense, and are liable
to equal difficulties, with nicer matters. There is nothing more common in
nature, than Matter and Motion, or more easily distinguished, but then we must
understand them to be so only in their grosser meaning, for if we speak of
subtle Matter and intestine Motion, they escape the nicest scrutiny of Sense:
And yet these are the secret Springs of most of the operations in nature, and
as for gross matter and visible motion, they are rather of mechanical
consideration. A Philosophers business is to trace Nature in her inward
Recesses and Latent Motions, and how hid these are, is best known to those, who
are most conversant in Philosophical Enquiries: Such Men by looking deep into
her, and observing her in all her windings and mazes, find matter enough for
Wonder, and reason to adore the Wisdom of God, but at the same time only meet
with mortification to their own Wisdom, and are forced to confess, that the
ways of Nature like those of God, are past Man's finding out.

Aristotle who has gone so far in his rational Enquiries, has given us little
insight into Physical Truths; for having framed a Body of Physics out of his
own Head, all the various Phenomenon of Nature were to be suited to his
Philosophy, instead of his Philosophy's being drawn from Observations in
Nature: His reasoning which did well in Logics, was somewhat out of place, and
misguided him here, where he was rather to be led by Observation, and where he
does make observations they are usually unphilosophical, and such as few Men
could be ignorant of: His four Elements are gross things, and leave the
understanding at the same pitch where it was, and his three Principles do not
advance it much higher; his first Principle as he has explained it, is
unintelligible, and the last of the three is no Principle at all, unless we
will allow that for one Principle, that is destructive of another: He tells us,
that all knowledge is to be derived from the Sense, and yet presently forsakes
that, and flies to Reason. But his Philosophy is enough decry'd already, and
needs not be brought lower than it is.

I need not here reckon up the opinions of other Ancient Philosophers; most of
them have been revived, and have been again confuted, and have dyed the second
time in our own Age: The opinion of Thales and the Ionic Sect, in making Water
the Principle of all things, has been revived by those, who have attempted to
explicate a Deluge from such an Original: And the Opinion of Pythagoras and the
Italic Sect, in placing the Sun in the Center of the World, and ascribing
motion to the Earth, has been maintain^d anew by Copernicus and his Followers;
and tho Transmigration of Souls be one of Pythagoras's hardest sayings, yet it
has found a Patron of late in a Countryman of our own Mr. Bulstr^de.
, who has maintained it in a qualified Sense, which perhaps was as much as
Pythagoras meant. An Anima Mundi, Prae-existence of Souls, with the rest of
Plato's Opinions, have found a strong party in their defense; and many other
late Opinions, which have little in them, except their novelty to recommend
them to the World, do really want that too, and might be easily shown, to be
only the Spawn of the Ancient Philosophers; by whom as there is nothing so
absurd, that has not been said, so they have scarce said any thing so
extravagant, wherein they have not been followed.

But among all the ancient Opinions, none have been revived with more general
approbation, than those of Democritus and Epicurus, the Founders of the
Atomical or Corpuscular Philosophy; an ill Omen to Religion, when they who have
explicated the production of the world, by the Laws of Mechanism without a God,
have been so generally followed. In this M. Des Carts has been too successful,
whom tho it would be very unjust to charge with denial of a God, whom he
supposeh to have created Matter, and to have impressed the first motion upon
it, yet in this he is blameable, that after the first motion is impressed, and
the wheels set a going, he leaves his vast Machine, to the Laws Mechanism, and
supposes that all things may be thereby produced, without any further
extraordinary assistance from the first impressor. The supposition is impious,
and as he states it destructive of it self; for not to deny him his Laws of
motion, most of which have been evidently shown to be false, and consequently
so must all be that is built upon them, his Notion of Matter is inconsistent
with any Motion at all; for as Space and Matter are with him the same, upon
this supposition there can be no vacuum, and there can be no Motion in a
Plenum: Motion is only the succession of Bodies from one place to another, but
how should they succeed from one place, if there be no room to receive them in
the next, which there cannot be, if all be full? And the difficulty is still
greater upon the first framing of things, before the subtle matter is
produced, that was to suit it self, to all the little Interstices, betwixt the
larger solid Bodies, which must needs clog and interfere with one another,
unless we will allow some fluid matter, that will yield and give way to the
other's motions. M. Des Carts imagines he answers all this, by a succession of
Bodies in a Circular Motion; but I think this Motion carries its own
Confutation with it, and that nothing can be supposed more absurd, than to
imagine, that upon the motion of every little Atome, the whole frame of things
must be disturbed and set a going. Motion is one of M. Des Cartes's darling
Principles, and by this and Matter, he pretends to solve the greatest
difficulties, that are in Nature, and it is very remarkable, that he has not
failed more in any of his Notions, than in these two great Fundamentals of his
Philosophy, for allowing him these, his other explications hang together
somewhat better. But this it is to frame Hypothesis out of one's own
imagination, without consulting Nature, which Mr. Des Carts has not done, for
it was equal to him, what Hypothesis he went upon, and had Father Mersennus V.
Rapin. Reflex. p. 423.
told him, that a vacuum was as much in fashion, and as agreeable to the taste
of the Age, as a Plenum then seemed to be, we should have had an Hypothesis
grounded upon a vacuum, and no doubt as specious and plausible, as that we now
have; perhaps more plausible, being more consonant to his own Sense, as having
been his first design, and the other only hammered out by the direction of his
Confident Mersennus: And it is a wonderful thing, that Men should run mad after
such an Hypothesis, which, as it has not the least ground in Nature, so the
Author himself never believed it. It has been answered and effectually confuted
in all its Branches, by several hands, but by none better than the Author of, A
Voyage to the World of Des Carts, which tho not always conclusive, is every
where ingenious, and confutes him in his own way, for one Romance is best
answered by another.

But we have been taught to distinguish betwixt Hypotheses and Theories, the
latter of which are shrewd things, as being built upon Observations in Nature,
whereas Hypotheses may be only Chimaeras: I should be glad to see that Theory,
that is built upon such Observations. The most plausible Theory I have yet met
with, is only built upon an Hypothesis, to wit, the Incrustation of the Earth,
and the cracking of its Cortex, the very same in substance we have been
speaking of, and how this Theory should be more certain, than the Hypothesis it
goes upon, is past my understanding. Thus much I believe may be said of all our
Theories, That, however natural they may seem at first view, they have always
some mark in nature set upon them, to discover them to be false: Thus Dr. B's
Theory, of the Incrustation of the Earth is very ingenious, but then there is
no sufficient Provision made, for Antidiluvian Waters, much less for Springs
and Rivers, which can neither be generated, nor flow in Streams without
Mountains. Mr. W's Theory, shows a vast reach and depth in it is Contrivance,
both in his accounting for the formation of things, and in his Explication of a
Deluge; But his Paradisiacal days are so long, by his allowing only an annual
motion to the Earth in that State, as to exceed all belief; and though he makes a
tolerable shift, to supply us with such stores of Waters, from the Atmosphere
of a Comet, as might occasion a Deluge, yet it is impossible for him to carry
them off again after the occasion is over; and for ought I can see, they must
have continued with us, till the return of his Comet. So that whatever
differences may be alleged betwixt Hypothesis and Theories, they are much upon
the same level, as to any real light they have yet afforded to Nature, and one
great difference seems to be this, that the former are only modestly proposed,
whereas Theories are ushered in with greater assurance. It is well if Theories
be not as much out of fashion in the next Age, as Hypotheses are in this; for
so many Observations and Experiments are required to raise a Theory, that I
despair of ever seeing One that will bear the Test.

When I speak of Observations and Experiments, I would not be thought to
under-value a Society, which has been erected to that purpose, and whose
endeavors have been so successful that way already: But however successful
they may have been, those excellent Persons have more modesty, than to
over-rate their own performances, and nothing has done them more injury, than
the vanity of some few Men, who have been so Planet-struck as to dream of the
possibility of a Voyage to the Moon, and to talk of making wings to fly
thither, as they would of buying a pair of Boots to take a journey Mr. G's
Scep. Sc. p. 134.
. The Genuine Members of that Society have other thoughts of things, being far
from any hopes of mastering Nature, or of ever making such progress, as not to
leave work enough, for other Men to do. One of their Number, a great glory of
their Society, after he had grown old in these Studies, learnt Modesty and
diffiding thereby, and was never more reserved than in his full growth and
maturity of Knowledge, when he had least reason to be so. And another
Incomparable Person, who has added Mathematical skill to his Observation upon
Nature; after the nicest Enquiry, seems to resolve all into Attraction, which,
though it may be true and pious withal, perhaps will not be thought so
Philosophical.

The truth of it is, we may as well rest there, for after all, Gravitation was
never yet solved, and possibly, never may, and after Men have spent a thousand
years longer in these Enquiries, they may perhaps sit down at last under
Attraction, or may be content to resolve all into the Power or Providence of
God. And might not that be done as well now? We know little of the causes of
things, but may see Wisdom enough in every thing: and could we be content to
spend as much time in contemplating the wise ends of Providence, as we do in
searching into Causes, it would certainly make us better Men, and I am apt to
think, no worse Philosophers. For though Final Causes have been so much banished
from our modern Physics, yet nothing is more to the purpose, or more easy to
be understood. Whereas Causes are yet Latent; and it is very remarkable, that
the very last Author, M. le Clerc.
that has given us a System of Physics, after all the Discoveries that have
been talked of, and Improvements that have been made in Nature, has been forced
to proceed in an Analytical method, for want of Principles to go upon, and
instead of demonstrating Effects from the Causes, has been forced to trace the
Causes of things from their Effects: which though it be some Argument of the
Author's Modesty, yet I do not speak it to commend his performance, for his
Physics are like his other Works, faulty enough.

CHAP. V.
Of Astronomy.
THE Chaldaeans were the first (unless you will except the Chinese) that we
meet with in Profane Story Cicer. de Divin. l. 1. p. 1.
, that made Observations upon the Stars: Two reasons might incline them to
this, First, the evenness of their Country, which afforded a free and open
prospect; and next the opinion they had of the Stars, whom esteeming as Gods,
it must have been a part of their Religion to look up to Heaven and observe
them. But then their observations were principally Astrological, they did not
so much measure the Heavens, as fetch their directions from thence, and were
more concerned for the influences of the Stars, than their Motions: So that
though Astrology were at its full height amongst the Chaldaeans, yet Astronomy
never seems to have arrived at any maturity. The same may be said of most of
the Eastern People; even the Chinese, after they have made Observations upon
the Stars above four Thousand years, yet have made so little progress in
Astronomy, that upon the arrival of the Missionaries, their Mathematicians
could not compose a perfect Calendar L^ Count. nouv. Memoir. Let. ^. p. 100.
.

The two Hypotheses of Ptolemy and Copernicus will take in most of what needs
be said on this Subject; for as to that of Tycho Brahe, as it is in a great
measure compounded of these two, and seems designed to account for
difficulties, in both these Hypotheses, so it is liable to several Objections
in them both.

The Ptolemaic Hypotheses has too much appearance of Art, to be esteemed
natural, all its Epicycles and Eccentries and other Ambages can never be
thought the Contrivance of Nature, which acts in a more simple manner, without
going so far about; those solid Spheres which it supposes have been shattered
and overturned by the Modern Philosophers, and shown to be inconsistent both
with the Trajection of Comets, and with that equal light, which is conveyed to
us from the Planets and other Stars, which by passing through such different
Mediums and Solid Bodies must have suffered innumerable Refractions: Several of
the Phoenomena of the Heavens admit of no tolerable solution this way,
particularly those of Mercury and Venus, and the Access and Recess of the Polar
Star to and from the Pole, which in the time of Hipparchus was distant from it
12 Degrees, but is not now fully three, and in process of time will recede from
it again more than ever; and the many different, and likewise opposite motions
of the Stars and Spheres are not easily conceived. But nothing is so
inconceivable as the velocity of their motion, for upon this Hypothesis they
must be supposed to move some thousand Miles in a Minute, which though it may be
conceived by Philosophers, is not very obvious to common understandings. Such
are the Objections that have been commonly brought against this Hypothesis,
which have rendered it so hard of digestion; and though nothing can excuse the
hard saying of that Profane King Alphonsus of Castile.
so well known and so often quoted, yet it may be so far mollifi'd, that having
been levelled against this Hypothesis, he did not thereby pretend to correct the
Works of God Almighty, only did not believe them to have been framed in such a
manner by God, as Ptolemy has described.

The Copernican Hypothesis values it self upon its easiness, and the great
Compendiousness of the way it goes in: But though it accounts for appearances
more Compendiously than the other does, and without the vast Apparatus, that is
required in the Ptolemaic Hypothesis, yet it contains things as
incomprehensible as the other does: For as the celerity of Motion in the former
exceeds all belief, so the Regularity of Motion is unfathomable in this. The
Motion of the Earth is of hard enough digestion in it self, but supposing it to
move in a fluid Medium, who is there that can imagine, that it should be so
regular and uniform as it is? The fluid with which it is environed and in which
it moves, is unstable, and mutable, consisting of little Bodies, that are
always altering their position to one another, and changing their shapes by
constant and mutual Attrition, and yet though the Ambient Fluid be always
altering, the motion is the same. It describes our days by its Di^rnal Motion
upon its own Axis, our years by its Annual Revolution, and our Seasons, by that
and its Inclination, and all these so regularly, as not to vary in so many
Successions of Ages, and yet we must believe that this Constancy and Regularity
is maintained by fluctuating matter, the most unstable thing in the world. The
exactest Movements or Machines, that humane Wit can frame, are Subject to
innumerable disorders, either from the breaking of the Spring of their Motion,
or wearing of their wheels, or some other external impulse or inward decay, and
therefore always want our care, either to set them right, or keep them in
order; only this vast Machine and Frame of things, preserves its Course, and
never varies, though acted in appearance by the most unconstant Causes. A Man
that well considers this will be inclined to entertain a more favorable
opinion of the Ancient Philosophers, and though he cannot believe the Heavens to
be turned and acted by Intelligences, yet he would find it almost as hard to
apprehend, how they move without them: whatever become of Intelligences, an
Intelligent Being must of necessity be taken in, without which our Philosophy
will be very unable to do the business.

There is another difficulty in this Hypothesis, which the Copernicans cannot
easily get over, and which will perplex any Man's understanding that well
considers it: That the Earth is only a point in respect to the Universe, though
it be a pretty large Postulatum, yet possibly must be granted upon any
Hypothesis; but that not only the Earth, but the whole Magnus Orbis, or that
vast Orbit which the Earth describes round the Sun, should be esteemed a point,
(without which supposition the Copernican Hypothesis cannot be maintained) is
such a Postulatum in Astronomy, as the more a Man thinks of, the less easily he
can assent to. For what is this Magnus Orbis or vast Circle which must be
esteemed as a point? To take only the Semidiameter of this Circle, or about the
sixth part of the whole, Hugenius Cosmotheor. p. 124.
, no incompetent Judge of these matters, has calculated the distance betwixt
the Earth and the Sun to be about 17 Million German Miles; or in other words,
that supposing a Bullet shot from a Gun could retain always the same velocity,
it had at its first discharge, with this swiftness in about twenty five years,
it would pass from the Earth to the Sun: All which immense distance is about a
sixth part of Copernicus's point. It is true, Hugenius assigns a proportionable
distance (if there can be any proportion in such an immensity) to the fixed
Stars; for this Bullet being shot again, with the same swiftness, he Ib. p. 137.
supposes, it might come at the nearest of the fixed Stars in about 700 years,
which is such a distance as common apprehensions cannot reach, and will once
more require a Philosophers Understanding.

In this vast compass, our Astronomers have discovered new Worlds (like that
Sanguine Conqueror who was seeking out New Worlds before the old one was half
subdued) every Planet must be a World and ever Star must have its Planets: this
Project was pursued by M. Fontanelle in a pleasing entertaining way, but has
been embraced by others with greater seriousness. What these Worlds are, might
as well be left undetermined, God having thought fit to say little of them, and
having placed them beyond our reach; But if we may guess at the discoveries
that are to be made in the remotest Stars, from those that have been made
already in the nearest, the Moon, I do not think they will make any great
addition to knowledge. It must be confessed, that mighty discoveries have been
talked of in that Planet: Hevelius has given us its Geography, and has marked out
Selenograph. p. 226.
every Mountain and Valley, Sea, and River, as exactly as if he had been there,
in his accurate Map of that World. Ricciolus Almagest. p. 204.
has gone a little farther, and has assigned every Astronomer his proportion of
ground; you may there meet with the Land of Copernicus, Galilaeus and Kepler;
and it is but just that they should have the benefit of their Invention: And
the same Author to show his modesty has placed Ricciolus in the best and most
Conspicuous spot of Ground in that World. But are these Men in earnest? Or do
we yet know where we are? That the Moon is an Opake Body is no new discovery,
the nature of Eclipses has long since shown it, and I am afraid it is little
we yet know beyond this. For though the Moon has been divided into Sea and Land,
and the Division so much acknowledged, that a Man's parts must have been
suspected, that would have doubted of the thing; and though the obscure parts of
its Body, have been generally thought to be Watery, and the Luminous parts,
Earthy and Solid, yet this Division seems rather to be grounded upon an
inference of Reason, to wit, that the obscure and Watery parts imbibe the
Light, whereas the Earthy Solid parts reflect it, than upon the experience of
Sense, assisted by Glasses. These Glasses indeed discover the difference
betwixt the dark and Luminous parts much more clearly, than the naked eye can,
but will never show the nature of either, or what Substance they are of, much
less distinguish the different portions of Earth and Water: But Men come
possessed with an opinion of Seas and Rivers, and then easily think they see
them (as every sound does answer the tune that runs in our ears) and after one
Man has seen them, it is a reproach to the next, not to be as acute and
distinguishing as he, and so we cheat one another into a tolerable agreement.
That this is the Case I am verily persuaded, for though I can neither pretend to
good eyes, nor good Glasses, and therefore will lay no weight upon my own
opinion, yet Hugenius who had them in perfection, and who writ since these
accurate Maps were taken, could neither observe Seas nor Rivers in the Moon,
and expressly denis, that any such are to be seen there Cosmotheor. p. 114.
And there is this reason besides, that if any such were, they must necessarily
raise a mighty Atmosphere, which, as it would hinder our clear prospect at all
times, so by its clouds, it would sometimes darken one part of the Moons Body,
and sometimes another; whereas now the dark and Luminous parts are always the
same: So that as far as I can see, we know little more of the Moon, than that
it is an Opake and solid Body, and so much we were pretty well assured of,
before Telescopes came in fashion.

No doubt, Telescopes are a noble Invention, and the discoveries that have been
made by them are very considerable, but as to the discovering thereby the
Nature and Substance of Heavenly Bodies, I look upon it as utterly impossible:
And yet this is the modish way of framing new Worlds; we first observe Seas and
Rivers, in the Moon, and if such be there, there must be Plants that they
water, and if Plants, there must be likewise Animals to feed upon them, and all
these are designed for the service of Men. The reason is easily carried
further, for if the Moon be a World, by parity of Reason, so must the other
Planets be also, and if all the visible Planets are carried about in the Vortex
of the Sun, which is no better than the other Stars, no doubt, the other fixed
Stars, have their attending Planets, as well as the Sun, and so we have a
Plurality of Worlds with a witness: but this chain of reasoning is easily
broken, by breaking its first Link, for if there be no Waters in the Moon, in
consequence of that, neither are there any Plants, or Animals, or Men, and if
none of these be there, by parity of reason, neither are there any in the other
Planets, and so the whole Chain falls to pieces.

These World-mongers are always objecting the improbability of God's framing so
many vast and glorious Bodies, only for the sake of this Earth, so
inconsiderable a portion of the whole: Amongst the rest Hugeni^s, who in one
place makes this Objection, in another part of his Book, P. 33.
as if he had forgot himself, thinks it enough to say, That God raised this
mighty Frame of things, that he might contemplate and delight himself thereby;
and were there no other reason, we ought to acquiesce in this: But they that
argue thus, seem to measure things by their Bulk, which is a false way of
reasoning; there is more Beauty and Contrivance in the Structure of a humane
Body, than there is in the Glorious Body of the Sun, and more perfection in one
rational immaterial Soul, than in the whole Mass of Matter, be it never so
bulky. There cannot then be any absurdity in saying, that all things were
created for the sake of this inferior World, and the Inhabitants thereof, and
they that have such mean thoughts of it, seem not to have considered, who it
was that died to redeem it. Let them measure the World by that Standard, and
they cannot undervalue it any longer, without some reproach to infinite Wisdom.

CHAP. IX.
Of Metaphysics.
MEtaphysics having so great an affinity with Logic, and being so interwoven
with the learning of the Schools, I need say less of them in this place: They
are styled by Aristotle Natural Theology, from whence we may be enabled to take
some measures of them; for Natural Theology is in it self a poor, weak thing,
and Reason unassisted has not been able to carry the clearest Philosophers very
far, in their pursuit after Divine Matters* We have seen this already in
practical Truths, and the Reason lies stronger, in such as are Speculative. And
if we see so dimly in physical matters, which are nearer our Sense, and in a
manner exposed to view, how much more must we be bewildred in our search after
Spiritual abstracted Truths, in the consideration of Universals, and of things
of a Transcendental Nature, such as fall properly under the consideration of
Metaphysics? For tho Metaphsiycal Truths may be certain enough in their own
nature, yet they are not usually so to us, but being abstruse things, and lying
deep and remote from Sense, it is not every one that is capable of
understanding them, and there are yet fewer that understand their true use.
They are usually under the Conduct of subtle Men, and these nice Professors,
instead of resolving doubts, have spun out new difficulties, and framed
Labyrinths, out of which they have scarce been able to disentangle themselves:
So that Metaphysics, which were at first only Natural Theology, are now become
the most artificial thing in the World.

One need only dip into any System, to see how these Men are plunged in setting
out, for whereas there are two things of principal consideration in
Metaphysical Knowledge, its Object and Affections; and whereas Philosophers are
pretty well agreed about the Object of other Sciences, as that Quantity is the
Object of Mathematics; and matter of Physics, and so of the rest; the
Metaphysicians have not come to any tolerable agreement about the Object of
this Science, or Sapience, or whatever you will call it: Suarez produces six
different opinions, and himself brings the seventh, which is his own. And as to
its Affections, they are again at a plunge to find out Affections different
from Being (which seems to comprehend every thing) for if the Affections and
Subject are the same, their Demonstrations are Indentical, and prove nothing.
But these are dry Considerations.

What Aristotle has done upon this Subject, is much short of a perfect Work,
and is rather an Essay, than a Complete Treatise, for though he has left fourteen
Books upon the Subject, yet they are loose and indigested, (which was not usual
with Aristotle, where he has given his last hand) and the two last are so
Foreign to his design, and so unsuitable to the place they stand in, that some
have thought fit either to strike them out of his Works, or to place them in a
new order: And indeed his twelfth Book should seem to be his last, which
concludes with his Notion of God and Spiritual Beings; though none of his Books
are Divine enough, to give a true account of Natural Theology. It is plain he
wants light in these matters, and neither knows where to fix, nor what to
determine; which is one reason of the obscurity of his Books of Metaphysics,
for no Man can write clearer than he thinks. And therefore his Commentators
have often tug'd in vain, in laboring to make out a meaning, where possibly
the Author himself was at a loss. If any Man could have understood him, Avicen
had the best plea, who was as subtle a Philosopher and studied him as much as
perhaps any Man ever did; and yet after he had read his Metaphysics forty times
over, and had them all by heart (which I will venture to say, is more than ever
any Man will do again) he was forced to lay them aside as unintelligible V.
vit. Avicen. p. 3.
In one thing I must do him right, that whereas he has been represented as too
Positive and Dogmatical in his opinions, it is the fault of his Followers, not
his: He begins these Books in a very different manner: His third Book (for the
two first are chiefly Prefatory) is taken up with doubts, and the Title of the
first Chapter is, The use of Doubting, to do which well, he makes one mark of a
Philosopher; and gives this reason, because unless a Man knows how to find out
and state a difficulty, it is impossible to solve it, as a Man must see the
folds and windings of a knot, before he can unty it. So that the Art of
doubting is no new invention, having been known to Aristotle, as well as the
Moderns, with this difference only, that he does it more modestly, and is not
so Skeptical, as the first mighty pretender to this way.

And because we are come thus far, let us consider this new Method of knowledge
by doubting, upon which our Modern Metaphysicksturn so much, and of which our
new Philosophers talk so loudly: For my part I can see no great use either of
their doubting, or of the knowledge, it leads to. For what is it we must doubt
of? Even of the most certains Truths in Nature, of the verity of our own
Bodies, as whether we have Hands, Arms, and Legs Cart. Princip. p. 2. Meditat.
1.
And what is the first knowledge that results from this doubting? That since I
doubt, I am; for that which doubts must it self necessarily have a Being. Now
allowing all this, I do not think we are much the wiser; for had ever any Man
real doubts of these matters? Or did ever any Man in his Wits question the
truth of his own Being? Such doubts and such proofs are only fitted for
melancholy Persons, and I hope we are not Philosophizing at this time of day to
yield conviction to such Men. Evident truths and first Principles may be
reasonably supposed, and indeed they must be supposed, for they are not capable
of proof, there being nothing clearer by which they may be proved; and for Men
to offer at proof in such matters may make a pompous show, but is no real
advancement of knowledge. The old way of proceeding upon allowed Principles
seems to me more rational than this method of questioning every thing, till we
have unsettled the first grounds and foundations of Truth; and however useful
doubting may be in Philosophical Enquiries, it ought always to suppose a
ground, for a groundless doubt is so far irrational.

After our Philosopher has done with doubting, and has proved to us our own
Existence, he brings us at last to the Being of a God, Meditat. 3.
in which a great part of his Metaphysics is spent; and I am so unwilling to
weaken any proof to that purpose, that I shall pass it over: Only thus much may
be inoffensively said, that his proof from the Idea, is the abstrusest and the
least conclusive argument that has been brought, for though constant and
universal agreement in the Notion of a God, may be a good Argument to prove his
Existence, and familiar enough to the weakest Capacities, yet this Idea as
managed by our Author, is neither clear nor very conclusive: For what is there
of either, in the Objective Perfection or Reality of this Idea, being greater
than the formal Perfection or Reality in the Mind, and therefore that this Idea
cannot proceed from thence, but must have some Superior Cause to produce it?
When after all this Objective Reality is nothing more than an operation of the
Mind, or rather a mode of its operation, which is such a Reality, as one would
imagine, the Mind alone might be able to give it.

But this Philosophers Metaphysics are only Meditations, a Complete Treatise
was to be given us by his Followers; amongst whom M. Poiret, I know not how,
has obtained a name; he has refined upon his Master, and is so full of
thinking, that he has made Cogitation to be the substance of the Mind Cogitat.
Ra^. l. 2. c. 3. 5.
, and in pursuance of this, the Essence of God to be likewise Cogitation;
which, with other odd opinions will hardly recommend him to considering Men. I
always looked upon M. Poiret as a Phanatic in Philosophy, and have been
confirmed in my Opinion, by what has happened since; for as Phanaticism has no
bounds, he has since (if he be the same Man) expres,'d it in his Divinity, by
licking up the vomit, and adoring the Opinions of a silly Woman, of whose
Inspiration he is as well assured as of the Being of a God V. Bour. Det. Nar.
1. p. 10.
; an expression which nothing but Enthusiasm, can excuse from Blasphemy. And
therefore I have the more wondered to see a comparison formed betwixt Plato and
M. Poiret, which I could have wished had been let alone.

I must rank Mallebranch in the same order, whose Recherche has furnished out
such refined and abstracted Metaphysics, as if they were designed for
Comprehensors; he has exalted Ideas to their utmost Height, and because they
bore not with them certainty enough, whilst they were barely operations of the
mind, or representations from external Objects, he has placed them in a Subject
that cannot err, to wit, in the Wisdom of God himself, whom having supposed to
be the Place of Spirits, as Space is of Bodies, and that there is an intimate
Union betwixt God and the Soul of Man, by attending to him, who is always
presential to our Minds, we are to see all things in this Ideal, or
Intelligible world Rech. ^. 3. Par. 2. c. 6.
. Now though there can be no doubt, but God can lead us into all Truth, by
displaying himself to us, and perhaps may deal thus with us when we are in
Heaven, yet this way seems too Supernatural whilst on Earth, and too clear for
frail and weak Men, who are not yet to know by Vision; and it is withal so like
the inward Light of a New Sect of Men, as not to make it over reputable: To
which purpose it is very remarkable, that Mallebranch's Opinion having been
espoused of late, by an Ingenious Person of our own, with all the advantages of
Beauty of Style and Perspicuity of Expression, yet the Men of New Light have
taken such hold of it, as to make it necessary for him to write an Apology to
disingage himself from the Quakers, who would needs have it thought they had
gained a Proselyte V. Cond. Hum. Lif. p. 183.
: Wherein though he has distiguish'd himself from these People, yet thus much he
owns, That if the Quakers understood their own N^tion, and knew how to explain
it, and into what Principles to resolve it, it would not very much differ from
his. In another thing there is too great an agreement: that these men of
thought have too low a value for humane Learning, either as it lies in our
common Books, or in the Book of Nature, in respect of that light which displays
it self from the Ideal World, by attending to which, with pure and defaecate
Minds, they suppose Knowledge to be most easily had. Experience and Deductions
have been formerly esteemed useful, but in this compendious way to knowledge,
provided we make our approaches, with our Souls purged and with due preparation
of Mind, there needs little more than application and attention. Indeed Prayer
has been made another Condition, which though it be proper and of good use upon
all occasions, yet is not so pertinent here, where we speak only of natural
means.

CHAP. X.
Of History.
I Scarce ever met with any Historian, who does not write true History, if you
will take an account of him from his Preface, and not be too nice in examining
his Book; the first Pages are usually filled with the Care and Integrity of the
Author, which possibly, are to be found no where else: Those who have taken
most care, have been charged with some negligence, and all of them have been so
far faulty, as to extort a Confession from one of their number, wherein he
fairly owns, That there is none of the Historians, that do not lie in some
things Vopisc. juxta init. -- Neminem Scriptorum quantum ad Historiam pertinet,
non aliquid esse mentitum.
. He names some of the most unexceptionable, and pretends to be able to make
good his charge by uncontestable proofs. Let us take a short view.

We have little considerable remaining of Profane Ancient Story, except what we
have left us, by the Greeks and Romans; for as to the Chaldaean History of
Berosus; and the Egyptian of Manetho they both writ since Herodotus, and we
have only some Fragments of them left preserved by Josephus, Eusebius, etc. and
the Books that go under these great names, are the impudent Forgeries of Annius
of Viterbo. And as to Sanchoniathon, who has given us the Phoenician History,
though he pretends to be much more Ancient, yet his great Antiquity has been
questioned by Scaliger, and his very Being, by Mr. Dodwell, So that those we
are to depend on are the Greeks and Romans.

The Greeks as they have not been noted for their veracity in any respect, so
their Truth and Integrity in this particular has been always so questionable,
That Graecia Mendax has been stigmatized in History: We have no tolerable
account from them before the Olympiads, the times before these were the Mythic
Ages, and are all Fable; and when the Historical Age commenceth, our Accounts
of things are not much better: For they having not originally had any Public
Annals, or Registers of things, and amongst their Ancient Authors, the Poets
having had the first rank; we may easily imagine what sort of Accounts are to
be expected from those Men, who were either to follow uncertain Reports and
Traditions, or what is much worse, to Copy the Poets. Accordingly their first
Accounts were very loose, and rather Poems than Histories, which they have been
charged with by the Romans pretty freely, and Quinctilian is so far from
softning the matter; That he compares the liberty they took to a Poetic License
Instit. l. 2. c. 4.
. But no Man has exposed them so much as Josephus Contr. Appion. l. 1.
has done. He tells them, Their accounts of things are all novel, that they
have no Public and Authentic Annals, nor any Author more Ancient than Homer,
and those they have do differ from one another, that Hellanicus, differs from
Acusilaus, that Acusilaus corrects Hesiod; and Hellanicus, Ephorus; he again is
corrected by Timaeus, as Timaeus is by others; and Herodotus, by all: And yet
this is that Herodotus, who has been styled the Father of History, though he
might with equal right be named the Parent of Fable. I know what Apologies have
been made for him, especially from late Voyages and Discoveries; But it is
enough to say, he cannot be defended, and that those few Instances, which have
been brought, do rather show the Wit of his Apologists, than signify much
toward the redeeming the Credit of their Author; his mistakes are too numerous
and too gross to be accounted for, from some accidental agreement with Modern
Discoveries.

It must be confessed, some of the following Historians, have writ more
cautiously, and in this, the Children have exceeded their Father, particularly
Thucydides who has been noted for his Accuracy and Care; but not to insist upon
Iosephus's Authority, who has not exempted him from the Common Censure, a great
part of his History is taken up with large Speeches and Harangues, which had
never any Existence, except in the imagination of his own Brain; and the rest
of his Story is of too narrow extent, both as to time and place, to be of any
considerable importance in the account of ancient times, of the darkness
whereof he himself complains in the entrance of his Book. He who has done most
and whose accounts are most extensive is Diodorus Siculus, taking his rise from
the Original of things and describing the World in its full Latitude and
extent; and let any one excuse him from Fable, and the Cause is yielded. His
first five Books are almost a continued Fable, describing more Ages than the
World has had duration, and such Nations as have had no Being: Lucian's true
History has scarce any thing more incredible, than what may be met with in that
Author. The best thing that can be urged in his excuse is, that he owns and
confesses the Charge, that is brought against him, Entituling his first Books,
Mythic History, which in plain English is Fabulous. But this argument has been
largely prosecuted by a learned Pen Orig. Sacr. cap. 4.
.

Well but however fabulous the Graecians may have been, there may be more
certainty in Roman Story: It is possible there may, and yet not near so much,
as might be desired. The most complete and only General History we have among
them, is Livy, whose Genius has been thought to equal the Majesty of the People
he describes: To pass by his Patavinity, which has been understood by some, of
Partiality to his Country, and his long Orations that are pure Fiction; and
Monstrous Prodigies, which are such vanities as only serve to amuse the weaker
sort of People; his accounts of remote times are dim and blind, and for want of
sufficient vouchers, are justly questionable. He himself describes the first
times, to the Foundation of Rome, as a Poetical Period, rather than grounded
upon undoubted Monuments Li^. 1 p. 1.
; and after the building of the City, he complains, that the use of Letters had
been very rare, and consequently little could be consigned to writing, that
therefore the memory of things was his best Guide, at least so far, as to the
burning of Rome, when most of their public Monuments, did perish with their
City Lib. 6. p. 1.
: which could they have been preserved, yet they were so jejune and naked, that
they could hardly furnish out materials for a tolerable History.

The first ground of the Roman Story is the coming of Aeneas into Italy, with
this Livy begins his Book, and ushers it in with tolerable assurance, and if
any thing could be known among them, it must have been their own original, and
yet this is so far from being allowed, that Strabo Lib. 13.
plainly shows, Aeneas never stirred out of Troy; and if Homer's Authority be of
any weight, it is plain, he did not only die there, but his Posterity were to
reign there in succeeding Ages Iliad. 20. l. 306.
. And that he never set foot in Italy, has been made pretty evident, in a late
Dissertation to that purpose Bochart. Epist. number, Aeneas unquam fuerit in
Italia.
. And yet notwithstanding what can be said against it, this was so received a
Truth at Rome, that the ancient Families derived from Venus and Aeneas, and
upon this reason, the People of Troy had Privileges and Immunities granted them
by the Romans, especially by I. Caesar who derived from them. But this was an
effect of partiality to their Country and of vanity, in being thought descended
from Gods and Heroes, wherein with like reason, they have been since imitated
by other Nations.

The truth of it is, this partiality to their Nation does show it self in all
their Historians; they represent themselves not only as the most Valiant
People, but likewise as the most Just and Faithful in all their Wars and
Alliances, and having had the advantage of writing their own Story, they must
have been believed in all they say, had not there been some way left of
discovering the contrary. Themselves discover the opinion their Enemies had of
them; Galgacus our brave Countryman is introduced describing them as Pirates and
public Robbers, Men of insatiable Avarice and unbounded Ambition, and upon
these motives, as disturbers of the Peace of Manking: And tho no doubt that
noble Speech of his in Tacitus, were made for him, yet the Historian had not
observed a due Decorum, had he not made him speak the Sense, their Enemies had
of the Roman People. And tho Polybius does sometimes censure the Roman Justice,
yet he no where discovers so much truth, as by what he tells us, of Fabius and
Philinus: It seems these two had writ the Panic War, the one a Roman, the other
a Carthaginian; the one blames the Carthaginians almost in every thing, and the
other the Romans: It is possible they might both be blameable, but I know no
reason, why we are not to give as much credit to the Carthaginian, as we are to
the Roman. Had such Historians as Philinus been yet preserved, we might then
have known all the Romans faults, as we now read little, besides their Virtues;
though we have the less need of them to this purpose, the Christian Apologists V.
Min. Felix. v. Lanct. Inst.
having left such an account of their Justice and public Virtues, as is very
inconsistent with their own Histories. And indeed we have one sure way of
detecting their insincerity, by comparing them with sacred Story: what
monstrous absurdities have Justin and Tacitus related of the Jews, where they
might have had opportunities of being better informed? and we are not to think,
that they have been more inquisitive in knowing, or perhaps much more
favorable in describing other Nations: So that upon the whole, the Romans in
this matter have not much outdone their Neighbors.

I am not ignorant what mighty expectations were conceived of one Man Cic. de
leg. l. 1. p. 1.
, I mean Cicero, and how forward Men have been in imagining, that nothing could
have been wanting in this kind, had he undertaken the work, he once intended.
For my part I scarce wish he had, and cannot but think, he would have been as
partial, and under as powerful prejudices, as any of the rest. For how do you
think he had cut out and contrived his Work? He had designed a History from the
foundation of Rome, to his time, and in order to that designed to begin at his
own Consulate, and write backward to Romulus V. ^ion. Cass. l. 46. ad Iuit.
Tus^al. i^.
: A very preposterous and unaccountable Method, did not the reason appear; the
Good Man was full of himself, and was impatient to come at his own praises;
Catiline, no doubt, was in his head, and after he had pressed his Friends to
write that War, and could not prevail with them to undertake it, he is resolved
to do it himself; and whether in the conduct of the Work, Cicero's Character
would not have been too large, and Catiline's too foul, I leave to every Man to
judge: Would not Catiline have been painted out in the same dress, as he now
stands in the four Orations? And had our Orator's History come down as low as
Anthony, should we not have had too much of the Philippies, to be reconcilable
to truth? Cicero requires so much of Oratory as an ingredient in an Historian
De Orat. l. 2. juxt. init. Epist. 12. L. ^.
and so much partiality in his own Historian, as to confirm the suspicion,
beyond a doubt.

If I should descend to Modern times, I should have a large field before me,
but the path is so trodden, that every Man's own reading will furnish him with
observations: If there should be any Man, who has made none of this kind, he
needs only peruse the English and French Historians, and by comparing them
together, he will find matter of Diversion and Admiration at the same time. How
differently do they describe the same action? How manifestly in favor of a
Party? How often do the French glory in a Victory, which with the English is
esteemed an Overthrow? And again how do the English sometimes proclaim Victory,
where their Enemies think they have given them a Defeat? How do they both
Triumph, where perhaps neither of them have reason to glory? Or if the
advantage be too undeniably on our side to be contested, as at Agincourt and
Cressey, how do our Enemies seek to lessen it? How do they palliate every
thing, and charge Heaven, or cross accidents, or mad Despair, with the fortune
of the Day? How do they turn every Stone and labor to have the success and
Honor fall any where, rather than on the English? Whereas on the other side,
How do the English arrogate all to themselves, and their own courage, and
scarce allow any share to Fortune or Despair, or lucky accidents. You have
Fabius and Philinus, only altering the Nation in the French and English. What a
reproach to truth was it, That a Duke of Orleans, one of the first Persons in
France, should be said to be openly executed for Treason at Paris; as was
reported in twenty Histories, whilst the D. was living, and could contradict
the report, who afterward died in peace, to the shame and ignominy of all his
Historians V. Bodin. Meth. Hist. cap. 4.
. Or who could imagine, that it should be thought an universal Custom amongst
the English, that upon an invitation to a Friends House, the Person invited,
should in compliment, lie with his Neighbor's Wife? And yet this, however
barbarous it may seem, has been related, by an European Historian Chalcocond.
l. 2. p. 49.
, a Christian, and one that lived almost to the last Century. Would not a Man
have suspected, he had lived two thousand years ago, or in some remote corner
of the world, where the English had been reckoned amongst Barbarous People?

These are Domestic Instances. If we look abroad; upon the discovery of the
West Indies, what strange Relations have we had from thence? we have been told
there of a Nation of Amazons, of Giants of a prodigious Stature, the People of
such monstrous Shape and truculent Aspect, as if they were of another Species;
and as many Cannibals, as might eat up an ordinary Country V. P. Mart. Ang.
Ocean. p. 2. 4. etc. Purch. l. 2. p. 34, 58, 91, 79.
. Whereas upon further enquiry, we meet with no Amazons, unless long Hair and
want of Beards will metamorphose Men into Women, and the People are much of the
same size and shape with the rest of Mankind: But the Spaniards either saw them
in a fright, or were under the vanity of reporting strange things, or being in
love with the Gold of the Country; they were to represent the People as
Monsters, that they might have a fairer pretense to destroy them. And such
Instances may serve to illustrate ancient History. Doubtless, Herodot^s and
Diodorus were imposed upon by such false Relations, and had not the like
opportunities with us, of correcting their mistakes.

I should be infinitely tedious, should I give a History of Incredible things,
and therefore I only touch upon some few, and those too matters of Fact, which
ought to be most certain: Whereas should we launch out into Mysteries of State
and the Cabinets of Princes, which are the most instructive part, and most
properly the Business of an Historian, we should be still more in the dark.
Matters of Fact are visible things, and fall under common observation, whereas
politic reasons and considerations, are abstruse and hidden, and only
penetrated into, by some few of clearer Capacity and deeper Reach: every
ordinary Capacity can judge of time by the point or hand, but the spring and
secret Motions are only observed by Men of skill. These Men in the State are
the Ministers, though the secret be often hid even from them; for the Reasons
which Princes give, are often only pretended, and rather what they would have
others think of them than the true motives by which they are guided. Such
things are out of my Road, and therefore I dismiss them.

I shall only observe further, that however vicious our Histories may be
already, there has been one way taken to make them more corrupt, by Secret
Histories and Turkish Spies, and other Books of the like nature, which by an
appearance of Truth and by mingling it with falsehood, impose upon Men of easy
belief, and are now grown so numerous, that it is a matter of Discernment to
distinguish betwixt Spurious and Genuine Pieces. To which I may add Varillas
and Maimburgh, and other French Authors, who write with so Romantic an Air, as
if they designed rather pleasant Books, than true History, and rather to
entertain, than inform their Reader; who give us paint instead of Dress, and
make Heroes, if they cannot find them.

I have done with this Head, and have kept close to one Condition of History,
the consideration of its Truth; for should I take in all the Conditions
required by Vossius and Le Moyne, we should either have very little History* or
none at all. The Jesuit Le Moyne, one of the last that has treated of this
Subject, requires such Conditions, and lays down such Rules as no Man can
follow, and is so nice in his Examples, as to allow Disc. 1. chapter 2.
only four Historians among the Romans and not so many among the Greeks, and
all of them short of Perfection. And as to the Moderns, he is yet more
scrupulous, in admitting them into account, only it had been strange, had he
not found two or three of his own Order, Ma^^eus, Strada, and Mariana, whom he
thinks fit to equal with Tacitus and Livy. He designs us a History himself, and
to that end has chalked out such a method as he means to pursue; but if we may
Judge of his veracity, by his perpetually running a Parallel betwixt History
and Poem; or of his prejudices, by his partiality to his Order, he is not like
to outdo his Predecessors: And notwithstanding his great design, we may
conclude this Chapter, as he does his Book, That a Complete History, shall not
appear, but in that year, that discovers the Perpetual Motion and the
Philosopher's Stone.

CHAP. XI.
Of Chronology.
CHronology and Geography have been looked upon as the two eyes of History, if
these shine dim, our History must be yet more obscure; without these it lies in
confusion, is only a heap of indigested matter, flat and insipid, and will
neither profit nor delight in reading. It is time and place that give Life as
well as Beauty, and a naked relation of things, without Circumstance, is very
unaffecting stuff: So that as if these can be had, they will be an accession of
Beauty, in want of these, there will be as great a blemish. And in what measure
we have them, we must next enquire.

And here again I shall pass by the fabulous accounts of times, such as the
Chinese, Egyptian and Chaldaean may be justly thought to be; for though Is.
Vossius has attempted the Chinese Antiquity, and the Egyptian Dynasties have
been endeavored to be reconciled by our Learned Countryman Sir John Marsham;
yet there are so many things to be supposed in their Accounts, and so little
possibility of proof at so immense a distance, that the Systems which they
raise are perfectly precarious; and whatever the aim of those Authors was, I
doubt neither of their Books have done Service to Religion. They seem to me
like an Hypothesis in Philosophy, which being granted, our Philosophers will
argue plausibly upon it, and make a shift to reconcile all difficulties that
shall be brought, though the ground they go upon be Fiction and Enchanted: so
these men will shift off objections pretty plausibly, and lay things together
in Specious order, though the Foundation they build upon, be laid in the Air.

It Is true our Accounts of Greece are somewhat more clear and certain, but then
they are such as are too recent; if you trace them up to their remote
Antiquities, the Graecians are as obscure as the rest of the World; The
Athenians, the most knowing People of that Race, know nothing of their own
original; according to themselves they were (...), and either sprung from the
Earth or had no original at all. When their Historical Age takes place, yet
their Periods of time are dark and confused, and their Chronology is not so
ancient as their History. This has been observed by Sir I. Marsham Chron. Can.
p. 14, 139.
, who shows that the Ancient Greeks, were wholly unskilful in Chronology,
especially in the Technical part of it. There was such diversity and inequality
in their Years, and such variety in their Periods and Cycles, as did
necessarily occasion great Confusion; and it was impossible they should make
right Computations of times, where they had no sure rule to go by: This they
had not, and accordingly their year was so disordered, and their Recurrent
Feasts thereby so unsettled, That Aristophanes Ap. Seld Marm. Arund. p. 233.
pleasantly tells us, that the Gods themselves did not know them, and
introduces the God's complaining of the Moon, that by her uncertain notice of
these good times, they were disappointed of their Entertainments, and often
forced to return back hungry to Heaven. Meton was the first who adjusted these
differences, and reduced their Accounts to tolerable Regularity, by the
Invention of that famous Period of nineteen Years, for which he has deserved
the honor to be recorded in Letters of Gold; Though his Period was not so
accurate, as not to be capable of amendment, and therefore was afterward
corrected by Calippus and Hipparchus. So very unsteddy have their computations
been. The Arcadians may have been thought to have been before them in this, if
you will take that account of their being before the Moon, assigned by some; by
understanding it of their having had a Course of Lunar Years, before the Greeks
had fixed their Periods; unless Scaliger's reason will be thought more probable
Proleg. ad Emend. p. 3.
.

Nor are the Roman Computations more Regular: It has been looked upon as matter
of wonder, That the Romans should differ so much in their first and great
Epoch, the time of building their City; Onuphrius Comment. ad Fast. p. 15.
reckons up seven different opinions, most of them maintained by considerable
Authorities, and is not a little amazed at the disagreement. I should have
wondered if it had been otherwise, considering either the darkness of their
Ancient History, or the irregularity and unequalness of their Computations. So
little regard had they to order in time, upon the Foundation of their City,
that their first Years were neither regulated by the Course of Sun or Moon.
Romulus instituted such a Year as might be expected from a Warlike Prince, and
an Illiterate People, consisting of ten Months, beginning at March, and ending
at December V. Blondel Hist. du Call. Romans L. 3. C. 1.
: and although this Year was soon discovered to fall short of the Natural Year
and Course of the Sun; yet it is probable, he had not Skill, or perhaps Concern
enough to correct the Mistake; and the Intercalations that were made, were done
in an unskilful, or negligent Manner: So that the Year of Confusion must have
happened sooner than it did, had he not been succeeded by a Prince, who had
more inclination for the Arts of Peace than War. Numa undertook the Calendar,
where Romulus had left it, and though I do not think he had any assistance from
Pythagoras, as some have imagin^d Blond. ib. cap. 2.
, (which I doubt will appear to be a Chronological Mistake) yet he reduced the
Year to better order, than could be reasonably hoped for, in so dim an Age, by
adding the two Months, which had been wanting in Romulus's Account, and
ordering such Intercalations to be made, as were necessary to set right the
irregular Days. But whether it was that his Calendar was yet very imperfect, or
that the Highpriests (with whom the power of Intercalation was lodged) were
wanting in their Duty, or whether somewhat of both concurred to the
miscarriage; this is certain, that before I. Caesar's time, the course of the
Year was so much disordered, that the Months had run back into one another,
their Winter was run into Autumn, and their Summer into Spring; and had not
that wise Prince applied a Remedy; their Winter might have run into Summer.
These Inconveniences being observed by Caesar, put him upon a Reformation,
which he attempted by his Pontifical Power, and the assistance of So^igenes, a
skilful Astronomer, and having run all the irregular Days into one Year,
consisting of Fifteen Months according to Suetonius, or of 445 Days, as
Cens^rinus will have it; by one Year of Confusion, he brought their Calendar
again to order, by such a Regulation, as is too well known, to need to be
explained. However, his Computations (notwithstanding the Skill of the
Undertaker) were not accurate enough, for in less than 1300 Years from the
Council of Nice, to Gregory XIII.) the Calendar and the Heavens were found to
be again at Discord, and to vary ten Days in the Course of the Sun, and about
four Days in the Course of the Moon, which brought things into such disorder,
as to occasion another Year of Confusion, under that Pope, in the Year 1582.

And though this Pope's Reformation, has been thought so complete, as to be
styled A Perpetual Calendar, and Medals have been struck upon the occasion to
perpetuate the Memory of the thing, yet he must be a bold Man that will
undertake, it shall be perpetual, or will venture to maintain it to be so
exact, as not to admit of improvement. This is well known, that it had not been
long abroad, till it was censured, and its failings discovered, by Scaliger and
Calvisius, and wanted an Apology from Clavius, who had been one of the
Principal Persons employed in the design; with so little success
notwithstanding, that if we will believe Scaliger Scaliger an. P. 51.
, it wants a Second Apology. And unless the Motions of the Sun were perfectly
regular and uniform even to Minutes and Scruples, (which according to the best
Calculations they are not) it is scarce possible they should fall under an
Invariable Rule. However this be, unless this Calendar were more generally
received, than it has yet been, it is like to occasion further confusion: For
whilst it reaches little further, than to those Kingdoms, under the Obedience
of the Pope, and the Julian Account obtains, in almost all the other Christian
parts of Europe, we are cutting out Work for future Critics, who are like to
find Employment enough some Hundred Years hence, in reconciling the Differences
which shall arise from the Old and New Style.

From this Historical Account of Times, I think we have a fair Specimen of the
uncertainty of Chronology. Should we remove the Scene from Times to Men, they
will further evince this Truth: The two great Men in this sort of Learning,
were Scaliger and Petavius, the former of these has taken prodigious pains upon
the Subject; which appears in several of his Works, so more particularly, in
his great Work of the Emendation of Times, of which he had so good an Opinion,
and was so much Complemented by Learned Men, upon his Divine and Immortal Work,
that a Man would have imagined the Difficulties in the Accounts of Time, had
been pretty well cleared, and little left to be done further. His Divine Work
had not been long abroad in the World, e're it was taken notice of by Petavius,
who had spent as much time in these Studies, as Scaliger had, and is so far
from allowing him those mighty Praises, that he shows, he had been almost under
a continued mistake. A great part of Petavius's Doctrine of Times; is spent in
confuting Scaliger, scarce a Chapter in his five first large Books, wherein
Scaliger is not mentioned, and his many Errors and Hallucinations discovered;
in such manner, that his Work might as reasonably be entitled a Confutation of
Scaliger, as a Doctrine of Times. He will scarce allow him to have done any
thing well in Chronology, or to have made any considerable Discovery, unless it
were in the Julian Period, and after he had granted him that Praise, as if he
had done him too much Honor, he retracts that Commendation, and will not allow
him to be the Inventor of that Period, but to have stole it from the Greeks Ac
pr^fecto in tot Scriptis ab eo Chronologicis libris, nihil fere est, quod
momentum aliquod ad rem ullam habeat; quodque reprehensionem effugiat, praeter
particulam istam, qua Iulianae Periodi methodum explicavit -- Quanqum in eo
castigandus est non nihil Scaliger: quod se periodi illius Inventorem, ac
methodi fuisse glorietur, hanc enim ^ Graecis transtulit -- Doctr. Temp. L. 9.
c. 1.
And if that Invention had been allowed him (which our Learned Primate perhaps
with more reason does attribute to a Country man of our own a Biship of
H^reford) yet it being only a Technical thing, and common measure for fixing
and reducing other Periods unto, and it self no real Period in time; though it be
of good use, as an Instrument to work with, yet it is no real discovery in the
Accounts of time, which notwithstanding this, remain in the same obscurity,
only they may be ranged in better order, under this common Period, than they
were in before. So that either Scaliger had discovered nothing, at least
nothing considerable, or he has been very unjustly censured by his Adversary
Petavius. In many things, no doubt, they have been both of them mistaken; though
both of them pretend to demonstrate, and in many of their Calculations proceed
with Mathematical assurance.

What has been done since, has been chiefly in the Historical part of
Chronology, (the Controversy some Years ago, having run much in the Technical,
the Reformation of the Roman Calendar, having probably turned Men's Disputes
that way) wherein Father Pagi has excelled, and from one accidental Observation
(to say nothing of his other Discoveries) concerning the Quinquennalia,
Decennalia, and other Roman Feasts, has given much Light to the Roman Fasti,
and discovered the Mistakes of Scaliger, Petavius, Baronius, and most of the
Historians and Chronologers, who have Writ before his Time. How far his
Observation will hold, Time must show; he seems to glory too much, where he
compares it to the Discovery of the West Indies by Columbus Pagi, Dissert.
Hypat. p. 6.
.

Our late Incomparable Bishop of Chester, as he begun to write about the same
time with Pagi, so he has done it with like success, and from some dark Hints,
and particularly from his Observations upon Plotinus's Life by Porphyry, has
given much light to a very obscure part of History, in his Cyprianic Annals:
though I cannot altogether have the fame Opinion of his Posthumous Chronological
Works: For behold the Power of Prejudice even in good Men! The Bishop in this
Work being to fettle and adjust the Succession of the Roman Bishops; it happens
that Eutychius's Annals were of good use to this purpose, and very agreeable to
the Bishop's Opinion: Who this Eutychius was, is well known, one whom the
Bishop in his Vindication of Igna^ius's Epistles Par. ^. Cap. ^.
, had represented as too modern Authority to be much credited, living in the
Tenth Century; and ignorant of the Affairs of his own Church, a trifling Arabic
Historian, without Judgment, and contradicting himself: And yet this same
Eutychius, when he favors the Bishop's Opinion, though he knew little of his own
Church, is good Authority in the Affairs of the Church of Rome, where he had
reason to be ignorant, Oper. Posthum. Dis. 1. C. 14.
and the Bishop is so possessed with him, that he forsakes our Greek and Latin
Authors, to follow his Footsteps; although his Authority be really of no value,
and he has had that right done him to be contemned by most of those who have
taken notice of him; except Mr. Seldom, who to gratify his Anger against the
Bishop, gave us a part of this Author, and encouraged Dr. Pocock to publish the
rest.

We have been promised great things of late from Medals and Inscriptions; Ez.
Spanheym famous for his Book, De usu Numismatum, has largely shown the Use of
Medals De Vsu Number. P. 859.
in Chronology, which Du Fresne, and Foy-vaillant have since illustrated by
Example; the one, in the Constantinopolitan Emperors; the other, in the History
of the Seleucidae accommodated to Medals; and a third has gone so far, as from
a few obscure Medals of Herod's Family, not only to call in question the
Authority, but by broad Intimations, to suspect of Forgery, both Josephus, and
several others of our best Authors. But besides the danger from a dim Legend or
Inscription, where the least stroke, will alter the Sense, or determine the
Number very differently; whoever considers, That Annius of Viterbo could forge
large Histories, will surely not think it strange, that we should have
Forgeries in Medals. It is too certain, there have been such, and the thing is
so noted, that some Medals are now as valuable, for being exact Counterfeits,
as others are, for being truly Originals. And as to Inscriptions, who knows
not, that it was generally the way of Flattery, to Complement Princes and Great
Men of all sorts, with fulsome Elogies, and that Domitian's Medals and
Inscriptions were called in after his Death, because he had not deserved such
Honors? And though I do really think the present French King to be a Wise and
Heroic Prince, yet I believe there are few, who would be willing to take his
History, from Menestrier's Lewis XIV. from Inscriptioes and Medals.

CHAP. XII.
Of Geography.
A Stranger to Geography, that should read the Voyages of Ulysses or Aeneas, as
they are described by the Poets, and should observe the time that is spent, the
Removes that they make, and dangers they undergo, in being tossed from Shore to
Shore, would be apt to imagine, they had visited most parts of the habitable
World; and yet it is plain, one of them scarce went any further than the
Aegean-Sea, and neither of them ever past the Mouth of the Streights: It is
much so, with our Ancient Geography, where we have a great noise and little
done. The Poets were wise in stopping short of the Straits, for had they
launched out, and led their Heroes beyond these Bounds, they must have been in
danger of being lost, all beyond having been, Terra Incognita. Nor can this
seem strange in the Poets, the Ancient Historians and Geographers knew little
farther; Herodotus Herod. l. 2. Strab. l. 3. ad init.
is lost when he passes the Straits, Posidonius and Artimedorus in Strabo make
the Sun to set there, and A^istotle's Philosophy will carry him little further,
who will needs have India to confine upon the Straits, and Hercules's Pillars:
And indeed it is so far true that the Straits and India did border upon one
another, as India seems to have been a common name amongst the Ancients for
Ignorance, for where they knew no farther they called it, India: of which
Strabo tells us Lib. 2.
all the Geographers that have writ have given us nothing but lies. I will not
enter upon a narrative of the mistakes of the Ancients, and show how they have
confounded places nearer home, and jumbled Sea and Land together, how some of
them have mistaken the Mediterranean, and joined it with the Persian Sea: How
the Northern Seas have been made to run into the Caspian, That is really a
Lake; and the Arabian, has been made a Lake, that is well known to flow into
the Ocean: He that has a curiosity may meet with a plentiful Harvest of such
mistakes, in Strabo's three first Books.

Strabo indeed has corrected many of these mistakes, and has delivered things
down to us with g^^^ter accuracy: But neither is he exact enough; he is too
much an Historian, to be a Good Geographer, and wanting Tables and Maps, and
the Longitudes and Latitudes being things beyond his Skill, without which it is
scarce possible to fix places a right, he must needs err for want of such Helps
to guide his Course: And the same may be said of most of the rest of the
Geographers, before or soon after his time.

The honor of reducing Geography to Art and System, was reserved to Ptolemy,
who by adding Mathematical advantages, to the Historical Method in which it had
been treated of before, has described the World in a much more intelligible
manner. He has delineated it, under more certain Rules, and by fixing the
bounds of places from Longitude and Latitude, has both discovered others
mistakes and has left us a Method of discovering his own. What these are I need
not say, the most considerable may be seen in Agathidaemon's Map of the World,
which is printed with Ptolemy's Works, and is the first of its kind now extant.
A man may see there with some pleasure, what Idea the Ancients had of the
World, after it was thought, to have been pretty plainly discovered by
Ptolemy's labors: No very clear one you may be sure; amongst other mistakes,
the situation of Britain is quite mistaken, Scandinavia a large Peninsula, is
divided from the Continent, and contracted into a poor narrow Island; Africa is
described without bounds, and no passage allowed from the Mediterranean to the
Red Sea, and it will not be wondered, if the description of India be remote from
truth. Lesser errors abound in him; how many of this kind have been detected by
a late skilful Geographer Cluvet. German. Antiq. Praef.
only in one of our European Nations? And how many more might be shown in the
rest? And if he could be so much deceived, as he is, in the Description of
Cyprus, an Island near Alexandria, and almost at his own door, it will not seem
strange, that he should be more out in his accounts of Scandinavia and Britain.
It is certainly no commendation, that the forecited Author, prefers Pliny's
accounts to Ptolemy's, who has not been very reputable for his accuracy or
truth, and that Strabo (in the Historical part) is preferred to them both.

We have had a Geography of late deducing all things from the Phoenician
Antiquities, which has appeared with pomp enough to dazzle men into an Opinion
thereof, and thereby to obtain Credit and Reputation in the World. The Author
is a considerable Person, and one who in order to establish his Phoenician
Antiquities, has successfully enough overturned those of the Greeks: But when
he comes to establish these Antiquities, the first thing he complains of, is,
want of Monuments Praef. ^d Chan.
and therefore flies to the Greeks to fetch them thence; so that we are much in
the same place, where we were. However what are these Monuments, which we meet
with there? By his own Confession only some loose and broken Fragments, which
seem to disover little more, than in general, that the Phoenicians made long
voyages, and visited remote Countries; and what is that to us, if they have
left us no Charts or Journals, which they have not done? So that at last, he
usually takes shelter in the derivation of a word, or place, from a Phoenician
Root, wherein, though he has been happy enough in his conjectures, yet this way
is principally conjectural, and too precarious to build a Geography upon. If
this be all, I will undertake Goropius Becanus will go near to do as much for
the Dutch, Pere Pezron for the Celtique, and almost every Country, that
pretends to an Original Language, and has a fanciful man amongst them, will do
the like for their own Nation. I am unwilling to oppose this Author, for the
sake of his Title, which is Geographia Sacra, and shall readily grant, nay it
is what I contend for, that as far as it is Sacred, it is likewise true; but
where he leaves Moses, he forsakes his Guide, and wanders as much as the
Phoenicians ever did.

I have no design to form a Comparison betwixt the Ancients and Moderns, they
are both alike to me, but the advantage in this, is too visible on the side of
the Moderns to be dissembled: They have opened a passage to a New World,
unknown to the Ancients, and those parts of the Old, which have been thought
Unhabitable, have been found to be Inhabited; and their Torrid Zone to be
Temperate enough, by refreshing Showers, and constant Breezes, and cold Nights,
by the direct Setting of the Sun, and interposition of the whole Body of the
Earth. Antipodes, who have been the Subject of so much Controversy, are to us
Matter of Fact, and the Globe it self has been compassed with less noise by
Magellan and Drake, than the Phoenicians and Greeks could Coast upon the
Mediterranean. However, least we should swell too much upon our Discoveries,
there is yet World enough left undetected to be a Check upon our Ambition.

I am not of his Opinion La Mothe le Vayer, Vol. 1. P. 825.
, who thinks that almost one half of the Terrestrial Globe is yet undiscovered,
but by modest Computation, I suppose we may allot a fourth part. That there is
a vast Southern Continent, as yet scarce looked into, is now past Centroversie;
though I much doubt, whether the further Discovery would turn to great account;
for the Dutch, who pretend to have Sailed to the 64th. Degree of Southern
Latitude, have observed Mountains covered with Snow; and no farther South than
the utmost Bounds of America, the Straits of Magellan are so Froze in April
Narborough's Voyage, P. 15.
, that there is then no passing that way for Ice: So that much of the Country
must be cold and barren, answerable to our Northern Climes on this side. The
Northern parts of America are yet undiscovered, nor can it be determined, till
its Bounds that way be laid open, whether it be a vast Island, or a Contiment.
Africa, though it has been compassed round and round from the Mediterranean to
the Red Sea, yet little more than its Coasts are thoroughly known, except Egypt
and Abassia; its Inland parts have been either not sufficiently viewed, or
imperfectly described, neither the Merchants Gain, nor the Missionaries Zeal
having determined their Pursuits to such rude and desolate Countries. And as to
Asia, what a prodigious Compass are we forced to fetch about, to come at the
extreme Regions of that Quarter of the World, most of which might be saved, and
a Voyage made with half the Charge and Time, could a Passage be discovered by
the North, to Tartary and China: A Passage which has been often attempted, but
always with disappointment, and sometimes with the loss of the Adventurers; and
is like to continue, a ne plus ultra, to their most daring Endeavors: Whether
we consider the Dangers they are exposed to from rough Winds, in a Clime
intensly cold; or from Mountains of Ice, which are the Rocks that are most
feared in those Seas; or the Difficulties in making their way in thick Mists
and Fogs; or what may happen worse, in Nights of some Months continuance, and
no Moon either to direct their Course, or give them Light. To say nothing of a
vast Ridge of Mountains, which has been observed by our late Missionaries Le
Count. Memoir. Let. ult.
to stretch it self forth into the Tartarian Sea, the Cape whereof has never
yet been doubled, and probably never may; it being doubtful, whether these
Mountains may not reach to the opposite Coast, and join America with the Asian
Continent: So that the bounds of Asia on that side, as well as the opposite
American Coast have been hitherto hid from our Enquiries.

There is one thing yet very lame in our Geography, the fixing the true
Longitude of places; and though several new ways have been lately tried, to
redress this Inconvenience, both from exact Pendulums, and from Observations
upon the Immersions and Emersions of Jupiter's Satellites, yet they have not
altogether proved effectual. For want of this, China has been placed in our
Maps five or six hundred French Leagues further distant, than it really is Le
Count. ib.
, and an imaginary Country found out, to fill up the vast intermediate space;
and Vossius, who delights in Paradoxes, (who has magnified Old Rome to above
Seventy Miles in compass, and its Inhabitants to fourteen Millions of People
Var. Observat. P. 23, 34. ib. P. 168.
has removed it yet farther off. And though the Jesuits of the Mission, have
pretended to rectify this Mistake, from the Mathematical Observations
above-named, yet neither could Vossius see into the strength of such Arguments,
and I much question, whether they would have obtained Credit, had not a
Missionary of the same Order Avril. l. 2.
determined the Matter in a more undeniable way, by opening a Passage from
Muscovy to China, and by marking the several Stages, and showing, from
undoubted Relations, it was only a Journey of so many Days. And yet the
difficulty is greater at Sea, which is not capable of being so easily measured,
and where the Observations in our Telescopes cannot be so regularly made, as
they may upon firm Ground; and there it is, the Jesuits themselves complain,
they are at a loss.

Vossius has assigned such a reason Var. Observe. p. 169.
of the variety in fixing the Longitude of the Eastern part of the World, as
may be extended further, and be of excellent use in Speculations of this
Nature. Upon the discovery of the West Indies, by the Spaniards, and a Passage
opened by Sea near the same time, to the East, by the Portuguese; Alexander VI,
by the Power which Popes have of disposing of Temporal Kingdoms, did by solemn
Bulls Marian, l. 26.
dispose of this new World to these two Nations; and having divided it into two
Hemisphaeres, the Western Hemisphaere he allotted to the Spaniards, and the
Eastern to the Portuguese; a Division which the Dutch and English have not
thought themselves obliged to submit to. However, the Division was made, but
when the Parties came to claim their respective Shares, a Question presently
arose about fixing their Longitude, and the Pope's having not been then
Infallible in Matters of Fact, especially in such as depend upon Mathematical
Calculations; the two Nations were left to end the Controversy betwixt
themselves. The great Contention was about the Molucca-Islands, which the
Spaniards claimed as theirs, and the Portuguese pretended, fell within their
share in the Division, and Men of Skill being consulted on both sides: the
Spanish Geographers went one way, and the Portuguese went another, and so far
were the two Nations from coming to agreement, that they differed almost forty
Degrees in their Calculations, which is a large proportion of the whole Globe;
and yet so obstinate were both in their Accounts, that Orders were given by
public Edicts, that the Degrees and Meridians should be no otherwise fixed in
their several Charts and Maps, than as they have been determined by the two
Nations. How much the one side was mistaken, has been since better known, the
Conclusion was, that whilst the Longitude was determined, in such an
unaccountable manner, by public Edicts, and absolute Power, it occasioned
strange confusion in our Degrees and Meridians, of which Vossius thinks, we
have not recovered since.

But granting the Globe to have been nicely measured, has it withal been as
accurately described? I doubt not. How are our Modern Geographers perplexed in
making out the S^tuation of Ancient Places? Babylon once the most Glorious City
upon Earth, is almost as much hid ^uyts p. 492.
, as the obscurest Village ever was; nay, they often stumble, where they tread
in known Paths. Ferrarius has given us a Geographical Dictionary, pretending to
be Universal, afterward so much Enlarged and Corrected by Baudrand, as to seem
a new Work; they were both of them Men noted for their skill in Geography:
Notwithstanding which, their joint Work had not appeared above Twelve Months in
the World, till Monsieur Sanson had discovered five hundred Faults Nouv. de la
Rap. An. 84. p. 310.
only under the first Letter A. A Work of the like Nature has been since
publi^h'd in English by two other extraordinary Persons, and though no Sanson has
yet made his Observations upon it, yet I will undertake with the little skill I
have in Geography, to show greater Mistakes under the Letter A, than any that
occur in Ferrarius, or Baudrand. To name only one, the Azores are there
described as the same with the Canary Islands; which is an Error of worse
consequence, and more inexcusable, because the first Meridian is usually placed
in these Islands: And yet they stand thus in the correct and enlarged Edition.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Civil Law.
WE have certainly one great Proof of the Excellency of the Roman Laws, from
the consent of those many Nations, by whom they have been received; and that
too where there is no Living Authority to enforce them, and they come
recommended only by their own native force: The Roman's Laws have lived longer,
and spread wider, than their Arms ever did, and the Conquests of their Wisdom
have been greater than those of their power. However, there is only one perfect
Law, a Character to which no Humane Ordinance can have any claim, and of which
the Roman Laws will be found upon Examination to fall much short;
notwithstanding the Reputation of Wisdom that they stand possessed of.

The Twelve Tables contain the first Grounds of the Roman Laws, and having been
Abridgments of those of Solon at Athens, and those of the other Cities in
Greece renowned for Knowledge, added to the Ancient Customs of Rome; if there
be any Wisdom in Humane Constitutions, it might be expected to be met with
there. It was of these Tables, that Cicero pronounced under the Person of
Crassus De Orat. l. 1.
, that they were of more Use and Authority, than all the Books of the
Philosophers. We have only some Fragments of them left Collected by Baldwin and
others; amongst which, as there are some things hard, so that Law which permits
the Body of the Debtor to be cut in pieces, and divided amongst his Creditors,
for want of Payment, is not only Cruel but Barbarous. Baldwin Com. de Leg 12.
Tab. c. 46.
himself cannot quote it without Exclamation; and Quinctilian who could give a
color to most things, and as a Roman was concerned to do it in this, yet where
this Law comes in his way, rather seeks to excuse it Ap. Bald. ib.
than offers at its defense. The best thing he says for it is, that it was then
antiquated, and as such we leave it with the rest of that Set, and pass on to
those, that are now in force, the Imperial or Iustinianean Laws, and will see
what Exceptions can be made to those.

They are principally reducible to two Heads, the Pandects and the Code,
whereof the first contains the Opinions of Learned Lawyers; the other, the
Decrees of Roman Emperors. As to the Institutes, they usually go along with the
Pandects, and are only a Compendium, or useful Introduction to young Beginners:
and the Novels are a Suppliment to the Code: The Feuds are not of Roman
Original, but Customs of a later Date, and meaner Extraction.

The Civilians who pretend that if the Latin Tongue were lost, it might be
found in the Book of Pandects, would take it ill to be thought mistaken in the
Word Pandect, which although a Masculine H. Steph. de abus. Ling. Gr. p. 12.
, is generally used by them in a Feminine Signification: This is a light Error,
only it is in the Threshold. It will not be denied, the greatest part of the
Pandects are writ with purity enough, they have that from the Authors, and the
Age they were writ in, and so much is owned by those Critics, who have been
pretty severe upon the other Tomes of the Law, and therefore I shall make no
Objection here: No more than I shall, that the Emperor by whose Order they were
collected, is under no very advantageous Character for Learning, that which
Suidus gives him being (...), a Man that did not understand his Alphabet: For
though he were unlearned himself, he might employ Men of Understanding, and if
Tribonian were such, who was the great Instrument in that work, his Laws will
have no less Authority upon that account: But so it happens, that Tribonian's
Character is worse than the Emperor's, not for his Understanding but Integrity,
being represented by the same Author Suid. ad Tribon.
as a Corrupt Person, one that writ Laws and took them away, and prostituted
Justice for the sake of Lucre, one that complied with his Prince's Passions and
Humors, and flattered him almost to Adoration. I know Suidas's Authority is
suspected, in both these instances, and therefore I should lay the less weight
upon it, did not Justinian seem to countenance the charge in his own
Constitutions V. Constitut. de Cod. conf. and de Conc. Digest. ubi. Divina
nostra, Numen nostrum, etc.
, where he assumes such Titles and Honors, as Tribonian is said to have given
him. However I charge nothing upon this Emperor, I only cite his Words, and
leave others to judge of and reconcile them.

But whatever Tribonian's other qualifications were, I doubt we have too much
reason to blame his want of care, and to suspect the Conception of the
Pandects, as well as the other Tomes of the Law, was a hasty work, and not
digested with that accuracy, which a work of that vast importance might justly
require. For whereas in his time the Books of the Law, had been g^owing up
above 1000 years, and had then swollen to that Bulk that they were contained in
2000 Volumes, so many as could not easily be read in some years, much less
compared and digested and reconciled; Tri^onian with his few Assistants had
overcome all these difficulties in a short time, and in three years had
finished the Digest and Institutes, then added to the first draught of the
Code; which last in all probability, having been composed too hastily, was
forced to undergo an Emendation and to come forth in a second Edition. And
doubtless the Digest might likewise have been more correct, had it cost more
years, and had had Trihonian's second Care. The Emperor himself seemed
surpised with the Dispatch, for as before it was undertaken, he styles it an
infinite Work, such as none of the former Emperors had ventured to undertake,
or thought possible; so after it was finished within the Compass of thr^e
Years, he plainly owns Constitut. lb.
, he did not imagine, it could have been effected in less than ten. Accordingly
the marks of have have been observed in the Work: In some places too short and
consequently obscure, in others redundant and ^he same things repeated only in
different words, or from different Authors; Antinomies are almost unavoidable
in such variety of Opinions and Answers, and sometimes inextricable
difficulties occur, by mangling the Sense and curtailing Authors: Some things
in that or the Code seem not so cons^stent with the Canons Wind^ck, Can. and
(...) cons^ns and di^.
; and other Cases yet harder have been cited Pa^q. Rech. l. 9. c. 41.
by a Learned Advocate. A great part of it is spent in Cases and subtle
Opinions, possibly of greater Learning than real advantage in the common uses
and occasio's of Life; and all these are left us much indigested, in loose and
broken Sentences, not in such method as is suitable to a Regular Body of Laws.
Most of which particulars have been taken notice of by ^ud^eus, Hottoman,
Valla, and others.

Nor is the Code less liable to Censure, for besides that it wants much of the
purity and Learning, which appear in the Pandects; Tribonian^s unskilfulness or
insincerity do more visibly display themselves here. For whereas, almost all
the Books of the Ancient Lawyers are now lost (the blame whereof, if some Men's
suspicions may be credited, will fall heavy on the Emperor or Tribonian) from
whose labors the Pandects were collected, and therefore we are less able to
Judge, of any unfair dealing that has been shown there; Many of the Emperor's
Constitutions do yet remain and have been preserved in the Theodosian Code,
from all which it is easy to determine, what sort of treatment, the Imperial
Constitutions have met with, in Tribonian's new Compilation. Some of the
Constitutions have been altered without Judgment, and others in such a manner
as betray no little ignorance in the Compiler; in some the words are struck
out, that determine the Sense of the Law, and again words added that give it a
new* one one Law is split into two, and sometimes' two are run into one; the
time and date are often mistaken, and sometime the Person; the knowing of both
which does afford great light to a Constitution: With other mistakes, which I
should not have ventured to have put down, had they not been shown at large, in
a Learned Preface and more Learned Prolegomena to the Theodosian Code: A Code
of such use to this day, that there is no understanding Iustinian's Law without
it; and formerly of such Authority that for several hundred years after
Iustinian's time it did obtain V. Seld. Dis. ad. Flet. c. 5. v. Pasq. Rech. l.
9. chapter 36.
in some of the Western parts of Europe, when Iustinian's Law was in a manner
extinguished and forgot, and must have been in danger of perishing at least in
the principal part of it, the Pandects, had it not been preserved, in the Pisan
or Florentine Copy, from which all our other Copies Ant. August. Emend. l. 1.
c. 1.
have been taken; and is now used as Law: So that by a strange Reverse of
things, Iustinian's Law which for so many Ages was lost or neglected, does now
obtain, and the Theodosian Code is in a manner antiquited: The Theodosian Code
was the better Law, till the Reign of Lotharius, when Iustinian's Law begun to
revive; and now, it seems, Iustinian's Law is better than that, and Time, or
Chance, or Opinion shall determine their worth. It is plain Iustinian's Law had
not the same esteem at its birth, as it has since acquired by Age, since it
could go into disuse so early after its conception, as to make it a question,
whether it obtained its Course Pasq. Rech. l. 9. C. 33.
in Justinians own reign? Or if it obtained then, as doubtless it did, it kept
its ground a short time till the Reigns of Basilius and Leo, when Iustinian's
Law was Abridg'd and Reformed by those Emperors, as he had done by the Laws
before his own time; and these Emperors Laws obtained in the East under the
Title of the Basilic Constitutions) till the dissolution of that Empire, as the
Theodosian Code had done in the West. So that if we might measure things by
Success or Duration, Iustinian's Laws have not yet been long lived, and what is
more surprising, it might perhaps be made a question, in what Sense they live
now? For if we will believe a noted Author, who had reason to understand their
Authority and Extent Sr. W. Temp. vol. 1. p. 161.
they have not now the force of Laws, either in France, Spain or Holland, (some
of the most considerable Nations in Europe) but have only the force of Good
Reasons or Authority when alleged, but the Customs and Statutes of those
Places, are only Laws. An^ of this Opinion Mr Seldom (...) 6.
seems to be, as to some other European Nations.

After the Consideration of the Pandects and Code, if I should take in all
those large Volumes, that have been writ upon them, I should make no end. The
first attempts of this kind were pretty modest, only by explaining the Text in
short Glosses, which was Accursius's method: But he having not had the
assistances of Humane Learning and particularly of the Greek Tongue, the want
of these have betrayed him to gross and childish mistakes: And it is a wretched
Gloss, where a Sentence of Greek occurs in the Text, Haec Graica sunt quae nec
legi nec intelligi possunt. And yet his Authority is great in the Law, much
greater than that of his Son; of whom it is said he never made a good Gloss V.
Gryphiand. de Ins. p. 9, 10.
.

Commentaries succeeded Glosses and have swollen to a larger Bulk: In this kind,
Bartolus is of great name; whose Authority is as much valued in some Nations
amongst the Modern Lawyers, as Papinian's was among the Ancients: who, as he
was to be followed, where the Opinions of the Lawyers were equally divided,
Duck de usu. l. 1. c. 8.
so Bartolus's Opinions of late have been of like force. He was confessedly an
extraordinary Man, and might have done more service in his Profession, had he
not lived under the same Infelicity of times, and wanted the same helps that
Accursius did, whereby he dashed against the same Rocks. It was from him, we
have had that noted and almost Proverbial saying that has cast some reproach
upon the Law, V. vit. Bart. ap. Freher.
De verbebus non curat Iurisconsultus, and odd expression for an Interpreter of
that Law, one Title whereof is, of the signification of Words: But this was a
Title, that he did not care to meddle with, and which his Enemies have charged
him, with not daring to explain. Notwithstanding all his Faults, he ought not
to have been treated so reproachfully by L. Valla, and the Men of Polite
Letters; for however unpolished he may be in his his Style, or nice or obscure
in expressions, or however ignorant in History or Roman Customs, it is certain,
he is not that Goose and Ass, that Valla Op. p. 632.
would make him; and that he has more Law, tho the others may have more
Learning.

The Polite Men of this Set, who gave the last turn to the Law, were Alciat,
Cujacius, Budaeus and others; they have indeed restored the Law to its
primitive Purity and Luster, and clothed it in a more Elegant Dress, and made
that a pleasant study, which in the hands of Bartolus and Baldus was uncouth
and rugged; They have given it all the advantages of Humane Learning, and
ransackt all the Stores of Arts and Sciences to fetch thence Beauties to adorn
it: But whilst they have busied themselves in various Learning, and attended to
too many thing at once, they have been thought wanting in the one main thing;
and have had less Law, than many of those whom they censure and despise. Ant.
Augustinus, who should have been named with the first of this Rank and Order,
does in a manner confess the charge, and owns that Budaeus whilst he had been
too much distracted, in attaining the Tongues, had made no great progress in
the knowledge of the Law. The most considerable improvements, that have been
made by these Men, have been principally upon one Title, about the
signification of Words, in which, however they may have excelled, they have
been rewarded by Bartolus's ^ollowers with no better Character, than ^^at of
Grammarians and Critics. And ^^deed many of their Discoveries are not (...)
remarkable, and some of them (...) a Catalogue of which may be had (...)
Gentilis's two last Dialogues, (...). because it is too sportful, I forbear
(...) That wherein they (...) excel being the Signification of (...), will be
allowed to fall much short of the knowledge of things.

One thing should not have been omitted, that has occasioned no little
obscurity and confusion: when the Law by the Bulk and Number of Books that were
Writ, was grown too voluminous, a way was taken up of contracting it into a
narrow Compass, by short Notes and Abbreviations: This way was found to be of
such use and so compendious, that it prevailed much, but its inconvenience was
quickly discovered from the Ambiguity that such short Notes were subject to,
and therefore they were forbid by a Constitution Cod. l. 1. Tit. 17.
of Justinian. However the mischief was not so easily remedied as forbid, for
it still prevailed, and that almost in Iustinian's own time, and some of them
have crept into the Florentine Pandects, which though not so Ancient as
Justinian, (as some have been of opinion, but whom this very thing V. Ant. Aug.
Emend. l. 1. c. 1.
does sufficiently confute,) yet must be granted to have been writ soon after;
and at last they grew to that height, and occasioned such Confusion and
Ambiguity, that several Treatises have been writ to explain them; a Collection
of which, and a Specimen of the notes may be had in Putschius. Even of late
they have been found so troublesome, that the Italian entered them in his
Prayer, amongst the three Evils he Petitioned to be delivered from, (he might
have deprecated greater Evils) and after, Dafuria de villani, and Da
guazuabuglio di medici; Dagli and caetera de not ai, was the third Petition V.
Her^. Hug. de. Orig. Scr. c. 21.
.

And here again, as in the entrance upon this Chapter, I must profess my esteem
for the Roman Laws, which I would by no means be thought to undervalue, and all
that I infer or pretend to prove is this, That no human Laws are exempt from
faults, since those that have been looked upon as most perfect in their kind
have been found upon Enquiry, to have so many.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Canon Law.
I Have no design to bring contempt upon the Ancient Canons, which were
doubtless, very well fitted for the occasions of the Church in its purer Ages;
having been framed by Men of Primitive Simplicity, in free and conciliar
Debates, without any ambitious Regards. That which is justly complained of, is,
that these Canons are too much neglected, and a New sort of Discipline erected
in the Church, established upon different foundations, and oft-times for
different ends with the former; which is so notorious, that it has given
occasion to a distinction amongst some Members of the Church of Rome, betwixt
the Old and New Law: Especially amongst the French, who pretend that the
Gallican Privileges, are chiefly Remainders of the Ancient Canons, which they
have preserved against the Encroachments of the Roman Pontif. For that Prelate
having taken advantage of the fall of the Roman Empire, and of the confusion
among his Neighbors, upon the inundation of the Goths and Vandals and other
Barbarous People; and of the ignorance that ensued thereon; made a pretty easy
shift to erect a New Empire, and for its support it was necessary to contrive
and frame a New Law. I shall not recount the several advances that were made in
the several Ages; Is^dore's Collection was the great and bold stroke, which
though, in its main parts, it has been since discovered V. Blond. Pseudo-Is. and
Tur. Vap.
to be as impudent a Forgery as ever was, yet to this Day stands recorded for
good Authority in the Canon Law.

The two principal parts of this Law, are, the Decrees, and the Decretals,
which, to give them the greater face of Authority, answer to the Pandects and
Code in the Civil Law: For as the Pandects contain the Answers and Opinions of
famous Lawyers; and the Code, the Decrees made and Sentences given by Emperors;
so the Decree consists chiefly of the Opinions of the Fathers and Definitions
of Councils; and the Decretals, of the occasional Sentences and Decrees of
Popes. As to the Clementines and Extravagants, which may answer to the Novels,
they are only Suppliments to the other two parts, and we have yet no Institutes
in the Canon Law. For as to Lancelottus's Book of Institutes, which Dr. Duck
seems to make a part of the Corpus, he is therein mistaken, if it be his
Opinion, for wanting Sanction and Authority, Dou^at Hist. du Droit. Can. Par.
2. Cha. 20.
it is only yet a private work.

The Decree carries contradiction in its very Title, being Concordantia
Discordantium Canonum, or a Concordance of disagreeing Canons: Or if there were
none in the Title, I doubt there are too many in the Body of the Work, which
have occasioned innumerable Glosses and busied the Canonists in reconciling
them. It having been compiled by Gratian, in an Ignorant Age, we ought not to
be too nice in examining it, and perhaps it were unreasonable to require too
much accuracy, amongst so much Ignorance; and therefore if his Style in Latin
be somewhat course, or if in quoting a Greek Father or Council, he mistakes
their meaning, or gives a wrong one, that might easily be forgiven him, Greek
being a Language, that was not understood in that Age, and was rather the
misfortune of the time, than his own: But then if he gives us such Fathers and
Councils as have no Being, or if he mistakes a Father for a Council, or a
Council for a Father; this surely is not so parpardonable, and yet this is what
he has been charged with, Ant. Aug. D^ Emend. Great. Di^ al. ^, etc.
by Authors of his own Communion. And among the Jesuits, who are not usually
wanting in the Cause of their Church, Bellarmin owns, that he has quoted a
Heretic instead of a Father. And the poor Monk having probably never seen many
of the Decrees and Councils, that he had occasion to use, nor traced his
Authorities to their Fountains, but having made use of others Collections, it
was impossible but he should fall into mistakes* which are so numerous,
especially in the names of Persons and Places, that a Man had need of good
skill in History, and of a New Geography to understand him a right; and without
such helps, one may easily lose himself in travessing the Decree.

It might be expected that he should be pretty exact in the names of Popes,
these being his Lawgivers, whose Authority he makes use of upon all occasions,
and yet even in these he sometimes miscarries, and gives us such names as were
never heard of in Ancient Story. I can never read him, but he puts me in mind
of a late noted Author, who has given us a Church History of Bishops and their
Councils; for as in that Book, you may meet with a Council at Araufican, V. Mr.
P. and D^. M's An^.
Another at Tole^ane and a third at Vienue near France, with others as remote
from knowledge, as these are; so in Gratian, you may find like mistakes, only
altering the Language, a Concilium Aur asicense, Anquiritanum, Bispalense, and
more of the like nature: one would be tempted to think, that Mr. B. had studied
the Canon Law and had borrowed his Authorities from thence.

After so much Ignorance we are not to wonder, if Gratian have no very
favorable Opinion of Humane Learning, which is condemned in the Decree, more
particularly Poetry and Logic: Those of the highest order in the Church, even
Bishops themselves V. Distinct. 37. Episcopus Gentium lib^os non legate --
are forbid to read Books of Heathen Learning, and St. Ierom's Authority is
urged who was reproved by an Angel for reading Cicero. It is true, the
Canonists endeavor to reconcile this, by alleging other places in the Decree,
where Learning is allowed, and by showing it to be Gratian's way, to cite
differing Canons and Opinions to the same purpose; and I will grant so much if
they please, but then it can be no great commendation of a Law, that it
contains such contrary Opinions, that it must be another Man's work to
reconcile them. Nor does his Morality exceed his Learning; the Decree in case
of two Evils, the one of which is unavoidable, allows us to choose the less
Distinct. 13.
; which although the Canonists would understand of the Evil of punishment, yet it
seems pretty plain from the Text, and the Instances there produced, that it
must be understood of the Evil of Sin; in which Sense the case can never
happen, unless we will admit of a necessity of sinning, which is as impossible
in Morality, as any the greatest difficulty can be, in Nature. That which
follows in the 34th. Distinction is yet worse, is qui non habet uxorem, and pro
uxore Concubinam habet, a Communione non repellatur; which in modesty I forbear
to translate, and could hardly have believed it, to have been in Gratian: And
when I first met with it there, I thought it had been only to be found in some
old Editions, and concluded with my self, it must be amended in that more
correct and authorized Edition by Gregory XIII. But was still more surpised,
when I found it stand there uncorrected, as if there had been no hurt done. I
think nothing can be said worse, unless what is said by the Learned Ant.
Augustinus in his fifteenth Dialogue of his Emendation, to be in some Books of
Gratian be so, Qui non habet uxorem, loco illius Concubinam habere debet. If
any thing can be said worse of them, than they have said themselves, it may be
had in Luther Oper. Tom. 2. p. 120. Wit.
who began the Reformation with burning the Canon Law, and in vind^cation of
what he had done, made a Collection of such Articles, as were most liable to
give offense. I have not yet compared his Quotations with the Text, and
therefore do not put them down, but if they be faithful, I am sure there is
enough, to give a Man a hard opinion of the Canon Law.

The Decretals, though not altogether so gross as the Decree, are more Imperious,
having appeared in the World, when the Papal Power was grown to its full
height, and having been compiled by Gregory IX, and consisting principally of
the Constitutions of Innocent III. the first of whom waged almost a continual
War with an Emperor; and the latter Subjugated a King, and called him his
Vassal, nothing better could be expected. For tho several Conciliar Decrees and
Canons were intermixed with the Papal Constitutions, yet they are with such
Exceptions and Reservations to the Pope's dispensing Power and absolute
Dominion, that they became useless: Popes were now become the Fountain of all
Power, and both Princes and Councils were brought under their Obedience. It is
expressly said in the Decretals Lib. 1. Tit. 6. Cap. 4.
That no Councils have prefixed Laws to the Church of Rome, inasmuch as all
Councils do borrow their Authority from that Church, and the Papal Authority is
excepted in them all. And Innocent, in the Title, De Majoritate, exalts the
Papal Power as much above the Regal, as Spiritual things are better than
Temporal, or the Soul Superior to the Body; and having compared these two
Powers, to the two great Lights in the Firmament, infers from thence, That the
Pontifical Authority is as much Superior to the Regal, as the Sun is greater
than the Moon. Upon which there arising some difference, concerning the
proportion of Magnitude, betwixt these two Luminaries, and consequently betwixt
these two other great Powers; the Gloss does learnedly refer us, to Ptolemy's
Almagest to adjust the proportion. But I need not cite particular
Constitutions, a good part of the Decretals turning upon this point, and
resolving all into a Monarchical Power at Rome: For which reason the five Books
of Gregory Doujat. Hist. du Droit Can. Par. 2. Chapter 15. 17.
have not yet been received in France without Restrictions; no more than the
sixth Book of Boniface VIII. has been.

The Clementines, notwithstanding a good part of them were given in a pretended
General Council at Vienne in France, yet are no Conciliar Decrees, only the
Constitutions of Clement V. Such having been the manner of some of the late
Western Councils, That the Bishops were only Assessors or Advisers, on at the
most Assenters, and the Pope alone defined in a pretty absolute manner; and
therefore they are not styled Decrees of such a Council, only the Constitutions
of Clement in the Council at Vienne. The Extravagants are tedious things, and
want that Majesty, which Brevity gives to Sanctions and Decrees: Both they and
the Clementines have this besides, that having been compiled in the Scholastic
Age of the Church, they are mixed with Theological Questions, and are as much
Divinity, as Law.

Nor is the Gloss better than the Text, which, however it be of great Authority
among the Canonists, yet it may be justly questioned, whether it deserves so
much? For to take things as they rise and to go no further than the first Page
of the Decree: Gratian having begun his Book very properly, by distinguishing
betwixt the several sorts of Right, and having said that Ius, was so called
because it was Just. The Gloss upon this observes, that there is a Right that
is neither Equitable nor Just Quandoque est aliquod jus, quod non est aequum
nec justum. Did.
and produces Instances, that are neither pertinent, nor prove the Point; and
then concludes, that in all Cases upon a Reason and for public Good, Rigor is
induced against natural Equity, and in some Cases without a Reason. Take
another Instance upon the Decretals, Lib. 1. Tit. 1.
which beginning with the Symbol, of our Faith: upon that the Author of the
Gloss enquires into the Nature of Faith, and having passed the Apostle's
account, as an imperfect Definition, gives a much more insufficient one of his
own; for which he is justly chastised by Erasmus: And as for the word Symbol
that should not seem to be over difficult, he derives it from, Syn, and Bolus,
which in the Language of the Gloss does signify, Morsellus; and then enquiring
into the number of Symbols, he adds a fourth to the other three; for no reason
that I can see, unless it were that they might answer to so many Gospels.
Besides other less mistakes upon the same Title, which I pass over, because the
same Gloss says, that, Modicum quid non nocet, and cites the Decretals Lib. 5.
Tit. 3. c. 18.
for it, where modica res, is said not to induce Simony; and yet the Modica
Res, there mentioned, is a Horse.

The Canonists are too numerous to be mentioned he^e, and therefore I pass them
over, and indeed they generally keep to their Text, and run out upon the power
of the Pope, to the great Diminution of Councils or indeed of any other
Authority: And whereas in that large Collection of Tracts that was published at
Venice, there are two gross Volumes concerning the Power of Popes, and their
Cardinals; it is very observable that there is scarce any thing said of
Councils, unless by such, as will be sure to subject them to the Pope. That
Haughty Bishop is their darling Theme, and one of them has gone so low, as to
write a Tract, Joseph. Stevan. val Tract. De adoratione Pedum Romani
Pontificis, Tom. 13.
about the Adoration of his Feet. Nor shall I insist upon the differing
Opinions and Constitutions in the Decree and Decretals, in how many things they
interfere and cross, and in how many more, they contradict the Civil Law.
Baptista a Sancta Blasio, has furnished us with two hundred contradictions
betwixt the Canon and Civil Law: Zanetin has discovered a great many
differences of the same kind, and I suppose it were no hard matter, to swell
the account yet higher: But I leave those, we have already, to be reconciled by
the Learned in the Law.

That I may do all Right to the Canon Law, it must be owned, that the Canonists
have interpreted the word Concubina in a sense of near affinity with a Wife: In
the best sense, it is bad enough and has been justly censured.
CHAP. XV.
Of Physic.
IF any Credit may be given to Pliny Lib. 8. c. 26, 27.
we shall have no reason to boast of the Invention of Physic, two great
Operations in that Art, having been owing to two inconsiderable Creatures.
Bleeding and purging have been taught us by the Hippopotamus and Ibis, the
former of which being over-charg'd with Blood, breaths a Vein by rolling
himself among the sharp Reeds of the Nile; and the latter sucking in the Salt
Water, administers a Cathartic, by turning her Bill upon her Fundament. I will
not vouch for my Author, (whom if I would make use of, it should be to a
different purpose, in showing, how little reliance there is upon our Natural
History) although the account he gives here of Physic may be as true, as theirs
is, who fetch its Original from Aesc^lapius and Apollo.

It is doubtless ancient, Men's necessity and desire of Health did put them
early upon this search, and Hippocrates who lived 2000 years ago has left a
Treatise concerning ancient Physic; so that it was ancient in his time. But the
Physic then in use was chiefly Emperical, Hippocrates brought in the Rational
way, and what he did in this Art, did so far surpass others labors, that their
Works are in a manner lost and forgot; and Hippocrates who was then a Modern,
is to us a very ancient Author. His Age gave him Authority, and although that, and
his short way of writing, have rendered him less intelligible to ordinary
Readers, yet he was almost universally followed: His Aphorisms have been looked
upon as Maxims, and Macrobius Hippocrates -- qui tam fallere quam falli nescit
Lib. 1.
speaks of his knowledge in such lofty strains, as are only agreeable to God
Almighty. Notwithstanding, of late he has been discovered to be a frail Man,
his Aphorisms have been examined, and the danger detected, in blindly following
great Names; and how mischievous the consequences may have been, in an implicit
submission to all his Rules, may appear from one, which once crudely swallowed,
has cost so many lives, all which might have been saved, had the contrary
practice been ventured upon sooner, which is now found Boil. us. Expe^. Phil.
Par. 2. p. 5.
to be not only Safe but Salutary.

Galen as he differs from Hippocrates in some things, so he follows him in the
main, and both in explaining his Author; and where he gives us his own
Sentiments* is somewhat tedious; he tires and distracts his Reader as much by
being too large, as the other does, by saying too little, which yet might be
excused, had he in so many gross Volumes and different Treatises, left us a
Complete Body of Physic. But this he is so sar from having done, that it scarce
seems to have been in his design; most of his pieces having been undertaken
with particular views, either to gratify Friends, or as helps of memory, or
exercises of invention. His Anatomical Pieces, which have been cried up above
measure, have been less admired, since nicer Observations have been made in
Anatomy, than he was capable of making; and those which he has made, are often
erroneous, for want of Comparative Anatomy, in comparing and distinguishing,
betwixt the Bodies of Men and Brutes: Most of his Observations having been made
upon the latter, and it being questionable, whether he ever saw the dissection
of a Human Body. Even his Treatise De Vsu Partium has been censured, as in many
things grounded upon Inferences of his own, rather than upon Observations from
Experience and View; and the Parts are described there in such order, as none
will think fit to imitate, unless any Man can find method, in beginning with
the hand and proceeding to the Foot, and so up again to the Belly. And tho he
has been remarkable for his care and tenderness of Life, which he has
expressed, as in other Instances, so particularly in being against publishing
exquisite Treatises of the Nature of Poisons, yet I question whether it will be
thought another Instance of it, that he sometimes took away six pounds of Blood
De cur and. Rat. per Sang. mis. cap. 14.
in a Fever: And bled his Patients, till by fainting they could bear no longer,
for which he was twitted in his own time, as appears from his Books De Meth
Med. l. 9. c. 4.
and was said to work Cures by muthering Diseases.

Whatever faults he had must have been derived upon his Successors, for as he
commented upon Hippocrates, so the following Physicians have copied Galen. The
Greeks Oribasius, Aegineta, and Aetius have in a manner transcribed him; and
Avi^en and the Arabians have done little more, than translate Galen into their
own Tongue: And their Translations having not been over Faithful, and the
Version double; first from the Greek to the Arabic, and from that back again
into the Latin, they cannot be depended upon without eminent hazard, especially
in the names of Drugs and Plants, where the mistake in a word, may endanger a
Life. They were subtle Men, and most of them Logicians, accordingly they have
given method, and shed subtilty upon their Aathor and little more can be said
for them.

The Chemists have appeared with so much Ostentation, and with such Contempt of
the Arabians and Galen, that we have been made to expect Wonders from their
performances. Paracelsus who would be thought the Head of a Sect, has treated
the Galenists so rudely, as if they were the most ignorant Men in the world,
and had little skill beyond a Plaster or a Purge: Tho neither ought he, to have
vaunted so much of his Discoveries; One of his great Admirers Helmont. Chym.
Princ.
having shown, that some part of his skill was stole: And it is some prejudice
against him, that a Man who pretended to such immortal Remedies, should himself
die in his forty seventh year, whereas Hippocrates and Galen are said to have
lived beyond a Hundred.

If there be any thing certain in Chemistry, it ought to be their first
Principles, which the Chemists have substituted in the place of others, which
they have thought fit to explode; and pretend that theirs are so evident from
the Analysis of Bodies, that there can be no room for doubt; and yet whereas at
first we had only three of these Principles, their number is already swollen to
five, and who knows whether they may stop there? Or whether their practice be
better grounded than the Principles they go on? For tho great Cures have been
effected by Chemical prescriptions, and those too in a manner less cloying and
nauseous, than the former practice would admit of, by separating the Faces,
with which the Galenical Medicines are clogged; yet the question will be,
whether they be not attended with other inconveniences? Whether they be equally
safe, and have no dangerous consequences to discourage their use? It will not
be denied that the Chemical Preparations are more vigorous and potent in their
effects than the Galenical are, and often work such Cures, as the other gross
Medicines have not activity enough to effect: But then, as their activity is
great, is not the danger so too? And does not the same power, that enables them
to heal, empower them to destroy? And whilst the Cures are recorded, are not
the miscarriages forgot? Have not our Enterprising Chemists sometimes preserved
life, only to make it the more miserable? And saved their Patients by ruining
their Constitutions? Have not their strong Opiats often disordered the Head?
And their too free use of Mercury, Antimony, etc. the whole habit of the Body?
If such Cures be offered me, I hardly accept them. He is the true Physician,
who attends to all possible Consequences, who does not heal one Disease, by
procuring us a worse, but restores such a life as a Man can enjoy; but where
shall this Perfect Man be found?

Some have gone as far as China to find him out, of which People's skill such
Wonders have been reported, as the Chemists themselves can hardly pretend to.
The Circulation of the Blood, which with us is a Modern Discovery, has been
known there according to Vossius Var. Ob. servat. p. 70. 71.
4000 years, they have such skill in Pulses as is not to be imagined, but by
those that are acquainted with them; and the Arabians are there said, to have
borrowed thence their knowledge in Physic. Even the Missionaries who have
reason to know them best, grant, that there is somewhat surprising in their
skill of Pulses, Le Let. 8.
tell us they have made observation in Medicine 4000 years; and that when all
the Books in China were ordered to be burnt by the Emperor Chiohamti, those in
Physic were preserved by a particular exception. But yet they likewise acquaint
us, that most of their skill is built upon Observations, which have not been
improved, to such purposes as they would have been by the Europeans; and that
for want of Philosophy and Anatomy the great Foundations of Medicine, their
Notions are confused, and their Practice in some things ridiculous. The Chinese
are an unaccountable sort of People, strangely compounded of Knowledge and
Ignorance; they have had Printing among them, and Gunpowder, and the use of
the Compass, long before they came among the Europeans; and yet for want of due
improvement, these useful Inventions have not turned to any great account; and
Physic has had the same Fate. So that after all our Travel, the most
considerable improvements in this Art, are most probably to be found at home;
and being so near, need not be much inquired into.

We have generally Men enough ready to publish discoveries whether real or
pretended, whilst deficiencies in most Arts are often concealed or passed by in
silence. What noise have we had for some years about Transplantation of
Diseases, and Transfusion of Blood, the latter of which has taken up so much
room in the Iournal des S^avans, and Philosophical Transactions; and the
English and French have contended for the discovery; which notwithstanding as
far as I can see, is like to be of no use or Credit to either Nation. The
retrieving the Ancient Brittanica has made no less noise, Muntingius has writ a
Book upon it, and we were made to hope for a specific against the Scurvy: After
all it is like to come to nothing, and Men lose their Teeth and die, as they
did before. The Circulation of the Spirits is a third Invention, which, if I
might have leave to judge, I should think scarce capable of being proved; for
neither are the Spirits themselves visible, nor, as far as I know, does any
Ligature or Tumor in the Nerve discover their Motion. The Circulation of the
Blood has indeed been said to be demonstrated to Sense by Monsieur Leeuwenhoek,
by the help of his Glasses, and Men have been look upon as dull, that will not
see it. I will not question the Fact, though I cannot but observe that a late
Italian Hom. Piso Crewon^ An. 90. ap. Act. Lips.
Author has in effect done it for me, who either has not met with M.
Leeuwenhoek and his Experiments, or cannot see so clearly in his Glasses as he
does; which however it be ought to be some check upon assurance. I might
enumerate a world of such like particulars; Anwald's Panacea discussed by
Libavius, and Butler's Stone so much magnified by Helmont, were as much talked
of in their own time as most things we can pretend to, and yet they are dead,
and have been buried with their Authors.

The most considerable real Discoveries that have been lately made, have been
in Anatomy, and Botany: no Man in his right wits, will contest the former; though
the Discoveries in that kind have been rather in the parts of the Body, than in
the Humors and Spirits and B^ood, which are the principal Seat of Health as
well as Disease: For the first seem designed for Strength and Motion, and fall
not improperly under the Surgeon's skill; the latter are the Seat of Life and
under the consideration of Physic, and are yet imperfectly understood. Till
these be thoroughly known, which perhaps they never will, there will be one
fundamental Deficiency in our Physic.

Another great deficiency was observed by my Lord Bacon Adv. of Learn. l. 4. c.
2.
in his time, that will I believe always hold, and that is in Comparative
Anatomy: He then gran^ed, as we may with more safety, that simple Anatomy had
been clearly handled, and that the several parts had been dil^gently observed
and described; but the same parts in different Persons had not been duly
compared, nor have they yet been; tho we may differ as much in the inward parts
of our Bodies, as we do in our outward Features, and that difference may
occasion great variety in Application and Cure. This is a deficiency that is
not like to have a speedy remedy, requiring more dissections than most Men have
opportunity of making,

Nor are the deficiences less in the Botanic part; for though this sort of
knowledge be mightily enlarged, since the discovery of the East and West
Indies, by opening a vast Field, and giving a much a larger range to it than it
had before, yet the great difficulty remains still to be overcome: our Herbals,
it is true, are sufficiently stored with Plants, and we have made a tolerable
shift, to reduce them to Classes, and to describe them by Marks and Signatures,
so far as to distinguish them from one another: But as their Characteristic
marks are known, are their Virtues so too? I believe no Man will venture to
affirm it. The qualities of many of our Plants and Simples are yet in the dark,
or so uncertain in their operations, that they are rather matter of Curiosity,
than Subjects of Skill: Or where some of their Virtues are too remarkable to be
concealed, yet they act one way singly, and quite otherwise in Mixture and
Composition; or they may have one effect, when outwardly applied, and a quite
different one when taken inwardly, after they have undergone so many
alterations in the Blood and Stomach, as they must do, before they can reach
the part affected; and they may again vary, according to the different temper
of the Bodies, to which they are applied. It is not enough to say, their
natures may be known by being Chymically resolved, for their effects are often
very disproportionable to the principles and parts that result from the
Analysis; there are other parts more subt^e, and yet most active and vigorous
in their Operation, that act upon the Spirits, as the grosser part do upon the
Blood and Humors, and those the subtilest Chemists, and the most exquisite
Analysis will not be able to reach.

In short, whether we consider our Bodies, or our Medicines, Physic must be the
most uncertain thing imaginable: Our Bodies are more compounded and unequal
than other Bodies are, most other Creatures live upon a simple Diet, and are
regular in their Appetites; whereas Man feeds almost upon every thing, Flesh
and Fish, Fruits and Plants, from the Fruit of our Gardens to the Mushrom upon
the Dunghill; and where Appetite fails, the Invention is called in to swell the
Account; high Sauces and rich Spices are fetched from the Indies, which
occasion strong Fermentations and infinite disorder in the Blood and Humors:
Hence proceed such variety of Diseases as perplex and distract the Physician's
Skill. A sound Body and healthy Constitution is easily restored when out of
order, Nature in a great measure does its own work, (a noted instance whereof,
we have in Cornaro in Lessius, who by regularity and temperance had brought an
infirm Body to such a temper, that he was not troubled with any Disease, and
any wound in him would in a manner heal it self) whereas in a disordered Body,
every little thing is Wound and Disease, and a Physician must give a new
Constitution, before he can perfect a Cure; this is a hard trial upon our
Physician, and yet by our way of living we often require it.

It is the harder, because his Medicines and Methods of Cure will not enable
him to work Wonders; For though our Materia Medica be large enough, and to look
into our Dispensatories, one would think no Disease incurable, yet the mischief
of it is, all those fine Medicines, do not always answer in the Application,
nor have they been found so Sovereign in our Bodies, as they are in our Books.
All which things have so distracted our Physicians, that they vary even in the
most common Methods: At one time they keep their Patients so close and warm, as
almost to stifle them with care, and all on a sudden the Cold Regimen is in
vogue; In one Age Alkalies are in fashion, and in the next Acids begin to
recover Credit; Antimony at one time is next to Poison, and again, the most
innocent thing in the World, if duly prepared; Bleeding is practiced in one
Nation, and condemned by their Neighbors; some People are prodigal of their
Blood, and others so sparing, as if so much Life and Blood went together;
Helmont and his Followers are for the latter way, Galen and Willis and their
Followers, encourage the former: and all of them, as you will imagine, with
equal assurance.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Critical Learning.
CRiticism as it is usually practiced, is little more than an Art of finding
Faults, and those commonly little ones too, and such as are of small importance
to the Scope and Design of an Author. Monsieur Bail was sensible of this,
whose first design was to publish a Dictionary of Faults, but was diverted from
his Purpose, by his Friends representing to him, that they were not
considerable enough to be insisted on: And yet he had that to say for himself,
that they were such as were taken notice of by Scaliger and other noted
Critics, either some mistake in a Name, Time, Place, or other minute
Circumstance. The truth of it is, Criticism is at a low Ebb, Men will be
finding faults in Authors, and yet our store is well near exhausted, for there
are few Faults in this kind, that have not been taken notice of.

Erasmus and the first set of Critics had Matter enough to work upon, a long
Age of Ignorance had cut out sufficient Employment, by vicious Copies and
obtruding Spurious from Genuine Authors; the distinguishing of which was a Work
of Use and Skill: But after the Business is pretty well done, the Vein of
Criticizing still continues; Men will play at small Games rather than want
Employment, so that our Modern Critics have usually either degenerated into
Grammarians, or if they soar higher, it is too often, by venturing too freely
upon those Books, which ought to be handled with greater tenderness: Their
business sometimes is in finding Faults, where there are none, or in perverting
the Sense, that they may make room for Correction. And for as much as these Men
do find Faults with all the World, they have no reason to take it amiss, if one
who is none of their Number, does find one or two, in them. I shall seek for no
more (nor have I room in the compass of a Chapter) but they shall be in two
Critics of Name; one of whom has writ the Art of Criticism, the other, A
Critical History of the Old and New Testament.

The former, Monsieur le Clerc, is as free in his Censures, as any Man I ever
met with, and often times as Unhappy: He begins with Erasmus, for I take the
first thing I meet with, whom he exposes Ars Crit. cap. 1. p. 13. Ed. Land.
as ignorant in Geography, for having in his Notes upon Act. 28. mistaken
Rhegium, a City in Italy, for a Town in Sicily; and for having took Melita an
Island, either for Mitylene a City; or the same Island, that is situate in the
Mediterranean, or African Sea, for an obscure Island in the Adriatic: and then
falls foul on him, as a Man that had scarce ever seen a Geographical Map. It
seemed very strange to me, that Erasmus who is known to have writ his
Commentaries upon the new Testament, with the Map of the Roman Empire always
before him, should be guilty of such Errors in Geography, and therefore I had
the curiosity to consult the Author: I have not so bad an Edition of Erasmus,
as Mons. Le Clerc quotes, but I consulted the worst Edition I could meet with;
in that, he is so far from placing Rhegium in Sicily, that he expressly says, it
is a City in Italy, and corrects St. Jerome for having been guilty of so gross
a mistake: And as to Melita the Island, he directly distinguishes it from
Mitylene the City, which Island he places betwixt Africa and Sicily, a
Situation very different from that, which Monsieur Le Clerc endeavors to
fasten upon him.

Monsieur Le Clerc in the next place is angry with Erasmus for quoting Hugo
Carrensis, being an Author of no Credit, and one who lived in the Scholastic
Age, and seems to think he was led into his Mistake, by trusting so mean an
Authority: It is true, Erasmus does quote Hugo Carrensis, but it is only to
make sport with him, as he does sometimes with the Scholemen, and Monsieur Le
Clerc needed not have gone above ten Lines further for a convincing Proof of
this, where Erasmus calls upon his Reader to laugh In Act. Apost. c. 28. v. 11.
at Hugo Carrensis for his Critical Observation upon the Sign of Castor and
Pollux.

Well! But Erasmus is not yet clear of Monsieur Le Clerc, for he remembers,
that Erasmus somewhere in his Notes upon St. Ierom's Epistles, mistakes the
City Mitylene for the Island Melita, only ^ he forgets the particular place,
but it is somewhere, where St. Jerome mentions St. Paul's Shipwreck: I always
suspect a Man where he forgets the place, and therefore I will help his Memory;
it is in St. Ierome's Epistle to Oceanus in the first Tome of Erasmus's
Edition; where, if Erasmus reads Mitylene I suppose it was only because, it was
the same word, which was used by his Author St. Jerome, for both of them make
it an Island and expressly the same where S. Paul suffered Shipwreck, and
without question the same, that Erasmus meant in his Notes upon the Acts. If
Erasmus be to be blamed in any thing, it is for making St. Jerome, read
Mitylene instead of Melita, for in all the MSS. that I have seen of that
Father, and I have seen more than one, the reading is, Melita: But I dare say
that is more than M. Le Clerc knows. Erasmus may have had mistakes in
Criticism, for though he tells us of himself, that his care in publishing St.
Jerome was such, that it cost him almost as much pains, in restoring his Works,
as it did the Author in writing them; yet Marianus Victorius Epist. Pio Quarto
pretends to have made 1500 Corrections upon him barely in the Edition of that
Father; and the Benedictines, no doubt, have added more. But as for M. Le
Clerc's attacks, I dare be confident, they will neither hurt St. Jerome, nor
any of his Editors; though he falls as foul upon the Benedictines, as he does
upon Erasmus. He would gladly make the World believe, that they understand not
Greek, and indeed they pretend less that way, and therefore their chief care
hitherto has been in the Latin Fathers, in which they have deserved great
Commendation: But as to M. Le Clerc's Critical observation Tom. 2. cap. 13.
which he passes upon them with so much Contempt, it is so far short of proof
to me, that I cannot but think their mistake better than his Correction, I am
sure more agreeable to St. Ierome's meaning.

He has past the same censure in another Work Patres Apostol. A^t. 98.
upon one who has less deserved it, the Learned Sorbonist Cotelerius, who has
not been susepcted of want of Greek, till M. Le Clerc took him to task, he has
caught him tripping in his Greek, where all things were plain, and tells us he
has shown it in his Notes upon Barnabas and Clemens. For my part I can meet
with no material Corrections upon either of these Authors, and the only thing
he charge him with in his Preface is, That he renders, (...), Capitulatim,
which in M. Le Clerc's opinion, should be summatim, which in reading our
Animadverter, a Man, would think Cotelerius had done, either in Barnabas or
Clement's Epistles. I have read over hastily these three Epistles; I will not
be overpositive, but I am pretty confident, the word does not occur in any one
of the three; and if it be to be met with in the Clementines, it is nothing to
the Animadverter's purpose; for we are not to expect to meet always with
Classical Greek there, or with words, always in the sense of Classical Authors.
Cotelerius Barnab. Es. p. 1.
has rendered the Verb (...), as M. Le Clerc would have it; and if he have
rendered the Adverb otherwise, it is probable it was not from mistake, but
judgment. Had M. Le Clerc considered, that there is a sort of Ecclesiastical
Greek, very different from the Classical, he would have been more reserved in
his Censures. But this is a sort of Greek, wherewith he seems not to be much
acquainted. St. Jerome, who understood this sort of Greek better than either of
them, has re^dred (...) by, recapitulare Ad Ephesians. cap. 1. v. 10.
; and though M. Le Clerc should oppose, I must think St. Jerome a good Translator.

Our Historian is a Critic of a higher form, but sets out as unfortunately as
M. Le Clerc has done: To recommend the Critical Art to the World, he tells us,
that in St. Ierom's time several Ladies of Quality, made Criticism their Study;
and to prove this Hist. Crit. du Vieux ^est. p. 1. 2.
quotes an Epistle of that Father to Iunia and Fretella, which shows them to
have been knowing in the Greek and Hebrew. The Hebrew was so little known in
that Age, that perhaps St. Jerome was the only Person of his Time, that
understood it perfectly, except the Jewish Rabbis, who were his Instructors;
and this Father Simon knows very well: But as to the Father's two Ladies, I can
assure him, there were none of that name that understood a word of either
Language: for Sunnia and Fretella were two Learned Men of St. Ierom's
Acquaintance. Somewhat of this was observed by a Friend of Vossius Let. a M.
Iustel.
: and if Father Simon have any doubt of the thing, I have that Epistle now
before me in two very fair Manuscripts; in both which it is, Dilectissimis
Fratribus Sunniae and Fretellae. This is no very great mistake, but it is
always ominous to stumble at the Threshold.

I will not trace him through his mistakes; I will only Note one other, which
an Englishman has better opportunities of examining than other Men have. Father
Simon Hist. Crit. du N. T. c. 30, 31, etc. Hist. des verse. c. 3, 5, etc.
has not taken more pains upon any one Subject, than he has done upon the
ancient Manuscript Cambridge Copy of the Gospels and Acts of the Apostles, and
two other Manuscript Copies of St. Paul's Epistles; the one in the King of
France's Library; the other in the Library of the Benedictines of St. Germain:
In the Latin Copies, of which he thinks he has discovered the Ancient Vulgar
Latin, as used in the Western Church, before St. Ierom's time, to whom we owe
the Vulgar now in use. I should be as glad, and would go as far to meet with
the Ancient Vulgar of the New Testament, as any Man shall do; but cannot be of
Opinion, that Father Simon or Morinus have met with it in these Manuscripts.
For to speak only to the Cambridge Copy: Any one that has observed that
Manuscript, knows, that the Latin Copy answers the Greek so exactly, that there
are very few various Readings: So that if the Latin be Ancient, as the Vulgar
undoubtedly was almost as Ancient as the Preaching of the Gospel at Rome, the
Greek probably is so too; and it will hardly be imagined, that had there been a
Latin Copy so exactly agreeing with the Greek Original, before St. Ierom's
time, that he would have ventured upon, or have thought a new Translation
necessary. St. Ierom's manner of reforming the Ancient Vulgar was, by comparing
and reducing it to the Greek Original: but here was a Copy already, agreeing
with the Greek. If it be said, the Greek in that Man^script may be a more
Modern Copy, but still before St. Ierom's time, and that the Latin is
translated from it: This may be true; but then the Latin is no longer the
Ancient Vulgar, but a later Version.

There is one pretty probable way of trying it, by comparing the Citations in
the New Testament, with the same Texts, as they stand in the Ancient Vulgar, in
the Old. This I have done in the Psalms, and am far from meeting with any exact
agreement: The same Observation will hold, in the Old Ecclesiastical Writers,
as far as the Vulgar can be traced there; and I believe Hilary the Deacon, who
has been noted for keeping closest to the Old Translation, will be no exception
to this Rule. Had Father Simon been as quick and diligent in observing
Differences, as he has been in marking Agreements, perhaps he would not have
been so hasty in drawing his Conclusion: In many things there is an agreement
betwixt the Ancient and Modern Vulgar, but no Man will conclude from thence
that they are the same.

Father Simon truly observes Hist. N. T. c. 30.
, that the Greek in these Manuscripts, is very faulty, and grounds an Argument
thereupon, that they could not for that Reason be brought from Greece. Had that
Father had a Copy of the Latin Version of the Cambridge Manuscript, as he has
of the Greek, he would have found, that the Latin is the more faulty of the
two; and that not only in the Orthography, but Concord. For what would he think
of Hic verbus, Joh. c. 21. v. 23. Or of, Retiam, v. 6. and repeated, v. 8. Or
of, Cumesset in Mesopotamiam posteaquam mortuus esset in Charris, instead of,
Prius quam moraretur in Charan: Act. 7. v. 2. Or of, Esset ei Filium, v. 5. Or
of, Iustitias coepisset cum genus nostrum, v. 19? All which mistakes are to be
met with in two Chapters, and more, which I forbear to mention, as I do to
translate those I have mentioned because I would not uncover the nakedness of
this Version. But though mistakes of this kind be so common, as to occur pretty
frequently in this Manuscript, yet they are not very agreeable to the Style of
the Ages before St. Ierom. We have enough left us of the Ancient Vulgar, to
enable us to judge of its Style, by all the Remainders of it we have, though it
has not Elegancy, which it did not affect, yet it appears to have been writ
with tolerable Purity; whereas the Version we are now speaking of, is uncouth
and rude, and almost barbarous.

What then shall we think of it? Whatever the Version is, or whencesoever it is
taken, the MS. it self seems to be Gothic; and probably both are of the same
Extraction, and were done after St. Ierom's Time, when the Goths had overrun
the Empire; and Father Mabillon De Re. Diplom. p. 347.
the greatest Judge of MSS of this Age, sets the second part of this MS. no
higher. We have already seen the Version is rude, and suitable enough to these
Times, and Dr. Marshal Ad Evang. Goth. p. 403. ^84, etc.
upon the Gothic Gospels has observed such an agreement betwixt those Gospels
and the Cambridge MS, that he thinks them to be taken from the Greek of that
Copy; and this agreement he has shown in several particular Texts. The
Characters in that MS are many of them Gothic, and Father Simon, who thinks he
has met with Greek Letters in the Latin Copy of the Second Part of this MS, and
Grounds an Argument upon it, is undoubtedly mistaken, for they are only Gothic
Characters several of which have a great affinity with the Greek: The
Abbreviations are often the same in the Cambridge MS and Gothic Gospels, and
the Numbers expressed by Numeral Letters, i and g are sometimes pointed, and
ei, for i, put down after the Gothic way; and Eusebius's Canons are placed in
the Margin, in a rude manner, without Marks of Distinction to make them useful,
with other Gothisms, that might be observed, did I design this, for any more
than a Hint or Specimen. One thing is too observable to be passed over, that
whereas our Savior's Genealogy in St. Luke, is placed in Columns in the Gothic
Gospels, it is put down in the very same manner in the Cambridge MS, which is
the more remarkable, because the rest of that MS is writ in long Lines, and the
Words run into one another. From all which, one would be apt to infer, That
this Copy was taken under the Goths, that it is compounded of the Ancient and
Modern Vulgar, which were both of them in use in the Gothic Churches, and
particularly in Spain two or three Centuries after St. Ierome's Time; though in
many things it differs from them both; as it needs must, whilst it keeps so
close to a Greek Copy much differing from any Copy, either Printed or
Manuscript that we now have. It has been taken from a Copy fitted for
Ecclesiastical use: For that it has been taken from such a Copy, appears from
the (...), or Lessons marked in the Margin Rubric-wise; and from the Word (...),
sometimes put at the end of a Lesson, to denote the Conclusion of a Reading.
That these are the Marks of such Copies has been observed by Father Simon Hist.
N. T. Chapter 33.
, and he needed only have applied them to this Manuscript, to have shown it to
have been taken from a Copy of this Nature. I am so far satisfied, of its
having been taken from such a Copy, that I once thought it, to have been fitted
for the Churches of the Greek Empire, when both Greek and Latin were spoke
there, as they were from Constantine, till after Justinian; in like manner, as
they yet have the Bible in two Tongues in such places, where the People are of
two Languages: But I think I have reason to alter my Opinion.

What Father Simon further conjectures, concerning the French MSS of St. Paul's
Epistles being the Second Part of the Cambridge Copy, is undoubtedly true of
one of them; For besides that in a Catalogue of the Books of the New Testament,
at the end of one of these, MSS Morin. l. 1. Exerc. 2. c. 3.
, the Gospels are placed in the same order, wherein they stand in the Cambridge
Copy, St. John immediately after St. Matthew, and the agreeableness in the
Character betwixt the Cambridge and Benedictine Copy, according to the Specimen
of it, we have in Mabillon P. 347.
. There is a Fragment of St. John's last Epistle, betwixt St. Mark's Gospel,
and the Acts of the Apostles, not altogether in the same hand, but in a Version
somewhat different from the present Vulgar which shows, the Catholic Epistles
have been there, and that the Book was once entire, bating only the
Revelations, that were not for some Ages, so universally received in the Church.

If I have brought the Age of this MS too low, or lessened its Authority too
much, I shall be ready to alter my Opinion upon better Reasons, for I am not
much concerned for the Reputation of a Critic. I hope I shall always have a due
Concern for Religion and the Church, and that my opinion should be true, I
think, is the interest of both: For this Copy differing so much from all
others, the less Authority we give it, it will be able to do the less hurt. I
am sure they have set it too high, who fetch it from Irenaeus, or St. Hilary,
both which Fathers were Born before the Goths had Letters; for that the
Characters are Gothic, I think I may be pretty positive. For this Reason I
shall never desire to see it Printed, though a worthy Person seems to have that
Design and a Scheme has been marked out to that purpose: But I hope that
Learned Body, in whose Custody it is, will have more regard to the Will of the
Donor, whose first Intention, it certainly was, that it should not V. Bez.
Epist. ad Acad. Can.
be published.

Its various Readings have been given us already in the Polyglott Bibles, though
not over accurately, and sufficient care taken that it shall not, In uno
exemplo periclitari; And what would the Critics have more? Even Father Simon
has procured a Copy, from England, though I much suspect, it is no other than
those various Readings: The Father tells us, Morinus had it from Iunius the
Library Keeper of Cambridge, by such a mistake Hist. N. T. Chapter 30.
as another Critic has given us a Magdeburgh College at Oxford. But of this
perhaps too much.

I will only offer one Criticism, in order to wipe off a Blot from the English,
that has been unjustly cast upon the Nation, either by the Author, or
Interpreter. I have already said in another Chapter, that Chalcocondylas does
report of the Enlish, that upon a Visit made to a Friend, it is permitted the
Stranger by way of Complement to Lie with his Neighbor's Wife: This the
Learned Interpreter of Chalcocondylas does plainly say, and it stands so in the
last Royal Edition of that Author: But the Word in Greek, is (...) * which one
would suspect was rather meant of Kyssing; no doubt some wandering Greek had
been in England, and having observed our way of Kyssing our Neighbors Wives,
which might as well be let alone, had reported it to Chalcocondylas in a Word
of nearest affinity in the Greek, and thereby given occasion to this Mistake.
This Account seems so probable, that (with Submission to the Critics) I durst
almost venture from thence, to add one other Word to our Glossaries.

(...), being a proper word for kyssing, there can be no great doubt of the
Correction I made, nor needs the word be thrown into a Glossary any otherwise,
then as it seems to be there rendered from the English.
CHAP. XVII.
Of Oriental Learning, Jewish and Arabian.
IT has been an old Question, and much debated amongst* Learned Men, whether
greater Profit or Inconvenience arises from reading the Jewish Books? On the
one hand it is alleged, that the Hebrew Tongue, and Jewish Rites and Customs,
can be no way so well learnt, as from themselves; and that as in order to
understand the Greek and Roman Polity, it is necessary to read Greek and Latin
Authors: So if we would be acquainted with the Jewish affairs, we cannot learn
them better, than from their own Books. On the other side, they have been
charged with gross Ignorance, even in their own affairs; and their Books said
to be so stuffed with Trifles, or, what is worse, with poisonous Opinions, that
the profit in reading them will not countervail the danger. Accordingly they
have met with a very different Fate; At one time they have been ordered to be
read and studied, as by Clement the 5 th, Clementin. l. 5. Tit. 1.
in the Council of Vienne: And again, the Talmudic Books have been adjudg'd to
be burnt, as 12000 Volumes were by public Order, V. Sixth. Senens. l. 2. p. 120.
only out of one Library at Cremona; And had not the Famous Reuchlin advocated
for them under the Emperor Maximilian, they had been in danger of an Universal
Ruin.

In such variety there may be need of distinction; And therefore the Jewish
Writers may be considered two ways, either as Witnesses, or Interpreters: In
the first sense, they have been Faithful Depositaries, and very useful in
handing down the Sacred Volumes, and in preserving the Text entire: In the
other sense, their Skill or Authority, as Interpreters, has not been thought
very considerable.

The great Reason whereupon their Books have been valued, has been their
seeming Antiquity: In the last Age, we have been told of Books as Old as
Abraham and Ezra, that have had the fortune to be believed by wisemen; V.
Morin. l. 2. Exerc. 6. cap. 1. Exerc. 9. cap. 8, etc.
and could their Rise be traced up and derived from such an Original, they
would have reason to be valued: But this Vizor has been taken off, and their
Novelty or Imposture has been detected: Morinus has brought down most of them
several Centuries from their boasted Height. Their Talmud that has been
commented upon by the Modern Rabbis, has been shown to be little older than
the Age of Justinian, the first Authentic mention we have of the Misna, or Text
of that Book (for the Gemara, or Comment must have been yet later) being in one
of his Novels Novel. 146.
, and probably, the Contention among the Jews about receiving it, had given
occasion to that Law. Origin and St. Jerome knew nothing of that Book; who
notwithstanding were inquisitive Men, and knowing in the Hebrew, and having had
opportunities of consulting their Hebrew Masters, and occasions of citing them,
and having done it in things of less moment, could not have avoided mentioning
this, had it been then in being, and so noted, as to be a standing Law
Ecclesiastical and Civil among the Jews Morin. ibid. Exerc. 6.
. Their two Books Bahir and Zohar, so venerable; among them for their mighty
Age, have been brought down yet lower; tho whatever Age they be of, they can be
of no use to any, being only a heap of Cabbalistical Niceties Buxtorf Bibl. Rab.
, which tho much valued by such Men, as admire every thing that is abstruse and
hidden, are sufficiently known to be nothing better than Jargoon and Cant. The
truth of it is, few of their ancient Books have been thought much better, being
either so mystical, as hardly to be understood, or so full of Gross Legend, as
to force them to take shelter under Allegories to reconcile them to sense.
There is little Light to be borrowed from them, for almost a 1000 Years after
the last Destruction of their Temple; and tho about that time, some of the
Modern Rabbis began to introduce Learning, yet this was no part of their
Rabbinism, but a departing therefrom; most of the Learning they had was
borrowed from the Arabians; and Maimonides, Qui primus inter suos desiit
nugari, by mixing Philosophy and Reason with his Comments, in order to make
their Books speak sense, thereby gave such offense, that he was continually
persecuted for it by his Brethren, Buxtorf Praef. in Mor. Ne. vocb.
and hardly escaped being branded for a Heretic. They that have taken the same
way, ought upon their Principles to fall under the like Censure; and it ought
always to be remembered, that the modern Rabbis have done best, whose Authority
by their Age is inconsiderable, and their Skill not so extraordinary, as to
need be imitated by Christians, who now understand their Language as well, and
their Critical and Philological Learning much better than they do themselves.
Even Maimonides Mor. Nevoch. Par. 1. cap. 67.
confesses of his times, that the Jews were not then skilful in their own
Language.

I am not ignorant with what design some Men have decry'd the Rabbis; whatever
their design may have been, they may have spoke truth, and at the same time
mistake their aim: We have the less reason to be jealous of them, since they
are not the only Men that have gone this way: For to pass by Luther, who has
treated the Rabbis very ruggedly In Genesis cap. 16, etc.
Let us hear what a great Professor, Reuchlin's Scholar and Successor says of
them, one who had spent all his Life, and part of his Estate in these Studies;
Ioh. (...).
In his Preface to the Dictionary (one of the first considerable ones of this
kind) he gives this account, In them is no light, no knowledge of God, no
Spirit, no true and solid Art, no Understanding even of the Hebrew Tongue --
they have done nothing worth notice toward understanding the Sacred Text;
Their Dictionaries and Comments have brought more obscurity than Light or
'Truth -- And then goes on to challenge them in matter of Fact, and to point
out a better way than that which they have followed, and such as himself has
pursued.

He may have gone too far in depressing the Rabbis; if he have been too warm
in decrying them, doubtless others have gone too great a length the other way,
who have studied the Talmud so long as to draw Contagion from thence, and
almost become Rabbis themselves: A Countryman of our own has exceeded in this,
who tho he has only commented upon one Book, has had such Faith in the Talmud,
as to believe, That many of its Traditions were divinely delivered to Moses in
Mount Sinai, which it was not lawful for Moses to divulge in writing; but being
transmitted down orally to his Posterity, they are related to us in the
Talmudic Books. V. Praef. ad Cod. Ioma. Multa Alkgorica and p^a dicta, quae
Antiqui Rabbini a Deo exagitati ^j^usque numine abrepti protulerunt, in
scriptis Talmudic it continentur. Ibid.
And least this should not be enough, he is of opinion, There are many
Allegorical and Pious Sayings contained there, that were uttered by the ancient
Rabbis, when heated with the Divin^ty, and moved by God. Could any Jew have
said more? Or could it be imagined, a Christian would have said so much? If
these be the Fruits of Rabbinical Enquiries, surely they were better let alone.
That a Man that is conversant in these sort of Studies should undervalue all
other sorts of Learning, is no new thing; it is what has been observed, and for
which a reason may be given: For these Enquiries being out of the way, and not
every Man's possession, vulgar Studies must be despised by Men of uncommon
Seize, and those only valued that are difficult and uncommon. Or that
others should imagine they find Eloquence in the Rabbis, and should compare
Abravanel to Cicero, and Aben-Ezra to Sallust Sim. Crit. Hist. l. 3. c. 7.
, is not very strange; for Men are apt to find Beauty in Blemishes, where they
have placed their Affections: But that Men should proceed to Idolize them, no
other Reason can be assigned, but that which is given for all Idols, and that
is, that they are all of them vain.

Because the Rabbis have been said to have borrowed most of their humane
Learning from the Arabians, I will likewise speak one word of them. As the Jews
have borrowed from the Arabians, so have the Arabians from the Greeks; For they
were so far from having any Learning of their own, that the true Arabs, the
Descendants of Ismael, had no Letters; and their Language must have been lost,
had it not been preserved in their Poems, that were composed by their Ancient
Bards Pocock ad Spec. Arab.
, and by their facility being easily learnt, were delivered down from hand to
hand. Other Learning they had very little, except Poetry, till having overrun
the Eastern Parts of the Greek Empire, they were taught it by the Vanquished
People, who translated the Greek Authors for them into their own Language; and
the Arabians being Men of quick Wits, refined so much upon their Authors, that
Aristotle became more subtle in the Arabic, than he was before in his own
Tongue; and so much was he admired in that Dress, that he was turned from
thence into Latin, with Averroes upon him; and for some time, one was not
thought to understand Aristotle aright, unless he had read him with Averroes's
Comment. But this humor held no longer than Averroes came to be understood,
(understood I should not have said; for perhaps no Man ever understood him, but
till he came to be better looked into,) for then his overgreat Nicety was not
only d^scover'd; but besides other Errors, he was charged with the Whimsies and
Visions of the Alcoran Lud. Viv. de Cause. Corrupt. Art. Lib. 5.
: And Averroes is now as much out of fashion for his Philosophy, as Avicen is
for his Physic, tho they were once the Wonder of their Age and Nation.

Physic and Philosophy were the Studies wherein the Arabians excelled most, and
therefore the Books of that kind were first translated and published among us:
But since those Books have ceased to be admired, an attempt has been made
another way, and we have been furnished with a Set of Arabic Historians, by
Erpenius, Golius, and Dr. Pocock. Their Books may be seen, and containing
Matter of Fact; every Man is able to judge of their performance: What sort of
Historian Abulpharajius is, may be inferred from his Learned Editor, who was
under discouragements in publishing him, from his disagreement with Greek and
Roman History. I am sure Eutychius is no better, (whom Mr. Seldom is pleased to
style Our Egyptian Bid;) His History of the Council of Nice is such a
Romance, as exceeds all Faith, but that of a Rabbin or Arabian Eutych. p. 440,
etc.
According to him above 2000 Bishops met at Nice, after they had been above two
years in assembling there; The Patriarch of Alexandria is appointed President,
and no more notice taken of Hosius, than if he had not been present:
Constantine is described as transferring his Power upon the Bishops by the
delivery of his Ring, Sword, and Scepter; with other things equally absurd: And
that the Canons might bear better proportion to the number of Bishops; In the
Arabic Copies we have above a hundred, V. Abr. Ecchel. Eutych. Vind. Par. 2. c.
17.
whereas all the World knows there are only twenty genuine Canons of that
Council.

We have been told oftener than once of Livy complete in Arabic, yet dormant
among their Manuscripts: But if their Translations be no better than their
Histories, (and if we will take Huetius's De Clar. Interpr. p. 121.
account of them, they are rather worse,) we have no reason to desire it
over-eagerly, tho it could be produced, which I almost despair it ever shall.
Nor have we reason to be more fond of their Geography, if we may make an
Estimate from that taste thereof, which has been given us, by Gabriel Sionita,
in the Nubian Geographer, who has relisht so little with the World, as not to
raise any thirst or appetite of having more. With what exactness he has
described the three parts of the World, particularly Europe, might be easily
shown, were it worth the while to trace him in his Failings: He is to be seen,
and every one that has a Globe and Maps, can judge of the Work.

In one word, the great Use of the Arabian and Rabbinical Writers seems to be,
in confuting the Alcoran and Talmud; and to that end, there is no doubt, they
may be effectually useful.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Scholastic Learning.
DIvinity, as it is professed in the Schools is become an Art, and so profound
a piece of Learning, that it requires great Parts, and much Pains to master
it; an argument sure, that it is not so very necessary, otherwise it would need
less skill to be understood. I would not detract from, much less deny all use
of this sort of Learning, though if I should be free in my Censures, I should
have good authority to warrant me therein; most of the first Reformers having
lead the way, and some of them having declaimed against it pretty warmly. Its
great abuse in the Church of Rome had given too just occasion to this; for that
Church having adopted it into her Systems, and interwoven it with most of her
Opinions, and the Schoolmen having been the Great Champions of her Cause, the
Reformers were never safe, till they had disarmed her of this hold, which they
did by exposing this new method, and introducing in its stead a much surer one,
built upon the clear Text of Scripture, and deductions from thence, which they
made use of in all their Conferences and Disputations. This, though the true and
ancient way, and most agreeable to the simplicity of the Gospel, yet had been
much neglected by the Schoolmen, who having broached new Opinions, were to
support them by new Methods, and the Scriptures having been silent, or not
speaking home to their purpose, they therefore used them very sparingly: The
Authority of the Fathers was called in, and where these were deficient
Aristotle's Philosophy was to supply the defect, (without whom, if the
observation in my Author In ^he ^aveva gran part Aristotle, coll haver
distinto Essattamente tutti i generi di cause; ^ che se egli non fosse
adoperato, noi mancavano di molti ^rticoli di feed. Hist. del Conc. Trident. 1.
2.
be true, a Neighboring Church had wanted some Articles of Faith) the Fathers
and Philosophical reasons were their great strength. Though after all it must be
confessed, that where the Opinions of their Church have not been concerned, and
where they have argued barely upon the Principles of Reason, they have often
done exceeding well; only launching out beyond their line they have as
frequently miscarried.

The Faults in this sort of Learning are chiefly these, (1.) Defectiveness for
want of proper helps. (2.) Incoherence. (3) Nicety. (4.) Obscurity. (5.)
Barbarity. (1.) The Languages are one proper help, for Aristotle's Philosophy,
and many of the Fathers being writ in Greek, it was necessary in order to be
Master of these, that the Language wherein they were writ should be understood:
This help the Schoolmen wanted, having had no Greek and only a very moderate
share of Latin; Aristotle was known to them in a Tongue that was none of his
own, and being obscure enough in himself, was much more so, in wretched
Translations; and the Fathers, who were very Intelligible in Greek, were either
obscured, by being turned into another Idiom, or were made to speak somewhat
they never meant. Both Greek and Latin Fathers have been treated equally ill,
for want of another proper help, viz. Criticism, in distinguishing Genuine from
Spurious Authors; for want of which Authorities have been crudely swallowed
down without distinction; false Authorities have been obtruded, and true ones
rejected, or often mutilated; the Ages of Authors have been confounded, and
some late Imposter has assumed the name of a venerable Father. Instances
whereof (for I do not love to dwell upon sores) may be had in Launoy in several
of his Epistles, and in Danaeus's Censure upon the first Book of Sentences.

(2.) By incoherence I do not mean any inconsequence in the way of arguing in
the Divinity of the Schools, but a disagreement of the parts, that it
principally consists of: which being chiefly two (as we have before observed)
the Sentences of the Fathers and Aristotle's Philosophy, what tolerable
agreement can there be betwixt two things so very different, most of the
Fathers were Platonists in their opinion, possibly for the sake of some
agreement, which that Philosophy seemed to have with the Christian Religion:
Origin, St Chrysostom, and to name no more, St. Augustine who was more followed
in the Schools, than all the rest, was of that number: Aristotle was either
much neglected by the Fathers, or where they had occasion to speak of him, they
usually condemn him; and that either for his Sophistic way of reasoning, or for
his unsuitable Notions of God and Providence, which are of first consideration
in the Schools. Even in the Church of Rome Aristotle was often forbid,
sometimes ordered to be burnt, and what is most strange, at that time when his
Books were commented upon by Aquinas, they stood prohibited by a Decree of
Gregory the IX, V. Launoy de var. Aristot. Fortuna cap. 7, etc.
Of late, almost in our time, a proposal was made at Rome to Gregory the XIV.
that Aristotle's Philosophy might be banished the Schools, and Plato's
substituted in his place, as being more agreeable to the Christian Religion,
and Sense of the Fathers; and above forty propositions were then produced,
wherein Plato's Consonancy was shown, in all which Aristotle was pretended
Ibid. cap. 14.
to be Dissonant from the true Religion: Whether upon just grounds or no, I
will not venture to determine; for since Platonism has obtained, as it once did
pretty early, and has again done of late, it has been found liable to as
dangerous consequences, as any that have been yet charged upon the other
Philosophy. I only bring thus much to show, that there can be no good agreement
in this particular, where the Parts are of so different a nature, as the
Fathers and Aristotle, and so jarring, that they cannot naturally cohere.

(3.) Nicety is the great fault of the Schools, her Doctors have been styled
Profound, Subtle, Irrefragable; Titles which they have most valued themselves
upon, and seem not much to have affected the Reputation of being Familiar and
Easy, at least none of their Titles have been derived from thence. They
delight in refining upon one another, and sometimes spin so fine a thread, that
it is either broke, or much weakened in drawing it out: They have perplexed
Knowledge, by starting insuperable difficulties, and seem in this to have run
into the same fault with your too profound Politicians, who, as they have often
foreseen designs, which are neither practicable, nor ever intended; so these
men have proposed Objections, that would never have been thought of, had not
they first started them; the consequence whereof has been, that we have
furnished our Enemies with Objections, who have made use of our Weapons, and
have turned our own Artillery against us. This is too visible in our Modern
Socinians, who have often gathered out of this Storehouse, and by picking up
difficulties in the Schoolmen, have turned their Objections into Proof and
Arguments, and have thereby gained the Reputation of subtle Men. Thus
Controversies have been multiplied, and those we have already, have swollen to an
unmeasurable height, and every difference has become irreconcilable; whilst Men
study Nicety more than Peace, and stretch their Wits, and rack their
Inventions, to out-reach their Opponents. And it were well if the mischief had
stopped here, and Men's Curiosity had not led them on, from nice Questions to such
as are Impious: It has done this, and least I should be thought to do them
wrong, I shall refer the Reader to an unexceptionable Author (...) Perron. de p
Eu^har, l. 3. chapter 20.
one of the Greatest Champions, the Church of Rome ever had, for a Catalogue of
them; which are so offensive to Christian Ears, that I forbear to put them down
in English, though he has not scrupled to give them in a more common Language

(4.) Obscurity, where things are intricate in themselves, if they be not so
clearly explained in treating of them, as might be desired, the nature of the
things will excuse, as not being capable of perspicuity; or if hard Terms are
made use of, if very significative, and not too many, this is what is allowable
in all Arts; But then, if Terms of Art have been multiplied beyond necessity,
and without significancy; or if things that are plain in themselves have been
obscured, by being handled too Artificially, this sure is a great Abuse; and
this is, what has been charged upon many of the Schoolmen. The mysteries of
Religion are not capable of being rendered obvious to Reason, and therefore if
they have not made these plain, they are not to be blamed; they would have been
more excusable, had they explained them less, and had not trusted too much to
rational helps, in explaining things, that are not the Objects of our
Understanding; but though Mysteries are not to be explained, other things in
Religion are clear enough, and would continue so, were they not clouded and
involved by too much Art. I do not charge this as a general fault, though it be
too common; some of the Schoolmen are less obnoxious to this charge, and
generally the first are least Obscure; and Lombard and Aquinas, the two Authors
of the Sentences and Sums have been more plain, than many of those that have
writ upon them, whose Comments have often helped to obscure the Text. It is an
odd Commendation that is given by Cardan De Subtle. l. 16.
to one of our Countrymen, one of the most subtle among the Doctors, that only
one of his Arguments was enough to puzzle all Posterity, and that when he grew
old h^ wept, because he could not understand his own Books. Men that write De
Subtilitate, must be allowed to say what they please, but those of ordinary
Capacities would have thought it a greater Character, that our Doctor had well
explained that one Argument, and had writ so, that he might have been
understood. There are great Charms in being esteemed subtle, and it is an
argument hereof, that Cardan commends this Author for his subtilty, whom in all
probablity, he had never seen, otherwise he could not so foully have mistaken
his name, as he does Richard. al. Raymund Suiseth. Venet. 1520. ap. Ca^dan.
Johan. Suiisset.
and as some others have done, that have spoke of this Author, who is very
rare. He is indeed profoundly obscure, though I must confess, I have only looked
into him so far, as to observe his way of ^riting, which is really such, as if
he never meant to be understood. Others have been faulty enough in this way,
and it were no hard task to show it in many of the rest, but having mentioned
this Man, I can say nothing worse against obscurity.

(5.) Rough Language and Barbarousness of Expression, that were made so great
Objections upon* the reviving of Learning, and are yet so with Polite Men,
whose ears can bear nothing without ornament and smoothness, shall be no great
faults with me, and in abstruse Subjects may be born with; and I should digest
Caramuel's new Scholastic Dialect, provided it conduced to promote knowledge:
However, a bad Dress and ill Mien are Blemishes upon knowledge, though they
detract nothing from its strength, and ought to be some mortification to those
Men who are apt to ver-value themselves upon imaginary Perfection. Of all Men
they are farthest from it, and after so many Imperfections as have been charged
upon them, it was surprising to me, to meet with one of the la^t Commentators
upon the Sum Bapt. Gonet. Clyp. Theolog. Par. 1669.
writing as if he had lived before Luther. In a Prefatory Discourse entitled,
Commendatio Doctrinae D. Thomae, he endeavors to prove in so many several
Chapters, that St. Thomas had writ his Books, not without special infusion of
God Almighty, Chap. 1. That in writing them, he received many things by
Revelation, Chap. 2. That all he writ was without any Error, Chap. 4. That
Christ had given Testimony to his Writings, Chap. 6. And to show of how near
the same Authority, St. Thomas's Sum is to the Holy Scriptures, he assures us,
That as in the first General Councils, it was usual to have the Holy Bible laid
open upon the Altar, as the Rule of their proceedings; so in the last General
Council (which with them is the Council of Trent,) St. Thomas's Sum was placed
with the Bible upon the same Altar, as another Inferior Rule of Christian
Doctrine, Chap. 8. which is very agreeable to what has been writ by a Jesuit
Tauner. Quaest. 1. Dub. 2.
upon the same Subject, That all the General Councils, that have been held
since St. Thomas lived, have taken the opinions they defined from his Doctrine.
It were needless after this to cite the Elogy of another Jesuit Petr. ^abbe ap.
Gonet. ibid.
, where St. Thomas is styled an Angel, and that as he learnt many things from
the Angels, so he taught Angels some things; That St. Thomas had said, what St.
Paul was not suffered to utter; That he speaks of God as if he had seen him,
and of Christ, as if he had been his voice, and more to this effect.

When such bold expressions are openly vented, it is time to look about us, and
it concerns every Man to endeavor to give a check to such daring assertions. I
am far from detracting either from the Knowledge or Holiness of St. Thomas,
which doubtless were both extraordinary, but when a Mortal Man, is equaled to
the Angels in Heaven, and such Elogies given him, as if he were capable of
hearing, he must blush to receive; it is justice to him, to rescue him from
false and undue Praises. To do him Right, he has improved natural Reason to an
uncommon height, and many of those proofs of a God and Providence and Natural
Religion, that have been advanced of late, as new Arguments with so much
applause, have been borrowed from him or other Schoolmen; and are only not his,
by being put in a new Dress, and sometimes in a worse method. Had it been his
fortune to have lived in a happier Age, under better opportunities, and with
those helps that we now enjoy, he must have made a greater Genius, than many of
those, who are now looked upon with wonder.

CHAP. XIX.
Conclusion.
AND now having gone through the several sorts of Learning, and observed the
various defects, and ofttimes uncertainties, which they are subject to; The
Conclusion is obvious, That since no complete satisfaction is to be met with
from them, we are to seek for it somewhere else, if happily it may be found. It
may be found, but not in our own powers, or by our own strength; and that which
our most exalted Reason, under all its improvements, cannot yield us, is only
to be had from Revelation. It is there we may securely rest, after the Mind has
tried all other ways and methods of Knowledge, and has tired it self with
fruitless Enquiries. It is with the Mind, as with the Will and Appetites; for
as after we have tried a thousand Pleasures, and turned from one Enjoyment to
another, we find no rest to our Desires, till we at last fix them upon the
Sovereign Good: So in pursuit of Knowledge, we meet with no tolerable
satisfaction to our Minds, till after we are wearied with tracing other
methods, we turn them at last upon the one supreme and unerring truth. And were
there no other use of humane Learning, there is at least this in it, That by
its many defects, it brings the Mind to a sense of its own weakness, and makes
it more readily, and with greater willingness, submit to Revelation. God may
have so ordered in his Wise Providence, thereby to keep us in a constant
dependence upon himself, and under a necessity of consulting him in his Word
which since Profane Men treat so neglectfully already, they would have it in
greater Contempt; and it would be much more vile in their Eyes, did they find
any thing within them equally perfect, which might guide them in their Course,
and bring them to the Haven, where they would be. But this since they do not
meet with, it ought to wean them from an opinion of themselves, and incline
them to seek out satisfaction somewhere else, and to take shelter where it may
be found.

I have said nothing in this whole Discourse (nor can I repeat it too often)
with design to discredit humane Learning; I am neither of their mind
Anabaptists in Germany.
who were for burning all Books, except their Bibles; nor of that Learned Man's
opinion, who thought the Principles of all Arts and Sciences might be borrowed
from that Storehouse: I would willingly put a just Value upon the one, without
depressing the other: But where Men lash out the other way, and take the
liberty to exalt Learning to the prejudice of Religion, and to oppose shallow
Reason to Revelation, it is then time, and every Man's business, to endeavor
to keep it under, at least to prevent its aspiring, by not suffering it to pass
its due Bounds. Our Reason is a proper Guide in our Enquiries, and is to be
followed, where it keeps within its Sphere; but shining dimly, it must borrow
Rays from the Fountain of Light, and must always act subordinately to
Revelation. Whenever it crosses that, it is out of its Sphere, and indeed
contradicts its own Light; for nothing is more reasonable, than to believe a
Revelation, as being grounded upon God's Veracity, without which even Reason it
self will be often doubting. That whatever God (who is Truth it self) reveals,
is true: is as sure and evident a Proposition, as any we can think of: It is
certain in its Ground, and evident in its Connection, and needs no long
Consequences to make it out; whereas most of our rational deductions are often
both weakly bottomed, and depending upon a long train of Consequences, which
are to be spun from one another, their strength is often lost, and the thread
broken, before we come at the Conclusion.

And though it be commonly objected, that there are as many differences
concerning Divine Truths, as about those of Nature: yet I think there needs
nothing further be said to this, but that Men would approach Divine Truths with
the same dispositions, that are required by Philosophers to the reading of
their Writings, and the Objection would soon fall to the ground: The best
Philosophers require, that in reading their Books, we should lay aside
partiality to a Party, all passion and other prejudice; and let Men only
approach the Scriptures with the same preparations of Mind, and with these and
ordinary Grace (that is never wanting to those that seek it) I dare be
confident, they will have no reason to complain of Obscurity or Ambiguity in
those Sacred Writings: With these Helps (that are had by asking) the weakest
and most ordinary Capacity shall see enough, and shall not stand in need of
deep Reach or Penetration, which are necessary to the understanding of Natural
Truths. God, who would have all Men happy, has likewise made them all so far
wise, and has so ordered, that the most important Truths, should be the most
easy and common; and if it can be no objection, that to the understanding of
them, we must make use of ordinary means, and must come prepared with suitable
dispositions: This is what is necessary in all other things; for every thing is
best understood by the same Spirit by which it is writ.

God has gone yet farther with us; Necessary Truths are not only the most
common, but he has likewise made them the most convincing, and has given them a
power, that is not easily resisted: Rational Arguments, however, convincing
they may seem, are usually repelled by Reason, and it is hard to convince a Man
by such methods, that is equally Master of Reason with our selves; whereas
Divine Truths make their own way, they act upon us with a secret Power, and
Press the mind with an almost irresistible Strength, and do not only persuade,
but almost force an assent: The first only act like Light, the other strike
down and pierce us through like Lightning. We have as remarkable a passage to
this purpose Sozo^^ Hist. l. 1 c. 18. Rufin. Hist. l. 1. c. 3.
, as most in Ecclesiastical Story; which though well attested, yet were it only a
Parable, the Moral of it might be of good use. Upon the Convening of the first
General Council at Nice, and the appearing of the Christian Bishops there,
several of the Heathen Philosophers offered themselves among the Sons of God,
intending to signalize themselves upon so great an occasion, by attacking the
Faith in its most Eminent Professors, and by endeavoring to overthrow it by
Philosophy and Reason. To this End several Conferences were held upon the
Principles of Reason, by the most noted Men of either Party, in which one of
the Philosophers more forward than the rest, begun to grow Insolent upon a
supposed advantage, and must needs Triumph before Victory: An aged Bishop took
fire at this, one who had been a Confessor in the late Persecution, and was
more noted for his Faith than Learning; Philosophy he had none, but encounters
his Adversary in a new manner, in the name of Jesus, and by the word of God,
and with a few plain Weapons drawn from thence, he humbles the Pride of this
arrogant Philosopher, and straitway leads him Captive to the Font; All the
Reply our Philosopher had left him, was, that while he was encountered by
Philosophy and humane Learning, he defended himself the same way, but being
attacked by higher Reasons, it was necessary for him to yield himself up to the
power of God. Such is the Force of that Word, which simple vain Men so much
contemn!

What then must we do? Are we to give our selves up to this Word, and lay aside
all humane Learning? I am far from thinking so, and have already cautioned
against any such Wild and Anabaptistical Conceit; these two may well consist,
Learning is of good use in explaining this Word, and the Word serves very well
to lessen our opinion of humane Learning; the former may be serviceable, whilst
it acts ministerially and in subservience to the latter, but being only a
Handmaid to Religion, whenever it usurps upon that, it is to be kept down, and
taught its Duty; it is still only humane Learning, that is, very weak and very
defective, and after all the great things that can he said of it, and the uses
that may be assigned it, it must after all be confessed, that our Bible is our
best Book, and the only Book that can afford any true and solid satisfaction.
It is that which satisfies and never satiates, which the deeper it is looked
into, pleases the more, as containing new and hid Treasures, by the opening
whereof, there always springs up in the mind fresh pleasure and new desire.
Whereas Humane Writings (like all humane things) cloy by their continuance, and
we can scarce read them the second time without irksomeness, and oftentimes not
without nauseating those fine things, that please so wonderfully at the first
reading.

The Sum of all is this, we busy our selves in the search of Knowledge, we
tire out our Thoughts, and wast our Spirits in this pursuit, and afterward
flatter our selves with mighty Acquirements, and fill the World with Volumes of
our Discoveries: Whereas would we take as much pains in discovering our
Weakness and Defects, as we spend time in Oftentation of our Knowledge, we
might with half the time and pains, see enough to show us our Ignorance, and
might thereby learn truer Wisdom. We frame to our selves New Theories of the
World, and pretend to measure the Heavens by our* Mathematical Skill (that is,
Indefinite Space by a Compass, or Span) whilst we know little of the Earth we
tread on, and every thing puzzles us, that we meet with there: We live upon the
Earth, and most Men think they rest upon it, and yet it is a very difficult
Question in Philosophy, whether the Earth rests or moves; and is it not very
wonderful, that we should be such strangers to the place of our Abode, as to
know nothing, whether we rest there, or travel a daily Circuit of some thousand
Miles? We rack our Inventions to find out Natural Reasons for a Deluge of
Waters, by fetching down Comets from above, and cracking the Cortex of the
Earth, to furnish out sufficient stores for that purpose; and yet from the
Convexity of the Waters, it is hard to account in the Course of Nature, why
there should not bea Deluge every day: And perhaps Providence is the surest
Bar, that has set Bounds to the Waters, which they shall not pass. We are not
only puzzled by things without us, but we are strangers to our own Make and
Frame, for though we are convinced, that we consist of Soul and Body: yet no Man
hitherto has sufficiently described the Union of these two, or has been able to
explain, how Thought should move Matter? Or how Matter should act upon Thought?
Nay the most Minute things in Nature, if duly considered, carry with them the
greatest wonder, and perplex us as much, as things of greater bulk and show.
And yet we, who know so little in the smallest matters, talk of nothing less
than New Theories of the World and vast Fields of Knowledge, busying our selves
in Natural Enquiries, and flattering our selves with the wonderful Discoveries
and mighty Improvements that have been made in Humane Learning, a great part of
which are purely imaginary, and at the same time neglecting the only true and
solid and satisfactory Knowledge: Things that are obscure and intricate we
pursue with eagerness, whilst Divine Truths are usually disregarded, only
because they are easy and common: Or if there be some of an higher nature,
they shall possibly be rejected, because they are above or seemingly contrary
to Reason, whilst we admit several other things without scruple, which are not
reconcil able with Revelation; tho Revealed Truths be certainly Divine, and the
other, either no Truths at all, or at the best, only Humane. This sort of
Conduct is very preposterous, for, after all, true Wisdom and satisfactory
Knowledge, is only to be had from Revelation, and as to other Truths, which are
to be collected from Sense and Reason, our Ignorance of them will always be so
much greater than our Knowledge, as there are a thousand things we are ignorant
of, to one thing that we thoroughly know.

APPENDIX.
WHilst I have been free in censuring others faults, I ought to be ready to
acknowledge my own; I never doubted but I was as subject to them as other men,
tho upon a serious review of my Book, I have not yet met with many, and such as
I thought material, I have Corrected. The great Objection that has been made by
my Friends, is, rather a Defect than a Fault; I am told by them, my Conclusion
is too Short, and that I ought to have enlarged upon the necessity of
Revelation. This I am sensible of, and freely own the Charge, but have neither
time nor opportunity now to redress it; and besides the Argument has been so
well and largely treated of by other Hands, that little new can be said upon
the Subject.

On the other side, I have received Letters and Papers from several Hands,
which flatter me with an opinion, that I have done somewhat well, some of
which, it would have been an advantage both to my self and Book to have
published: But I deny my self herein, only make this small but grateful
acknowledgment to the Worthy Persons, from whom they came.

FINIS.
AN Answer to the Dissenters Pleas for Separation, or an Abridgment of the
London Cases: wherein the Substance of those Books is digested into one short
and plain Discourse. By Tho. Bennet, M. A. and Fellow of St. John's College in
Cambrige. Printed for A. Bosvile, at the Sign of the Dial against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street. Price 4 s.


