A Journey INTO SPAIN.

Nec ille qui voluptatem probat sine contemplatione est; nec ille qui
contemplationi inservit sine voluptate est; nec ille cujus vita actioni
destinata est sine contemplatione est. Sen. de Vita beata. LONDON, Printed for
Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at the Sign of the Blew Anchor in the
Lower Walk of the New Exchange, 1670.

TO THE READER.
I Present you the vast body of the Spanish Monarchy, which, though it has
spread its roots into many and distant Provinces, is but of late growth, having
but little before the last age first aspired, not only to a competition with
the two anciently ballancing powers of Christendom, England and France (for two
they were when France depended not on England) but the Empire of the World. Our
near concernments either in peace or war with it, rendering it very necessary to
be known to us, I am willing to show it you in such particular remarks of the
people and Country, as I think you have not yet seen, with something of
observation on its sudden advance, and almost as sudden decay; so that it is no
longer a competitor with the other two, but so much fallen from it, it could
scarcely any longer subsist, did not the moderation and justice of one of those
Monarchs, oblige him rather to join in supporting its Throne, then enjoy his
share of the many advantages, his maritime power and situation of his
Dominion, might reasonably promise by the fall of it; especially in regard by
sending abroad he shall not need to fear such a depopulation as it suffers
under, when his doors shall be opened by Acts of Naturalization and Registers,
to admit and secure such as (out of consideration of the fertility of his
Country, temperature of its Air, and convenience for Trade) will abundantly
supply what may be so exhausted.

The time of taking this survey sufficiently discovers it self in it, and
though some years since relates to several very modern transactions of
Christendom of the highest concern, as the English rebellion, renunciation of
the Queen of Sweden, and imprisonment of the Duke of Lorrain; neither have any
changes very considerable since happened to Spain, either in its Government,
Customs, or Negotiations.

You have in it a clear prospect of decay of Power, with increase of Wealth,
which shows you are not undone by scarcity (whether real or pretended) of those
adored Metals for which this People have sold themselves and abandoned their
Country, whilst you abound in all things else that contribute either to use
or pleasure, and they (though Masters of the Fountains of them) are indeed as
indigent and miserable as you fancy your selves to be in the want of them
alone. It makes no less evident that when a Nation (especially its Nobility and
Gentry) contemns or neglects Arms, it is at the highest, if not declining. If
it be a little Satirical as to the haughtiness and singularity of that People,
it has also something of Panegeric as to several of their Virtues, without
which yet I suppose it might be tolerated, our Press having formerly made as
bold with most of the other Nations of Europe, as they with us.

A JOURNEY INTO SPAIN.
WHen we left Italy, we resolved for Spain; but because M. P. intending his Son
should take that Journey with us, had ordered him to expect us at Monpellier,
whither he had commanded him to repair, from the house of a Gentleman of
Xaintonge, where he had resided some months, we were obliged to tarry for him.
He came not till the later end of December, the extremity of which season
pressing us to spend the Winter there, we deferred our departure till the
Spring: and the weather in Languedoc being pleasant in March, we went away the
6th of that month. I shall not concern my self in describing what we saw in
that most agreeable Province, nor in repeating what we learned that was
considerable, whilst we traversed it almost from one end to the other; nor yet
say any thing of Gascony, through which we passed; nor of Bayonne, where we
took our leaves of France. Having travailed those parts only as they lay in our
way to Spain, I shall reserve all my curiosity for it, and not charge my
Table Book with any observations till I come to the Frontiers of that Kingdom.
That I may not neglect many particulars I learned of the Government, Customs,
and present Condition of the Imperious Nation that inhabits it, I will here
make an Extract of what I scattered in several Papers during our abode at
Madrid: to put which into method, were to unravel confusion it self; every
thing shall therefore have its place, as I saw or heard it; and if some be
repeated more than once, it is because I design not a polished work, but to
give liberty to my discourse according to Time, Place, Persons, Companies, and
Entertainments, and such reflections as have presented from them; not confining
my self to what I saw, or happened to me, or my Company, but enlarging to what
was told us, having ever endeavored to get the best informations possible. It
ought not to seem strange if in some places I happen to speak untruths without
lying, and in others to wander without knowing I am out of the way, and
devoting my Book to those only that have seen its foundations laid, and
materials gathered together, to serve us as memorials of part of that time
which for six years we employed in studying the World in its great School,
which is Travail: The mistakes and errors made either by me, or such as I
conversed with, will not to them appear very considerable or uneasy to be
effaced as soon as discovered: and if it accidentally happen into other hands,
they may make choice of what is weighty and certain, leaving what seems light
and doubtful, without any just cause of complaint against me on account of that
which I write not for their sakes. I have nevertheless endeavored to make as
few errors as possible, and what I set down at night according to the several
Objects and Companies of the day, I overlooked next morning, and made farther
enquiry of such persons as I thought likely to disabuse me if ill informed, and
give me clearer light if what I had received were imperfect. According to this
method I have (better or worse) satisfied my curiosity in examining this grave
and haughty Nation at its own home, since it seldom goes abroad unless to
command others, and secure its King of their obedience by Garrisons and
Colonies sent into all parts of his Dominions in the new and old World, and by
the Governments and Magistracies he bestows upon it, with an entire exclusion
of the Inhabitants of those Countries to which he distributes them.

Resolving to enter by way of St. Sebastian, which is the most easy, we lodged
at the last Town of France called St. John de Luz. It is the Seat of Commerce
between the two Frontiers, and may pass for a good City, being large, well
built, and rich: Its Mariners are esteemed and employed in fishing for Cods,
and Whales; and we found Dutch men there that had hired fifty to be made use of
at New Foundland.

As soon as we had passed Baione we perceived the humor of the people to
incline to that of their Neighborhood, being insolent and little complying
with strangers: the women in passing the Streets cast their Coats over their
heads, and so to cover their cheeks discover their buttocks. The next day we
wanted but two leagues to the Spanish Dominion, and at a good distance
discerned Fontarabia, a Fort at the falling of Bidassao into the sea: This
River, or rather Torrent, separates the two Kingdoms; it is pretty broad at the
Ferry, the Country thereabouts being fenny, and ebs and flows with the Sea: at
low water it is in many places fordable. Andaie a little Town or Village is
seated on its bank, right over against Fontarabia, and separated from it only
by that stream: but we were fain to go higher to seek the Ferry-boat, and were
troubled how to find it, having been wrong directed by the Postmaster, who does
all ill offices he can to those that travail on their own horses: The Toll paid
by the Boats goes half to the French, and half to the Spanish, one of them
receiving it of such as pass into Spain, and the other of those that travail
into France, but both of them equally squeezing the Passenger. These Frontiers
have no less Communication than if there were no war between the two Nations;
and it is well for them it is so; for otherwise an universal desolation would
follow. The Country is barren and mountainous, producing nothing but Iron, as
well that which belongs to France, as that which is possessed by the Spaniard,
which is the greatest part* It is called Biscai: the language is understood
only by the Inhabitants, and so poor that one word has diverse significations,
so that it cannot without difficulty be made use of in Commerce: None write it,
and the Children at School learn French or Spanish, as they are subject to
either King.

It does not a little surprise, when having passed Bidassao, one is no more
understood without speaking Spanish, when a moment before French was
intelligible. Half a quarter of a league further is Iron, the first Town
belonging to the King of Spain; they neither demand Passport nor Account of
any's business; and one would think there were neither war nor distrust; only
the Alcalde came for two Reals as a due belonging to him: but such as return
and pass into France are not used with the like indifference: We were
entertained at the Posthouse, much as we had formerly been in Italy on the way
to Naples, but more slenderly: little Dishes with little bits of meat, made us
despair of filling our bellies; but at last one after another enough were brought
to satisfy us. When the reckoning came they fleeced us, and we were forced to
give four Crowns for a Meal that was not worth one. Over several Mountains, and
by a way very rough and stony, we got that night to lie at St. Sebastians,
where we arrived before we were aware, it being covered by a great bank of
sand, which passed, the Town appears at the foot of a Mountain that keeps off
the sea, though she embraces it almost on all sides, and enters far enough to
make a Haven; but for greater safety to Ships, there is a Redout in form of a
Basin, they riding at the Town side, and foot of the Mountain, where they seem
secure from storms, though we were told some have risen to that height that
they have broken in pieces such as anchored there.

Greater Vessels cannot enter, the water serving only for Barks and Shallops:
Ships of War ride a quarter of a league lower, toward Fontarabia, where is
the Arsenal for the Oceans Fleet, at present in no very good condition. It
returned from Bourdenux much weather-beaten, and for want of money nothing is
done toward refitting it.

Before St. Sebastian there is a great Ship on the Stocks intended for Admiral:
it will be a stately Vessel if ever finished: we were told it had been long in
the condition in which we saw it, and that more money had been spent about it
than would have served for a dozen such Fabrics, of which the greatest part
became a prey to the Overseers.

Bilbo and St. Sebastian are the principal Havens the King of Spain has on the
Ocean; Corugna also is spoken of, where the Marquis of St. Cruz tarried
somewhat too long, whilst revolted Bourdeaux, for want of his Succors, was
ready to return to its Kings obedience: he could not have chosen a fitter place
to refresh his Fleet, none on that Coast abounding more with Limons and
Oranges, which from thence are transported into England, France, and Holland;
and if he was better pleased there than he should have been in fighting,
Monsieur de Vendosme, he paid dear enough for it, having been detained
prisoner ever since his return from so famous an expedition. St. Sebastian is
seated in a very little Province called Guipuscoa; Trafick draws to it a great
concourse, though the Town be but small, it is very compact, and extremely
populous, one house containing several Families. A Merchant Stranger is there
forced to lodge with some Citizen, it not being permitted him to be a
Housekeeper: many Dutch men are obliged to live in this manner. The custom was
thus introduced; strangers at the first settling of Trafick out of mere
liberality gave their Landlords as a Gratuity one in the hundred of all the
Commodities they sold; and the Inhabitants to preserve this profit made such an
Order, which has caused some that would not observe it to be sued at Law. That
which most pleased me in this Town, was, that the Streets are wide, straight,
and very well paved with a broad stone, like that of Florence. The principal
Revenue of the Country is drawn from Iron-mills, some of them of a very pure
metal, and so rich they may furnish all Europe: Wools of old Castile are also
shipped here, sent in good quantity by the Merchants of diverse places. The
Baron of Batteville, a Gentleman of the Franch Contie (who was then present) is
Governor, and with it of all Guipuscoa. Though he has rendered very many good
services to Spain, particularly in the Troubles of Gasconie) and so seaseasoned
himself with Spanish Customs, that he has forgotten his own Language and
Country; this employment, to which that of Admiral is joined, draws on him no
little envy. We waited on him, and he received us well, but returned not our
Visit, and we went away without bidding him adieu. Here we stayed three days,
and kept our Easter: we had been recommended to a worthy Merchant, who after
Dinner carried us to a Nunnery, where we heard most pitiful Music. This
Cloister is on an Eminence, from which the Town that is overagainst it may be
very well battered; and the Castle or Citadel which is on the top of a hill, at
whose foot the Town stands, seems rather a Sentry-house to watch, than a
Fortress to defend it.

On Tuesday in Easter-week, having been treated by our Merchant, we took the
way of Madrid, 84 leagues distant. The Country we passed through is mountainous
and barren, and we perceived that we traversed the tops of the Pirenean, which
almost divide Spain, as the Apenine Italy. Necessity quickly taught us the Mode
of the Country, which obliges Travailers to buy in several places all
accommodations necessary. We tarried a while at St. Sebastians, partly to
provide us a Moco de Mulas, that is a Servant or Guide, to bring us to Madrid,
to whom it belongs to buy victual, and carry other provisions: Forty Crowns
were demanded of us for the attendance of one of those Rascals, which being so
dear, we resolved not to take any, and to guide our selves as well as we could.
The part of Moco de Mulas fell to my share: I shall give you the particulars of
this employment, and of travailing in Spain. At the first arrival at an Inn you
ask for Beds, which being provided, you either give the meat you bring raw with
you to the Host to be dressed, or go your self and buy it in the Market: if you
find any Capon, Pullet, or Partridge you seek to make sure of them. We were
told we should meet plenty of the last, fatter, larger, and better than those
of France; but in all our Journey we found but one, neither had it all those
advantages. The best way is to carry your provision along with you in Wallets,
and provide what you find on the place to be made use of the next day. Coming
to your Inn, you go abroad to buy bread, wine, and eggs; for something of those
is usually to be had, but none allowed to sell them except such as farm that
Privilege: Excise goes so high, that the King has a quarto upon every egg.
These Inns are sad spectacles, and the sight of them gives one a belly full.
The fire is made on a hearth in the middle of the Kitchen, choked with so thick
a smoke, that you would think your self in the Kennel of a Fox that the Hunters
would drive out* a man or woman all in rags like a beggar, and no less lousy,
measures the wine to you, which is drawn from a Hogs, or Goats skin, in which
it is kept, and which is to it both Barrel and Celler: the best wine out of
these is a very unpleasant liquor, having a most abominable taste of the
pitched hide. The White Wind is as fiery as Aquavitae, yet bears not water, the
least drop being mixed with it, becoming insipid and without spirit. By what I
have said may be gathered how ill living is in Spain; yet I found it not so bad
as I expected, especially in Biscai, though a Country less fertile then
Castile. It is true indeed, that being a Frontier, it is not so much taxed, and
the People enjoy greater liberty, and some provisions may be found in the Inns,
but at double their value.

About a day and a halfs Journey from St. Sebastian we passed over a pretty
high Mountain called St. Adrians; it is none of the steepest or craggiest, but
that which I found most remarkable, is that on the top of it runs a ridge of
rock, which hinders passing; one would think it placed there by nature, as a
fixed and insurmountable separation between Biscai and old Castile, in such a
manner, that they have been fain to open a way with much difficulty; for the
rock is cut thorough thirty or forty paces: In this there is one house, which
must needs be very well roofed, having so great a Mass of the quarry to cover
it. Freed from this wonderful passage, we descended into old Castile, something
more plain, though not much more fertile. We found here no less trouble than on
the Alps at the Mountain of St. Godard, night surprising us in the middle of
the descent, and for increase of our misfortune, we could get no lodging at the
next Village: this the more incommoded us in regard one of our horses had lost
both his shoes before: notwithstanding which we were forced to seek
entertainment in another miserable Village (to which the Host was our Guide)
which afforded us only bread and wine, and two wretched Beds, whose Sheets and
Matresses could not oblige us to put off our cloths.

We began now to approach the heart of Spain, having entered the old Castile,
where stands the City of Valladolid, for a long time the Seat of its Kings, the
Country is all sand, and little hillocks of unfertil earth, often interrupted
by Mountains hooded with rocks, unless in some few places where small Plains
and Valleys appear, that afford the Inhabitants such provisions as sustain
them. But never did I see any Country less beautified with Gardens: I know not
whether by reason the soil affords them not, or that the people are not
industrious enough to take care of them.

Coming near Vittoria, the first City of Castile, we passed through the fairest
and best cultivated Plain we had till then seen: that little City is seated at
the end of it, as seemed to us, very pleasantly: we rested there half a day, as
well to shoe our horses, as to deliver a letter we had for the Master of the
Custom-house, from whom we hoped addresses necessary to continue our Journey
securely. We heard rumors of Thieves, and beyond Burgos a great Robbery had
been lately committed. This Letter was very useful to us, for till then we had
not been any ways molested about our horses or baggage, but we were assured,
that had we only passed the Gate without a Ticket from the Custom-house all had
been confiscated. It fell out very luckily for us to have a letter to him that
is the Kings Farmer, who as soon as he had received it, visited us, and not
only caused a sufficient Passport to be given us, but made us a Present of
Wine, Capons and Neats-tongues, with which furnishing our Knapsacks, we had
recourse to them in case of necessity. The civility of this Spaniard was very
pleasing to us, and made us judge this Nation more generous then the Italians,
though they be equally for their particular interests, and one of them as
little communicable as the other.

The first of April we dined at Pancorbo, and lay at Miranda, and the next day
did the like at Barbiesca and Monasterio de Rodillas; the Third we arried at
Burgos, the chief City of Castile, and so considerable in both Castiles, that
it possesses the first place, though disputed by Toledo: we were not at all
troubled with heat on our way, but not a little that day with cold; a sharp
wind caused a hoar frost, and in some places Ice: Burgos is the coldest City of
Spain, being seated at the foot of a high Mountain; it has formerly enjoyed a
considerable Trade, which of later days is almost lost; it is not very great;
and the most remarkable things in it are the Church and Archbishops Palace,
admirable Fabrics for Spain, where generally they build ill; in some places
because they are poor, and in others for want of Lime and Stones, so that in
every part, and even in Madrid it self, many houses are made of earth; and the
best Fabrics cimented with Clay instead of Mortar. Another ornament of Burgos,
is a large and very convenient Bridge, passing from the Suburbs to the City:
its inhabitants are thought to speak the best Castilian; this Territory, of a
certain breeds the best soldiers, and very few afford the King a greater
number; we received extraordinary civilities from a Merchant, to whom we were
recommended by the Customer of Vittoria. He did not only inquire us out company
for our journey to Madrid, because of the danger of Thieves; but finding us in
a lodging where we could not be well entertained, after showing us the Town,
carried us to his House, where he Treated us at Dinner with a frankness, much
more valuable then his good cheer; it was served in dish after dish, and began
by a slender potage, with two or three slices of bread in it; every one of us
had an earthen porrenger of it presented him, but the Saffron and Pepper gave
such a hogo, it could hardly be eaten. It was on a Saturday and according to
the custom of that Country to eat on such days, the heads and intrails of
Sheep and Oxen, we had such meats, so that we fared much better then we should
have done by hunting among the Taverns and victualing houses to make our own
provision: besides, the gallantry of his manner of Treating, surprzed us,
conducting us with a great deal of freedom into the chamber where the Cloth was
laid, and his wife lay sick abed of a Quartane Ague; that day I spurred up my
memory to furnish me with all the Spanish, had lain dormant there, since I
studied it at Florence, and lighting on any expression of civility, repeated it
so often, that it was very evident, Compliments were scarce with me; M. P.
spoke now and then a word, and M. S. was continually silent, so that the
burden of the entertainment lay all on me, who knew not very well how to
acquit my self, especially, when the wife began to speak from the bed; I knew
not whether I was to Treat her with Vuestra Merced, or Vuestra Sennoria, which
so confounded me, that often supposing, the first belonged only to men, I
blushed as if I had committed some heinous crime, and recalling my self,
brought out the second, due only to persons of eminent Quality, for Vuestra
Merced is of all genders, and so common, that Grooms and Footmen honor one
another with it: To bring my self off, I drank her good health, saying, Sennora
a la Salud de XXXX and there was gravelled, not knowing which word to choose,
and I think I made use of both, que dios le dia prompta guarison, I cannot tell
whether she understood me, for I have since been told, the last word is not
Spanish; but this I am sensible of, that I committed a great incivility by
putting off my Hat, which is never done there at Table: Having made better use
of our teeth then tongues, it was at last, time to be gone; the Master of the
house, according to the custom of the Country, leading the way, for as they
button contrary to other nations, they are also contrary in this particular;
and they say, that in accompanying the stranger, the Master of the house goes
first to leave the other in possession. I forgot to give the woman a parting
Compliment. Coming back to the Inn, where we alighted, we found the widow that
kept it, drunk, on which I must take occasion to say, that I never saw so many
women drunk in Germany, as on this side the Pireneans; this was the second that
gorged with wine, which they send for to Taverns, came to piss before us all in
the Stable. Though we had almost resolved to lie at Burgos, as soon as we had
left our Merchant, our minds altered, because we were told that three Leagues
from thence we should find a very good Inn, but our servants being walked
abroad, had like to have hindered our putting this in execution. One of them
having entered a Church with spurs on, the Gates were shut upon him, till he
paid money exacted as on shipboard, but at last he freed himself; we presently
took horse, and as soon as out of Town, missed our way; after which, making use
of a Priest we met with for our guide, we happened to be very ill lodged: the
next day cold and rainy, we dined at Lerma, where having lit on a good Inn, we
continued till the morning after; we went to see the Palace of the Lord of it,
next the Escurial, esteemed the fairest in Spain, It is a vast Fabric, but ill
contrived, without either Garden or Plantation for Walks: being holiday, the
inhabitants were together, drinking in a large Hall, into which, as soon as we
entered, they very civilly presented us Wine, and the Corrigidor, or chief
Officer of the place, entertained and showed us several rooms of the Palace.

Leaving Lerma the 5th, we arrived at Madrid the 9th. where we were very glad
to be, as well to rest our selves as to enjoy a milder Climat, for in Castile
we were tormented with continual cold wind and rain, and a Country so Steril,
that we could not but rejoice to approach one something less savage. An
inexpressible number of French pilgrims pass to and from St. James in Galicia,
the occasion of the Spaniards calling them Gavachos, this makes evident that
France abounds in people, and those very idle, in such a manner to pester the
roads of Spain. Ignorance, poverty and abuse in matters of Religion, cause this
disorder, and that a great many poor pilgrims (not entertained here as in
Italy, the Hospitals affording only house-room) die every year in Spain. The
best Town we saw on the way was Aranda de Duero, where we provided our selves
to pass the 7th the Mountain of Samosierra, which separates Old Castille from
New, in which Madrid stands. These passages are called Ports, as if there were
Rivers to be forded or ferried over, and at first deceived us with the
expectation of some rapid and difficult Torrent. This day we suffered by rain,
hail, snow, and wind, and found not Spain hotter then other Countries, being
almost frozen in so advanced a season, and between the two Castiles. We were
not free from the Mountains, till within Three or Four Leagues of Madrid, the
snowy tops of which are discerned at it: the Plain in which it is seated is
somewhat uneven, rising and falling every half quarter of a League: it is not
adorned by any one tree, the Land on that side by which we went toward it is
tilled, yet seems very barren, consisting only of Sand and light Earth, unless
some few eminences; no wood, and abundance of stones: the way all along is
good, as is usual where Land is bad; and when we enquired after it, we were
answered with a Spanish Rhodomontado, that we could not possibly miss it,
because the greatest highway in the world. On the side we entered it appears
not much, but on that where Buon retiro stands, gives a very agreeable
Prospect. It is not walled, the Streets are large, but foul, and stinking They
which calculate all the ordures cast into them, say they are daily perfumed by
above a hundred thousand Close-stools; the Pavement is so defective, and the
Coaches so ill hung, that to ride in them over so uneven ground is to be broken
on the Wheel. Houses (as well as all things else) are very dear here. They
build only with brick and clay, having little lime, and no stone but what is
brought seven leagues from about the Escurial. A House that in another place
were very inconsiderable is sold here for 20 or 25 thousand crowns. Whoever
builds is concluded to have a Purse very well lined. They which return from
Governments beyond sea, demolish their Houses and build Palaces, which make
appear they have either been Viceroys of Naples, or Governors of Flanders or
Milan. In this manner this Town, which is new, and the greatest part very
slightly built, according to the abilities of the Inhabitants, becomes every
day more beautiful, as the better part of the Kings Revenue, is appropriated to
those that have the managing of it. La Placa Major is very fair, something more
long than large, the houses on all sides uniform, and the highest in Madrid.
They are all encompassed by two or three ranks of Balconies, which serve to see
the Feasts of Bulls, the famousest Ceremonies of Spain.

Report speaks this Divertisement to have been derived from the Moors, and
indeed it savours not a little of their Brutality: It suits so strangely with
the genius of this People, that no Town is so mean but it has its peculiar
Feasts, and think a Curse would follow should they omit solemnise them. The
King cannot absent himself from those of Madrid without the murmurs of the
People. His Palace is at one end of the Town, on an almost indiscernable
rising, that side on which we went to it enjoys the prospect of a little River,
and part of a Valley in which are some trees: by it he can pass to la Casa del
Campo, a wretched House of Pleasure, without other Ornament than a few Walks in
a Wood.

On this Brook, rather than River, Philip the Second built a very great and
broad Bridge, some of its arches not touched by any water: And I believe it was
rather made for a more commodious passing the descent of the Valley, than to be
a great Bridge to little or no River. The Kings House has nothing magnificent,
yet is not so mean as was reported to us. There is a very fair Piazza before
it, to which it represents no unhandsome Frontispice, were the building higher,
and a defective Tower finished. It has two Quadrangles very large: All
Councils meet in the Palace, and the King by private Galleries can go to any of
the Rooms where they sit. There is a great Concourse, and no less noise, when
any of them are assembled: But in the Kings Apartment all is very still, and no
body appears till he goes to Mass, the only time of seeing him: His Halberdiers
are then drawn out on each side the Gallerie, by which he passes; These are
Germans, Burgundians, and Spaniards, about two or three hundred, wearing all
Liveries of yellow trimmed with red Velvet. When he comes from his Apartment
the Captain of the Guard goes before him, and he is followed only by two or
three Persons. Passing between these Halberdiers he receives such Petitions as
are presented him. One day as he went to Chapel we would have gone in before,
the better to view him, but a Doorkeeper (as formerly happened at Ratisbone on
such an occasion) told us, that none were to enter unless clothed in black. I
liked no House in this Town so well as the Prison, where yet I would least
desire to lodge: It is a massy solid building, the Windows fortified with
great bars of Iron, as much for ornament as security: they are artificially
wrought and gilded, so that my mistake will not seem very strange, who at
first thought it the habitation of some Grandee of Spain.

All agree that no City of Spain is so populous as this, and excepting London
and Paris I never saw so many Coaches in any; they are drawn by Mules only, and
none but the Kings and the Masters of his Horse with more than four: They are
no ways magnificent but in some slight guildings of the Iron-works, and about
the Boots: the greatest part of them are covered with waxed cloth. On one side
of the Town is the Prado, a large Walk made use of for the Tour; near it is a
great Fabric, but low, called Buen Retiro. The Duke of Olivares, during his
administration, spent many Millions on a Structure that is not very
considerable: I saw but part of it, where a Comedy was preparing with Scenes,
that would amount to a great expense; a Florentine was the Undertaker. For
ordinary Comedies here are two Theaters, where they act every day: The Players
have to themselves not above three half pence for every person, the Hospital as
much, and as much the Townhouse; to set down it costs seven pence, the whole
amounting to fifteen pence. I can say little to the Lines or Plots, not being
skilful enough in the language to understand Poetry, nor the figurative fashion
of speaking that belongs to it: but know they play their parts ill, few or none
having either the mien or genius of true Actors. They present by daylight, so
that their Scenes appear not with advantage: Their Clothes are neither rich,
nor appropriated to their Subject; and the Spanish habit serves where the Scene
is Greece or Rome. The Plays I have seen have but three Acts, called Jornadas:
They usually begin by a Prologue in Music, but sing so ill, that their harmony
resembles little Childrens whinings: Between the Acts there is some little
Farce, Dance, or Intrigue, the most diverting of the whole Piece: The people
are so taken with them it is hard to get place, the best being bespoken, and
the excessive idleness of this Country, as that of England, is made evident in
that in Paris it self, though there are not Plays every day, there is no such
crowding to them. Having with some exactness reported the particularities of
such places as we saw, I will now acquaint you with what I in general observed
of the Spanish humor and Government. This Nation is thought to be very proud
and disdainful, but is really neither so much as it seems: its mien doubtlesly
is deceitful, and they which frequent it find not all the vanity imagined, and
may perceive it to be a vice proceeding rather from erroneous Morals than an
insolent temper. To Hector it both in words and gestures, seems to them a
symtome of a great soul; and visiting other Countries, little or not at all
they discover not this defect, derived to them from the first milk they suck,
and the first Sun gives them light.

Some Spaniards are so ignorant that they believe not there is any other
Country than Spain, other City than Madrid, or King than their own. When I
speak of ignorant Spaniards, I mean those mere Castillians who never having
quitted their Threshold, know not whether Amsterdam be in Europe, or the
Indies. The Nobility and Grandees go little out of Madrid, neither as Soldiers
nor Travailers, unless commanded and employed. They have no information either
by Gazetts or other news written or printed, and I never more admired any thing
than that this Nation we esteem so politic, and imperious, Masters of the
secret of the universal Monarchy, and capable of imposing fetters on the rest
of Christendom, has so very few able heads, amongst whom it is thought the
Earl of Castriglio, Viceroy of Naples is none of the meanest: Pignoranda, Don
Lewis de Haro, and Don Fernando de Contreras govern all. The Earl of Ognate is
a great headpiece, but the Favorite is jealous of him, and as much as
possible keeps him from affairs. The Grandees of Spain appear such only at a
distance: here they seemed to me very little, and without any other advantages
than to put on their hats, and sit down in the Kings presence; in other
particulars I never observed less inequality in the most popular Republic. A
Shoemaker when he has laid aside his Awl and Last, and hung his Sword and
Dagger by his side, will hardly give the first salute to him he wrought for in
his Shop a moment before. You cannot speak to one of the most inferior of the
rabble without giving him titles of honor; and they treat one another with
Senores Cavalleros. If a Beggar seeks an Alms, and you refuse him, it must not
be without a Compliment, Pardone Vuestra merced, no tengo diveros: pardon me
Sir, I have no money. No other Prince lives like the King of Spain, his
employments are continually the same, in such a manner, that he at all times
knows how every day of his life is to be passed over: You would think some
indispensable Law prohibited his omitting to do according to custom; so that
neither weeks, months, years, nor hours change any thing of his manner of
living, nor present him any thing new. As soon as he rises and recollects what
day it is, he knows what businesses he is to dispatch, or what pleasures to
enjoy. He has certain hours for forain and domestic Audiences, and for
signing all that tends to the expedition of his Affairs, dispos*d of his
Treasure, Meals, and Devotions. And I have been assured that whatever happens
he continues firm in such a manner of acting. Every Saturday he goes to a
Church at the farther end of the old Pardo called At^cha, where he has a most
particular Devotion to the Holy Virgin, saying it is from her he has received
so great favors, and admirable assistances in his greatest extremities. France
also imputes all its successes to her mediation, and the advantages of these
potent Kingdoms, having been so long diametrically opposite, it seems something
inconsistent, that (little happiness coming to one without the others
misfortune) they can both boast to have her propitious. Every year at the self
same time he goes to his Houses of pleasure, and they say nothing but sickness
can prevent his retiring to Aranjuez, Pardo, or the Escurial in the Months he
had wont to enjoy the Air of the Country. In a word, they which have spoken to
me of this humor, tell me it is very conformable to his Mien and Port, and they
that are near him assured me, that when they speak to him he changes neither
look nor posture, but receives, hears, and answers them with the same
countenance, nothing in all his body being moveable but his lips and tongue.
This gravity, whether natural or affected, is in this Country so essential a
part of Majesty, that we were told that the Queen one day, transported at
dinner to a more than ordinary laughter, at the ridiculous postures and
discourses of a Buffoon, was put in mind, that to do so became not a Queen of
Spain, who ought to be more serious at which surprised, being young, and but
newly come out of Germany, she said she could not help it unless that fellow
were taken away, and that they should not have brought him thither if they
would not have had her laugh at him. Two days in the week he gives public
Audiences, principally to receive Petitions and Memorials of such as beg any
favor of him. He answers not immediately, but causes them to be all carried
into a certain place, where they are perused by a Secretary of State, who
distributes them to such of the several Councils, as their contents relate to;
after which he that would be dispatched, must enquire at the Secretaries Office
what answer is returned, but seldom finds any, especially if the pretense be
arrears or reward; and when he has lost all hope of hearing what is become of
his Petition, it is permitted him to present as many more as he pleases, but to
little purpose, for the King seldom sees any, and all are carried to the
Council that received the first, which having no intention to satisfy him,
returns neither Petition nor Answer: For this reason Madrid is ever full of
pretenders, who with the attendance of whole years, lose their ink and Paper.
His Majesty has also certain hours in which he signs all expeditions of State,
and of his Treasury; so that nothing is done, nor one penny given out without
an Order signed by him, whereas in France the Secretaries of State have the
Seal and Signature of the King in their power, which would give them
oppportunities of doing many things on their own account, should they abuse it.
It is true yet, that neither here nor there the Secretary signs or presents any
thing to be signed, but by consent of the Favorite or chief Minister: and Don
Fernando de Contreras, principal Secretary, who with Pigneranda, and Don Lewis
de Haro governs all, causes nothing to be signed but what is approved by the
later, and the King entirely confiding in him, signs all he presents without
reading it: for never any Prince was more easy, nor put greater confidence in
his Ministers: When delivred from Olivares, he was no longer without a
Favorite then till the Queens death, which happened very suddenly after the
disgrace of that chief Minister: Then he received into his privacy (as they
call it here) the Nephew of the former, at present the most powerful in this
Court: He is also one of the richest, and possessing the great wealth he
inherited from his Uncle, contents himself to enjoy his fame, and neglect his
maxims, which would probably be attended by the public hatred, his politics
having been thought very corrupt and biassed. It is believed this Favorite
makes no use of his Masters coffers; and it is but necessary he spare them,
they having never been so exhausted; for besides the Monthly Pensions of the
Prince of Conde, and those that follow him, which are very ill paid, this Court
is obliged to an extraordinary charge in Catalonia, and its forces being very
weak there, to treat for three or four thousand Wallons and Germans, of which
the poorest foot Soldier will stand it in six score crowns. The Marquis Serra
a noble Genouese (who on that condition returned to Barcelona) is promised a
hundred thousand crowns a month to maintain that Army, and to resist the
French. The Indian Fleet was expected, which brought but 800 thousand crowns on
the Kings account the last year; what it would then bring was very uncertain,
thought it was given out to be very rich, and that it had aboard it two years
Revenue.

Before the King went to Aranjuez, he assembled the Estates of both Castiles,
which consist of the Deputies of 22 Towns, each Town sending two. Such
Assemblies are called las Cortes. The King made them a Speech, and told them,
that of the ten Millions of Gold, his Kingdoms yearly supply him with, not
above three came into his Coffers, and necessities of State considered, it was
his pleasure they should consult of ways to bring the entire sum into his
hands. That to this purpose every Town and Province should take care themselves
to bring their proportion into his Exchequer, where he willed them to suppress
many of the Officers that managed his Revenue, and devoured the greatest part
of it: after this he also demanded some augmentation. The Cortes met, and
labored in this affair, but it was much feared they would not consent to such
a suppression, which would undo many, and some of their Relations, for the
augmentation, it was believed they would not think the people able to pay any
more, the misery and poverty of the Country considered. In the mean time this
King, (his ten Millions of crowns excepted) draws little or nothing from the
People; and Navarre, Arragon, and the Kingdom of Valentia, (not united to the
Castiles) are not thought to bring up above two Millions.

The great expenses to which his Wars oblige him, are known to all the world,
but some nearer home consume the best of his Revenue: these are many Pensions,
there being hardly any Grandee of Spain, Duke, Earl, Marquis, or Knight that
has not something from the Public: not in recompense of service in War; but
because the most of them are extremely necessitous, in so much that I have been
assured that many of them compounding with their Creditors, have assigned them
their Pensions, reserving only some small sum toward a wretched subsistence.
Neither are any accounted rich (the three Favorites abovementioned excepted)
but the Duke of Alva, the Marquis of Leganes, the Earl of Ognate, and two or
three others whose names I have forgotten; the rest of the Nobility wanting
wherewithal to supply their ordinary expenses. But did the King allow no
Pensions to them, he pays enough to others to divert a very considerable part of
his Incom. His Armies abound with Reformadoes, who receive pay as if actually
in service: it is true indeed that these are so il paid, that I connot imagine
how they subsist, and I spoke with an Alfieres that came from Portugal, whose
Pension is twelve crowns a month, that protested he had not recived six in six
year.

The Jesuits have of late been obliged to bring sixty thousand crowns into the
Kings Coffers, which very much disgusted them, and allayed their zeal in these
quarters for the House of Austria. This Sum was shipped by them on the Indian
Fleet, without registring it, and upon discovery confiscated according to the
Law. The Jesuit to whose care it was entrusted, played his part so well that the
Kings Officers could not find it, but that which belonged to other Cloisters,
being seized, they peached, and it became the Kings, notwithstanding the good
Fathers alleged it designed to build a Church in Navarre, in the Town where the
Saint the Founder of their Order was born.

This King spends nothing either in Buildings or Gardens. Much of ornament
might be added to his Palace, and its height require a Wall in form of a
Terrass, to support its declining, that increases daily. A Wood below it, that
serves only for a Shelter to Rabbits, and a Nest for Crows, brought by Charles
the 5th out of the Low Countries, might be converted into a fair Garden. The
river that passes by it is called Maucanarzes, not so broad as its name is
long; its Channel is gravelly, and it self in Summer so low, that in June and
July Coaches at the Tour go through it. The Bridge, or rather Causey, by which
it is passed, is both long and large, and cost I know not how many thousand
Ducats; and he was no fool, that being told that Philip the Second bestowed so
much cost on so poor a River, said it was fit either to sell the Bridge or buy
Water.

Gentlemen here contrary to the customs of England, France and Germany live in
Cities; few of them having any privileges for Hunting or Hawking, neither
Manors or Vassals as with us, where they are most of them Lords of the
Parishes they dwell in: and indeed the quality of a private Gentleman is here
scarcely intelligible, the people having respect only for Orders of Knighthood,
and such as are Titulados, which comprehends Dukes, Marquisses, and Earls. Here
are yet some Families whom they call Solariegas or de Solar Conocido, who alone
are true Gentlemen, and can derive pedigrees, of which they may have
testimonies, called Cartas Executorias, and on account of them, enjoy some
inconsiderable privileges. The most ancient of their Titles, was that of
Riccos Hombres, very different from Hombre Ricco, which last implies no more
but a rich man, but the othet anciently were the great Lords of Spain, before
Dukes, Marquisses and Earls were heard of: They were covered in those days in
presence of their King, and alone had deliberative voices in Assemblies.

Neither Governments, nor Military, nor Civil Charges are here sold, which is
not altogether so commendable as it seems at first sight; for ununworthy
persons (if well looked on by Favorites) may more easily attain them then if
they paid for them, and several of ancient extraction and great abilities are
willing to lay out their money to put themselves in a condition to serve their
King with honor: neither in Countries where Charges are most vendible, are
they so to all Chapmen; but to Gentlemen only, and such as are qualified for
them.

All the while Olivares was in favor, he caused an ill understanding between
the King and his wife, Elizabeth of Bourbon. In order to which (as some report)
he sought to corrupt his Master with an abominable opinion of certain graceless
People who in Madrid joined together in a Sect, and called themselves
Alumbrad^s, as much as to say illuminated, or (if you please) Phanaticks; these
seeking to countenance themselves in their villainies, that they might commit
them with the greater liberty, held it out as a Maxim, that part of the Gospel
was mis-understood, and that it was an error to believe Copulation with a woman
(on what account soever) could render a man blameable before God.

This King is supposed to have had natural issue by several, but none is owned
but Don John of Austria, whose Mother was a Comedian. Of legitimate Children
none grew up but the Prince and the Infanta, the rest dying very young. The
Prince seemed courageous, but, as was conjectured, of a nature violent and
cruel. Some report he was taken from so many Kingdoms (as whose sole Heir he
was considered) by an accidental connivence of Don Pedro de Arragon first
Gentleman of his Chamber, who one night giving way to his lying with a
Curtezan, he so overheat himself that next morning he fell into a violent
Feavour; and the Physicians ignorant of what had passed, by letting him blood
so extremely exhausted his Spirits, whose dimunition was the only cause of his
Disease, that they hastened his death. Don Pedro either for not preventing or
not discovering this to the Physicians, continues in disgrace, and though
Brother of the Favorite, may not yet return to Court: Permission only being
given him to dwell at one end of the Town, where he neither receives nor returns
Visits with any Splendour.

The fall of Olivares has been very public in Europe, and made appear that
Favor, which has no other foundation than the Princes affection, nor supports
it self otherwise than by the dexterity of him that possesses it, cannot be so
durable, as his that established on the Basis of his good service, renders him
necessary to whom he is agreeable, and it is reported that this man did
sometimes buoy himself up in the Kings good affection and opinion, by the very
same inconsiderable Artifices, that at last sunk him. Amongst other inventions
this is discoursed; Complaint having been made that Bread was very dear, and so
scarce it could hardly be had in Madrid, because he had taken money of all the
Neighboring Villages, to exempt them from an Obligation lay upon them, to
bring a certain quantity every day to Market, he gave Order that all that was
in the Town dispersed among several Bakers, should be brought and exposed in
the street, by which the King was to pass to our Lady of Atocha. They to whom
he gave this command performed it so well, that the Shops and Stals were laden.
The King at sight of such plenty said he perceived that they which had told him
of scarsitie of Bread were impostors and liars: For better Confirmation the
Conde Duke Ordered they should bring every day into the public Market place
all the Bread, they were obliged to, notwithstanding the Exemptions, upon which
the complaints ceased, and the King a long time believed that what had been
told him was an effect of the Malice, of such as emulated and envied his
Favorite: But the Queen by her Wisdom and Patience, at last ruined him, and by
degrees entered on part of the Government, from which his Ambition and Jealousy
had so long excluded her. As soon as she had gotten credit with the King her
Husband, she made him understand the disorder of affairs, and danger of the
Crown by his Favorites ill conduct: and this with so much Prudence that he was
banished the Court; and at last preparations made to bring him to this trial.
The Queens chief Counselor on this Extraordinary occasion, was the Earl of
Castriglio, a very near Kinsman of him she designed against. They could not
without great difficulty bring the King to condescend, but at last the
Inquisition concerning it self, and charging him with that accursed Doctrine of
the Alumbrados, and an endeavor to Corrupt the King with it, he was very near
being abandoned to it, but this was prevented by his death, suspected to have
been hastened by poison, and that good turn done him by his relations, that
they might the sooner possess his wealth. Don Lewis de Haro inherited the best
part of it, and to so great a value that I was told, by one that had it from
his own mouth, his yearly Revenue amounts to 130 thousand Crowns: it is not
therefore to be wondered if he contents himself with the quality of Favorite,
or Chief Minister, without a greedy hunting after all advantages he might
acquire by it: but though by this he exempt himself from the clamors raised
against his Uncle; he is yet supported by very few creatures, not endeavoring
to make any, according to the Pasquil, comparing him with his Predecessor. Two
persons have ruined Spain, one by doing ill to all, the other by doing good to
none.

Before he came into favor, he was in the Coach with Villa Medina, when he was
poniarded. This Gentleman was the gallantest Courtier, and greatest wit of
Spain: the Curious relate many of his Reparties, of which this is none of the
worst; coming into a Church, a Basin was presented him, the usual receptacle of
Money to redeem souls from Purgatory; and he (demanding what sum served to
deliver one, and being answered, what he pleased) put in two pistols; withal,
desiring to know if the soul were free, which the other assuring him, he took
again his two pistols, telling him he had done enough; the soul being in no
danger of returning. Of all his Gallantries, none cost him dearer then that of
a Mask: he was in love with the Queen, which he managed with so little
caution; it occasioned him to be censured rash and indiscreet; the goodness of
this Princess inclining her to favor men of parts, caused her (altogether
ignorant of his folly) to look well on him. This hastened his fall, for besides
that he could not forbear to mention his Mistress, which terms better becoming
a gallant then subject, he appeared in a Mask, in a Suit embroidered with
pieces of Eight, with this word Mis amores son reales. This, though equivocal,
gave occasion of discourse to all the world, because it was very evident, that
he rather designed the eminent object of his love, then the avarice of which he
accused himself. The violence of his passion, made him provide a Comedy with
Scenes, in which he spent 20 thousand Crowns, which (to gain an opportunity of
embracing the Queen, whilst he carried her out of the danger) he set on fire,
and with them burnt almost all the house. Subjects that incite their Masters
jealousy, stand on precipices. This man was stabbed in his Coach at noonday:
when accompanied by Don Lewis de Haro.

One may very reasonably inquire the occasions of the great expenses of
Spaniards, and how they undo themselves, little of pomp or luxury appearing
amongst them, and few of them going into the wars. They which are well
acquainted with Madrid, assure, that most Families are ruined by Women: every
man keeps a Mistress, or is besotted on a Curtisan; who (none in the world
being more witty, impudent, or better skilled in that accursed mystery;) as
soon as they ensnare any, plume them to the quick; they must have Robes of 30
pistols price, which they call Gardepies, other accoutrements answerable,
Jewels, Housholdstuff, and Coaches. To deny any thing to that Sex, is accounted
dishonorable. I was assured that the Admiral of Castile (none of the richest)
gave at once to one of these Cattle, Fourscore thousand Crowns. One of the
Palavicini of Genoua, told me, that not long before, an inclination cost him
Two thousand Crowns, and finding himself delayed by the Baggage to whom he made
his Addresses, he abandoned her, without obtaining any thing. Here are four
Processions without the Town, whereas at so many Solemn Rendezvouses they
endeavor to set out themselves. All Gallants then present them, which if any
neglect, they are lost, and no more thought persons of Honor; this makes all
with emulation strive to adorn these infamous Creatures, and glory not a little
in it. No Town in the World offers so many to public view ever at all hours of
the day, all Streets and Walks are full of them; they wear black Vails with
which they hide their faces, but discover one eye. They accost all men boldly,
being no less impudent, than dissolute. In Italy they are more modest, not
seeking Men as here; and as the disorder is universal, so the mischief caused
by it is almost infallible, These Sinners yet enjoy alone all the liberty of
Madrid, for Ladies of Quality, and honest Women, scarce ever go abroad, neither
by Coach, nor otherwise, to take the Air. Most of them hear Mass in their own
Houses, and excepting some few Visits, never appear in Public, and then in
Sedans. It must needs be granted, that this Sex has here a great deal of Wit,
exercising it self in Reparties; and this with much liberty, One I have heard
of, that seeing on a Wall the figure of what Women are so careful to conceal,
with this Inscription, Without bottom; with a Coal instantly added, For want of
line.

Nothing is so frequent, as the alterations Love is pleased to make in the
inclinations of those he inflames, liberal men by them becoming prodigal, and
avaritious liberal; and he whom he inspires not to spend all for the sakes of
Ladies, hazards here to be esteemed a Beast the rest of his days, and persons
of a parsimonious humor, and sordid thrift, how high soever their birth be,
shall be thought base, and the infamy of this defect follow them to their
Graves.

At the Tour, the Curtains of their Coaches are usually drawn close, and if a
man be in their company, none speak to them, otherwise they may be discoursed
with very freely; They all paint, and lay on the Ceruse and Vermillion so
grossly, they disgust the Beholders. In short, they ae generally unhandsom and
unwholsom, and paint as much to hide the symptoms of the ^ocks in their Faces,
as to beautify them. Husbands that desire to have their Wives live honestly,
begin so arbitrarily, that they treat them almost like Servants, lest by a
handsome liberty, they should pass the limits of Chastity, little understood,
and worse observed by this Sex. In Andalusia, they say, the Husbands are yet
more violent, using them like Children or Slaves. If at meals they suffer them
to approach the Table, it is not to eat, but serve them; with which if the more
Civil dispense, they give them meat from the Table on the ground, where they
sit on Carpets or Cushions, like Turks or Tailors; in which manner, they also
sit in Churches, and in most Houses, instead of Chairs, you see only a few
Cushions set one on another, by the walls side.

The Tour of Coaches when in Town, circulates in the high street, otherwise in
the Prado, near de Retiro, or by the Rivolet below the Palace. The greatest
Lords appear with little splendour above the rest, only their Coaches are drawn
by four Mules, and attended by some few Footmen more than ordinary; the Pages
have place in the Boots of the Coaches. They wear not Liveries; but most
commonly are clothed in black; scarce any of them have colored Lace, except
on the Sleeves: The Kings are still worst clad, and worst paid. In all Great
men's Houses, they every Night eat up all that remains, and burn all the
Candles, consuming also the Oil and Salt, the Servants otherwise taking it as
Va^^s.

Grandees of Spain are of two sorts, this Honor being sometimes personal,
sometimes hereditary. The first, the King bids be covered themselves; the
second, themselves and Heirs for ever. This is all the Ceremony in making a
Grandee, neither do any other privileges belong to it; so that it is but a
Chimerical and Airy Honor, without any profit; they which marry the Heiress of
a Family of a Grandee of Spain, that is such hereditarily, become Grandees in
right of their Wives.

This is all I could learn concerning Grandees, but Spanish Books mention three
sorts, one of which the King commands to be covered before they speak to him,
another after they have spoken, but before he answers; and the last cover not,
till they have spoken and he answered. When the King creates a Duke, he is also
a Grandee, and the consequence is good; he is a Duke, therefore a Grandee; but
not he is a Grandee, therefore a Duke; many Marquesses and Earls being also
Grandees. Their Wives sit in the Queens presence, and she rises at their coming
in. The King in all Edicts and Letters calls them Princes: In his Chapel, they
have a Seat called the Grandees Bench, where, without regard to Antiquity, they
sit as they come promiscuously. The Title of Sennioria belongs to them by
patent of Philip the Third. These are, in a manner, all the advantages they
have above other Gentlemen, who, as well as they, are exempted from all Taxes,
unless when the Public is in danger; at such times, they have been so heavily
burdened, that they have paid near half their Revenue. They are not obliged
to quarter, unless when the Court goes a Progress; but to speak in general of
the Spanish Nobility, they have a very considerable privilege (at least if it
be made good to them) which is, that how great soever their Debts be, the
Revenue only can be attached, the rest being in Mayorazgo (as I understand it)
entailed, which goes farther; so that when the Revenue is seized on, the Judges
will appoint the Gentleman, whose Quality oblieges him to keep Servants,
Horses, Coaches, etc. a Stipend sufficient to support him according to it; and
though he owes as much as a Revenue of 50 thousand Crowns can be worth, and
has but 30, his Creditors can pretend to no more, than the overplus of what is
ordered for his subsistence.

Here are very few Knights of the Golden Fleece, nor many pretenders to that
Honor, because difficult to be obtained, and bringing no profit. It was lately
sent to the Archduke Leopold, eldest Son of the Emperor Ferdinand the Third.
The other Orders are Calatrava, known by a Red Rose worn on the Cloak, and
Alcantara by a green one, St. Jago wears a Sword gules or an Arrow, these are
near of an equal esteem and dignity; these Knights have sometimes profit by the
Commands they now and then obtain by the Kings favor. A great number of them
were slain before Lerida, since which time it is not believed there are above
1800 in all the three Orders, whereas before there were above 4000. Alcantara
is most esteemed, which they that pretend to, must prove themselves Gentlemen
of four Descents, two being sufficient to either the other.

In the second Court of the Palace, are Chambers for several Councils. The
Council of State assembles under the Kings Apartment, where the welfare of all
his Dominions is consulted. There is also a Council of War, where the ways of
executing what has been resolved in the Council of State, are taken into
consideration: Near these is the Council of Castile, called Roial; it is very
powerful, and consists of Seventeen Counselors and a President. Many Affairs
of the other Councils are referred hither, especially of the Council of the
Indies, in which the people of both Castiles are very much concerned. Arragon
has also its Council, Italy and Flanders theirs. The Council for the Indies,
and the Kings Revenue called de la Hazienda, sits in another place; so does
that de las Ordenes, which determines the differences of the Orders of
Knighthood, and Judges of the proofs of Gentry of such as pretend to them. All
these are within the Palace Walls. That of the Inquisition has its Tribunal in
the House of the President of that holy Office: That of the Cruzada, which
gives Dispensations to eat Flesh on Saturdayes, and some other privileges
granted by Popes to the King, is also held at the Presidents. None of these
pretend to be so absolute, as the Inquisition. I have been assured, that it is
not always in the Kings power to free those that are accused there: And though
this Jurisdiction derives its Authority from the Pope, in some Conjunctures it
has had no regard to his Orders. It extends not only to those which in matters
of Religion go contrary to the Church, but is a sharp curb to all whose temper
gives jealousy to the State, and dispatches them without noise, as was
intended against Antonio Perez, and the Duke of Olivares, had he not dyed. All
resolutions of these several Councils, pass through that of State, before put
in execution, which examines whether there be any thing in them, contrary to
the general good of all the members of the Crown.

A Mornings, because then all the Councils assemble, there is a great crowd in
the Palace, yet only below in the two Courts, whither they which have Business
or Suits (as they say here, para pretensiones) come to follow them. Amongst
others, you may see many undertakers of Levies of Soldiers, soliciting their
Disbursments. When Horse are raised, all the Horses are brought into the Piazza
before the Palace, where one Ear of each of them is cut off. By this mark they
are made known to be the Kings, and a Trooper selling one of them, or one of
them being sound in the possession of a man that serves not the King, he may be
seized, and carried away without any formality of Law; but the Troopers
sometimes cut off the other Ear, and then presenting the Captain some Dollars,
obliged him to depose before the Commissary, that the Horse is dead, after
which he is sold without difficulty. This is one of the greatest profits of
Captains of Horse in Catalonia, as they which have served there informed me.

It is not only very difficult to raise men for Catalonia, but to maintain
them, when brought thither: enduring much hardness, they quickly die, Flemings
and Germans especially; Castilians and Neopolitans disband and run away, the
latter getting into France, present themselves there to the General, who
usually gives them a piece of money to bear their charges to their Country, the
other coasting to the Pireneans on the side of Languedoc, return into Castile
by Navarre or Biscai. Old Soldiers, of what Nation soever, know the Country,
and will certainly escape, young ones, besides that they are of little use,
last not, as being unaccustomed to so great fatigue.

The War here is more troublesome to the King of Spain than any where else, and
more important, being in a part of his Dominion, of which he is very jealous,
and where he would redeem any loss by twice the value in Italy or Flanders.
They which penetrate into the secrets of this Court, assure that it has a kind
of contempt for losses in other places, but those in Catalonia touch to the
quick, and are as so many wounds the State seems to receive in its heart, by
which it appears, that they which have concluded the certain way of shaking the
Spanish Monarchy, to be by making war upon it in its own Country, have
doubtlesly very well discovered where it is weakest.

To defend it self, it must be at a vast expense, for very small forces,
because in great want, not only of Victual and Ammunition, but much more of men
In this it is become defective but in this last age; for by what Cicero said of
it, we find it otherwise in time of the Romans, who giving the epethite of
courageous to England, gave that of populous to Spain, reserving to themselves
that of Piety only. This alteration is easily understood by those that
consider, how the falling of the Goths and Vandals into this Country, with the
irruption of the Moors, that immediately followed it, scattered the greatest
part of the Inhabitants: and when these strangers had so well settled
themselves, that the Cities again abounded with people, Ferdinand of Arragon,
that conquered all Spain, destroyed a great many, and exiled more.

The discovery of the West Indies, that happened soon after, drew away great
Colonies, and peopled the new World with the Spaniards, as well by the great
concourse of such as (finding it a better Country than that they abandoned)
seated themselves there, as by a necessity of furnishing Navies, and
transporting Soldiers to form an Army, and Garrison Forts and Cities; and this
in such manner, that the best of Spain is now in the Indies, the Kings wants
having obliged him to sell his Subjects for gold, though neither the Mines of
Potosi, nor all Peru, are able to supply the expense he is fain to be at for
want of men; neither do the Gallions ever bring wealth enough to discharge the
States debts; for besides that the greatest part of it belongs to particular
persons of Flanders, Holland, Genoua, and France, that which comes on the Kings
account is due to several that have assignations upon it: So that Spain is no
more than the channel by which the Gold of the Indies passes to discharge it
self in the vast Ocean of other Countries: and therefore in that similitude,
where the world is compared to a living body, Spain is the mouth, which
receives, chaws, and prepares the nourishment, but immediately conveys it to
other parts, retaining nothing to it self but the savor alone, or the little
that accidentally sticks between the teeth. And he had reason, that considering
Spain, where little Gold appears, all other Nations abounding with her Pistols,
said she serves them as the Damnati ad Metalla did the ancient Emperors; or
else that she is like the Ass of Arcadia, that laden with Gold, fed on
thistles. But that which completed her desolation, was the general expulsion
of the Moors. There were many reasons for the quitting her self of so cursed a
Generation, and impoisoning the waters thereby to destroy all the Christians,
having been imputed to them, and their continual correspondencies with the
Africans, Turks, and other Enemies of the Kingdom discovered, Philip the third
possibly could not have taken a better resolution, than at once to free himself
from the continual apprehension of them: Though it may well be objected, that a
good Politician ought as little as may be to make use of such universal
punishments, by which a State is more enfeebled, than amended; and that when
with the dagger at the breast, we go about to free our selves from some ill we
apprehend, we act rather as desperate then as courageous and prudent: that it
is ignorance of lenitives that forces so soon to cut and cauterise: That it is
a greater virtue to instruct the vicious, and convert them, then to drive them
from their homes, and shut the doors against them: In a word, that we may
oppose errors without destroying persons. It is very certain that this Edict
cost the King of Spain a great many rich and good Subjects, of no turbulent
principles, and that with time might have been made sensible of the truth, and
profession of Christianity. But they were altogether deprived of the means of
it; for if they embraced Christianity, dssimulation was objected against them;
and that it was only to avoid the rigor of the Edict. This gave opportunity to
the avarice of those that executed it to play its game, passing by without
molestation such as bribed them, and suffering them to continue quiet in their
houses.

What discourses soever are made on this extraordinary rigor, which some have
admired as a policy very high and generous, and others blamed as a most
unnatural cruelty, it having deprived a King of his Subjects, and almost a
Nation of its native Country: It is very certain, that since that time Spain
has been a desert, and could never recover the loss (as is reported) of some
millions of people: But besides this her voluntary depopulating her self, the
Indies prevailing either on the necessity or inclination of her Subjects, draw
them still away, by frequent and numerous Colonies, in such manner that it is
believed more people have left Spain than at present remain in it.

After these misfortunes (at first looked on as incomparable felicities by
those which boasted the possession of the West Indies, and expulsion of the
Moors) Wars arose, and so violent, that it is computed, that in twenty years
they consumed a million and a half of Inhabitants, and that the Plague, which
often afflicted this Country, carried away near another million; so that ever
since Philip the third, Spain has extremely wasted both in men and money: this
is very true, and in so extraordinary a manner, that if its Enemies had
understood it, and those that were left behind had not after their separation
differed amongst themselves, the Spaniards would have been altogether unable to
have resisted them.

Besides this great ambiguity of good or evil, which they which judge according
to the event or their own sense, observe in the discovery of the Indies, and
expulsion of the Moors, another policy is spoken of, which not directed against
the Kingdom in general, attacques only that part of it which is most noble and
illustrous. Philip the second, styled the Solomon of his age, apprehending that
the Grandees and Nobility might at some time or other make use of their wealth
and power against his authority, or that of his Successors; and remembering that
they had discovered their turbulent inclinations under Charles the fifth, in
such a manner, as had like to have given him great troubles, thought he could
not better secure himself against such of them as meant ill, than by the
weakness of that whole body; to which purpose he cast the seeds of vanity and
envy amongst them, increasing the number of Grandees, Dukes, Marquises, and
Earls. The smoke of this drove from their Families all thoughts of profit, and
their honors, redoubled their expenses, by every ones endeavoring to surpass
his Companion.

When he saw them deeply engaged, he gave way to attacquing their Lands, and
deprived them of the Privilege of Mayorasgo, the most considerable that
belonged to them; and that they might not have in their hands any places of
strength, or houses to retire to when they had a mind to be troublesome, he
forbad them to repair their Castles: and such as have travailed between
Valentia and Madrid, observe many ancient Castles advantagiously situated for
commanding the Country, that decay and fall to the ground. Thus by heaping
honors on them he took away their power, and obliged them to a greater charge;
and by sparing them that of keeping up their Castles, deprived them of the
submission and respect their Tenants formerly had for them: Since this they
have lost daily, and complain that that Prince did not only clip, but cut off
the wings of their Predecessors, reducing them to that inconsiderable condition
they are in at present; which, like original sun, so closely follows, that it
destroys such of them as find not remedy, by obtaining some employment at a
distance from the Court, by means of which the public Treasure may pass
through their hands. Then they neglect not to fill their baggs, and enrich
themselves and Posterities. It is reported, that besides those which endeavor
to repair their fortunes in Italy and Flanders, by some employment suitable to
their birth, many return rich from the Indies. I speak not of Viceroys, who are
canged every 3 years, and lay up millions, it being sufficiently known, that
very many Officers under them make great advantages, and that in Madrid they
hide the Treasures they bring home even from the Sun that gave them birth, lest
their discovery cause an account of their administration to be demanded, or
they be obliged to lend the King a good part without any hope of ever being
paid: so that they neither dare put their money to use, nor buy land with it,
but choose rather to eat up the main Stock than to hazard it: Thus by little
and little they consume what they so suddenly amassed, of which their Family
sometimes enjoys nothing beyond the second generation.

They which are employed in the Kings Councils or Treasury, have a certainer
and securer way of enriching themselves, because seated at the helm of
Government. These men thriving without any apprehension of being molested, and
demanding account of others, themseves not obliged to render it to any; make
use with splendor of what they have acquired, building palaces of
extraordinary expense in a Country where Stone and Mortar are excessive dear.
Their plenty alone is with ostentation, that of others so reserved, and as it
were bashful, that it often pretends necessity that it may avoid being really
reduced to it: and some Dutch Inhabitants in Madrid told us, that some few
years before, a Tax had been laid upon them, only because they were thought to
be rich and at their ease: The manner of doing it seems very severe. A rich
Merchant being sent for to a Committee of the Council, was told that the King
commanded him to bring three or four thousand crowns into his Exchequer; if he
went about to excuse himself as unable, or by reason of money due to him from
the King, it signified nothing; and he was sent away with notice, that if he
paid it not in three days he must go six leagues from Madrid in custody of the
Ministers of Justice on his expense. That time expired without paying, he was
sent 20 leagues from the Court. They which paid at first freed themselves from
this charge and trouble; they that were obstinate against what appeared so
unjust to them, suffered both, and were at last constrained to pay what had
been imposed before they were permitted to return to their houses.

Gown-men and Penmen are here the richest, and none spoken of but Counselors,
Senators, and Secretaries, who from very poor beginnings suddenly become
wealthy: They which manage the affairs of the Indies are thought to surpass all
others: and the Earl of Pigneranda, who served his Master so well in the
negotiations of Munster and the Low Countries, and is the Favorites Favorite,
chose rather to be President of the Council of the Indies, than of that of
Flanders, which questionless had been more proper for him than any other.

That Council advantages it self as well by the employments of which it has
the disposal, as by all Merchandise that passes to and again: Amongst which
wine makes a very profitable and speedy return, none but Spanish being suffered
to be transported, which is sold with so great gain, that that which in
Andalusia, or other part where it grows, costs one crown, is worth 6 or 7 there.

That this may be continued, planting Vines is there prohibited on pain of
death, though that soil would as well bear them as any part of Spain. Traffic
in general (as I before observed) is not equal to what it has been; for which
(amongst many other pretended here) this reason may be given, that the profit
made on occasion of it by the King and his Ministers has discouraged
Merchants, to the loss of a very great Revenue to the Crown: whatever is
shipped for the Indies must be registered, and pay the tenth penny for fault of
which it is confiscated. By this the wealth of the Fleet is known to a
farthing, as well what belongs to the King as to particular persons. Some years
since his Catholic Majesty (wanting money) laid hands on that which
appertained to Merchants, under the notion indeed of borrowing, but (besides
that such forced lones suit not well with Merchants affairs) it was never
returned: For which reason many do not register their Gold and Silver, but
choose rather to combine with the Captains (though it cost them more) than to
abandon all for fair words. Before the Fleets arrival at Cadis, English or
Holland Ships meet it either near that Port, or that of St. Lucar, and receive
there from such Captains as they correspond with, that which is on account of
those that send them, and carry it away before it enters any Spanish Haven; and
even the Merchants of Sevil and other Spanish Cities send their money into
those Countries, where they may freely dispose of it without fear to have it
seized on. It is said that the Fleet comes this year more rich than usually;
but that the wealthiest ship is stranded, and uncertain whether the silver all
saved. But they which will have nothing lost report that more Gold and Silver
has been recovered than was registered, if so the King will have the advantage
of it by confiscation.

If we consider the general Government of these Kingdoms, it seems to move so
steadily, that it declines not at all from those bold Politics which are never
disturbed, and that trample on the sharpest thorns as resolutely as if they
walked on roses: but going to particulars we shall discover, that the Spaniards
who give much to appearances and the exterior, use no fewer meens and grimaces
in their public affairs, then in their particular comportment.

In the Streets, at the Tour, and in the Theaters, where many eyes are upon
them, they seem very grave, serious, and reserved: but in private, and to those
that are familiarly acquainted with them, they act in a manner so different,
you would not take them for the same persons, being as vain, wanton, and
humorous as other Nations.

The Politics of every Country are of a temper and genius like that of the
people that inhabit it; and the Spanish considered by an unbiassed judgment
are so as well as the rest.

At first view they seem firm, constant, resolute, and entirely swayed by
reason and judgment; but coming nearer, and examining them, piece by piece, we
may discover weaknesses we could not have imagined them capable of. Their pace
is sometimes so unsteady they stumble in the smoothest way, and sometimes so
positive, on account of Reputation and Interest, they haz^rd all for trifles;
but always so flow, that of a thousand of their Artifices, scarce any one
succeeds: I shall not give such examples as I might of this truth in times
past, particularly, in the revolutions of Flanders under Philip the II. and
what happened during the League in France in the same Kings Reign, being
provided of later in the insurrection of Catalonia, and revolt of Portugal,
both foreseen, without application of necessary remedies, not only, because of
obstinacy, but of irresolution and slowness. I will mention no more here then
what is disc^u^sed of at Madrid: opinions very much differ about Sequestration
of the Goods of the Genoueses, some declaring it to have been very just and
prudent; others the contrary: but all agreeing, that having been so vigorously
begun, it ought to have been continued in the same manner, and being an affair
of reputation and interest, that so great a Monarch should not have boggled at
going through with it, or an accommodation appearing necessary, by reason of
the prejudice this Rupture gave to affairs, they should not have moved so
heavily toward it, because in that interval they suffered for want of returns
from Genoua, which during such a suspension they could not supply with the
Money they had seized.

They which negotiated in this Court for that Republic, endeavored to make
understood that the Siege of Arras failed the year before, because the
Merchants recalled the Bills of Exchange they had drawn on Antwerp; but the
Spanish Ministers would not acknowledge this, though it was evident they began
to have some light of it. In the mean time, punctilios only span out a year
before matters could be accommoded, though the Spaniards were no less desirous
of it then the Genoueses; though these many demurs had no other end but to save
the Spanish reputation, they failed peradventure of that effect; what had
passed was nullified by the agreement; what had been seized, released, and the
dispute about Final, which had caused it, referred to arbitration.

They had long been agreed of all that was substantial; but a punctilio of
honor caused the execution to be delayed, it was this: The Republic would not
set at liberty the prisoners taken before Finale, unless the King asked them to
do it, and the King would have them sent home before he made any proposal: all
being like to break off an expedient, was found (by means of Marquis Serra,
brother of him that commands in Catalonia) that the Ambassador should visit the
Earl of Ognate, and ask him, if he thought the Republic might oblige his
Majesty by setting the prisoners at liberty, and the other answering yes, all
should be ended; but they add, that this Earl, who is both high and crafty, and
that at his return from Naples had been the first cause of the
misunderstanding, soundly ratled the Ambassador: In this proceeding, appears to
me a very great zeal in the Spanish Ministers, in resenting the affront done
them by the Republic, but it continued not, and the honor of it was blemished
by useless delays, all at last being concluded on conditions, that might have
been obtained at first.

The good understanding that has continued several years between the French
and Genouses, caused the first of these to offer their assistance to the other
toward righting them against the Spanish violence; on account of which the
Republic held it self so much obliged to the French King, that it sent Lazaro
Spinola, a Noble Citizen, in Quality of Extraordinary Ambassador, to return
thanks for the assistance and protection offered; that difference gave the
Genoueses such distaste of the Spanish Alliance, that it moved them to do this
to those they had formerly looked on as the greatest enemies of this liberty.
If we except such in Genoua as by Alliance and Interest are bound to the
Spanish party, the rest of their inclinations are very contrary to what they
were in their Fathers days during the Reign of Francis the I. of France, and
the Genoueses have at present no other kindness for the Spaniards, then a
Creditor for a Debtor, out of whose hands he would fain recover what belongs to
him; after which they would little value them: but however the Genoueses
comport themselves, their patience will never oblige their debtors to satisfy
them, who think they do enough when they pay the interest without any longer
considering the principal, which the Spaniards are well enough content to be
thought unable to discharge, whether it be so to free themselves from being
demanded it, or that the necessity of their affairs obliges them to it.

This in the mean time is a good caution to the Genoueses, by little and little
to free themselves from the Spanish clutches. All strangers, what services
soever they may have done them, ought to fear them, they considering themselves
and interests only,, in such manner that the Italians and Flemings that are
this Kings subjects, are used no more favorably then if born under another
Master: If they pretend to employments, either at Court or in the Armies, they
are told they are not natural Spaniards, who engross all, as well to keep up
the glory of the Nation, as out of diffidence of others, whom they in a manner
declare incapable of all trust because not born in Spain: this Country are
nevertheless abounds in strangers, but they only Artificers and Mercenaries
invited by gain, and that meddle with nothing but their pedling traffic. It is
thought that there are above 40 thousand French in Madrid, who wearing the
Spanish habit, and calling themselves Burgundinians, Walloons and Lorrainers,
keep up Commerce and Manufacture; it concerns them to conceal their Country,
for if it be discovered, they are obliged to pay a daily Pole Money of about a
penny to the Town, and, any bad success happening to the public, appearing in
the streets, are liable to a thousand insolences, even to blows.

They that know what number of strangers are in this Town report, that would
they undertake it, they might make themselves masters, and drive out the
Spaniards.

Such as have business, or intend to stay any time, habit themselves after the
manner of the Country, which we must have done had we been para pretensiones
(as they call it;) we must then have put on the Cassock and all the rest of the
Castilian Harness, none being welcome to the Court without it: nor can any
speak to the King unless clothed in black, in which they are so punctual, that
an Envoye from the Prince of Conde was fain to wait till he suited himself in
that color before he could have Audience; even Women, and of those the
loosest, least desirous to appear such, immediately solicit strangers to quit
the habit of their Country, which causes them to be the more observed when
they make their visits. The Spaniards wear a Cassock with deep skirts which
sits very close to the body from the neck to the hanches, a black leather
Girdle, which buckles on the Breast, or toward the Navil; their Breeches are so
straight, that for more easy putting them on and off, they are buttoned at the
sides toward the bottom; their shoes are shaped exactly to their feet, with
narrow soles; and a little Foot and large calf of the leg, are in such request,
that Gallants bind their feet about with Riband, to their no small torment,
whilst by quilted stockins they put themselves perfectly in the mode: their
silk stockins are knit very open, almost like Network, which they stretch very
straight upon white, that is seen through them; they wear no longer broad
brimmed Hats, but very narrow ones lined with Taffata; they esteem it very
gallant, and of more then ordinary magnificence, to wear Hatbands of many broad
black Bone-laces, which doubtlesly cost as much as Plumes, they sending for
them to France or Flanders: they are not curious in their Linen, using little
Bonelace on it.

The reason of their beginning to dress themselves from above, and to button
from below, is not to be contrary to other nations in all they do, but because
the Air is so penetrating, that if they be not very careful to keep their
breasts warm a mornings, they hazard sickness; many for neglecting this, having
suffered terrible accidents, and lost the use of their Members; this has also
happened to others by leaving their windows open a nights: Black Bays and
Rattin is their Winters wear; in Summer they use Taffata Suits, but leave not
off the Baise Cloak and Cassock.

The first of May we saw the Tour of Coaches without the gate of Toledo, this
is one of the most celebrated, and at it appear many of all sorts, some drawn
by four Mules, if Dukes or great Lords, with a Postillion, and the former Mules
fastened by long Harness; such as have six Mules, you may conclude belong to
persons very eminent, who are not allowed this Magnificence but without the
Town, which prohibition was occasioned by the Kings being told that the Tour
was little frequented, by reason of the vanity of such as unable to appear with
six Mules, forbore it, that they might not seem less then those with whom they
pretend equality.

No Coachman sits before the Coach, but on one of the foremost Mules; this
having been forbidden by the Conde Duke, who had a secret revealed by the
Coachman: they almost all use Mules, since the Coach-horses were either
effectually taken away, or threatened to be sent into Catalonia. The breed of
horses is by this means so near lost, that if something be not done to prevent
it, Spain will be entirely disfurnished, the greatest part of Mares being
reserved to bear Mules, the profit of them being great by reason of a quick and
advantageous Market. The King of Portugal has remedied this, by forbidding the
use of Mules, and the Clergy refusing to obey under pretense of certain
privileges, he gave them exemption, but on pain of death forbad the Farriers
to shoe any Mule, by which means he easily reduced them to observance of his
order.

The glory of this solemnity principally consists in the bravery of the Ladies,
who are extraordinarily industrious to appear with splendour, putting on their
richest accoutrements, they forget not Ceruse and Vermillion: they are seen in
diverse postures in their servants Coaches, some making a half discovery of
themselves, others with open Curtains, exposing their gallantry and beauty;
such whose servants cannot or will not accommodate them with Coaches, stand in
the streets that pass to the place where the Tour is made, or at one end of it.

Part of their liberty, or rather licentiousness consists in an indifferent
demanding of any to pay for Lemons, Wafers, Sweetmeats or Perfumes, which are
carried up and down to be sold; they give intimation of this by those that sell
them, and it is accounted a great incivility to refuse, though for six penny
worth of ware one pay a Crown.

Here appear also many fair Horses with rich Saddles, and their Mains and Tails
tied with Ribbands; the Riders are either such Gallants as have lent their
Coaches to Ladies, or such others as having no Coaches, are willing on
horseback to enjoy the pleasure of the Tour. After many circuits, and the view
of the several files of Coaches; evening coming on, all make a stand, and in
their Coaches eat such provisions as they have brought with them. This custom
is not peculiar to this solemnity, but almost every day, especially Sundays,
you walk amongst Bevers and Collations; so much the Spaniards are pleased to
Feast in the field, though but on an Onion, a Salad, or a few hard Eggs.

Hither also come some Women of Quality with their Husbands, and Gallants with
their Mistresses, who being under their eye comport themselves so modestly,
they hardly look on any, or return a salute. Ordinary Citizens are dispersed
about the fields, or sit on the River side, or some corner of the Meadow or
green Corn: they feast on very slender provision with much Majesty and Jollity,
accompanied by some friend, or their Wives and Families. I have been assured,
that besides these slight debauches, the Spaniards in their houses seldom or
never Treat one another: and they which have been at their Feasts add, that the
dishes, as soon as set on the Table, vanish, each guest seizing one with this
word Con licentia, to send it to his Mistress, in such manner that the company
is sometimes without any meat, and almost ever without so much as tasting the
best.

At this time the King is usually at Aranjuez, from whence he often comes to
view the Tour, and having ridden about, returns without entering the Town, which
at first seemed to me but a poor diversion, it being Seven long Leagues from
Aranjuez to Madrid; but considering how swiftly he passes them, with Six Mules,
ever driven at their best speed, and changed at half way, I could neither think
it tedious nor inconvenient, the seven Leagues being dispatched in little more
then three hours; but I could never apprehend what pleasure he can take at the
Tour, since as he passes by, all Curtains out of respect, are drawn, so that he
sees nothing but the Coaches, though the design of it is only to appear with
splendour, and enjoy the view of all that is gallant: Respect here questionless
destroys the pleasure it augments in other Countries, where at the Princes
approach, all make a stand, and Women unmask,

The 5th of May we went to Aranjuez to see the Court; this pleasant seat where
the King every Spring resides a month, is certainly very agreeable, and the
Spaniards that see nothing equal to it, mention it no otherwise then as the
Elisian fields: their Poets call it the Metropolis of Floras Kingdom, and her
Treasury; in the way to it we passed the River Tagus by a wooden Bridge, which
has a Gate at one end of it, that is shut when the Court is not there, then
people Ferry over, paying some Duties, which are part of the Rents of Aranjuez.
The first thing presents it self is a Park with Earthen walls, called Tapia, it
is large, and beautified by diverse Allies; in the Heath on each side the
passage to it, are Cony-Warrens: by the Park side is a very large Walk, from
which several others like it; extend to the right and left, it leads to a Gate
at the end of a bridge over a Canal, drawn thither from the River; this forms
an Island in which the Garden is, very fair and neatly kept, its entrance is
from the Palace, and as soon as the Bridge is passed, two Statues of Brass
appear, from the cut off Arms of one of which, water distills; hard by these is
the Cistern of the Fountain of Diana, which stands in the middle of a Mount
raised of Stone, Wood, Moss and Earth; many Figures of several Creatures are
joined to it, who pleasantly spout out water as they receive it by Pipes from
the River; in all this Garden I saw not any Fountain that derives its stream
from a Spring; round about the Cistern stand Eight Ships (if I mistake not) of
Myrtle, whose Branches are so accommodated, that the poops, prows, and all the
rest of the hulks are well shaped; on each of these is a little Statue that
spouts water against the Beasts that are on the top of the Mount. We came next
to the Fountain of Ganimed, who is mounted on an Eagle at the top of a Pillar;
at the Cistern side stand Mars and Hercules; a little from it is the Fountain
of the Gelosia, or small Lattice, so called, because at the top of it, the
water represents the form of one of those Lattices or Gelosias that are usually
set before windows: near it is another, called the Golden Rowel; and at the
entrance of the middle Ally, that of the Harpies, the fairest of all; its
Cistern is square, and at the four corners on four Pillars, stand those
monstrous Creatures, vomiting water against the statue of a man, that sitting
on one of the middle Columns, seeks a thorn in the sole of his foot: in the
same Ally not far from the end of the Garden is the Fountain of Don John of
Austria, whose Statue is placed on the top of it, water distilling from his
hair; it is made of a stone that was found in a Turkish ship after the battle
of Lepanto, it has two Cisterns, and below four Cupids with several Emblems:
this Garden is very pleasant, as well in it self, as by reason of its
particular ornaments which are not yet equally taking; the Walks are almost all
too narrow, and one would think they had been niggards of ground for the
parterres; the Arbors are low, and upheld only with Laths instead of Deal
spars, which would not have been spared by a rich private person; round about
the Isle by the River and Canals side is a large Walk, well kept and swept,
shaded by tall Elms; this is the fairest, and in which their Majesty's most
delight, in it is one Arbor, looking into the highway of Madrid, in which the
Queen was the day the Bulls were fought, to see them pass by, after the King
and his Court had brought them from the Heard from which they had separated
them: the day of this sport is made a great secret, the King never declaring it
till the night before he sends away the Herradores, or markers of the Bulls,
then also giving notice to the country people to bring them in: we had the
first news of it in the great walk, of which I will speak anon, where we met
the Queen going to take the Air; as soon as her Coach and that of her Maids of
Honor were passed by, a man on horseback, said to be the Guardian or overseer
of that Sex, taking us for Dutchmen, calling to us told us, that one of those
Ladys or Maids of Honor had a Cosen married in the Low Countries, and would
be glad to enquire of him, we turned back and after some short discourse, she
acquainted us, that possibly the sight of Bulls might be the next day, not
daring positively to declare it: this caution is to prevent too great a
concourse: immediately the Ladies Guardian interrupted our small entertainment,
bidding us go off from the Coach, having talked long enough with the Ladies* we
returned, admiring no less his incivility, then the impertinence of the Queens
Buffoon, presenting one of us a pipe of Tinn to speak to him with, because deaf
as he feigned; this great Walk is beyond the Village of Aranjuez, so wretched,
it scarcely affords any lodging, so that at our arrival there we were fain to
go farther, and though the Moon shone, and we had guides, lost our way; in the
place where we stayed we had much ado to get Stable-room for our Horses, and
shelter for our selves, and were very well contented to sleep on Chairs and
Benches. This is not occasioned by reason of a great Court, for almost all the
Officers are lodged in the Kings house, though very small; but the Village
affords but one Inn, which was taken up by the Emperors Ambassadors, so that
we could have no place there till next morning. That day we resolved to make an
end of seeing Aranjuez, and when we had been where the Camels are kept, where
there was only one Female, and a young one, the rest being abroad to carry
wood, as we returned by several f^ir Allies, our guide told us, that after a
birth the Females are two years before they again bring forth: He said also,
that they sometimes bait them with Dogs, and that it is very pleasant to see
how dexterously those ill shaped creatures defend themselves against Mastiffs;
and that their fury sometimes break through the Rails and discharges it self on
the Spectatators: coming near our lodging, he mentioned a rare Waterwork with
so many circumstances, that he incited our curiosity to go and see it, by we
discovered his simplicity, it being nothing but a Mill to saw boards. This
confirmed our opinion that what is very common in other places, passes often
here for miraculous: in the afternoon we went to see the great and magnificent
Walk at the end of the Village, near the way to Alcala de Henares: on each side
it is a double row of fair young Elms, toward whose better growth, they can at
pleasure let in water between the ranks: it is very long and large, and in two
or three places are wide circles where Coaches may wheel about as at our Tour
in Hidepark: at the end of it is a bridge over Tagus with a door, in such
manner, that the King when at Aranjuez, either without Guards, or only with 10
or 12 Halberdiers, is as within an entrenchment, not to be passed but by these
bridges; on the right hand is another Walk leading to a Grange where three
Asses are kept to cover Mares for production of good Mules; in my life I never
saw any so big, the youngest being as high as any Mule, the two other not much
lower; the First cost Two and twenty thousand Reals, which amounts to 600 l.
sterling; they are exempted from Duty but two days in the year, that is, on
Corpus Christi, and the Feast of the Ascension; at other times, as we were
told, the Male Caresses the Female twice a day, by this appears that most of
the Mares being made use of to bear Mules, the breed of Horses will by degrees
be lost here, and they would have much ado to raise Cavalry, were there
occasion for it. Rumors have been spread that Mules should be prohibited, but
this was found difficult; I know not whether by means of the Clergy, if so, it
had been easy to have applied the remedy made use of by the King of Portugal;
Though above the folly of those Travailers, that mind no more of the Courts of
the Countries they pass through, then to see the Princes Diss or Ride. Our
little stay in Spain, and difficult access to the Court, by reason of its great
privacy, obliged us to amuse our selves with what takes the eyes, but little
satisfies the intellect. On Ascension day by means of Sir Benjamin Wright, we
were permitted to stand in a corner of the chamber where the Queen dined; she
is of a middle stature, rather inclining to be low; over against her stands a
Lady that presents the dishes, and does the Office of Carver; on each side of
her stands another; she on the right, presents the Glass, she on the left, the
Napkin; she drinks very little, but eats well; she was served with many dishes,
but as we thought, few good ones; she has a Buffoon that talks continually to
endeavor to divert her; four or five youths of the best families in Spain
bring in the meat out of the next chamber, these are called Meninos, all
habited in Gray, yet with difference in the Color: we wondered to see the
Spanish gravity suffer such neglect of Majesty; these Meninos using very little
respect in the Queens presence, they often prated and shared a dish of Apples
with the Buffoon, and some of them at the door pushing one another, made a
great noise, without any reprehending them; none are admitted to see the
Infanta dine, and upon our expressing a curiosity for it, it was rumoured that
the Duke of Savoy was incognito at Aranjuez: an honest Spaniard after the fight
of Bulls, brought me into a Garden where I saw her take Coach: she is low, of a
sprightly mien and quick eye, her face rather long then round. It is pity the
custom of the Country obliges her to paint, for with less red she would
certainly appear more lovely, though the Queen and she seem less inflamed then
the rest of the Court, whose cheeks are Scarlet, and that so grossly laid on, it
seems rather to aim at disguise then beauty; and indeed the most of them are so
ill favored, that all the paint in the world made use of with the greatest
Art, cannot help them. The Maids of Honor take the first three or four
Coaches: and the Duenas: (who are old Women clothed in white, and almost
covered with Vails) the last; the Queen and Infanta follow in a Coach with six
Horses, an old Lady sitting in the Boot; their wide Farthingales extremely fill
the Coach, and one would take their thick and knotty Elflocks for Hempen
stuffing, broke out of an old pack-saddle.

Their Whisks or rather Cravats are made of great points, which doubtlesly cost
a great deal, though unhandsome: almost all of them have Looking-glasses,
Watches or Pictures hanging at their Girdles; I saw none Court them but the
Marquis of Aytona, who walked by a Coach side talking with one that sat in the
boot; but I was told this is done with freedom enough in the Queens withdrawing
room; and whenever they appear at windows by signs agreed on between them and
their servants in order to so gallant a conversation. When they marry, the
Queen adds Fifty thousand Crowns to their portions, which are very will paid;
besides these Ladies and some Querries, the Queen has no attendance at her
going abroad but her Buffoon, with some mean Officers and Footmen: she has no
Guards, and I admired her being public with so little state. The King has
about a dozen Firelocks that wait daily at his Stair-head; these are either
Flemings or Burgundians, the Duke of Arcos is their Captain. On the Guard they
wear the Kings Livery (which at other times they lay aside) and an odd Kind of
Sword or Hanger called Cuchilla: They are in all 150. There wait also daily
sixteen Spanish, and as many High Dutch Halbardiers. This Guard was first
introduced in Spain by the House of Austria: and we were told there are besides
these two old Companies of Spaniards formerly the Guards of the Kings of
Castile, which are but ill paid, and the rest not much better. The morrow
after Ascension day Dom Lewis de Haro arrived, the King having sent for him to
the Solemnity of the Herradura or marking of Bulls: a little after which his
Majesty took horse at the point of the Island of the Garden, and having
commanded the people to go without the rails, went with all his Court to the
end of a great Alley, to drive the Bulls into that part of the field that is
enclosed: Men on horseback with great cudgels enrage them, whilst others behind
drive them forward with shouts and blows. Then comes the King with his Court,
and the sport is at an end.

Their Majesty's having heard Mass, the Governor of Aranjuez, the best
Torreador, that is Champion against Bulls, of all Spain, begins the second
hunting of these beasts, to drive them into the innermost partition, where they
are to be marked with a hot iron: There they remain till 3. in the afternoon,
at which time all Windows and Scaffolds abounding with Spectators, their
Majesty's take their seat, and give order to begin: within the Barricadoes
stand several young Country fellows (whom they call Herradors) expecting the
Bulls to grapple with them, and two or three being let loose, the bravest run
and seize their horns, or tails, and seconded by the rest endeavor to cast
them on the ground, whilst others with hot irons mark them on the thighs, some
the mean while slitting their ears. Much agility is necessary in this action,
as well in performing it as afterward, the Bulls being very furious. To
deceive them, the assailants present each a Cloak or Hat, and the Beast
shutting his eyes when he gores, one of the boldest leaps upon his neck, and
catches hold of his horns, the rest doing the like to such other parts as they
can light on, but he overthrows and hurts many, and it is strange that he kills
not the most, for oftentimes running right upon them, he casts them down and
passes over them, but those one would think dead (I know not how) suddenly rise
again. They are indeed very nimble in avoiding their horns, and ready in
falling to let them go by. This sport may be very pleasant, but not to the
actors, and I admire so great a King vouchsafes to look on it, and conceive he
does it rather out of policy to comply with the custom, then invited by any
delight, he takes in it; but that something extraordinary might be done for his
diversion; Don Lewis de Haro caused his Fool or Buffoon to enter the Lists, who
clad in all manner of colors, and mounted on a white Steed, was with it tossed
into the Air, and afterward trampled on the ground: Twenty two or twenty three
of the Bulls were marked, which will be made use of at the Festivals of Madrid,
amongst which we hope to see that of St Isadore, the Patron of the Town.

A while after we went to the Escurial, which to give it no less then its due,
may in Spain pass for an admirable Structure, but where building is understood,
would not be looked on as very extraordinary. In a general consideration, it
seems a mass of stone of great perfection, but going to particulars, scarce any
of them but falls very short of the Magnificence imagined, and that so much,
that if Philip the Second who built it, and was called the Solomon of his age,
did no more resemble that wise King then this edifice does his Temple, to which
it is often compared; the copy comes very short of the Original: in the mean
time to stretch the comparison they please themselves in saying, that Charles
the Fifth like another David only designed this Holy work, which (being a man
of war and blood) God reserved for his Son. Ignorant strangers are entertained
with this tale, but such as are versed in History tell us, that after the
battle of St Quentin, Philip the Second made two vows, one never to go in
person to the wars, the other to build this Cloister for the Order of St Hierom
instead of that which had been burnt, it cost him near six Milions of Gold,
though out of consideration of parsimony and convenience of bringing stone, he
made choice of the worst situation in nature, for it is at the foot of a
barren Mountain, and hard by a wretched Village called Escurial, that can
hardly lodge a man of any fashion; this may seem very strange to those that
know the Court is there twice in a year: the place it stands on, is by
transcendence called the Seat, because it was levelled in order to build on.

The Fabric is very fair, with four Towers at the four corners, but coming to
it, one knows not which way to enter, for as soon as out of the great Walk, in
a kind of Piazza, you see only little doors, which when you are over it, lead
into two Pavilions that contain Offices and Lodgings for some of the Court;
when you have well viewed this side of the square, you come to that which is
toward the Mountain, where is a very large Magnificent Portal, on each side
beautified with Pillars; by this stately Gate you enter a Quadrangle, where
right over against it stands the Church, ascended to it by a Stair of five or
six steps, as long as the Court is large, extending from one side of it to the
other: very fair Columns support the Porch, and on the top of the wall stand
six Statues, the middlemost of which are David and Solomon, by whom they would
represent Charles the Fifth, and Philip the Second. About the Church are many
Pavillions, all comprehended in the exact square which environs that building.
Report mentions many Bascourts, but we could not reckon above 7 or 8. That this
is a very fair Cloister for Friars cannot be denied, neither can it be allowed
to be a Palace Magnificent enough for such a Monarch as Philip the Second, who
having built it in One and twenty years, and enjoyed it Twelve or Thirteen,
boasted, that from the foot of a Mountain and his Closet, with two inches of
Paper, he made himself obeyed in the old and new world.

The King and Queens apartment have nothing in them that appears Roial, they
are altogether unfurnished, and they say, when the King goes to any of his
houses of pleasure, they remove all to the very Bedsteds: the rooms are little
and low; the Roofs not beautiful enough to invite the eyes to look up to them:
its many pictures of excellent Masters, and especially of Titian, that wrought
a great while there, are very much vanted, yet there are not so many as report
gives out. The Spaniards have so little understanding of pictures, they are
alike taken with all, and the Marquis Serra a Genouese that accompanied us
sufficiently, laughed at the foolishness of a Castillian, who willing to have
us admire the slightest and wretchedst Landskips of a Gallery where we were,
told us nothing could equalize them, because in a place where their King
sometimes walked. There are yet in the vestry some good pieces, especially a
Christ, and Mary Magdalen; and in the Church, others very estimable. For
paintings in Fresco, the Quire done by Titian is doubtlesly an excellent work,
and so is the Library, I think by the same hand, where amongst the rest is
represented the ancient Roman manner of defending Criminals, who stand by bound
hand and foot; Cicero is also there pleading for Milo, or some other, I not
being sufficiently acquainted with his mien, to be positive and without
apprehension of mistaking: this Library is truly very considerable, as well for
its length, breadth, height and light; the Pictures and Marble Tables that
stand in the midst of it; as for its quantity of choice and rare Books, if we
may believe the Monks; they are certainly very well bound and gilded, and if I
mistake not, but seldom read. In the Vestry they show Priests Copes, where
embroidery and Pearl with emulation contend, whither Art or Matter renders them
more rich and sumptuous; they showed us a Cross of very fair Pearl, Diamonds,
and Emeralds; it is a very pretty knack, and would not become less such if it
changed Countries; I would willingly have undertaken for it if they would have
suffered it to pass the Pyreneans, had it been only to show my friends a
hundred thousand Crowns in a Nutshel. The Library I have spoken of; the high
Altar and Monument of their Kings, which they call Pantheon (though I know not
why, unless because a single round Arch like the Pantheon at Rome) are
certainly the best pieces of this Magnificent Fabric. The high Altar is
approached by steps of Red Marble, and environed by Sixteen pillars of Jasper,
which reach the top of the Quire, and cost only a matter of 50 or 60 thousand
Crowns cutting, between these are Niches with Statues of gilded Brass, and so
there are on the side of the Tables, and Praying places* the Pantheon is under
the Altar, and descended by stairs, though narrow, very light; at the entrance
of this rich Chapel, a Marble shines, whose luster is heightened by reflection
of the Gold, with which, all the iron work and part of that fair stone are
overlaid: In the middle of it, and right against the Altar is a fair
Candlestick of Brass, gilded, and in six several niches, 24 Sepulchers of
black Marble to receive as many bodies: above the Gate are two more. This
stately monument is small, but sumptuous, it was finished by the present King,
who about six months since placed there the bodies of Charles the V, Philip the
II, and Philip the III. The first was most entire; in the niches on the left,
lie the Queens, and the last of them Queen Elizabeth of Burbon. He that
preached the day that these seven Tombs or Sepulchers had bodies laid in them,
began by his apprehension to speak in presence of so many Kings who had
conquered the world, and expressed himself so well, and so highly pleased the
King that he got a yearly pension of a thousand Crowns. Nothing attaining such
perfection as to secure it from the Teeth of Critics, the three pieces I have
now mentioned, have been attacqued by them. It is objected against the Library,
that its entrance suits not with its Magnificence and Grandeur, and that it
stands as if stolen in, and not of the same piece with the rest.

Over against the great Altar, where all is so well proportioned, they wish
away a silver Lamp, whose size corresponds not with that of the place it burns
in, which is vast and large. In the Pantheon they find great fault, that all
the steps by which it is descended are not Marble, and that the sides of the
walls are not incrusted with it, the Chapel being all so, and a like
Magnificence requisite every where: In the brazen Candlestick, the inner part
which is not gilded is discerned amongst the black and foul branches that
extend from it. It cost 10 thousand Crowns, which is ten times more then it is
worth; but it is common in this Country to boast things of excessive price,
which they would have admired on that account, as if because they are foolish
Merchants, the ware they buy too dear, were therefore the more valuable. These
are my observations of the so famous Escurial, adorned only by some small
Parterras and Fountains; one side of it affords a handsome prospect, but the
ground near it is the greatest part Rock or Heath; some Walks and Groves are
planted about it, but being cold and windy, trees thrive not. There are some
Deer in a kind of Park, ill designed, and with very low walls; the way to it is
nothing pleasant, and the King who goes thither thrice every year, one of which
times is in the Winter, cannot certainly find any great diversion in those
journeys, for during three months, all is covered with snow. I have no more to
say of these two wonders of the world, The Escurial for Art, and Aranjuez for
Nature, The paralels of the Son of Austria, (as is here said,) according to
times and fancies.

The Twentieth of this month, all Madrid assembled in the great Piazza to see
the Bulls fought; they mention this solemnity so advantagiously, as if it were
to be compared to the Noblest Spectacles of the ancients: every Town of Spain
has several days set apart for it, and not any one of them but enjoys this
pleasure about Midsummer. The people have so great an esteem for it, that they
think you extremely injure them if you prefer it not to all others, and if you
seem not to admire all its circumstances, you may as safely deny their King to
be the greatest in the world.

The prospect of the Piazza this day must needs be very agreeable: People of
the best quality adorn all the Windows and Balconies, hung with Silks and
Tapestrys of diverse colors, with the greatest ostentation possible: Each
Council has its Balcony hung with Velvet or Damask, with a Scutcheon of the
Arms belonging to it. The Kings is gilded, and under a State; the Queen and
Infanta sit by him, and the Favorite or chief Minister in a corner of it; on
his right hand is another great Balcony for the Ladies of the Court, the rest
are promiscuously taken up by others. Both men and women set out themselves to
all advantage possible, paying very dear for the Balconies; those on the first
and second stories cost Twenty or five and Twenty Crowns, though the first rank
cannot contain above five or six persons: the King pays for those of such as
are considerable to him, as Ambassadors and Envoies of foreign Princes. Before
the Balconies are Scaffolds that extend some feet into the Piazza; they are
extremely crowded, all the people taking places dearer or cheaper according to
the posts they make choice of.

Though these solemnities are very frequent, three or four being yearly
celebrated in Madrid, the meanest Citizen will not once neglect to see them,
and rather pawn his Goods then fail for want of Money. This takes its name of
distinction from St Isidore, protector of the Town, which therefore bears the
charge; the reason it passes not for a Royal Spectacle; it costs the King
nevertheless something, and I was told, he gives every Council that day Three
thousand Crowns: those at Midsummer and September are most esteemed, when
several enter the Lists a horseback, whereas at this of St Isidore all do it
afoot. There are four passages to the Piazza, which is strewed with Sand, and
freed from those moving Shops or Booths that at other times pester it; some
ride, others walk about it till the King appears, then his Guards break through
the crowd, and place themselves on each side to attend him: as soon as their
Majesty's are seated in their Balconies, all go out of the Piazza, which being
cleared, fully discovers its beauty. At the same time four or five Alguazils
well mounted, and better then becomes ordinary catchpoles, attend bareheaded,
and as soon as the King gives the word, he of them that has authority over the
Wagons, causes them to move from the place they stand ranged in, and the
barrels and sheepskins that are in them, distill water so artificially, that the
whole Piazza is equally bedewed: after which, they immediately depart by the
four Gates, which are shut as soon as they which are to fight the Bulls are
entered; amongst these gallant champions was a fellow of Valladolid, mounted on
a Bull, he had managed and accustomed to bridle and saddle; one a foot
carrying his Lance by him: he rid straight up to the King, and after a profound
obeisance, endeavored to show his own and his Bulls address; he caused him to
trot, gallop, and turn every way, but that undisciplinable creature, weary at
last of the tediousness of the manage, fell a kicking and bounding so
fiercely, he threw the poor Peasant, who not at all daunted at his misfortune,
ran after his Bull that made away, attended by the hooting of all the
assistance till he had retaken him; but these quickly began again, for as soon
as an Alguazil had received the keys of the place where the Bulls were
enclosed, which Don Lewis de Haro threw to him in observence of the custom,
which requires the Kings giving them to his favorite, and his casting them from
the Balcony to the Alguazils; and that those wild beasts were let loose, and
furiously attacqued one another; his, though so well managed and harnassed,
set on a running without regard either to spur or bridle, making it impossible
for his Master to engage, who stood prepared to that purpose with his Lance in
Rest; so without any other effect then the laughter of the assistants, after
several attempts, he retreated without striking stroke, though his Bull and he
had received many from those that avoided not the shock, but ran to it. At the
beginning of this sport they usually let one Bull loose after another, who
according to his greater or lesser fury with precipitation attaques such as are
within the Lists, whom he soon drives away; but such as are slower then the
rest, when they can no longer avoid him, fall flat at their lengths, or present
him their Hats or Cloaks; he passes by those that lie on the ground without
hurting them, because when he gores he shuts his eyes, and commonly strikes
nothing but the Air; they which present their Cloaks or Hats, by them, put a
stop to his rage, which lighting on any thing, is satisfied. What I have
hitherto mentioned, is but the farce; the serious part, and that in which the
activity consists, is the darting certain Arrows or little Javelins, which the
skilful fix between the Bulls horns, with admirable dexterity, without which
they would be torn in pieces. A Barber signalized himself, the Bull feeling the
smart of these little Javelins, (which for their better support through the Air
are winged with red Paper) grows to a higher rage, whilst by his struggling and
tormenting himself, the iron heads piercei farther. It is said, that between
the horns of these creatures is a little place, so very tender and delicate
that the smallest wound there is mortal; at which some of the Champions can aim
so well, that they kill a Bull at the first stroke; when he seems almost tired
and spent, the Trumpets sound, the signal to hamstring him: then with Swords
and Hangers they endeavor to cut the sinews of his hinder legs, after which,
thrusts and slashes which they call Cuchilladas shower on the poor beast. In
this the common people make their bloody inclination apparent, for such as can
come at him, would scarcely think themselves sons of honest Mothers, did they
not plunge their Daggers in his body, after which, quasi re been gesta, they
march off triumphantly: When he moves no more, Mules come a gallop to draw him
out of the Lists, and another is let loose. About a score were killed that day,
the skins so pinked, they could be of no use but to make Sives; Dogs are
sometimes set against them when it is too troublesome and dangerous for men to
join them, and the pleasure would sure be greater, if when the dogs have
fastened on them, they forbore wounding them on all sides: the only horseman
that appeared this day, was the Buffoon of Don Lewis de Haro, the same that
showed himself at Aranjuez; he made one carrier with his Lance handsome enough,
but the King unwilling he should get mischief, caused him to retire. This
manner of fight is to be performed with short stirrups, otherwise a leg may be
easily spoiled; not with managed horses, but such only as are fleet, and have
tender mouths: when the Bulls are to be attacqued on horseback, such as have
horses proper for it, cannot handsomely refuse to lend them, nor with honor
pretend to any satisfaction, if (as it often happens) they be spoiled in the
service.

This days sport properly belonging to Peasants, one such, in affront to
Cavaliers, came in mounted on an Ass, which the Bull at first overthrew, but
the fellow having recovered his courage, and silly animal, attacqued the Bull
with so good success, that he gave him a great wound between the horns, which
bled extremely: after so gallant an exploit, he begged the Bull of the King,
which being given him he went away with his famous prize, better satisfied then
if crowned with Laurel. The Bull oftentimes falls upon the Guards, who stand
ranked on one side of the Piazza with Darts and Halbards; if they kill him he
is theirs; he twice charged them through, and overthrew some of them, nothing
of gallantry appearing on their side, who suffered the Bull to trample on their
bellies, instead of killing him at their feet. The Alguazils or Sergeants are
very conspicuous, with fair embroidered Saddles, and their horses adorned with
Ribands, and tassels; they were very nimble in quitting all places the Bulls
approached, and it had been the best of the sport to have seen them charged
home, at least this was most wished, but by the readiness of their flight, they
escaped these horns, though probably not those which are so common in Madrid.

The grand solemnity begins not till the afternoon, but five or six Bulls are
attacqued in the morning, for the sakes of such as cannot be present
afterward: at this, order is not so well observed, which sometimes occasions
mischief. I was told that this day in the morning several were hurt, and one
killed by a horn that entered by his eye. They end not but with daylight, and
every Gallant gives his Mistress a Balcone and Collation. In all the
circumstances of this diversion, a certain inveterate cruelty derived from
Africa, and hat forsook not this Country with the Moor^ is very remarkable:
for the pleasure of ordinary Spaniards is not fighting the Bulls, the rabble
delighting in nothing so much as shedding his blood. At Tunis and Algier are
the like solemnities, but (as they say) with greater splendour.

As the public sports, the Moors introduced in Spain; whilst they possessed
it, continue after their exile; the Church also retains something of their
superstition, especially on Corpus Christi day. The Twenty seventh of May we
saw all its Ceremonies, which are many, and last long; they begin by a
procession, whose first ranks are intermixed with several Hoboies, Tabors, and
Castanettas, a great many habited in party colored clothes, skip and dance as
extravalantly as at a Morris. The King goes to St Mary's Church not far from
his Palace, and after Mass, returns with a Torch in his hand, following a
silver Tabernacle, in which is the Holy Wafer, attended by the Grandes of
Spain, and his several Councils. This day to avoid dispute, they observe not
order, so that the Counselors de la Hazienda, join with those of the Indies;
before these Counselors and certain other persons, move Machines, representing
Giants; these are Statues of Pasbord carried by men concealed under them: they
are of several shapes, some very hideous; all of them represent Femals, except
ths first, which is only the Figure of a great head painted, within which is
concealed a little man that gives it mien and motion: it being a Colossus over
the body of a Pigmie. Amongst these chimerical Monsters, there is one which
represents two Giantesses, Moors, or Aethiopians, such having really been if we
may believe the vulgar, who call them Hios de Vicinos, that is, neighbors
children. The people are so taken with these Gothic figures, that there is
scarce any Village without them. They report the Giantesses to have lived in
the time of King Mammelin, and on that account sometimes call them Mammelins,
after the name of that Gothic or Moorish King, who once Reigned in Spain. I
was told of another terrible Pageant which they call Tarasca, from a wood that
was formerly in Province, where at present stands the City of Tarascon on the
banks of Rosne, over against Beaucaire. They fancy that in this place was once
a Serpent (no less enemy of Mankind, then that which seduced our first
Ancestors in Paradise) called Behemoth, and report that St Martha by oraisons
triumphed over it, leading it prisoner in her apron strings. Be this History or
Fable, the Tarasca is a Serpent of enormous greatness, in form of a Woman,
moving on wheels, the body covered with scales, a vast belly, long tail, short
feet, sharp talons, fiery eyes, gaping mouth, out of which extend three
tongues, and long tusks. This Bulbegger stalks up and down and they which are
under the pastboard and paper, of which it is composed, by certain Springs,
cause it to move so dexterously, that it puts off the Hat to the Sots that
stare at it, and sometimes lays hold on Country fellows, whose fright moves
laughter amongst the people. Such as please themselves in telling wonders of
this foppery, relate that a certain Town having sent to some of its neighbors
six of these paper Giants, two Pigmies, and the Tarasca to be made use of on
Corpus Christi day, they which give them their motion being entered, to divert
themselves in the passage, caused them to dance as at processions by couples:
they were met by certain Muliters or Carriers, who (Moonshine discovering at a
distance, these imaginary Monsters,) marching with a great deal of prattle and
loud laughter, for their merrier passing two or three Leagues) not recollecting
what was to be done the day after, were so affrighted, that the terror still
augmenting, by their contemplating those fantasmes, they at last run away with
all their might. The conducters of the Monsters perceiving this, casting off
their Vizards, went out of the Machines to disabuse them, running after them to
cause them to come back to their Mules and charges; this increased their
astonishment, and hastened their pace, which aided by the wings of fear, soon
transported them cross the fields to a village, which they allarmed to free the
Country of highway men, so hideous, they could be little less then Devils: the
other in the mean time slipping their cases, and perceiving themselves masters
of the the spoils, the muletiers had abandoned, began to visit the baggage, and
finding Wine, drank so much they fell fast asleep till morning. The Muletiers
after their raising the Village, and bringing the Justice to the place,
perceived their mistake, and the Country fellows laughing heartily at them,
drank the remainder of the Wine in recompense of their trouble. The Village of
the solemnity, a great while waited for those grim Puppets, which came too
late, and by their excuse and relation of what had happened, disordered the
whole procession, changing it into a Ring of such as abandoned the Cross and
Banner, to hearken to their story. The pleasantest posture of these Mammelinas
that I saw was, when they made their salutes before the Queens Balcony, besides
some seats of activity by address of those that dance them. The King passing by
it, salutes the Queen with a smile, and the Queen and Infanta rise a little
before he comes at them, to return his compliment; The Procession having filed
to the Piazza, returns by the High street or Call Major, adorned by many
Tapestries waving on the Balconies, filled with men and women of all
conditions: the crowd is so great, one cannot pass without difficulty, and we
had much ado to return to St Mary's Church where the procession ended. As soon
as free from it we went to the Palace, and there saw the King, Queen, and
Infanta, return with all the Court Ladies: I think I have mentioned all that is
worth notice, unless it be that as on this day all the men put on Summer
clothes, so do all the Ladies, and those new and very rich, of several fashions
and colors. In the afternoon about five a clock, Autos are represented: these
are ghostly Comedies, with interludes, very ridiculous to give relish to what
is serious and tedious in the pieces themselves.

The two companies of Players that belong to Madrid at this time, shut their
Theaters, and for a month represent these Holy Poems: this they do every
evening in public on Scaffolds erected to that purpose in the streets before
the houses of the Presidents of several Councils. They begin at Court the day
of the Solemnity, where a seat under a State is provided for their Majesty's:
the Stage is at the foot of these Scaffolds, and little painted Booths rolled
to it, environ it, and serve as tiring houses. This is continued certain days,
every President having one, and a Stage and Scaffold erected before his house:
before these Autos begin, all the foppery of the Procession dances, and the
Gigantine Machines make the people sport; but what I most admired in that which
I saw at a distance in the old Prado, is, that in the streets and open air they
use Torches to those pieces, which in the daily Theaters, and within doors,
they represent without other light then that of the Sun: all these antic
ceremonies appeared much more ridiculous to those that beheld them, then they
can possibly do in my describing them, and confirm me in what I often observed,
that the Spaniards, and other wise and grave nations seem fondest in their
diversions, as Misers at their Feasts sometimes become most prodigal.

The next day the Alguazils came to the house where we lodged to demand account
of our host of his provision of victuals and what Poultry he fatted. They were
very inquisitive, what he did with such abundance, and where and why he had
bought it; he told them we gave him Money to be our Caterer, but this would not
serve his turn, because so great store is forbidden by Law, and gives a
jealousy that the Master of the house keeps an Ordinary or Pension, which is
not allowed: besides all which certain witnesses deposed that he sent victuals
abroad to some of the company that lay sick, and that he bought some at the
private Kitchins of Don Lewis de Haro and others, all very straightly
prohibited. The reason why neither Ordinaries nor Pensions are allowed in
Madrid, nor any part of Spain, seems very strange, when they tell you that
consideration of the sterility of the Country, gives apprehension of Famine,
and an entire disfurnishing the Markets by those that keep such houses; for it
appears to me, that liberty being left to every one to buy what he pleases, and
as much as he pleases, provided it be by his Domestic, the same inconvenience
will no less follow.

However, it is good to keep out of the Laws clutches in Spain; especially, in
occasions where the Catchpoles interpose; for, for a matter of nothing, they
seize and carry away all, and the Master to prison, from whence he escapes not
without the aid of Money, be his cause right or wrong; especially, if he be
thought rich: false witnesses are never wanting, and here the neighbors had
deposed against our host out of envy; but his good luck was to be Tenant to an
Alguazil; this Sergeant mediating with his Comrades, assisted by four pistols,
the Information was cancelled, and our Host not carried to prison as they had
intended: by this, all here appears vendible, though had this cheat of the
Alguazils been complained of they had run hazard of being sent to the Galleys.
This was almost the only punishment inflicted in those times by reason of want
of men to be employed at the Oar.

An Assentista, that is a Patentee or Farmer of Levies of soldiers, or of the
Kings Revenue, was a little before assaulted in his chamber by Thieves, one of
which being taken, discovered his confederates; amongst whom, (though they set
daggers at his throat, and wounded him in the head) was a Friar; the first with
his Comrade was whipped and sent to the Galleys, and the Friar condemned to
pass the remainder of his days between four walls with bread and water. This
man being a stranger, little befriended, and ignorant of the customs of the
Country, had much ado to obtain this Justice. He was born at St. Omer, but
resides ordinarily at London, from whence he sends Irishmen to serve in
Catalonia. Such French as they take at Sea are in like manner sent to the
Galleys, from which none can be freed, without putting one in his place, which
costs dear, there being no other way but to find out some Negro Slave.

The Commerce of the Indies has restored rights of servitude in these
Countries, and in Andalusia there are few other Servants. The greatest part of
these are either Moors or perfect Blacks, which gives occasion to the Proverb,
No assi tratan los hombres Blancos: White Men are not be so used. Christianity
requires, that such as embrace it be enfranchised, but this is not observed in
Spain, and those wretches are not made freemen by becoming Christians. They
are much more cruelly used in the Indies, where inhumanity has so long
prevailed, that all imaginable rigor is exercised on those unhappy creatures,
who are only such by occasion of their Mines of Gold and Silver, to which their
Masters owe all their fortune and greatness. An incredible number of them found
their graves, whilst they dug for those Metals, so that scarce any remain
to pursue that fatal employment. Besides this destruction made by the Mines, it
is said the Wine sent thither, occasions so many diseases, that the greatest
part of the Indians die. They are passionate Lovers of this liquor, and spare
nothing that may obtain it; and the Spaniards to discover the Treasures they
may have concealed, sell it them, to the ruin of their goods, health, and
strength for labor; and I remember to have read a Book entitled Las
Excellentias del Espannol, in four or five Chapters where the Author makes
appear the prejudice the King and Traffic of the Indies, receive by the Vines
planted in Peru; and often repeats, that the vice of the West-Indians being
Drunkenness, many of them perish by Wine, not like their Chica, made of Maiz
and more agreeable to their Constitutions; besides that, the Spaniards to get
more, and by selling it cheap, to make quicker returns, falsify it, in such a
manner, it is little better than poison. On these occasions the Indians are so
much wasted, that for some years there have not been enough to work in the
Vine-yards nor Mines of Peru. Negro's are therefore made use of, bought in
Guine, or the Kingdom of Angola; by which means the profit is much lessened, a
Negro costing 50 or 60 Crowns, and since Portugal has re-established their
true King, and that all those Countries of the Indies that are strongest in
Colonies, have acknowledged him, Negro's are not had so cheap; for besides the
60 Pieces of Eight they cost, the King of Portugal has laid an Impost equal to
the Price, so that a Negro comes not to Carthagena, where they land, till he
stands the Spaniards in above 200 Crowns. The profit the King of Portugal makes
by this, is incredible, those that understand Trade, assuring it amounts yearly
to some Millions of Gold. The consideration of this and some other things
before mentioned, make evident to me what I was often told at Madrid, that the
great wealth of the Indies belongs more to particular persons and strangers,
than to the King of Spain, and that at this time when the Gallions are expected
richer than in many late years, because of the return of the Viceroy, it is
thought 3 quarters of what it brings is on account of Merchant Strangers, and
that there will not come to the King and natural Spaniards above Three Millions
of Gold.

They which manage the Affairs of that Country, very prosperously advance
their own, and the Earl of Pigneranda President of its Council, draws vast sums
for Licenses to French Merchants; One I knew, that for leave to bring a hundred
Hides from St. Domingo by the Gallions, gave Ten Pistols. Notwithstanding all
which, much deceit is used in that particular, and the greatest part of the
French that trade into Spain, import and export at their pleasure all manner of
Commodities, by pretending to be Walloons, Burgundians, Lorrainers, or
Flemings. For this reason the King was counseled to give freedom to trade, and
to abolish the Fees of Licenses, and Impost of the Tenth Penny on all French
Merchandise; representing that his profit would be greater, because the usual
duties would be paid without any fraud; whereas to avoid this Tenth, the
Merchants combine, and they that have French Goods, get one or other to attest
they are English or Flemmish, and so (at most) pay but the ordinary Custom, of
which also they are sometimes crafty enough to deceive him.

The Commerce of these is principally in Andalusia, where they have found a
place of freedom as convenient as Cadis; this is the haven of Santa Maria, a
little Town belonging to the Duke af Medina Coeli, who protects them, and draws
great Trade to the prejudice of Cadis and Sevil.

When Spain and France were at peace, Traffic was more difficult then at
present, little Merchandise arriving that was not confiscated under pretense of
coming from Holland. There never wanted two or three Knights of the Post to
swear this, but time and care have given remedy to this mischief, and false
swearers escape not, Merchants by presenting a Bever, or some other Knack,
putting themselves under the protection of some Grande.

By this is evident that Spain cannot well be without Commerce with France, not
only on the Frontiers of Biscai and Arragon, where it has been almost ever
permitted, but through the whole Country where it is prohibited, for Provence
has ever had correspondencies in the Kingdom of Valentia, by its necessity of
the others Commodities; and for the same reason Britaign, Normandy, and other
parts on the Ocean have continually sent theirs to Cadis and Bilbo. I speak not
of Corn and Stuffs of all sorts brought from that Country, but even of Ironwork
and Sword; by which it appears a mistake to think that in these days the best
come out of Spain. No more being now made at Toledo, few but foreign are used,
unless a very small quantity that come from Biscai, which are excessivly dear.

It is moreover hard to imagine how much Spain suffers for want of
manufactures: So few Artificers remain in its Towns, that native Commodities
are carried abroad to be wrought in foreign Countries. Wools and Silks are
transported raw, and being spun and weaved in England, France, and Holland,
return thither at dear rates. The Land it self is not tilled by the people it
feeds. In Seed-time, Harvest, and Vintage, Husbandmen come from Bearn and other
parts of France, who get a great deal of money by sowing and reaping their
Corn, and dressing and cutting their Vines. Carpenters and Masons are (for the
most part) also strangers, who will be paid treble what they can get in their
own Country. In Madrid there is hardly a Water-bearer that is not a Foreigner,
such are also the greatest part of Shoomakers and Tailors, and it is believed
the third of these come only to get a little money and afterward return home,
but none thrive so much as Architects, Masons, and Carpenters. Almost every
house has wooden windows (here being no glass) and a balcony jutting into the
Street. Once in five years all Fabrics are re-builded, of which the
Frontispiece only is done with Lime, the sides and back-parts, being usually
earth.

Every house in Madrid pays duties to the King which mount high, the first
floor of every one is his, which if not redeemed, he may sell at his pleasure;
This the Proprietors usually buy, to do which if they be not able they build no
more but it alone. This is the reason there are so many little houses in
Madrid, with only one stair to get up to the Garret. The most considerable
Architecture is that which is adorned with some Tower, only one of these is
allowed, and he that will build more, must have permission to do it: A fellow
that thought he should have much ado to obtain this, begged leave but for one,
which being easily granted, he built one on account of the permission, and
another because one had never been prohibited. Nothing is more notorious, then
that Madrid wanting both some Rivolet to void its filth and Vault to receive
it, casts all into the Street; but it is admirable to see that by vivacity and
penetration of the Air, all is consumed in a moment, it being as drying and
corrosive (if one may so call it) as lime that devours a body before the
corruption discovers it self, and I have found dead Dogs and Cats in the
Streets that smelt not, by which we may perceive they had reason that chose
this place for the Seat of their Kings, the Air being not only hard to corrupt,
but takes away even the cause of corruption, by dissolution of Elementary
qualities as sudden as imperceptible. In ancient times their Queens repaired
hither to lie in, that the Princes might at their births breath an Air whose
purity is not to be equalized. The Waters of this place have been weighed
against several other, and none have been found so light. The Cardinal Infant
had them carried with him into Flanders, and great care was taken to ship for
him Tuns of the same the King drinks, the Fountain of which is a little without
the Town. The Streets here being Common Shores, one ran great hazard, were it
allowed at all hours to cast out at window what the people will no longer keep
in their houses; but from day break til ten at Night this is forbidden under a
pecuniary mulct. Once I remember I saw a Woman that had forgot this, whom the
Sergeants, that wait on such little advantages, immediately caused to pay the
Fine, which is Sixty Rials, about 25 s. of our Money. They which walk a Nights,
carry neither Torch nor Lantern, which I never saw born before any, whether in
Coach, a horsback, or a foot; Ladies of quality only make use of these, such as
belong to the Court especially, who then muster all their Footmen. Women here
go abroad with much more splendour than their Husbands, for besides a great
number of servants about their Sedans, a Steward or Master of the Horse still
follows them on horseback: in great houses, Footmen neither enter their Lords
chamber, nor yet his apartment, they being served by their Gentlemen, Pages,
and other Officers; when called, they kneel, receiving their Commands; this
custom has gone higher in the Favorites family, for I have been assured, that
when Don Lewis gives Audience, and his Secretary serves as Interpreter, he
kneels; and what is stranger, that Fernando de Contreras (none of his
Domestic, but the Kings servant, and the most considerable of his Secretaries
of State, as having charge of the Despecho Universal) pays him that honor. For
what concerns the respect due to the King and all such as are near him; they
have many little customs very extraordinary; amongst others, that no man ever
mounts a horse the King has once made use of: and they say, that after the
taking of Barcellona, in the Cavalcade his Majesty made to Atocha; the Duke of
Medina de los torres, sent to present him his most beautiful horse that was so
famous in Madrid; but the King returned him saying, Scrina lastima, that is, it
were pity, since by that means he would become useless, and rid only by
Querries: and indeed no horses are so little rid as the Kings, who almost burst
with fat, acquired by continual standing in the Stable, which is not very well
furnished, because he gives away the best; he lately sent the Queen of Sweden
Twelve of the greatest value; the wars have made horses very scarce and dear in
Spain, especially in the beginning of winter, when all provide themselves to
ride about the streets of Madrid, whose dirt is so troublesome, it can neither
be avoided nor got out of any thing it lights on.

They are cheaper in June, people going afoot during the fair weather, which
lasts till the end of September.

We were told of another custom, no less extraordinary, that no natural Son of
the King, owned to be such, may enter Madrid; and that Don John of Austria, who
at present, Commands in Catalonia, was never there, he was bred at Ocanna, some
Leagues from the Court where the King sometimes visited him, and not long since
he was within a League of this Town where he also met him. It is believed this
King has more such issue, but being by Ladys of quality, he owns them not; he
seldom attempted any without success; yet a certain Lady of Madrid, is reported
to have been inexorable to him, though she was not so to all the world; she
still excused her self with protestations of as much esteem as respect for his
person, but that she could not without horror apprehend to become a whore of
History.

I enquired the reason why the Kings natural issue may not come to Madrid, but
found none could satisfy me; for that which is generally received, that it is
to avoid disputes of the precedence between them and the Grandes of Spain, is
of no validity, since I have seen a Letter of Don Lewis de Haro to Don John of
Austria, which treats him, not only with Highness, but most Serene Highness;
but whatsoever the cause may be that the Gates of the Court are thus shut
against them, and of the jealousy real or imaginary, might be occasioned by
their presence there; it is most certain that this nation has a great deal,
for whatsoever in the least concerns it in love or Honor, of which, many
little stories of daily passages in Madrid are related, where the extravagance
of Women produces various passions in the commerce of criminal Gallantry, which
has its punctilios of honor as well as a knot of highway men, its justice
within it self; They which keep Amancebadas; that is, Mistrisses maintained at
their charge, are more jealous of them then of their wives; and such of these
as have a servant that ordinarily visits them, call him Infidel and Traitor, if
they ever know he goes to others, and to this purpose I have been told that the
King himself being with a Lady the Admiral of Castille kept, that young lord
transported by jealousy, forgetting all respect and consideration, having
knocked violently at the door, gave the Mother of that wench who opened it,
many boxes on the ear, saying, Jade, thou make me Cuckold, but if I could get
up, I would strangle both thee and thy daughter, were it in the Kings presence.

Though the Profession of Curtisans admits no conceptions but of interest and
design for rapine, they are sometimes excellent Counterfeiters of Passion, and
borrow the transports of real affection. The Earl of Fieschi, who at his first
arrival at Madrid, passionately attacked that Sex, tells as a Gallantry, his
usage by one of those Cattle, who openly at the Tour fell upon him with
reproaches of infidelity, calling him Traidor and Picaro, because she had heard
he had a new Mistress.

And Mr. de Mogeron was not a little surprised, by a Woman's treating him in the
same manner one Evening, pulling him by the hair with reproaches and injuries;
because he had not visited her according to a promise made her at the Tour,
where he met her the day before. They do a thousand such extravagances, and are
really Mistresses of the Epithet Bizarre, which in their Language is
understood in so good a sense. They are ridiculous in their habit, and wear
their richest accoutrements under others very homely, so that you would not
take any of them to be braver than the rest, unless you see them at some
Festival, or that as they pass by, they let the Clinquant of their Wastcotes
appear; their Linen is Cambrick most generally used and best esteemed in
Spain: they paint not their faces only, but change also the color of those
parts that least appear. Their Smocks are also laid with Bonelaces, where
visible only to their Gallants, indeed of those slight ones that are made in
Provence or Lorrain, those of Flanders being unknown to them, unless when they
force some bits of them from Strangers, tearing their Bands or Cuffs.

Besides the great numbers of loose Women that are to be found up and down
Madrid, there are others in certain fixed quarters, countenanced by Public
Authority, for accommodation of any that will go to them. These are called
Cantonera's, perhaps Bulkers. They have a Salary from the Town, for which cause
so infamous an employment is sought after, and when one of the Jades dies or is
disabled by the Pox, the Magistrates are solicited for the vacancy. What their
Pension is I could not learn, but those which assured me of this beastly
establishment, told me that every one that visits them is obliged to pay them
12 Quarto's, about 6 Pence of our Money. Physicians are fee'd by the public,
to take care they be free from those Pestilential Diseases that are gained by
so honorable a Profession. A Matron also belongs to them, who is obliged to
advertise the Magistrate or Physician, as soon as she discovers any thing
amiss. They which described to me the lives of these miserable creatures, told
me that when they are accompanied, a second man is never admitted, on which
account there never happens any disorder; the first enterer leaving his Sword
and Dagger at the Door, which when they which come after perceive, they retire
without more ado. Sinning thus with impunity and toleration of Public
Authority* they seldom forsake the vice they so openly profess, though one day
in the year is devoted to exhort them to repentance: On a Friday in Lent, they
are by an Alguazil or two conducted to the Church of Penitents, and there
seated near the Pulpit, where the Preacher does his best to touch their hearts,
but seldom with success; after many vain exhortations to amend their lives,
descending from his Pulpit, he presents them the Crucifix, saying, Behold the
Lord, embrace him; which if any does, she is immediately taken away, and shut
up in the Cloister of Penitents; but usually they only hang down their heads
and shed a few tears, without laying hold on what is offered, and after their
grimaces continue their deboshed life; neither can the Story of St. Mary
Magdalene so often inculcated to them, move them to imitation of her.

In this antic of remarques which I have daubed with so many colors, I must
not forget what concerns the imprisonment of the Duke of Lorrain. He failed but
very little of an escape, and that news had not come of his being entered the
Frontiers of Portugal when he was thought still in the heart of Castille. As
soon as he arrived in Spain he was confined to Toledo, without being admitted
to the Kings presence. When misfortunes of War of State cast one Sovereign into
the hands of another, methinks he ought not to be treated altogether as a
Prisoner, but that his Captivity should be made use of, to work upon him and
gain his affection by Offices of honor and civility. Of the two French Kings
that were taken Prisoners, it is notoriously known that Francis the First left
Spain entirely possessed by thoughts of hatred and revenge on account of his
ill usage by Charles the Fifth: and that John returned from England so well
satisfied, that he was ever afterward careful to live with Edward as with a
Friend and Brother: but the Spanish austerity suffers not a Maxim that may be
deceitful, and graspes hard whatever it lays hold on to prevent escape: She
would never let Duke Charles taste the air of her Court, and notwithstanding
his many instances, ever treated him as a simple prisoner of State, though she
suffered him to go abroad under good Guard both to Church and to take the Air,
which incited him to attempt greater liberty. Thus he laid his design, One of
the Kings Coaches was appointed to attend him, whose Coachman happened to be a
Lorrainer, and consequently his subject. He supposed this man's affection to his
natural Prince, would oblige him to be assisting toward his liberty, and
resolved to have him sounded. I could not learn whom he made use of to engage
him, nor in what manner he set it a foot, but it is said, that having gained
him, he several times left Tickets under the Cushions of the Coach, and the
place he sat on, which the Coachman very carefully took away; and by means of
a Lorrain Embroderer, sent to those that had the principal management of the
Affair. This went so far before its discovery, that the Coachman had received
instructions to drive the Duke very often beyond a ruinated Building that was
near the part he usually frequented, and one day, when least suspected, 50
Horsemen were appointed to lie concealed behind it, who having killed his Guards
and set him at liberty, were to convoy him to the Frontiers of Portugal, where
500 Horse should be ready to receive him. A Ticket, and perhaps the last that
was necessary to this Negotiation, discovered it; for whether it were that it
was not handsomely enough conveyed under the Cushion, or whether the Captain
that then commanded the Guard, and was in the Coach with him, observed better
what was done than others, or that he was more jealous, going out of the Coach,
searching the Cushion, he found the Ticket; upon this the Duke was more
straightly shut up, the Coachman imprisoned, and the Ticket sent to Madrid, where
the Dukes Secretary and the Embroiderer were secured; the last of these was
racked, but the particulars of what he deposed never published The light that
appeared at the bottom of this Affair, moved the Spaniards themselves to say,
That to hold the Duke faster at the very time his liberty was most earnestly
solicited, they persuaded him he would have made an escape: whatever may be of
it, it is certain the Duke was not afterward allowed to go out of Toledo, and
that this unfortunate Prince might justly complain, That if the French
Neighborhood was a smoke that drove him from his House with tears in his eyes,
the Spanish Friendship was a fire that burnt him alive. Which if we may believe
public report, was his own expression to the Captain that guarded him. All
that has been given out of the causes of his imprisonment has divulged but
part of the mystery, and I sought at Madrid to inform my self of the real
motive. They which speak and judge most solidly say, That this was rather done
on account of reason of State, and to spare money, than that he had indeed
be^raied his party; and truly the taking quarters in the Land of Liege that
Winter, rendered him no more culpable that year, then his seeking them at his
Swords point had done in those that went before: but the conjuncture differed,
and the Elector of Cullen, who had made himself absolute Master of that people,
desirous to give them a more powerful protection, clamored much at the Diet of
Ratisbonne, from whence, as misfortune would have it, he retired dissatisfied
with the Emperor, for having decided to the advantage of him of Mentz, the
Dispute that was between them about the Function of crowning the King of
Romans. As soon as he arrived at Cullen, he wrote to the Emperor, that without
speedy succors, according to the Laws of the Empire, to free his Country from
the devastations of the Lorrainers, he must have recourse to the protection of
some foraign Prince. This Affair being taken into consideration, the Emperor
only wrote about it to Brusselles and Madrid. The Elector in the mean time took
heat, and resolving no longer to expect the event of those delays, raised
forces, treated with France, and gave her opportunity of re-assuming the Black
Eagle in her Colors, and renewing the Title of Preserver of the German Liberty.
Cardinal Mazzarin, who during his retirement had been so well received by this
Elector, lost not the opportunity of making his acknowledgments, and sent him
Troops under the Command of Monsieur Faber, which joined to his own, forced the
Lorrainers to discamp, whom it was resolved to pursue even into Brabant, to
revenge the havoc they had made in the Land of Liege, and assist the French in
some Conquest. I his bold proceeding, awaked the Emperors jealousy, who
perceived that in that very moment he had re-established his Authority in the
Empire, and when he had given an end to a Diet, in which he had caused his Son
to be crowned King of Romans, one of the powerfullest Princes of Germany,
sought other protection than his, and gave example to all his Neighbors to do
the like, as often as they should be oppressed by Troops entertained by Spain.
These considerations obliged the Emperor to send the Earl of Furstemberg to
the Elector of Cullen, to work him, and prevent his going farther in the Treaty
with the French, promising him an effectual and real satisfaction for what was
passed, and for the future to establish such order, he should no more need to
apprehend the like visits. At the same time he wrote to Madrid and Brusselles,
with all possible efficacy, to represent the dangerous consequences of this
Affair, how prejudicial it was to him, and necessity of the remedies he
proposed, which were to satisfy the Elector of Cullen with Money, so to oblige
him to lay down Arms and dismiss the French, to make sure of the person of the
Duke of Lorrain, that he might be no less so of his Conduct, the cause of all
these inconveniences, and to use his Brother Duke Francis for continuing the
Army in the Spanish Service, which he thought might easily be prevailed upon,
by giving it a Head of the same Family, and presenting the Chief Officers with
money. These reasons and expedients were the better rellished by the Spanish
Ministers, out of apprehension of the Storm that began to gather against them.
The great Services the Duke had rendered the House of Austria, were of no
advantage to him in their Council, nor any thing examined but his avaritious
and unequal Politics, his irresolutions alone were represented, and the times
in which he had declined their Service, when they might have obtained great
advantages, if he would have acted with his forces.

The account was also cast up of the great Sums he had cost the King of Spain
yearly, by a crafty selling him his Army as if at an outcry, so that if they
would make use of it in the beginning of a Campaign, or continue it at the end
of it, he must be paid at his own rates. It was at last concluded as well at
Madrid as Brusselles, that for a certain remedy to all these mischiefs, to
prevent falling again into the like inconveniences, and put a stop to the
preparations making at Liege, the Elector was not only to be indemnified, and
the protection of the Duke of Lorrain abandoned, but his person to be seized on
and sent into Spain. Thus this Prince saw himself treated as a Soldier of
fortune, and not like a Sovereign, by a Family whose friendship caused the loss
of his Country, and reduced him to the sad necessity of living like a vagabond
at the Head of an Army that subsisted only by his industry. If what has been
reported of the first heats of his youth be true, and that he then lamented he
was not born a private Gentleman, to try how far his wit and courage could
carry him; one would think he had divested himself of his Dominions, only to
show what he could do without them. That he had very eminent parts, is
undeniable, but overshadowed by such uncouth Policies, and in such a manner
intermixed with humor and vanity, that one would think he had but one Maxim
sacred and inviolable to him, To prefer what was profitable above what was
honorable or honest. It is not therefore strange that he built his ruin on so
bad foundations, nor that after his imitation of that crafty Lewis the Moor
Duke of Milan, and all his shifts and slights of hand, he is caught in a trap,
from whence his deliverance is very uncertain, and whether he end not his days
in the Castle of Toledo, as the other did in the Tower of Loches; though it is
believed here, that were his Army disbanded, his liberty might be obtained
without much difficulty, because the Spaniards are confident they need
apprehend nothing from this Prince, who loves his money too well to employ it
in his revenge, and the 200 thousand Livres a year he is reported to have
within the Dominions of the King of Spain to forfeit them. To which they add,
that were he desirous to take Arms, he needs the support of France, which he
will probably fail of obtaining, without an entire giving up Lorrain, which
they will either keep still, or restore on conditions but little better, and
such as he will never accept, for fear of depriving himself of what belongs to
him for so small an advancement toward his particular satisfaction. On these
grounds they add, that even the Ministers of Spain wish the destruction of his
Army, which in the fashion it subsists and is disciplined, costs them very
dear, but they would gladly gather together its ruins, and incorporate them
with their other Troops, that their Enemies might not profit by them, the fear
of which hinders their undertaking it. This makes evident that Princes are
incommoded by Auxiliary forces that serve in a Body, and under a Head they own
as their absolute Master, for it is always hard to oblige them to do well, and
no less difficult to disband or be quit of them, and therefore the wisest
Princes, that have been necessitated to make use of such, have at first
endeavored to separate and mix them with their own, to prevent their
correspondence, and diminish the Authority of those that brought them. The
Venetians once endeavored to deal in this manner with the Marquis of
Roquelaure, and the Prince of Orange, at relieving Berghen ap Zome, would have
obliged Mansfelt to suffer such a separation: but neither of them would
consent, but made appear that this is not to be propounded or obtained, but of
a Soldier of fortune, that has drawn together forces he is not able to make
subsist.

The most public curiosity, whilst we were in Spain, was to divine the
designs of that Fleet Cromwell sent into the Indies, and at our arrival at
Vittoria, being saluted by a man of good presence, who enquired what was spoken
of it in the parts we came from, when we told him it was believed those great
preparations were made to subdue the Isle of Hispaniola, he assured us that if
the English began there they would fail of success, that he knew that Country
very well, having lived some time in it, and that this Island was one of the
strongest and most populous of America. That after the year 1586, in which St.
Domingo (its Capital City) was sacked by Sir Francis Drake, it was put in such
a posture as could no more apprehend the like misfortune, and a very fair
Citadel raised adjoyining to it, whose situation is so advantageous, it seems,
destined to command the neighboring Sea. When we came to Madrid, I found that
those little Cabals, as well of Spaniards as Strangers, that met a Mornings in
the first Court of the Palace, usually entertained themselves with the
assurances Cromwell had given the Spanish Ambassador, that the Fleet he had sent
into the Indies should attempt nothing against his King: that they therefore
made no question but it was to drive the French out of what they possessed in
New France, and that it was there he would begin a War against them, and
break that Treaty of Peace from which he had often declined, and again complied
with, the better to amuse them. But the clear sighted easily judged so
considerable preparations aimed not at so slight a Conquest. Computing his
charge, they found that all the French possessed, whether Islands or Continent
in those quarters was not equivalent to any considerable part of his expenses,
and therefore concluded he had some vaster and more important design. These men
seemed to me to flatter themselves least, and to be most reasonable, for I had
often heard such as had negotiated with Cromwell say, that if they had any
judgment, they assured themselves they mistook not in this observation, that
he had a particular passion for some great Enterprise in the Indies. After he
had made all Europe admire and fear his Naval Power by a War against Holland,
which yet was more glorious than profitable to his Country, it is probable he
contrived how to employ his arms in some part where he might reimburss part of
his charges. Although of all his Neighbors he at that time used the French
worst; yet it may easily be judged it was not his interest to come to an entire
rupture with them; because their Traffic for the most part making use either
of English or Holland Vessels, he should by that means displease either his own
Merchants, or those with whom he had lately made peace, besides that the French
had for some years been Masters at free-booting against whom if he sent a
Fleet, they would easily avoid it, their design being only to pillage; so that
he should be at a great charge against them that would always fly from him,
and waiting for his Merchants, oblige him to convoy's; unless he would lose all
the Trade of the Mediterranean, and part of that of the Ocean. Cromwels
interest therefore requiring a War, and a War by sea, that may yield him profit
proportionable to the great equipage of Men, Arms, and Ships he is obliged to
maintain, to make himself feared, by which he has obtained the Command of both
Seas, he will not attaque France, who having all within her self, waits till
Strangers bring home to her that she can be without, and fetch from her that
which is absolutely necessary to them. For it has been observed that her
greatest and wealthiest Cities are not situated near the sea (though two wash
her Coasts) but in the middle of the Country. By this appears that her Stock of
wealth is within her self, and that (according to the Politicians rule) she is
rather Vendax than Emax, selling more than she buys. Her soil being so rich and
fertile, it is no wonder she has in all times abandoned the Ocean to be
plough'd by her Neighbors, who employ a great part of their art and labor to
send her as tribute the fruits of it. To make a war therefore against France
with profit, it must most certainly be done by land; but if we consider the
present condition of England, a War of this nature seems not to agree with it;
for we may easily judge that Englands design now aims at no more then to
maintain her self in her present posture, and to become redoubtable to all the
Princes of Europe by a power suitable to her situation, which hinders their
attempting any thing against her, and obliges them (though against their wills)
to approve what has passed, by owning her Republic. To this purpose she
resolves to be continually potently armed both at home and abroad, one of which
puts her in a condition to concern her self in all the affairs of her
Neighbors, without their interposing in hers, whilst she is environed by a
prodigious number of invincible moving Castles, which when she pleases she
joins for her defense, and causes to fly for her advantage to what part soever
seems good to her; by the other she thinks securely to fix her innovated
tyranny, in continual danger of an insurrection of the people, to restrain whom
her Militia is a curb, as it is lightening to destroy those that attempt to war
upon her. In fine she can make use of these winged coursers both near hand and
at a distance, and nothing confining them to her Coasts, where there will
always remain enough; for Guards and Rounds exact enough to justify her Media
insuperabilis unda, the rest may seek their fortune abroad, and either wait for
the Indian Treasures in their way to Spain, or seize them in their mines. But
it is not thus with her landforces* who must ever be at home to keep up her
usurped power, which will be hazarded by the first shock she receives from the
many malcontents that have much ado to suffer her.

A War by land must needs therefore be prejudicial to England in the present
Conjuncture, and with France destructive, it being the most potent Nation of
Christendom in this age, its Forces the most united, and that may with the
greatest ease be drawn to any part where there shall be occasion for them, so
that it cannot be attacqued, but by great and courageous Armies; of which if
this pretended Republic make use, she must disfurnish her self of her
trustiest Commanders, and stoutest Soldiers, which she cannot do without
danger of losing her new form of Government. Neither is it very much to the
purpose to say, that for securing it she can make new Levies, to supply the
places of the old ones she sends abroad; for to an unsettled power, supported
only by the boldness of the Usurpers that raised it, such a change is very
dangerous. It cannot be denied that England uniting with Spain would turn the
balance that way; but besides that, to do so would be of little advantage to
her, there would be an encounter of the same inconveniences. For she must
either join her Forces to theirs, and then France that is so great a nursery of
Soldiers, having put an end to its civil war, minding only that which is
foreign, would not need much to strain it self to oppose Armies belonging to
several Masters, and of diverse interests, which seldom succeed in any thing
they undertake; or else send an Army of her own, against which France would
immediately unite all its power, and be the mean while only on the defensive
against Spain, who to make a thrifty use of such a conjuncture, would move but
slowly and weakly to assist her. However she might proceed, this is most
certain, she would be constrained to weaken her Land Forces, the only
Supporters of that New Republic. Should she act only by Sea, and furnish the
Spaniards with Money, to recruit their Armies, it has been already showed she
would make no advantage by the former, and that a War attended by such Booty
and Conquest as may countervail the charge and labor is only proper for her:
for the second, it is sufficiently known that the Treasure of England is much
exhausted, and that she owes large sums both to her Land and Sea Forces; and
that to prevent her over-charging her People, by the great Expense she is
obliged to, the Gold of Peru is more necessary to her, then to supply from her
own Treasury those that are Masters of it.

During these Discourses, Letters came to Madrid that cleared all Doubts, for
after a long amusing the World with expectation of the Fleet and the great
Treasure it was to bring with it, and after knowledge that what was on the
principal Gallion, which had been wracked, was for the most part saved, a rumor
arose that it had been met with by the English, who made no difficulty of
attacquing it, but that after a vigorous defense, in which it sunk two or three
of their Ships, it had retired into the Havana, the Chief City of the Isle of
Cuba. I know not whether this particular was true, but am certain it was
written from Cadis and Sevil, and from that time believed that Cromwell
intended to have his share of the Treasure of the Indies. More to confirm this,
the English Merchants that resided in Spain, began to send away, and as well as
they could to conceal their Goods, fearing a Confiscation in case of Rupture; a
little after which it appeared that this Pre-caution was not useless, for
Admiral Blake who had passed the Spring and part of the Summer in the
Mediterranean, returned into the Ocean just at the time the Gallions were
expected. It is said he desired to careen, which not being permitted, but on
certain conditions, he seemed offended; and having taken aboard him several
English Merchants with their Consul, put out to Sea, and scouted about Cape St
Vincent. It was then quickly understood that he looked for the Gallions, with
intention to fight them if they escaped Pen and Venables, who were in the
Indies; this caused several Advice Boats to be dispatched from Cadis by Order
of the Council in Madrid, to give notice to the Gallions that they should not
leave the Haven they were retired to, till farther Order: at the same time a
resolution was taken to fit up some Ships, partly at the Kings Charge, and
partly at that of the Merchants, that were concerned to watch the motions of
this Admiral. Great part of the Traffic of Europe depending on the arrival of
the Gallions, many Ships are ever about Cadis at the time it is expected. Of
these and some others a Fleet was quickly made ready, and sent to anchor near
Blake, yet without hostility, if the other began not, and only to endeavor (in
case the Gallions had not received the advice sent them) to secure them from
him. These two Fleets contemplated one another two or three months without any
act of hostility, either general or particular, and whilst one of them thus
waited for his prey, and the other to secure it from him, news came that the
Spanesh Fleet was advertised of the design against it, and would not leave the
Haven it had retired into without express order. At the same time also it was
said that Pen and Venables had attacqued St. Domingo, but with so bad success,
that after loss of many of their men, they went off for the Island of Jamaica
and conquered it.

This proceeding of Cromwell changed the discourses of those that looked on him
as one of the nearest and faithfulled Allies of Spain, who had first of all
acknowledged him: For as soon as an execrable Party of the scum of this Nation,
violating all Laws divine and humane, had possessed themselves of its
Government, and (by an attempt so horrible it cannot be paralelled in foregoing
times, nor scarce mistrusted in the worst that shall succeed) at one stroke
deprived their King of his Crown and head, the Spanish Ambassador received
order from Madrid to endeavor to make advantage by it, and court the
friendship of that new Republic for his Master, by giving it in his name all
such titles and rights of a legitimate Power as it should desire: it was very
likely he might succeed in this, there being probability enough of a league
against France, who not only received the exiled Family of the King of England,
and refused to own Cromwell, but seized all his Ships, and gave freedom of his
Havens to those that remained faithful to their King.

The hopes of so advantageous a Treaty increased in Madrid, not only by
Englands giving Letters of Reprisal against France, and landing forces
hostilely in Bretaigne, but by her being so kind to Spain, that she caused her
Fleet to take those ships France sent to succor Dunkirk besieged by it. All
these fair appearances of Amity proved insignificant, and the Usurper that
governs in England, who seems no less crafty than bold so well understands the
interests of his infant Republic, that he by degrees accommodates all to them.

She is Mistress of many strong and populous Isies situated on the passage to
the Indies, and that are keys to to the Gates that may lay open a way to so
rich a Conquest, by means of which, she may surprise its treasures as they pass
by, if she will not take the pains to dig them out of the Mines, of which she
may certainly make her self Mistress: she knows that all the great extent of
Land the Spaniards possessed there, adheres to their Dominion, more out of
apprehension of their violence, and because none has vigorously attempted to
deprive them of it* then by any real power they have established, capable of
preventing this, England thus understanding the advantages she has toward
getting her share of the new world, with the weakness of those who pretend it
discovered for them alone; it is not strange if she endeavor to profit by both
of them; especially in a time, where they which sit at Helm are obliged to be
powerfully armed, and to employ their many Fleets in some profitable war, that
may make them subsist without the peoples murmuring at their great charge in
entertaining them: and the Spaniards, as quick sighted in their politics, as
slow paced in their enterprises, very well foresee, that if the French
Negotiations with Cromwell effect a peace between them, he will pursue his
interest, and forget all advances Spain has made to gain his friendship, This
they think they ought the firmlier to believe, when they remember they could
never get satisfaction for several prizes taken by the English, especially, for
the money designed for a whole Campaign which they sent by sea to Flanders, not
knowing how to make it over by Bills of Exchange, by reason of their difference
with Genoua: however, that they might not in so considerable a conjuncture, be
wanting to themselves, and out of consideration of the advice, Philip the II
gave his Son at his death, to be in peace with England, that he might be able
to make a war with all the world; they neglected nothing that might oblige
Cromwell to a good understanding with them. Alfonso de Cardenas their Ambassador
in England, and who having resided there since the beginning of the troubles,
is looked on as very able in manageing those affairs, endeavored all means of
a good understanding, and to thwart the French Treaty* but his politics being
apprehended at Madrid, to be less undertaking then those of de Bourdeaux the
French Ambassador; a resolution was taken to send thither out of Flanders the
Marquis of Leda, Governor of Dunkirk, as Extraordinary; these two persons
joined all their adress to bring Cromwell to some friendly composure of
differences about the complaints the Spaniards made against him, and his
against them; but finding no favorable Audience of their many proposals, the
last of these resolved to be gone, with regret, to have done nothing for his
Masters service, but to have given him clearer light of Cromwels bad intentions
against him: it therefore began to be more publicly discoursed in Madrid; that
the many delays in his Negotiation with France, were but tricks to lull the
Spaniard asleep, whilst he sent to attacque his Indies; and that the Treaty
which he sometimes seemed ready to break off, and again to renew, had been
agreed on, and privately signed three months before. Spain now believed
England intended a breach with her, and though the passion of the Castilians,
inveighed sharply against the avarice and ambition of Cromwell, which moved him
to invade their Treasure; the moderate sort reasoned otherwise, and in what was
passed, sought the causes of what was present and to come. But by such
discourses, one could not judge of the whole secret, or entire cause of the war
they apprehended* the thoughts of such as sit at the Helm of Government being
covered with a cloud of appearances, which disguise them even to those that
have the nearest prospect; for the most part discovering nothing but the
pretenses; their actions being like great Rivers, of which, though the streams
are viewed by all, the heads are invsiible. They yet at last easily persuaded
themselves, that whilst their King had so many irons in the fire, that he knew
not where to find either Wood or Coals to heat them, Cromwell would make use of
the occasion to attacque him both in the new and old world, where expecting
little resistance, he needed not doubt of a certain profit, more considerable
to him then the jealousy of the French progressions or cautions given by the
maxim, Decreseat Iberus nec crescat Gallus.

On these grounds they concluded, that Cromwell fearing a peace between France
and Spain, and standing in need of an advantageous war to justfy his continuing
in Arms, would attacque the weakest, and let the future safety of his estate
give way to the present necessity, and on that account agree with France, that
he might share in her victories by leaving Land enterprises to her, and
applying himself to those of the sea, which better suit with his affairs and
the support of his power.

But if all this discourse be grounded on conjectures, by which they which are
curious in Madrid, seem to divine of the future, and fancy reasons perhaps very
different from the English Councils; it is not so where it concerns what they
say of the right the English may have to attempt the Indies. Such amongst them
as are most reasonable and least scrupulous freely confess, that by the law of
nations, Countries that have made no Treaty or Compact, may be assaulted by
them that on other accounts are in peace with those which appropriate them: So
that the King of Spain having, in all Treaties he ever made with the Kings his
neighbors, declared, that whoever goes to the Indies, either to settle or
traffic, not being natural Spaniards, shall be used as enemies, cannot
complain of such acts of hostility, as are made by other nations, since himself
has chosen a perpetual State of war, owning neither friend nor ally beyond the
Line, especially in America.

To this purpose the answer of a great Spanish Minister is remarkable, rallying
on two healthes were drank to him, one to his Masters Wife, the other to his
Mistress: America says he, is my Masters wife, and the East Indies his
Mistress; for the later he is not so jealous as to think himself concernin
honor, if any of his friends too freely caress her; but his Wife he would keep
chaste and rereserved, without suffering any to court her. Questionless when he
called America his Masters Wife, he alluded to the Popes Bull, which gave him
power and propriety in this intended Marriage; but it is generally said that a
Rape merits not such a benediction, since he possesses America without either
her own consent, or that of her relations, Europe, Africa, and Asia.

To speak seriously, the Popes donation is a ridiculous title to those that own
not his Authority; besides, that a great number of those that do, believe not
that it extends to things of this nature; so that if Spain have no other right
than what is derived from Rome, she is not well invested in the possession of
the new world, neither can they which dispute it against her be accused of
injustice, since some of them say they owe him no obedience, and others that he
cannot dispose of that which belongs not to him. Nothing then appropriates it
to Spain but the first discovery, to have landed Colonies here and there, to
have built Cities and Forteresses, subdued the Barbarians, and given names to
Rivers and Havens: But all this cannot have acquired a possession absolutely
general, and without exception; and since it made its seizure by the law of
such things as are Nullius and quae fiunt primi occupantis, it has right to no
more than it inhabits, cultivates, and has entirely conquered. Any Nation may
with justice take his part of the remainder, and (Spain going about to hinder)
make use of force, and by force drive away him that has settled himself only
by force.

When Philip the second fortified himself by the Popes Bull, for invading
England, he added to that title the most considerable forces that had ever
appeared on the Ocean: What is spiritual thus stands in need of what is
temporal, one of them well seconding the other, without which admirable
conjunction it is very hard to seize what belongs to others.

The Spanish Council spared neither wit nor industry, nor the wealth of the
whole Kingdom for this redoubted Fleet, in which they neglected not to send
fetters to enslave the Inhabitants of Great Britain: but their Forces both
spiritual and temporal had very ill success, and that prodigious Navy which
could hardly be completed in two years, was lost in two hours; part of it the
sea swallowed, and the rest fell into the hands of those it went to subdue, and
of all that proud Armado, scarce any escaped to carry the sad news into their
Country: by which it is very discernable that Heaven does not always
correspond with the visible Head of the Church. If he disposes of what belongs
to the Indians, because Barbarians, one would think it ought to be restored as
they become Christians; but their Conversion is to little purpose as to
recovery of their Country; and the Spaniards very exactly imitate
Ecclesiastics in their acquisitions, like so many dismembrings of the
Patrimonies of the Laity, from whom whatsoever is taken returns no more; and if
they well keep what they have once laid hands on, they can as well cause
themselves to be obeyed. Their Empire is formidable, and he that doubts of this
truth, may be convinced of it in their Cloisters, where such religious persons
as have neither dignity or parts to set them out, are rather Slaves than
Brothers in Christ to the other. If within their walls they exercise so
absolute a power, on those which are as it were their fellow prisoners, and
make the same profession, what will they not do to such as are of a different
condition, if they obtain the authority they desire, and which some of them
know so well how to make advantage of under pretense of Religion and directing
consciences, without fear of punishment, forsaking the functions of legitimate
Confessors, to creep into Families, and make themselves arbitrators of their
affairs and interests.

But to return to this Papal Donation, it is very clear, that this imaginary
propriety of a world as yet not well known, and of which probably not so much
is hitherto discovered as we are ignorant of, cannot, nor ought not to hinder
other people from trafficking there, because it belongs to the first finder,
and that the Spaniards acquired those parts of it they possess, without any
consent of other Nations to enjoy the propriety and sovereignty of the whole as
heirs of it.

If then the English now attacque the Spaniards in the Indies, such as are just
acknowledge that this is not so much to begin as to continue a War, since they
always (more or less) molested them there, and that no formal Treaty
concerning that Country was ever made with them. I have heard some very curious
persons examine what good or evil might by it accrue to either of these
Potentates; and they hold that the Spaniards would be the first gainers, by an
immediate seizing all that belongs to the English in their Dominion. They would
find considerable sums in the hands of Merchants of that Nation, as well at
Bilbo, Cadis, and Sevil, as in many other of their Port Towns, which might
assist them toward the first charge of the War.

For we may remember that England has for many years been possessed of all the
Trade of Spain, Hollanders, during their War, and the French, since their
breach, trafficking only by her interposal. So that the English have
established themselves very considerably, and possessed themselves of much
wealth in a Country that abounds in money, and is poor in Commodities, and that
cannot receive from its Neighbors what is necessary for it but by their hands.

We cannot oppose against this Confiscation of the goods of English Merchants
in all parts of the Spanish Territories, the like to be done to the Spaniards
in England; for as they never go abroad to serve any foreign Prince in his
Wars, they have a Maxim for security of their Commerce, not to exercise it but
in Countries where their King is Master. They go not therefore abroad how great
soever their Trade be, but content themselves to deal at home with Merchants
Strangers, who for want of correspondence are forced to settle amongst them,
which they do the more willingly, because having to deal with people not very
well understanding their Commodies they make the greater profit.

We see now the King of Spain without danger of a retaliation of his Subjects*
when he shall seize what belongs to those of England, inhabiting here and there
in his Dominion: But this small and inconsiderable advantage, prejudicial only
to private persons, is not to be compared to that the English will obtain, by
cruising in both seas, and attacquing what ever is sent to Spain from its
Neighbors, without which it cannot without difficulty subsist. Genoua, Naples,
Amsterdam, and Antwerp, whose Comerce with it is so great, will then be able to
send little or nothing that shall not run hazard of falling into their hands;
and if they ever make Conquests in America, or take the Plate-fleet (to which
it seems they are forward enough) the Thames will be covered with the spoils of
both worlds.

To all these considerations of particular loss one of State is to be added,
which is, that by a War with England, the vast and scattered body of the
Spanish Monarchy will lose its ligaments, and all communication with its
remoter Members. France leaves her little liberty but by sea, of which this
potent Nation, that attributes to it self the Empire of it will deprive her. It
is true, some object that shift will be made to open a passage as was done in
her War with Holland, but others observe great difference between those powers,
for besides that England is so advantageously situated, that it can without
difficulty break all correspondence between Spain and Flanders, the Hollanders
Naval Power appeared not at its height, till the War was grown old, and the
first animosity decayed, where as now Spain will have to do with a Nation, that
does not raise forces to fight, but fights to employ those that are already
raised. Besides all which, the King of Spain was not then so drained of men and
money, as at present, but could set out considerable Fleets to oppose the
Hollanders, who making Traffic alone the end of their Navigation, rather
sought for themselves free passage through all seas, then to deprive their
enemies of Communication by them; and this so much, that though they have
sometimes attempted the Spanish Fleets, and taken some of them, we may perceive
they were not very greedy of such Conquests, because their own Merchants were
concerned, and received almost as much prejudice as those of Cadis or Sevil. It
is well known that at the same time their ships cruised up and down to
interrupt the Spanish Traffic, their Merchants passed and repassed between
Flanders, Genoua, and Naples in favor of it, and carried thither the secretest
intelligence, and best ammunition, whereas in a War with England all will go in
a more serious and real manner, and Cromwell little caring to advance his
Nations Trade, will vigourously fall on, and aiming directly at Conquest of the
Indies, endeavor every where to incommode Spain in order to it.

About this time two Books were published in Madrid, which clearly and
ingenuously discovered the great exigencies of the State. This was admired by
such as could not imagine a natural Spaniard would ever own its spirits spent,
and it in a languishing condition. The Author of the first was one Don Philippo
Antonio Alosa, a Knight of the Order of Calatrava, of the Kings Council, and
his Secretary in the Council general of the Holy Inquisition. It contained an
Exhortation to Ecclesiastics to supply the King by voluntary Contributions, in
the so very pressing necessity of his Kingdom; of which having first declared
the Causes, which he derived from the time when Philip the Second engaged
almost all his Revenues, for aiding the French League and building the
Escurial, and represented how under Philip the Third his Son, occasions of
expense augmented, by reason of the Wars of Italy and Flanders, removal of the
Court from Valladolid to Madrid, with his great Charges in entertaining the
Princes of Savoy, and Reception of the English and French Ambassadors; and that
which completed the ruin of the State, and drew on it the extremest misery,
the raising the value of Copper Money, by which Sajavedra says more mischief
happened to Spain, than if all the Serpents and Monsters of Africa had attacked
it: he makes out, that the present King at his Succession received the Crown so
poor, it was admirable there could be found wherewithal to resist so many
Enemies as at once proclaimed War against it; and concludes, that after the
many shocks it has sustained, it will hardly any longer prove able to defend
it self, without recourse to some sudden supply, though it be useless to fancy
New Imposts, or augmentation of the old ones, there being a general incapacity
in the subjects to pay what is already laid upon them. This pre-supposed, he
continues that applications ought to be made to the Clergy only, who have ever
kept their doors open to all manner of acquisitions, and closely shut against
the least alienation, and who with little or no expense possess the greatest
wealth of the Kingdom, till a more learned Pen make evident, they may justly be
compelled to contribute to the Kings urgent occasions, he declares his design
to be no more but to oblige them to a voluntary loan, which he shows will be
to their advantage; because if the Kings necessities force him to press the
Laity with rigor, they will abandon Tillage and the Country, in such manner,
that Ecclesiastical Rents, deduced only from the hands of the other by Tithes,
and the like, will fail.

Going on he adds that such a liberality is more especially due to the most
Catholic King, who aims only at the Churches good, and requires assistance for
continuing the War only in order to an advantageous Peace, neither does he
demand any thing that he first gave not, all of them having received their
benefices and dignities from his Majesty as their Patron: That they need only
spare part of their Plate, Jewels, and rich Movables, abating something of
their great Trains, entertained questionlesly by them, show that grandeur, they
will more handsomely make appear by assisting their King: afterward he says
that to give this greater efficacy, the King may please to make choice of one
of his great Ministers of State, to whom the Clergy have some kind of
obligation on account of their preferments, and from whom they may reasonably
expect more, by his report to the King and Council of their forwardness and
liberality: he advises farther, that addresses be not made to the Body or
Convocation, but to particulars, and an exact register kept of the willingest,
which will on all occasions be useful to them, toward acquiring greater
favors. By this method, which is nothing else but a Collection of State, he
supposes the King may amass a considerable sum toward paying his Troops, that
perish for want, and re-establishing his Affairs, which the same necessity has
so much disordered.

The Second Book was a Memorial drawn up by a certain Captain called Joseph
Puteol, in which he represented to the King, that by easing his people he would
be the better enabled to make War, Como assistiendo a todos se pue da lograr el
hazer mejor la Guerra.

The Expedients he propounded, spoke him a man of parts to such as knew him
not, but in others prejudice, raised a contempt of his reasons because he was
not in an eminent condition; as if the validity of a medicine depended on the
quality of the Physician, and aliquando etiam Olitor commode potest esse
locutus, etc. but passing by these, I will here recount what the former look on
as most judicious in his Book, which will also very much tend to the better
understanding the condition in which I shall leave Spain. After particulars of
all the Revenues his King draws from his Kingdoms of Castille and the Indies,
(which in gross amount to no more than Eighteen Millions of Gold, and of which
Philip the Fourth when he came to the Crown found but Eight Millions two
hundred seventy four thousand Crowns without encumbrances, which to supply his
Wars against France, he was immediately necessitated to engage, and afterward
to alienate, (for reducing Catalonia, appeasing the troubles of Naples and
Sicily, defense of the Duchy of Millain, recovery of Portolongone and
Piombino, and many Towns in Flanders; besides assisting such Princes as had
sided with him in the French revolutions:) he concludes a very exact and
parcimonious economy for the future to be the only means of replenishing the
Kings Coffers.

The ways he proposes for this, seem so many remarques of the former ill
dispensation and administration of the Public Treasure.

In the first place he says, That what is necessary to the subsistence of
their Armies, fails of being supplied, not only by reason of the Engagement of
the principal Revenues of the Crown to such as have furnished the King in his
necessities, but no less by the prodigious cheats of an infinite number of
Officers employed toward their recovery; which gave the King just cause to
complain to the Cortes, That of Ten Millions paid yearly by Castille, six stuck
to the fingers of Under Treasurers, Secretaries, Receivers, Tellers, and other
Exchequer men, that subsist only by Rapines exercised on the King and his
People.

Then he desires that difference be made between Monopolists and Farmers of
Customs, as well old as new, and that such of them as have dealt franckly,
without making malicious advantage of the necessity of affairs, may be
distinguished from those that have thriven by craft and design, in purchasing
or renting the Kings Duties. With the first he holds it but reasonable to make
a fair composition, and afterward that they be permitted the enjoyment of what
they acquired with so great equity: the other he would have treated with all
possible severity, and compelled to refund with no less rigor than Sorcerers
are burnt and Thieves hanged. For what concerns rewards, he allows it just to
recompense all such as have done the Crown service, be its necessities never so
great; but even for this he would not have the King draw any thing from his own
Purse, nor pretend to liberality at a time when he has not wherewithal; he
therefore advises (since high birth is not ever the source of eminent actions,
neither do Children always inherit the Prudence and Virtue of their Parents)
not to continue in the same Families, 49^ Commanderies, which the Eight Orders
of Spanish Knighthood possess, worth above a Million of Gold yearly; but
instead of bestowing them out of favor for the most part to persons unworthy
and useless, hereafter to distribute them to such as either have preserved or
extended the Limits of his Monarchy, or at least by an Honorable Profession of
Arms are in a capacity to do it. And if he ever suffers any of them to be
diverted from the advantage of Soldiers, to whom only they of right appertain,
that it be to some able Statesman or Dextrous Ambassador, who without drawing
Sword, has saved some Town or Country, surprised an Enemy, broken in Pieces
his Levies, cut off Ammunition and Victual from his Armies, drawn in
Neighboring Princes to unite against him, obliged some of them to quit a
Neutrality, succored some Ally, or confirmed some other that wavered; in a
word, to such a person whose industry and prudence has been highly
advantageous to his King and Country. He no less complains, that instead of
giving what is substantial in these Orders to Persons of Merit, the very Badges
of them, which are only superficial, are for the most part refused. He
instances in Mr de St Maurice, a Gentleman of Burgundy, who after very good
service, pretended several years without obtaining this, though Marquis
Caracene writ in his favor, and attested his Valor and eminent Merit. This
takes away his admiration, that in all the Troops that serve in the Duchy of
Millain, there are but Eight Knights that have this honor, the peculiar
recompense of Soldiers, being frequently bestowed on Penmen, or such as depend
more on the Gown than Sword, though they wear the later, as a Mark of what they
ought to be, rather than of what they really are. After this detection of
abuses in manageing his Kings Treasure, he passes to the ways of increasing
and better securing it. Toward increasing it, he would have taken into
consideration that Spain is inhabited by some persons that are very rich,
others indifferently so, the rest very poor, which is the greatest number, and
that in raising Contributions neither of these three can be favored, without
prejudice not only of the other two, but of the Sovereign himself: Such a
Geometrical proportion is therefore to be observed, as considers the means and
faculties of each, and prevents that inconvenience in the State that often
afflicts our Bodies, when all the ill humors fall on the part that is weakest.
After so good a Foundation, he attacks those that possess most and pay least,
and makes appear that the Spanish Clergy, being very wealthy, pays the King but
Four hundred forty seven thousand Crowns, a trifle compared to its ability, and
concludes that an augmentation of the Kings Revenue might in so pressing a
necessity be charged on it with all justice and reason imaginable. He thinks it
not fit to impose more on the Nobility and Gentry, who ought to be in a
continual posture to do the King personal service, but upon Citizens and
Farmers, and concealed Treasure for the greatest part in the hands of Persons
faulty or disaffected, and that this might bring up a considerable aid, were
the sources of their abundance well examined. For such Taxes as are settled
ill, he says that which is imposed on the Eighth part of Flesh, Oil, and Wine,
is the worst of all others, giving occasion to a thousand cheats, as well by
the Officers, as by such as endeavor to bring those provisions into Madrid and
other Towns without paying Duties. To which I can add, that I have been
assured, an infinite number live only by that employment, in so much that not
only some poor Gentlemen and Ranting Hectors that will live on nothing, and
without doing any thing, with whom Courts and great Cities ever abound, concern
themselves in it; but even Churchmen and the greatest Noblemen, that are weakly
revenued. For this cause Guards have been appointed to attend the Collection of
these ^mposts, on condition that what they can seize of Goods that have entered
without paying Duties, shall be their own. But this which was established, to
redouble their diligence, they have turned into small Politics, that causing
them to consider the Kings interest, if vigorously pursued, as that which would
put an end to their profits, they are not very exact, perceiving that should
they not sometimes connive, they which busy themselves in stealing Customs,
would give over the Trade, finding no effect but Confiscation of their Goods,
after which the Kings Duties would be well paid, but they get nothing. They
therefore correspond with them, and seize not their Goods, till so much has
entered, as will make them more than savers. This Confederacy against the King,
is maintained at his Charge, and drones suck the blood of the poor people, the
effects of so great a disorder falling on their heads. Amongst other
Impositions he thinks ill laid, and which I will not give my self the trouble
of reciting* he mentions Sealed Paper, and says it is a ^ery uncertain Revenue,
because founded on ^aw Suits, to which the folly and obstinacy of humane nature
alone gives being; it is true that in England, madder in this particular than
Spain or any other part of the World, more profit might be derived from this,
than in a Country where that infamous employment is not so much in request;
whereas in England it is exercised with such avarice, rapine, and so prodigious
delays, that this horrible Pestilence which feeds it self fat by means of
infinite numbers of vile Insects, Attorneys, Solicitors, Attorneys Lieutenants
and Sub-solicitors, it must needs pass for one of the heaviest scourges of the
Nation, and plagues of its best Families.

To conclude, he implores his King to cast off all those ill designed
Impositions, that will be destructive both to him and his Subjects, and to lay
the burden more equally, which will make it light, and his people bear it
cheerfully, when free from Vexations, that tend more to the advantage of
Pettifoggers, than of his Revenue.

If what he proposes may be endeavored, he doubts not but his King will
vanquish all his Enemies, there being already so many Victories that testify
his Valor, and so many Books that publish his Prudence, besides so much Gold
and Silver stamped with his Effigies, current through the World, though Spain
admits none that is Foreign; an invincible demonstration of its inexhaustible
Treasure.

Whilst these two Books were Subjects of our Discourse, by reason of their
surprising Novelty, the Genius of that Nation considered, which seldom
discovers where the Shoo wrings it, and whose constancy is so admirable, it
always sets a good face on an ill game; we received Letters for some of the
Principal Ministers of the Catholic King: had they come to us at our first
arrival at Madrid, they would have introduced us to a nearer speculation of
that Court, but arriving in June, and we being resolved, for avoiding the great
heats, to repass the Pyreneans before they began, we had but little time to
continue in a Country, where the Sun is something too prodigal of his beams.
To make use therefore of all advantages possible, and that according to
Formalities, which are here essential, I addressed my self to Don Martin
Secretary of the Earl of Pigneranda, desiring him to give his Lord the Letter
of Recommendation we had for him. I acquainted him with the qualities of my
Lord B. and A. and inquired at what hour we might have access, least we should
apply our selves to him when he gave not Audience. Such precautions are
necessarily to be observed in this Court, by all Strangers, who without any to
introduce them, desire to be particularly admitted to a Principal Minister of
State: by means of which they escape being exposed to that dry gravity which
receives Strangers with a leaden austere Fore head, close and reserved, all
such whom they apprehend they may mistake in its Civilities, for want of
knowledge of their quality; besides that, generally speaking, such as
understand the World, ought never themselves to deliver such Letters, which
serve only to make them known to those they never saw before; for if they be
read in their presence, they suffer some time of vexatious incivility, and if
the reading them be deferred till after their departure; at the first Visit
they have but a cold Reception, the Complements faint and confused, directed
more to him that sent the Letter, then to those that bring it, and for whose
sake it was written. This we avoided, for the Earl having been informed, as
well by the Letter of Dom Estevan de Gamarra, as report of his Secretary, who
we were, received us as well as we could wish: And to speak truth of him, none
in this Court understands Civility and the World better. His first presenting
himself is graceful and winning, and makes appear, that with the severity of
his Countries Customs and imperious gravity of his Nation, he has mixed a
certain forain air, that takes off from the austerity, and makes him so
agreeable, that if the Address and Gallantry of the first of the Tarquins
caused it to be said, Graecum ingenium miscuerat Italicis artibus, he had added
the Complacency of Greece to the Arts of Italy. We may conclude that those of
this great man make evident, Hispanicum supercilium potest moribus exteris and
comitate exotica dilui. That Spanish severity may be moderated by forain
Civility. His Wit and Judgment appeared in his Embassy as Plenipotentiary to
Munster; and when News came to Madrid of the promotion of Cardinal Chigi to the
Pontifical Chair, and the great desire he expressed for Peace between France
and Spain, this man was spoken of to be sent to Rome with the Embassy of
Obedience: though indeed he was chiefly designed to that Employment, because it
was hoped that by reason of the great friendship he had contracted with the new
Pope when he was Nuncio in Germany, he might do his Master good service in all
manner of Negotiations. Many advantages are also reported to have been offered
on behalf of the King to oblige him to accept this, besides a considerable sum
of ready money, particularly Three thousand Ducats a Month, his Son to be made
an Earl, and himself continued President of the Council of the Indies, and that
the Golden Key he carried only as a Badge of Honor, should be conferred a
Exercicio, that is to be made use of, with all Privileges belonging to it: but
nothing of this is yet effected, and they which understand the confidence of
Don Lewis de Haro in his fidelity and capacity, assure he will not remove him
from the Council where he is now President, till needs must. Having thus
received all manner of satisfaction in our first Visit, to so accomplished a
Person, who omitted nothing that might assure my Lord B. of the esteem he had
for his quality and merit, at the very first sight remarkable to him by that
vivacity which is so natural to Extraordinary Persons, they need not speak
twice to those to whom they would make themselves known: We thought our selves
very forward on our way, to obtain the like from Don Lewis de Haro, when we
should wait on him: For besides the Letter we had for him, we doubted not but
the Earl would acquaint him with the Visit we had made him* and with all that
could oblige him to receive us well. Besides our Letter for Don Lewis de Haro,
we had another for a Gentleman called Alonzo Vercoca, Cousin to Dom Stephen de
Gamarra the Catholic Kings Ambassador in Holland, who, we were assured was
very well with this Favorite. We therefore thought best first of all to visit
Seignior Alonzo, that he might deliver our Letter, and present us when it
should be seasonable. We were not a little troubled in inquiring after his
Loding, but at last learned that he was usually resident in the Country, and
only a Son of his who was one of Don Lewis de Haro's Gentleman lived in Madrid.
Enquiring for him at the Palace of this Chief Minister* I was told he had a
Chamber in the Town, and came not thither whilst his Master was with the King
at Buen Retiro; the Civility of the Officers of whom I enquired his Lodging,
extended not so far as to send some body to show it me, and he being seldom at
home, I was either to seek him very early in the Morning or late in the
Evening. At last I found him just out of Bed, no less troubled how to enquire
after us, because he had received a Letter from the Ambassador to his Father,
by which he reiterated his request for doing us all manner of good Offices in
that Court. Some days passed, in which he neither visited us nor returned any
answer. This made me imagine that eithet he did not much value the Ambassadors
Letter, or else had not sufficient access to his Master to perform what was
recommended to him.

As soon as we thought of leaving Spain, I began to consider how we might
obtain an authentic passport, being sufficiently informed of the insolence and
impudence on the passes called Puertos, as well by the Farmers of the Customs
as such as are there in guard. On which account many formalities are necessary
to be observed in the Passes, that they may be effectual enough to check the
importunity and knavery of those Harpies that lie in expectation of travailers,
especially strangers, to put all imaginable affronts upon them.

I made very solicitous enquiry of all circumspections necessary, and the Earl
of Pigneranda having told my Lord B. that not to leave Spain without carrying
along one of its greatest rarities, he should do well to take some horses; to
which purpose he would provide him all sufficient passports; we did not in the
least distrust, obtaining them as advantageous as we could wish: they which
have no friends in Court, are obliged to petition a certain Council, whose
Secretary is called Carnero: the petition considered on, if the Pass be
granted, the Result goes from thence to the Kings Council, from whence it is
returned sometimes confirmed, sometimes annulled, and often limited or
amplified, according to the petitioners success in his solicitations. Indeed,
though either by favor or bribe, authentic Passports are sometimes obtained,
and that without delay; such as are unknown and unfriended, find this trifle
become a troublesome and tedious negotiation. Ours was not so, for having drawn
up a very exact memorial, and according to the sense of those that understand
the form of a Passport, to go out of Spain without let or molestations: I
carried it to Don Martin, the Earl of Pigneranda's Secretary: he read it, and
told me so many particulars were not necessary; and that our Passport being to
come immediately from the Kings Council, there needed no more but to translate
into Spanish, that we had brought from the Archduke; the like whereof, which
would be every where respected, should be dispatched us; I acquiesced in this,
and went with him to Geronimo de la Torre, one of the Secretaries of State, to
whom he delivered a Memorial for the said Passport, recommending it to him in
the name of his Master; he promised to carry it to the Council of State that
very day, using us with great civility, and accompanying us to the bottom of
his stairs.

Our Passport being in this forwardness, Mr. B. and I, went one morning to
visit Segnior Versosa, by it the better to understand the nations humor, and
whether negligence or want of credit had caused his failing in what the
Ambassador desired of him: he instantly excused his not having waited on us,
and told us he had delivered the Letter to Don Lewis de Haro, who had commanded
him to accompany us to Audience (such is the manner of speaking in this Court)
which he would give us the next day. This discovered that his slowness in
returning us answer, was rather an effect of the humor of his nation, (not very
punctual nor forward in its civilities, no more then in its affairs) then of
his negligence or little power to perform what had bin recommended to him;
being a kin to the Secretary Geronimo de la Torre, who had received our
Memorial, he would needs go along with us to him, and recommend it in our
presence; but I was strangely surprised to see this man in this visit we made
in company of his kinsman, so different from what I had before found him; for
instead of our former civil reception of which I spoke but now, he would
scarcely move from his Table and Papers, entertaining us with interrupted
sentences, whilst he ranged the writings he held in his hand. I was scandalized
at such an inequality, and the favourablest judgment I could make, was (whilst
I considered him to be of that nation which is esteemed so unvariable in its
humor and actions) that his thoughts were that day entirely possessed by
something very important and vexatious. This prevented not our repairing next
morning according to our appointment to visit the chief Minister of so superbe
a Court. He is not difficult of access, nor environed with the pomp and
splendour usually affected by such as possess the place next their Master: he is
not courted, nor his withdrawing room crowded with any that have not business
with him; none are refused admittance, but every man in his turn brought into
his chamber, where having spoken, he retires and gives place to others* To such
as are not admitted, if they have formerly moved him in their concerns; he
signifies his pleasure by his Secretary, which (if they have nothing new to
offer) must of force content them; such as have never opened their affair, or
have any thing to add, are referred to the next day or another hour: so that
few go away without some kind of satisfaction or hopes to receive it, at least,
in obtaining Audience. In other places, Favorites or chief Ministers seldom
are accessible, and never till after many refufals; and not content to
participate of the Sovereigns authority, pretend to a degree of adoration above
it: and we may assure our selves, that though this quality occasions in most of
these, pride, vanity, and pleasure; it gives Don Lewis (as he makes use of it)
trouble alone, and that amongst all that are in public employment he is not
only first in rank, but in attachment and subjection to the service of his
King; to which, to speak the truth, he entirely resigns himself: for in the
morning immediately after his devotions, and visit of the Kings apartment,
about Seven a clock he sits down in his chamber of dispatches, where he
continues till one; giving order to his Secretaries in all that is to be done,
and hearing such as are to speak with him, preented by order as has already
bin said: after dinsner he reposes, or retires some hours; and about four or
five, returns to the same chamber, and like employment till seven. Two days in
the week he, as well as the King, gives public Audience; then all enter, and I
have seen there of all qualities, even lame and naked soldiers, who amongst
others present themselves and pretenses, without any other difference, then
obliging them to advance with discretion and respect, if perhaps they observe
it not.

To all this is to be added, his care of the Court, he being Master of the
Horse, with his hours at both Councils of State and Privy, besides Audiences of
ceremony, and affairs of Ambassadors, and Agents of foreign Princes; so that I
can imagine no life more agitated nor busied then his. I shall say nothing of
his parts, which the Spaniards hold not equal to those of his predecessor; the
other having bin quick and active in the most eminent degree; but they add that
they were not therefore more succesful, either in public or particular; and
that the great moderation and good nature of this man, is equivalent to the
heat and zeal of the former, who to attain his ends, suffered none to enjoy
quiet: so true is that of the Politians, that the greatest intellects are not
most proper to govern States and Kingdoms; and that they look so far before
them, they often stumble in such a manner as casts them into extremities, from
whence all their dexterity has much ado to free them, and the height of their
good fortune to secure them from ruin; whereas the middle sort by moving
softly are not subject to those politic transports, which often toss interest
of State into the air with the sublimest maxims of him that governs.

As soon as we came to Don Lewis his lodging, which was then at the Hermitage
of Buen retiro, we were received by Don Christopher his Secretary. He is a
little man, of address and subtilty beyond what is usual in his nation, being a
German, of which Country he has so little the mien and presence, one would
rather take him to have been born at the foot of the Apennine or Pyreneans,
then on the banks of Rhine or Danube. He takes care of all foreign affairs,
and serves his master as interpreter; we were immediately presented to him, and
thus he received us: He sat in a Chair at the end of a Table, with his Cloak
on his shoulders, and his sword by his side; he rose up at our entrance, and
after we had saluted him, caused seats to be presented us; and immediately Don
Christopher placed himself on his knees, on the Carpet that was between his
Chair, and that of my Lord B. who having spoken, Don Lewis answered by
interpretation of Don Christopher, as obligingly as was possible. After the
first compliments, he enquired after our journey, and continuance at Madrid,
and finding us inclined to leave it, asked, if we would not pass by Sevil; and
we excusing our selves, by reason the Summer was so far advanced; he replied,
our time indeed pressed us, if we desired to be out of Spain before the great
heats; but not visiting Andalusia, we lost the sight of the pleasantest
Country in the world; he afterward made us many offers of service, and when
we acquainted him that we desired to pass through Arragon, and, if possible,
enter France by Catalonia; he promised us two Letters of recommendation; one to
the Duke of Monteleon, Viceroy of Arragon, the other for Don John of Austria.
He asked us if we would kiss the Kings hands; but our time for leaving the
Country being so near, we thought it unnecessary to give him the trouble of
obtaining that honor for us, having so often seen his Majesty. In a word, he
omitted nothing that was obliging, or might render our visit satisfactory; he
is indeed of a humor to discontent no body, and never favorite did less hurt:
he suffers to live at Court, not only such as envy him, but his professed
enemies, as the Duke de Medina de los Torres, and goes abroad with so small
pomp, that his Train little or nothing exceeds the meanest Grand of Spain: he
is not crowded after, but observed to follow much better then his predecessor,
the advice of a favorite of the same nation, who after his fall admonished all
of the like condition, themselves to put a spoke in the wheel of fortune, when
by too great an elevation she almost equalized them to the King, adding, that
he which thinks himself advanced highest, is often nearest his ruin, and
therefore ought never to be transported to receive such honors and
attendances, as his fall cannot deprive him of, without shame; on occasion of
which I must needs mention, what was reported to me to have been spoken by a
great Statesman of this Court: That a Favorite ought to have the moderation and
prudence of that Angel before whom St John prostrated himself with adoration,
and refuse some kind of respects that may be rendered him with a Vide ne
feceris, conservus tuus sum: for if God in that immensity of glory and power he
possesses to reduce the universe to nothing, admits no companion in his
adorations: Kings whose Authority is limited, and whose Might only weakly
imitates that which is infinite, will much less endure it. Such boundless
ambition, and excessive thirst of grandeur, in two years time strangely shook
Cardinal Spinola, one of the greatest Favorites of Philip the II. and at last
overthrew that famous Conde Duke Olivares, whose place is at present possessed
by Don Lewis.

Besides what I have touched concerning his Ministry, the curious find a
considerable difference between the favors of the Uncle and Nephew, as well in
the foundation as managements of them; they consider that of the former was
derived from his conformity of manners (real or affected) with those of his
King; and from the care he took to second his inclinations, and make himself a
necessary instrument of his satisfaction in pleasures, perhaps contrary to his
greatness and condition: but that of the second had its source from the Kings
obligations to him, for services rendered him in encounters where his Life and
Crown were concerned: that the first had his good will and affection, which are
but as blossoms that a thousand accidents blow away, whilst the other is
established in the intellect, having been fixed there by experience, the true
and only root of favor, proof against time and humor; that the first arrived
at so eminent a degree almost at the same time and the same manner as the Duke
of Luines rose near Lewis the XIII of France, and the later by a way very like
that ascended by Cardinal Richlieu: the Nephew had time to make use of the
faults and misfortunes of the Uncle, as well as the Cardinal of the failings of
his Predecessor. But for what concerns the exercise of his authority, they
observe it is very different from the other three. The Duke de Luines, and the
Conde Duke Olivares disturbed the quiet of their Masters Dominions; the first,
that he might make use of the sword of Constable he had newly received, and the
other to make ostentation of the vast capacity he pretended to above all
mankind. Richlieu, who succeeded the first of these, though with very different
maxims, thought nevertheless he was to continue the war he found begun, to
gain him reputation, and remove all obstacles that might prevent such a one as
was more the interest of France, and would give him opportunity of entering the
Lists with that ambitious Conde Duke. Don Lewis was no sooner infavour, and
entered on business, but he endeavored to make understood, that the whole world
and especially the house of Austria, suffered by emulation of those two
Ministers. He well foresaw (...) the condition of the Spanish Monarchy,
attacqued in Trunck and Branch, considered) that ^peace, (the least
dishonorable that could be obtained) was necessary to prevent final
destruction. It is said, he effectually represented to the King and his Council
the faults of his predecessor, and made it appear, that the universal desire of
all the lesser Potentates of Europe, who wish equality amongst the greatest, as
balances where every one may find his counterpoise is very suitable both to
the inclinations and interests of France and Spain* though not often so to the
ambition of their Kings, and vanity of the Ministers that serve them; and that
which soever of them gains upon the other, would acquire most enemies, were not
Europe by artifice of their Favorites (who set their Masters together by the
ears to make ostentation of their own address during the combat, as Pilots
their skill in the height of a tempest) divided into Leagues, and almost all of
it in arms in favor of one or other of these Crowns* that whilst war continued,
the allies of France would never forsake her to become Neuters, or turn their
swords against her, but that in the mean time the dangers into which they
precipitated themselves, were to be represented to them, with a great
inclination to peace, even so far, as to purchase it at what price soever. That
experience in all ages had made evident, they recovered by Treaties what they
had lost that by wars. That in Germany even they were to be incited to cry up
peace that were confederates with France and Sweden, to oblige them to which,
they should have intimation, that nothing was taken into greater consideration,
then their satisfaction; and that it was high time to divert the jealousy of
their liberty against two foreign Potenthtes, more ready to invade it, then
ever the Emperor was to impose fetters upon it. That in Italy, Flanders, and
all other parts where there were Leagues against France, the like was to be
done; and at the general Treaty of peace, all desirable conditions given to
their weakest enemies, to enfeeble the more potent by depriving them of the
others assistance. Thus the beginning of his Ministry, (if what has been
informed me, and I have here represented be true) was not to cry up war in his
Masters ears, out of consideration only, of what might augment his own power,
as is done by such Epicures of favor as turn it to their particular advantage:
He would neither seem idolatrous in his politics, by giving no council but
such as was to his Masters advantage; nor Atheistical in valuing nothing but
the good of the people, but with respect to both of them, showed himself a good
Statesman* dealing with them like Husband and Wife, and concluding that for
their living happily together, they should admit no friend that might separate
their interests. I had bin made acquainted with some of these particulars
before I visited Don Lewis, and could set down more, were not a great part of
the remarques as well effaced from my Tablebook, as vanished from my memory: if
it be expected, I say something of his person; I must add, it is sufficiently
taking, and that I was told, his wit was neither of the finest or grossest
temper, not extravagantly high, nor insipidly low; his countenance neither very
airy nor excessively serious. Nothi^^ (...) be discovered in his eyes, either
too he^^^ or too light, his make and posture of body is neither eminently
heroic nor contemptibly vulgar, Vt staturae and oris non est plus quam
Heroici, ita nihil in eo quod nimium vulgar sit. And he is looked upon to be
no ways incommodious, either to Prince or People; and as he charms not the
first by extraordinary endowments either of mind or body; neither does he
disgust the later. And a Spaniard one day told me, En el semblante mismo este
privado no enfada por lo atrevido, in desluce por l^ disanimodo: to which I
will give no other English, but, the mien of this favorite is neither insolent
nor abject.

The great revolutions in the affairs of this Monarchy since Don Lewis had the
managing of them, present me a vast field to expatiate on what seems vigorous
or weak in his conduct; for some particulars are observable, in which, nothing
more could be wished then what he did, and others as discernable, in which he
seems not to have made use of all advantages that presented themselves. The
peace concluded at Munster with the Hollanders, is thought a masterpiece, they
having received as an eternal maxim, never to have it with his King; and the
miracle became greater, not only in that he disarmed them by a particular
Treaty, under no other garranty, but that Seal and Oath they had so many years
protested never to confide in; but made use of the family of Orange, which
seeming no other way (...) in the affairs of the world, then in (...) it great
Captains, could not act toward (...), without setting a knife at the throat of
its own glory and reputation.

After so politic an achievement, he might have effected another little less
considerable, if we may credit such as determine the affairs of Princes,
according to their particular capacities, had he (during the troubles of
France) endeavored a peace with that Crown, which in such an extremity must
needs have accepted it, on conditions, more advantageous to Spain, then the
Towns retaken by it, because giving way to her intestine commotions, by
removing the foreign object that might divert her dissentions and civil
enmities, her fury would have rebounded on her own bosom, and she like a good
Mother have abandoned the greatest part of her conquests, to gain more leisure
and better opportunity to chastise her disobedient children: here it is that
considering affairs by their event, and seeing France again in as good a way as
ever to pursue her victories, the Spanish Councils are blamed for neglecting
that opportunity of putting such a stop to them, as should have prevented their
progression. Instead therefore of Treaties with the City of Paris, siders with
the Princes, and the Princes themselves, it is said, Spain ought to have
negotiated with the Court alone, from which, as is believed, it might have had
good terms for abandoning the seditious, and their endeavors to encourage the
rebellion, in which interim, the Catholic King might probably have succeeded
beyond the Pyreneans, in reducing the Catalonians, and recovering Portugal,
much more considerable to him, because very certain, that the revolt of the
former, and separation of the later, are the greatest mischiefs, that have
attacqued that Monarchy during the whole war; for remedy of which, it should
have neglected some slight bruises in other places, and applied it self only to
the cure of those two wounds so near its heart. The ways of doing this, had bin
more easy, more safe, and of less expense then those which recovered
Barcelone; they which examined the affairs of that time, were of opinion that
the Spaniards lost more by retaking that Town, and neglecting to relieve
Bourdeaux, then they would have done by some condiscentions to France in order
to peace. For it was freely discoursed in that Court, that the siege of
Barcellone cost so dear both in men and money, that so great a failing of
spirits followed, that all the repose obtained by the French disorders, was not
sufficient to their restoration, and that neglecting to relieve Bourdeaux, gave
the French opportunity of freeing themselves from the difficulties of appeasing
their civil war, and almost at the same time of re-beginning an offensive one
against the forraigners with vigor equal to their former. In the judgment
therefore of these critics, the Spaniards could neither make all the
progressions, might have been expected from them in such a conjuncture,
notwithstanding their recovering three or four of the principal places they had
lost, nor embrace the opportunity of the peace, to which France seemed
necessitated, nor yet supply the flames of civil discord already so well
kindled, but after so great charge and small profit, they looked on them as
negligent Merchants that had let slip the best time of the Fair, and perhaps
brought but one commodity from it, that will never sell for what was laid down
in ready Money, and is hereafter to be paid for it: I mean the Prince of Conde
and rest of the French that are at present only a charge to them, and whom
deceased Quevedo, were he now alive, would join to the late Queen Mother of
France and Duke of -- for that new kind of stratagem by which the King of
France may batter by disgusting all his family, who repairing in discontent to
the Spaniard, will oblige him in assisting them to consume that which is
designed to maintain his Armies. Now the Prince of Conde is retired to them,
and has no more places nor Troops in France, they seem to understand this, and
notwithstanding the miracles he did at the rout before Arras, and on occasion
of which it is reported, the King writ to him in these terms. Mi primo, he
intendido todo estava pardido, V. A. ha conservado todo; Cousin, I looked on all
as lost, your Highness has preserved all; they complain of the large pensions
they allow him, though they pay them ill. In a word, some observe, that whilst
they consume their Treasure in entertaining him, and such as have followed him,
the profit of those great pensions accrues to France, as well as the
confiscation of his vast estate, by means of which she may well support the
loss of some Regiments to the weakening her own and strengthening her enemies
Army. Their esteem for his person is indeed equal to his merit, and his name is
in such veneration both amongst Nobility and People, that he is looked on as
the greatest Captain that Europe has seen in many ages, and to be above all
encomiums due to the highest courages; his actions surpassing all that can be
imagined; notwithstanding which they consider him to be a stranger, and Prince
of the blood of a Crown that is enemy, which makes the establishment of an
entire confidence between him and Spain, very difficult, but to prevent all
appearance of such distrusts, which they have much ado to disguise, they have
made use of an artifice, that has been well enough discovered by his Agents;
which is, that such of them as cannot be concealed, are imputed to the
misunderstanding between him and Fuensaldaigne, Master of the intrigue of
Flanders, whilst to content him, they find expedients that rather amuse then
satisfy him; to take away which the Prince has declared against Fuensaldaigne,
and caused his calling home to be solicited in Court, with protestation, that
as long as he continues in the Low Countries, with the present power, he will
not only ruin his affairs, but the Kings his Masters.

Monsieur de Mazecolles his Agent told me, he had made them sufficiently
sensible of all the mischiefs occasioned by this man's conduct, but the kindness
Don Lewis has for him, prevails against any remedy. That the Archduke had
given the same advice, all which could not prevent their obstinacy in
continuing him, grounded perhaps on this Maxim, which requires (as well in
Kingdoms as Families) to nourish dissension amongst those which serve, lest
they conspire to betray us, or are not exact enough in observing the
comportments of one another, nothing being so industrious or penetrating, as
envy and animosity, which pry not only into what the Master would not be
ignorant of, but into such things of which he cares not for getting information.

In the mean time let politic Censors, who often judge of counsels and
resolutions, rather by the events, and what is discernable, than the inductive
reasons of which they are ignorant, please themselves in discoursing according
to their fancies of this great intrigue of State, the effect of the French
troubles: they shall not yet hinder my observing, that in consideration of
several successes caused by them, as well in Germany, where a King of Romans
was chosen, as in Italy, where the affairs of the Duchy of Milan were secured*
Casal changed Master, Piombino, and Portolongone were retaken, the Rebellion of
Naples severely punished, and that furious Courser reduced to curb and cavison,
the Spaniards are generally pretty well satisfied, with little other
displeasure than that by not succouring Bourdeaux, they suffered the French
civil flames to be too soon extinguished; so that they cannot without
indignation mention the negligence of the Marquis of St. Cruz, when he
endeavored with the Fleet under his command, that had been fitted up at St.
Sebastians, to open the passage of the River to the besieged. He was encharged
with this employment, because not having comported himself satisfactorily in
one like it, it was believed he would strive to make amends by some very
eminent action in so pressing a necessity: but he failed even at his first
setting out; for having received his orders at Madrid, where the Earl of
Fiesque arrived to hasten him, he went away in a Litter, with all the
conveniences of one that had time enough before him, and as if he had not had
a Commission that required the most extraordinary diligence. His delays were
the same in embarking, and having shown himself at sea* and scarcely taken view
of the Enemy, he retreated to la Corugna in Gallicia, where amongst the
delightful Limon and Orange Trees, that grow there abundantly, he let the bad
weather pass over, and with it the opportunity of securing Bourdeaux, whose
loss was the entire ruin of the disaffected party in Gasconie, and of the
Treaty of the Prince of Conti. His manner of proceeding astonished all that
were concerned, though some suspected his orders required no more but to make a
show of relieving the place; whether it were that the Spaniards would hazard
nothing in a War that could not last long in that part, or whether there were
an understanding (according to the ravings of such as on all occasions vent
their imaginations) by the return of Bourdeaux to its Kings obedience, to
obtain the like for Barcelona. Whatever may be of this, he was secured and
confined to a Castle where he still remains, as is thought, more on account of
reason of State then of his guilt.

To conclude, the French troubles presented great speculations to the chief
Minister and other Wits here, how far they ought to concern themselves in them:
but those of Naples which happened a little before, and which the King of Spain
beheld as a fire kindled in a corner of his Dominion, he most valued, and
distrusted were no less subjects of the discourse of such as had curiosity for
the affairs of either Crown. All agree that France drew not so great advantages
from them as she might have done, had she more straightly embraced the
Neopolitan interests, and such as have discoursed with me about it, have made
it evident, that Spain in no occasion ever judged more solidly, or acted more
effectually. At the first advice of that revolution she was not deceived in
taking her measures, and the Earl of Ognate giving his sense of it, made the
mischief and its remedy so intelligible, that he was employed to administer the
later. I saw an Extract of his Letter, which represented that the fury of that
people could not last, having at first declared open war against the Nobility
and all that were powerful. That such commotions (the better part of the State
being contrary to them) bring forth only confusion and disorder, without any
possibility of erecting a true form of Government, which must be done (if at
all) in a moment, and that a multitude that had neither feet nor wings
proportionable to mounting so high must necessarily fall of it self, being
imprudent in its Councils, rash in its Designs, and slow and timorous in its
Executions. That the people of Naples went very aukwardly about forming
them-themselves into a Republic, beginning by desolation of the richest
Families, which could not be so totally ruined, but they would retain power to
join with the offended Prince in the public revenge; and that that which would
be imposed on this enraged Multitude would be the more advantageous, in that it
would give opportunity of drawing the reins of Government streighter, and
binding them so fast, that notwithstanding their former several bloodlettings,
a vein should then be opened, by which should be drawn the greatest part even
of that which was best, provided all that was corrupted came away with it. His
council was followed, and his hand employed in the Execution, whilst he
doubtlesly played the part of an able Surgeon, the whole body of the Rebels
suffering his lancet, and the Ringleaders his Saw and Rasor. All the world is
witness of his admirable conduct in so dangerous a Malady. I shall only add
that he is looked on here as the ablest and zealousest Politician of Spain; and
it is not doubted but if he had employment suitable to his wishes, he would add
something of vigor that in several men's opinions is wanting. But his parts
being apprehended he is kept at the greatest distance possible from the
intrigue; and setting aside what he must necessarily be made acquainted with by
reason of his employments, little is communicated to him. He therefore passes
his time in building, and employing part of the great treasure he amassed in
Naples, on a Pal^ce that will be one of the fairest and vastest of Madrid.

Among the great affairs and eminent negotiations of Dom Lewis, was one from
the North, whose interest was at first well enough understood: for none admired
that Spain kept an Ambassador at Stockholm for facilitating the Election of the
Son of the Emperor to be King of Romans. The Swedes were judged to have great
credit in the Empire, and known to have too long opposed the House of Austria,
to look well on its elevations; a man of parts might sound their intentions,
discover their designs, and by dexterity allay their greatest animosity
against the Emperor, if not obtain something really favorable in his behalf.
Piementelli, chosen for this employment, had success beyond what was expected,
quickly possessing himself of the good opinion of that Queen, ever charmed by
novelty; for amongst the great affluence of strangers she drew to her Court,
the last comer still carried it from all the rest. She was so much pleased in a
Spaniard, having never yet received any respects from that Nation, that it was
not difficult for him to make himself acceptable without taking pains to
corrupt any of her Council. Such as understood how matters passed in Swede were
not suprised at her letters during the Diet of Ratisbone, as well to the
Emperor, as to the Electors and other Princes about election of a King of
Romans. They easily perceived that the Counselors of the Kingdom and ablest
heads had not contributed to so open and authentic a Declaration in favor of
the King of Hungary. During her Fathers reign, and in her minority, they had
been otherwise inspired; and if their opinions might have prevailed, doubtlesly
the Party of the Princes and Towns had rather been supported, who demanded a
making good of all that had been agreed on by the Peace of Munster before they
would proceed to that Election. This makes easily comprehended that an
Ambassador from this Court was necessary during all that time, but that he
should be continued after the resignation of this Princess, and that when she
had left the Kingdom ^iemente^^^ should every where follow her under that
character, is a mystery, of which no reason can be imagined, that seems not too
flat and feeble to be real. For why should the Spaniards be at such cost to
keep in with this Princess after she had dispossessed her self of her Dominion,
or court her then, their enemies having received all her favors whilst she
sat on the throne? The Spaniards, I say, that never do any thing, where that
interest, that as much governs Kings as Kings do Subjects, is not exactly
observed: that repine at the entertaining the many discontented Princes that
have sided with them, and that seldom abandon what is solid and necessary, for
what is plausible and superfluous. Notwithstanding all which they not only
caused her to be attended by an Ambassador, when she had no right to one, and
who (her Prerogative being gone with her Sovereignty) must needs appear rather
a Gentleman Usher than Public Minister, but omitted not to complement and
present her from Madrid it self, with 12 of the beautifullest Horses of the
Kings Stable. What is rumored here that she has still the disposal of Forces,
and that Koningsmarc by her Order marches to assist the Archduke with an Army
of Twelve thousand men, is a mere raillery.

Her resignation was doubtless a secret of State, spun and wove with more art
than is imagined, and nothing less than what it seemed; she retained neither
credit nor authority to make her Mistress of any thing more than her Pensions;
and though because the Pill was very well gilt, the World believed she
swallowed it willingly, and tasted nothing bitter, a Person of as great
judgment as curiosity, told me, That as the Palatine appeared a great Captain
when Generalissimo in Germany, he no less approved himself an able Politician,
in a quiet possessing himself of the Crown of the Great Gustavus his Uncle,
even in the lifetime of his Daughter and only Heir: The manner of doing this
seems very subtle, for after he was declared her Successor (partly on occasion
of the over-heroick inclinations of that Princess, who seemed amorous only of
her own wit, and more ambitious to be thought a Woman learned and liberal, than
a Queen prudent and capable of governing partly by reason of the inclination of
the Counselors and States of the Kingdom, who grew weary of obeying a Maid,
more sollicitous to be the Miracle of her Sex than of her Dignity) and a
resolution taken that if she should marry, it must be with none but him, all
his endeavors tended to make known he was fitter to espouse the Kingdom than
Queen: in effect he quickly appeared equal to the former, and (were it
naturally or artificially) so well acted the part of a King, that it was very
apparent that whilst he fell back from probability of being such by means of
the later, he advanced in hopes of it, by the general inclination of the
People, and Interest of State. His Conformity of Humors and Manners with those
of that Country, opened him so fair a way to the Throne, that the Queen (whose
Customs were directly contrary) became jealous, with such an aversion for his
Person, as she could not sufficiently conceal. This obliged him to retire to an
Island, part of his Inheritance, leaving all to time and the Queen her self,
who confirmed the People in their dislike of her. She continued to value less
than she ought the most considerable Persons, and most important Affairs. Her
vast fancy and ardent thirst after curious Sciences, joined to that
extraordinary manner of conduct that possessed her, made her fly from thought
to thought, and from employment to employment, without ever fixing on the
Duties of her Charge, and Care of her Crown and Subjects. One while she was
entirely taken up by Letters with Des Carts, Salmasius, and Bouchard, whom she
had sent for, with the first to engage her self in the Labirinth of his Modern
Philosophy, with the other to trace the Antiquities of Rome and Greece, and
with the last to penetrate the Mysteries of the Catholic and Protestant Faith.
Sometimes she abandoned both Books and Scholars, calling all the first Bawbles,
and the last Pedants. At the time of this gay humor, crowds of young people
that swarmed about her, p^ssed their time very agreeably. Masks, Balls, Plays,
Collations, Huntings, Tours, with all the little pleasures that are the
principal ragouts of the idleness of Courts, were then alone in request. Wit
and Fancy, with all that boundless and extravagant jollity can produce, then
displayed themselves with the highest advantages, and his parts were most
applauded, that seemed capablest of these fond Diversions which lead from
pleasure to pleasure and pastime to pastime, without knowing what they seek, or
on what to settle. In these several manners of living she equally scattered the
Crowns Revenue amongst Strangers, by whose Counsel she governed her self in
many things, and by her own head in all the rest. This gave occasion to one
Missenius, a Physician or Historian, if I mistake not, that had been advanced
by her, to publish a Book little to her advantage. He highly extolled the
Prince Palatin, then declared Heir of the Crown, addressing himself to him and
the Kingdoms Senators, for remedy of the disorders he observed. His Style
discovered him, and the Queen made appear very great moderation on occasion of
his ingratitude, and the Prince no less address and judgment, in satisfying her
that he too much detested the Crime of that unworthy fellow, to have
contributed any thing toward it. All this while a secret aversion for the
Queen insinuated it self amongst the greatest part of the Senators and People.
Some said they must have a Soldier to command them, others lamented the poverty
of their Country, and that Rixdollers were so scarce amongst them. That Peace
suited ill with a Country that produced nothing but iron, which they ought to
truck for the Ducats of Poland or Patagons of Germany. That an occasion of
rupture with one of these could not be wanting, that the truce with Poland was
almost at an end, and that they stood in need of nothing but a King, either a
Charles or another Gustavus. That all that was defective in his Daughter
abounded in his Nephew; notwithstanding all which their respect to the next
blood of that great King, suffered them not to open their mouths wide, nor to
speak publicly; but whether it were that the Senators had more particularly
expressed themselves to the Queen in private, or that of her self she well
understood, by the Conjuncture of Affairs and Inclination of the People, that
she had not long to reign, or else by some transport of Heroic fancy, or were
it that all these things together contributed to her renunciation, it at last
became public to the admiration of all the world. This change was the
discourse of all Europe, and as there had not happened any thing in many Ages
so suprizing, every man endeavored to find the causes of it in a thousand
Chymerical reasons. This great Queen was so unfortunate, she escaped not the
teeth of Satyrists on occasion of it. They began by a bad opinion of her
understanding, and jealousy of ill guided Morals; her affections and judgment
seemed very unstable, and her Enemies reported she quitted not a Crown and
Scepter on a Principle of Virtue to live to her self, and in a solitude where
she might the better cultivate her Mind and exalt her Faith, but out of of an
inclination to wander, and expose to Fame that Prodigy of the North she had so
highly vaunted. This so feeble Motive of so great an Action made some
conjecture it was not her choice, but that her Descent from the Throne might be
glorious, she was permitted or advised to cover with the Mantle of Generosity
and austere Virtue, the necessity to which they reduced her of resigning the
Crown to her Cousin before her death. That great Soul and vigorous Intellect she
ever pretended to, on this occasion doubtlesly furnished her with such Maxims,
it represented her resigning the Soveraiguty as much better than its forsaking
her, and that by anticipation of her defeat she should triumph in it: That a
timely retreat is oftentimes better than an obstinat combat. That a good
Horseman alights, when he perceives his Horse will not carry him to his
journeys end. That she should do well to imitate that Illustrious Roman that
vaunted to have been employed before himself desired it, and to have quitted
before it was desired by others; by the first designing the effect of his good
fortune, and by the second giving testimony of his good Conduct. The Event
shows she yielded to these reasons, and the better to disguise all appearance
of constraint, omitted nothing that might conceal her displeasure. Piementelli
her Favorite wrote in such terms to this Court, clearly discovering the bottom
of this affair and humor of this Princess, with which he had order to comply,
and offer her all manner of honor and good reception in the Dominion of the
King his Master. He effected this without difficulty, because so well with her
that all was acceptable from him. Having entirely resigned her self to his
Counsel and Conduct, she had no sooner cast off the Royal Robe, than she left
Swede in the Equipage and Habit of a Modern Amazon. She did not only in her
actions retain nothing of the Customs of her Sex, whose weakness was so
contemptible to her, but avoided all conversation with it, her Attendants and
Servants were all Men, scorning to use Women either at her rising or going to
bed. Her own habit was mixed of what is used by both. A loose Coat reaching to
the middle of her Leg, and under it a kind of Vest almost to her Heel, a
Handkerchief like a Cravat about her Neck, a Black Periwig, though her own Hair
was flaxen; with a Hat and Feather, were her ordinary Accoutrements, or rather
her Disguise, whilst she travailed: Nay at Antwerp and Brusselles, where she
continued some time, she changed nothing; and they which have written of her,
represent her in a Dress very little different. Humor or aversion made her
always (as much as possible) avoid the Visits of Women, and as Thalestris for
Alexander, so she at first expressed a great impatience and extraordinary
passion to see the Prince of Conde. She publicly said, She was sorry there was
no House in Brussels large enough to lodge them both; that he was her Hero, and
the only Man she admired. He was at that time at the Siege of Arras, whither
she writ to him she would come, and after his Example make no difficulty of
wearing the Spanish Colors. This Prince having augmented his glory, though by
an unfortunate conclusion of that Enterprise, her desire of seeing him was
redoubled; to testify how much she was concerned in the honor he had acquired
by a retreat that had equalized the defeat of the Spaniards, to the victory of
their enemies. After so handsome advances and obliging addresses for an
Interview she passionately desired, one would hardly believe she could become
cold, and change so many evident testimonies of impatience, to as visible ones
of indifference. One of that Princes Agents told me, that out of an humor very
extraordinary and surprising, she studied Punctilio's on the form of his
Reception, when he was even ready to make his Visit. The Archduke after the
rout before Arras, went to see her at Antwerp, and she received him with
excessive respects and honors; for not satisfied to attend him at her
Stair-foot, she passed over a great Court, and met him at her outer Gate. The
Prince of Conde, whose courage may justly equalize him to what is greatest, and
whose birth yields to few that wear not Crowns, desired to know how she would
comport her self toward him; those he employed in this could never obtain any
satisfactory answer, and therefore doubting she might make some difference
between him and the Archduke, he resolved not to see her: but because he was
already on his way, and importuned not to come to an open rupture, he resolved
of an expedient to see her incognito. He therefore sent his Train to attend her
as if himself were gone back, and that he might see her unknown to her,
resolved to enter her chamber when full of his people, and to appear no
otherwise than as one of those that waited on her on his account. At first she
knew him not, but at last discovering him, when he went away she would have
accompanied him; but he told her he must have all or nothing, and without
staying for an answer went as he came. It is most certain that he whom she
looked on as the Hero of this age, at that interview lost the opinion that she
was the Heroine. Her resolution yet, that has on so many occasions been
remarquable, was not the principal cause of her inequality toward him: It was
a trick put upon her by the Spaniards, contrived by Piementelli at instigation
of the Earl of Fuensaldaigne, that was very ill with him: For though the King
of Spain had expressly ordered that he should be treated equally with the
Archduke, and the same honors paid him, this was not the first time that more
had been promised at Madrid than performed at Bruxels, she who is entirely
devoted to the Spaniards, and governs her self by their Councels only, did
nothing on this occasion that was not agreed on with them: and most certain
that the Prince of Conde made appear such a contempt of their vanity, and
indifference for her, that they were ashamed as well of their own as his
proceeding: this obliged the Spaniards to endeavor their reconciliation, and
to find a neutral place where they might accidentally meet: which happened in
the Pall mall, where a game was agreed on, in which both of them were on the
same side; but this had no effect, and they parted with the same indifference
as at first.

What I have observed of the humor and comportment of this Princess, is but
the sum of what I have heard from those that discourse of the design of this
Court in its many caresses to her: of which public curiosity has gained so
little light, we may conclude that nothing is so certain as the uncertainty of
it. Some will have that no Northern puissance having been so fatal to the House
of Austria as that of the Kingdom she abandoned, the chief Minister aimed at
acquiring her affection, and making use of her animosity against her Country
for discovering its greatest secrets. To this fancy they add, that it being
improbable that the King that succeeds her should continue long in peace with
the Emperor, her Councils and Creatures that continue in Swede, may be useful
as most proper against all correspondence he may have in Germany, for thwarting
the Election of the King of the Romans, and forming a party capable of
recalling him, with another manner of power then what he had before Prague,
when he retired with so great regret, and discovered that if he had not so
strong a hand, nor so long an Arm as the great Gustavus his Uncle; he had no
less thirst after victory. Others as ridiculous, imagine that a principle of
generosity and bounty obliges the King to maintain an Ambassador with this
Queen, to comfort her in her Eclipse of Dignity, by continuing such an
acknowledgement of Power and Honor; and that to mitigate her resentments, he
will in time make her Vice-Queen of Naples, or some other Realm, where though
she command not over so largely extended a Dominion, nor with a power so
ablolute, as when she sat on the Throne, she will have the satisfaction to
enjoy a pleasanter Climate. There are that when they must needs acknowledge
they cannot comprehend to what purpose the chief Minister is so solicitous in
cultivating this Queens good graces, have recourse to Zeal for Religion; and
that he proposes to himself no other end nor other glory, then to cause an
abjuration of her Faith, to follow the renunciation of her Crown, and to send
her to Rome as his triumph for so great a work. Whatever it be that moves the
Spaniards to a Negotiation, that to most wits seems very useless; this is most
certain that if they have complacency for this Princess, she has no less for
them. For besides what I have already said, I have had advice that at her
arrival at Antwerp, she extolled the beauty of that City with such excess, she
made no difficulty of preferring it before the kingdom she had quitted; nor of
saying, She had rather be Marchioness of Antwerp then Queen of Sweden. It is
most certain, that in Stockholm it self, in her familiar discourse she made it
manifest, she had no great value either for her Country or Subjects, whither
this were a design and foresight, that as she should not long command the
latter, so she would soon quit the former, or an effectual aversion for her
people, caused by frequentation of strangers, and contempt of her Country by
reason of the relations they made her of the benignity of the Air they breathed
in the parts where they were born. Besides all this, it is well known, that
after she had testified a desire to become Mediatress of a peace between France
and Spain, about which she had discourse with Mr Chanut, when he was to see
her, (assuring him that the Spaniards wished it, and would put their
concernments into her hands, if France would do the like) she was angry when
she knew her interposal was not accepted, and writ to him in terms very
different from the former, and more advantageous to Spain: amongst her respects
for all that comes to her in the name of that King, might be reckoned her
manner of living with Antonio Piementelli, were it believed she had the same
value for his Character as for his person: she has an extraordinary propensity
to all he propounds, even to a forcing her own inclinations to a compliance
with his. She is known to be Learned, and to love Books and Scholars, yet
busies her self in trifles to suit his Genius, in such a manner, that if any
Learned men visit her whilst he is present, she avoids such discourses as may
discover his weakness, be tedious to him, strike him dumb and constrain that
gay humor is reported to be so natural to him.

Having reported all that the Spanish Criticisms informed me in those matters
of State, (whether Catholic or Paradoxical) which because of freshest date are
their most usual entertainments, and having mentioned their opinions of those
that manage them, or that are or have bin their principal or accessory objects;
it is time to say something of such Ministers of foreign Princes as I had the
honor to be acquainted with in this Court, the first of these was the Earl of
Fieschi, Agent for the Prince of Conde; he was very kind to us, and being as
well one of the greatest wits as Gallants of the French Court; it is pity he
has engaged himself in a party and employment that has so much altered his
constitution, and changed his humor, so that he is hardly to to be known by
those that have been most particularly acquainted with him: he is fallen into a
sickness that by intervals makes him pale, disorders his pulse and disables him
for company or discourse. He keeps a good Table, the Country he is in
considered: when we eat with him, it afflicted us to see him in the middle of a
meal rise from his seat and cast himself on a bed. At access of the fit, he
suddenly changes color, and one would think him fainting: this is supposed to
be the effect alone of melancholy and displeasure caused by the troubles in
which he is engaged, which have separated him from his relations, estate, and
tranquillity of the life he had wont to lead. He took the Prince of Conde's
party out of inclination and generosity only, for it is said, he had not the
least cause of discontent either from the Court or chief Minister, and his
interest would rather have led him to have followed the Duke of Orleans and
Mademoiselle then any other, his wife relating to that Princess; but he thought
he was to go on, and not boggle when he had once chosen a master. After serving
him well at Bourdeaux, and several rencounters, he was sent hither to give
greater reputation to the affairs of that Prince, managed by St Agolin, in
quality of Gentleman of his chamber. At first he endeavored to divert himself
by all the recreations this place afforded, besides which, he enjoyed one
peculiar to himself by reason of the excellent verses he composed: he was
pleased to repeat to us some sonnets he had made in praise of the Prince of
Conde, and almost a whole Scene of a piece he begun in imitation of Senecas
Medea: but neither love nor the Muses had charms powerful enough against that
discontent and melancholy, which reduced him to the lamentable condition in
which we lef him; his health being disturbed by so frequent and sudden
alterations as neither himself, his friends, nor Physicians could understand.
He therefore forsook all pleasures, for Devotions, and instead of seeking
company that might divert his thoughts from contemplating his affairs and
infirmity; he made la Casa del Campo, his Hermitage, whither he often went,
either alone, or accompanied by one friend, whom he tired with silent walking.
The King allowed him a Coach with four Horses, neither good nor bad; but the
Coachman and Footman very ill clothed for servants of so great a King. Besides
this equipage which he commands whenever he pleases; he has his particular
Train which consists of Some Footmen, a Secretary, a Master of the Horse, a
Page, and some other Officers; to maintain himself and them, the King allows
him 1800 Crowns a month and pays his house-rent: he wears the Spanish habit,
and seems so far concerned in the interests of that Court, whither really, or
to justify his engagement with it, that he speaks of it with passion, and will
allow nothing to be comparable to the manner of living in it; this is not
because without cause of complaint* but, (as is supposed) obliged by prudence:
He medles with little at present, as well by reason of his indisposition, as
that the Prince of Conde sometime since, sent one of his Counselors, who seems
to have the intrigue and principal affairs in his hand; he is called Mazeroles,
and well qualified: he has as much Learning as is necessary to manage the
affairs of the time; he perfectly understands this Court and Nation; his wit is
solid, yet quick and supple; his judgment exquisite, and in the affairs he
handles there needs be no distrust of his mistaking the shadow for the
substance, nor the point for the hilt; his conversation is both agreeable and
serious in such a manner, that none go from him without satisfaction, and
instruction of many things remarkable in themselves or circumstances. In a
word, one may say of him that his parts are solidly established, both by Art
and nature, were he not tormented by an Astma, that gives him little repose.
This indilposition was acquired by riding post on his Masters occasions, and it
is so violent, that for some years he has not slept but in a chair, not daring
to lie in a bed, for fear of being suffocated by a defluxion and shortness of
wind. The King of Spain allows him also one of his Coaches, drawn by as many
Horses as that which attends the Earl of Fiesque. In the Palace which is called
Conde house remain still some of those that followed that Princes party, and
accepted not the Amnesty; the chief of these is Monsieur de Trincars,
Counselor in the Parliament of Bourdeaux, he is a man of parts and honor, and
that was very well with Monsieur d' Espernon, but that carried with the stream,
abandoned himself to follow the fortune of the Prince of Conde, when he came to
possess himself of the Government of Gascone; that party declining, the Prince
of Conti sent him into England to solicit succors, whilst he was there, they
of Bourdeaux returned to their Kings obedience, which exposed him to a great
deal of rigor, the effects of which, would have been sensible to his Estate,
had it not been secured as his wives Dowry. That his person might be in no less
safety, he retired to this place; after which, the Prince made him Intendant of
his Army, but he cannot obtain from these Ministers 500 pistols the Prince gave
him to be paid out of his pensions; neither does he solicit them longer, nor
press any thing but his discharge, which he knows they will not grant without
the 500 pistols, lest his arrival with the Prince, give him a new subject of
complaint by so much the more just, in that this Counselor, whom he summons to
an employment, in which he will be necessary to him, demands not any
gratification or Ajuda de costa, as it is here called, but the payment of part
of a sum that is due to him; by what I guessed, the difficulty lay not in the
expedition of the pasport, but of the Money, without which they would not have
him go away. In the same house lives also an Agent of Monsieur de Marcin who
solicits his Masters pensions (which amounts to 12000 Crowns a year) as General
of the Kings Armies; besides the assignation the Prince of Conde gives on the
Money he draws from hence; all these and some others that are in this house,
live on the 18 hundred Crowns a month that are given the Earl of Fiesque; it is
true, that by the death of St Agolin who was the Princes first Envoye; this
charge will be somewhat eased: St Agolin was a Gentleman of Auvergne that lay
sick long, and was at last killed by hot Medicines; they speak very pleasantly
of his Doctors, who after six months application of all manner of cold
remedies, told him, that since those availed not, they must try hot ones, and
so brought him to his end, in which he was happier then in so crasie a life: I
saw his Grave, and was pointed out one of the sumptuosities of this Country,
which requires persons of quality to have crimson Velvet or red Satin nailed
to their Coffin, adorned with gold and silver Lace, at least on the seams, if
not covered over.

The second Agent or Ambassador of foreign Princes, was the Dukes of Florence;
he is a Clergyman that wants not wit, of good mien, and free and affable
conversation. His brother, whom we knew at the great Dukes Court, where he is
very considerable, had given us a Letter for him, which we delivered quickly
after our arrival at Madrid: he received us well, and made many offers of
service to my Lord..... but gave us occasion to observe that the study of
Spanish and its near relation to the Italian, made it very difficult for us to
use the latter without mixture of some words of the former: nay some Italians
could scarcely avoid this, nor speak their own languaage with purity after
acquisition of some little of the Castillian. No Prince in Italy being more
streightened by the Spaniards than the Great Duke, he always keeps an
Ambassador in this Court to get intelligence of whatever passes: for besides
that which this King possesses in the Isle of Elba, he is Master of the best
Havens in Toscany that belonged to the Republic of Sienna, and therefore much
concerned in the affairs of this Crown particularly in those that belong to it
in Italy. Seignior Encontri, of whom I now speak, is very intelligent in these
matters, and too active and quick-sighted to be ignorant of what passes here.
He discovered the Treaty of the Genoueses with this King for acquisition of
Pontremoli; and as soon as he had vented the mine, and recived the great Dukes
orders to act with all his might toward gaining a place so advantageous to
him, he so well thwarted the Genoueses in their Bargain, he broke it off, and
struck up for his Master. In acknowledgment of which that Prince a little after
sent the Ambassador a horse of massy Gold, made sometime before for Henry the
fourth, or Lewis the thirteenth of France, and removing the effigies of one of
those Kings which was of the same metal, there needed no more but to place in
its stead that of Philip the fourth, to be presented to Don Lewis de Haro, who
accepting it, declared to do so on no other terms, but to bestow it in his
Masters Cabinet, where, as was reported, he effectively placed it. My Lord.....
made many visits to this Ambassador, who also came twice or thrice to see him;
being an Ecclesiastic he only wore along Robe, without taking the habit of the
Country.

The third foreign Minister was Seignior Quirini, Ambassador for the Republic
of Venice: He is very magnificent and splendid, and of a mien altogether
suitable to the Majesty of that August Senate: whose dignity yet he better
supports by an acquired knowledge of all that belongs to a person of quality,
accompanied by a judgment whose solidity incomparably moderates the exuberance
of his memory in such a manner, that the promptitude of the one never clashes
against the maturity of the other.

A Gentleman of Piedmont called Ranusio, who had been sent by the Duke of Savoy
to the Duchess of Mantua, his Aunt, made us known to Seignior..... Secretary
of the Embassy, who presented us to that excellent person. He received us
perfectly well, and assured my Lord..... that the memory of his Grandfather was
dear to the Senate, to whom he had been Ambassador, and that they which then
governed saw so many excellent qualities in that great Personage, they
mentioned him to their Children* as one of the ablest headpieces had ever
appeared before them; after this he discoursed with us about the troubles of
England, and the War between Cromwell and Holland then lately ended, and told
us that the Seigniory of Venice, who was the first that sent Ambassadors to
Henry the fourth of France, before seated on his Throne, which the League with
great might and fury disputed against him, and that had made no difficulty of
acknowledging the States of the Low Countries when they had freed themselves
from the Spanish obedience, had not as yet sent any Ambassador into England to
own that Republic or Protector. The reason he gave us was, that that prudent
Senate would do nothing it might be forced to revoke; and though these later
might seem (however so suddenly) better established than the former, they could
not subsist long, and would therefore wait till their power were better
settled, less tumultuary and precipitous than as yet: That it would see what
time would do with them, lest with other Sovereigns it might suffer the
displeasure to have adressed it self to Mushrums, who started up in a night,
and might vanish in the morning; for though the forces and industry of the King
of Great Britain had till that time failed of restoring him to his Throne, it
was probable enough he might recover it by means of internal revolutions, and
such flowings of State, as return what the like ebbs have carried away. Visits
and acquaintance of this nature give a soul to travail, when a moment presents
one part of what great Personages resident, in the Country where he is, have
been long acquiring. And as such men observe all with great exactness, and have
opportunity to do so, their discourses are sometimes more instructive than some
years residence, they being usually most open to strangers.

The three Ambassadors I have mentioned were all we knew here, though there was
also one on account of the Emperor* called Comte Lambert, who succeeded the
Comte of Grain; but we never visited him. At our being at Antwerp he was also
there with all his Family; his Wife is Daughter to Compte Wallenstine, Lord
High Chamberlain of his Imperial Majesty. He received the Collar of the Golden
Fleece from the Kings own hands, and went away no less satisfied than we, by
vacancy of several Chambers in the Inn, for want of which we did little less
than Camp the night before his departure. He is a tall man, thin-faced, and of
no extraordinary mien. They say he agreed better with this Court than the Earl
of Grain, a bold wit, that made himself more feared than loved, that spoke free
truths to the King, and meddled in more than belonged to his charge: he slighted
the Order, that no Coach, except the Kings and Masters of his Horse should be
drawn with six Mules or Horses in the Town. He did not think himself obliged to
observe this, and still went through the streets as formerly: He was once in a
passion against those that admonished him of it in the Kings name, whereas the
last complies and uses but four like other Ambassadors.

The King of Denmark has also an Agent here, but we had no acquaintance with
him; he lives privately, and the people one day as he passed called him
Lutheran; the King himself (on occasion of a difference he had) not using terms
more favorable. Besides some small interests of State of his Masters in this
Court I think his residence is only to facilitate the Commerce of his Subjects
and Allies, he was upon his departure, and staid only for a pass from France,
that he might not be arrested on the Frontier.

An Envoy of the Landgrave of Armstadt was also upon going with more
satisfaction, (as I found by his discourse) as well that he was no longer to
trouble himself with ineffectual solicitations, as that he had obtained (as he
thought) something for his Masters interests. He came to demand the Pensions
the Spaniards ought to pay him according to Treaties made with him in Germany,
and of which the arrears mounted very high, but he carried away nothing but
Paper with assignations very uncertain (as I was told) and no ready money,
besides Aynda de Costa, that is something to bear his charges.

We saw also the Popes Nuncio who was likewise on his departure, for which he
had long prepared, but, because he that was to succeed him, called Seignior
Massimi (if I mistake not) had at his landing in the Kingdom of Valentia been
arrested in the Kings name, with prohibibition to go forward, he was fain to
stay till that difference was accommoded, which arose from Innocent the Tenth's
sending him that was to succeed, without having first given the Court advice of
it, and known whether it were acceptable; and since the French had on the same
occasion arrested the Nuncio in Provence, it was thought Spain might do the
like; besides that, this came charged with some instructions relating to
Portugal and this Court, which in the Kings opinion were not sufficiently
Catholic, who possessed of that title with precedence of all others, required
them after his own fashion.

These difficulties, and such other as concerned his reception, being at last
removed, after his passing sometime as a private person in the Kingdom of
Valentia, he was permitted to come to this Town, and exercise his function: He
arrived on the Eve of Corpus Christi, or a little before it, and saw the
solemnity through a grated Window, not appearing because not received; and he
in whose place he came (doubtlessly not a little troubled to be removed from so
profitable an employment) did that day his last office in attending the King in
that Ceremony.

Now I am speaking of the Ambassadors and Ministers of foreign Princes, I will
not omit what I have to say of Margarite of Savoy Duchess of Mantua, who
prepared to leave the Court, and pass the rest of her life in the Duchy of
Millan, where the King had assigned certain lands for her entertainment. She is
Daughter of an Infanta of Spain and of Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy: She was
married to Duke Ferdinand, the last Duke of Mantua of that Line, and had but
one Daughter during the life of her Father married to the Duke of Rethel, Son
of the Duke of Nevers, to secure to him the succession of those Estates as
nearest Heir; but Spain resolving to dispute it with him; this woman, whose
inclinations were totally Spanish, sided with the house of Austria against her
own Daughter; the Commotions that were consequences of this in Italy, are known
to all the world, it is enough that I remember here that this Princess being
retired to this Court, for which she had so openly declared, was well received,
and to employ her wit and zeal made Vice-Queen of Portugal; where, to speak
truth she comported her self prudently. But the insolence and avarice of the
Ministers imposed to act under her, seconded by the countenance and approbation
of the Condeduke, at that time Favorite, was so great she could not prevent
their driving the people to despair, discontenting the Grandes, and wronging
the Clergy, giving occasion to all of them to take Arms for reestablishng their
liberty. These things she often wrote both to the King and his chief Minister,
particularizing all exorbitancies committed, and danger of a general revolt:
But the Favorite caused little regard to be given to her advice, ever crying
out she was a Woman, and all she writ trifles, more crediting the letters of
the Ministers he had sent with the intrigue than hers; on which account after
affairs in Lisbonne had changed face, and a short exile that permitted her not
to come to Court was passed over, at her return from that lost Kingdom, getting
opportunity to speak with the King, she assisted toward ruining the Duke of
Olivares in his opinion. She was afterward entertained at Madrid by his
Majesty, who now at last gave her permission to retire to her native Country,
there to lay her bones, being very aged. Some nevertheless suppose her sent
into Italy, to be a means of enticing the Duke of Savoy her Nephew (now of age)
from the French alliance, and of continuing the Duke of Mantua her Grandchild
in the Spanish interests, into which he entered after the taking Casal, and from
which they distrust he may be biassed by his great engagements to France, as
well on account of his birth as of the Estate he possesses there.

During our stay at Madrid we had many faithful Companions of our Travails
Monsieur...... in whom to the desire of knowing things that are considerable,
is joined such a comprehension of them, he is become capable of signalizing
himself in service of his Country, as soon as he shall attain the rank his own
merit, and his deceased fathers services seem to have acquired him. I will say
nothing of his other virtues, that have made too deep impression in my memory,
to believe they can ever be effaced, I had the happiness to know him in
Florence, where Mr...... and he renewed the friendship they had contracted in
their tender years, when they bore arms together in Holland under Prince
William of Orange. Coming out of Italy he landed in the Kingdom of Valentia,
and from thence went straight to Madrid in hope of meeting us, but having
continued there sometime, despairing of our arrival, he resolved to be gone:
when he least thought of us, and could not expect at Madrid in the Middle of
the Spring those that should have passed the Winter there* four horsemen
passed by his lodging, whose habit and horses discovered them to be of the
other side the Mountains, his curiosity obliged him to follow them to the place
where they ^^^ghted, not a little surprised to find those he had so impatiently
expected: he was then in such an equipage, that I must confess at first I knew
him not, he wore the Cassock, Rocket, thin and straight Stockings, with Pumps
and Breeches like Holsters, which so strangely diguised him he seemed not the
same person we had been acquainted with in Florence; his mustaches or whiskers
grown long and turned up with irons, made me more a stranger to the air of his
face, he not a little resembling the King of Spain, of whom he has more of the
mien in that habit, than of himself, when clothed after the fashion of his
Country. After mutual expressions of our joy, we acquainted him with the
delays of our journey, and he told us the successes of his, and having passed
three months in Madrid, during which we failed not one day of seeing one
another we resolved to pass together into France by way of Arragon: but before
we put this in execution, a Troop of illustrious Strangers, whom we were very
glad to see arrived in Madrid: amongst them were two Gentlemen whose
perfections of mind and body made evident, that if heaven has given them great
advantages by eminent birth, their education and docility have contributed no
less to that virtue and prudence which surpasses their age. They brought many
Letters from the Earl of Fuensaldaigne, Dom Stephen de Gamarra, and other of
the King of Spains Ministers in the Low Countries, to the best of this Court,
who received them very well, but wanting the language they took along with them
a Burgundian Doctor called Rognar, employed in the businesses of several
Officers that serve in the Kings Armies, and other persons of his Nation that
are concerned in this Court to be their interpreter, they were caressed by all,
especially by Don Lewis and the Earls of Ognate and Pigneranda: Though they
resolved to stay at Madrid no longer then Midsummer day to see the fight of
Bulls, they habited themselves according to the mode of the Country, and
intending within two Months to leave it for Portugal, they began at first to
provide horses, and solicit the expedition of a Pass to make the Tour of Spain,
notwithstanding the excessive heat of those Regions.

As soon as we got our Pass we prepared to be gone, it was in the same form as
that we brought out of Flanders from the Archduke, very ample and unlimited,
as well to time as persons. Having taken our leaves, and besides the Nags we
brought out of France furnished our selves with some Spanish Horses, we left
Madrid the 17th of June, taking the way of Arragon* in the forenoon we rid six
leagues, the Country very dry, which continued to be so till we came to the
River de los Henares, on which stands the City of Alcala, in Latin called
Complutum. It is very famous for its University, founded (as is reported) on
the Model of that of Paris, and like it divided into several Colleges, every
one provided of Professors called Cathedraticos. Divinity and Philosophy
flourish more here than in any other University of Spain, and Salamanca in the
Kingdom of Leon most for Students in the Civil Law, alone equals it.

The Town is long but narrow, having little more than one fair street, in which
the Scholars lodge. Here, as I was told, Cardinal Mazarin was a Student, sent
by Cardinal Colonna when Legate in Spain: the little River of Henares that
passes by it makes the land about it fertile, and renders it more agreeable than
the rest of the Country, where for want of water there are neither trees nor
grass: leaving here the post Rode, and taking the shortest way that led to
Arragon, we lay at Marcamalo* about 4 leagues distant; this is a little Village
without any thing remarkable.

The 18th we dined at Hita, a small Town seated on the top of a little hill
shadowed by a greater: that night we lay at Cadadra a pretty Town in a Valley:
From hence we went the next morning early, and dined at Saguenca; we inned in
the Suburbs, where we drunk wine esteemed the best of Castile; but it is like
aquavitae, not only strong but fiery, yet bears not water. Having refreshed our
selves, for we had a very cool chamber, and plenty of snow, we went to lodge at
Fuente Caliente: or rather to do penance there for the pleasure we enjoyed at
noon. Its name (interpreted, the hot fountain) is not given it without reason;
we suffered here very much, not only by heat, but bad accommodation on all
accounts; the Host was rude and barbarous, suitable to so savage a habitation.

The 20th over a very barren Country and hot Mountains we came to Arcos, the
last Town of new Castile, where consequently is a Puerto or Customhouse: It was
a Sunday and Holiday, and the people all at Mass when we passed; we traversed
it very leisurely without any one's saying any thing to us; but as soon as we
were beyond a certain gate, by which we went from the Village to the Highway,
in that part very straight by reason of the Brook and Mountain, and had gotten
about 100 paces beyond all the Barricado's, we perceived people running and
calling after us; I stayed to know what they would have, and when they overtook
me, they told me the Puerto or Custom-house was in that Town. I replied we we
were not Merchants, nor had any obligation upon us on that account, having
sufficient Passports from the King, and that if they had had any thing to say
to us, they ought to have done it in the Town, and there have acquainted us
that there was a Custom-house, we having no Moco de Mulas, or Guide to inform
us. They desired that one of us would go back to show our Pass, which I did,
though unadvisedly; for I have been told since we might have gone on, and
gained Arragon, and so have avoided the cavils and impudence of those Harpies.
When I showed my Pass they said they must call a Council to consider if it were
valid, and that therefore I should send to the Company to return. Which being
done they told us we might go a la Posada, e que toda la nuestra ropa estava
descaminada; that we might go to the Inn, for all our baggage was confiscated:
then guessing they intended by terrifying to get money of us, I bid them read
our Pass, which was in these terms.

It having been represented to me in the names of..... and..... at present in
this Court on occasion of business very much importing them, that being to
return to their Country, they desire I would please to order them a Pass: I
have condiscended, and therefore command all my Viceroys, Captains general,
Governors, Corrigidors, Alcades, and other Judges and Justices of my Kingdoms
and Dominions of what degree or quality soever, where the abovementioned
persons with four servants and eight Horses, their Arms and Baggage shall pass,
not to give them any let, impediment or disturbance whatsoever; but on the
contrary, all assistance and favor they may stand in need of, for such is our
will and pleasure,

I the KING,
and underneath GERONIMO de la Torre.


I thought this Pass sufficient to prevent these Publicans detaining us, but
thirst of gain in which, on several other occasions they had had success
against all Justice and Reason, made them obstinate by expectation of the like.
I asked the cause of their disrespect to His Majesty's Pass? sometimes they
said it was showed too late, and otherwhiles that it was not on sealed paper; by
which I perceived they designed to bring us to a composition of 50 or 60
pistols. Finding us not at all compliable, and that I caused a Certificate to
be made by a public Notary; that Francisco Salazar, Alcalde of the place,
stayed us contrary to the Kings Pass, (having plotted together to that
purpose) they began to talk high, hoping so to terrify us, and the Alcalde
seizing our Valises, caused them to be carried to the Custom-house, where
opening them he took an Inventory of all, and not only of such Money as we had
in them, but in our pockets, and forming an accusation, obliged us to put in
our answers; in which they endeavored to circumvent us, but I looked so near
to what they writ, I suffered nothing to pass I had not spoken, otherwise
protesting against signing it: these many formalities were made use of to
fright us with the name of Justice, of which, all their noise and scribbling
coming short, a Priest that belonged to them and another fellow that did the
Office of a Secretary, told me in private, that giving 50 pistols we might go
freely; I slighted this, but told them, I cared not if I gave them 30 Patagons,
though their insolence did not deserve it. And such indeed it was, particularly
on the part of the Alcalde Salazar, a Knight of St Jago, but an arrant rascal
as well as the Customer Nicholas Lopes de Cordoua that had the mien of a Jew;
at last they became impudent and desperately outrageous when they saw they
could not effect their design of plundering us; and perceiving it, resolved
that I should return post to Madrid, to complain of them and desire Justice;
they also provided one to carry their Justification to the Receiver-General of
the Customs, and sent him away afoot: the remainder of the day was spent in
such contestations with them, but at last they suffered me to go about Eight in
the evening; their messenger being first dispatched: My Lord -- writ all to the
Earl of Pigneranda. I was imposed upon by them at my first mounting, in the
prices of the Horses; no Posts in the world furnished with better then those of
Spain, nor that are less ridden; for, excepting such as carry Letters and some
extraordinary Couriers that are sent to Court from several parts, especially St
Sebastians and Catalonia, this way is little made use of, they preferring
Hackney Mules: which indeed are more commodious, as I found by experience on
this occasion, for though the Horses be good, one is tormented by wretched
Saddles, with very narrow Seats, high Pummels, and extraordinary hard. So that
to be mounted in such a manner, one is little more at ease then on a rack. At
the 3d Stage, the horses for all furniture had only Pannels with wooden
stirrups hung in Ropes. Finding fault with such equipage; the Postmaster told
me, it was not strange he had no Saddles, and that I should find the panel
easier, I complied, and at first was in a great deal of disorder, because I
could not settle on the stirrups, and by reason of the extraordinary breadth of
the panel; but this passed over, I liked their Pannels better then their
Saddles, and called for one at the next Stage, but could not have it, and took
a Saddle, not so convenient as the Panel I was so unwilling to ride on. At the
3d Stage they took me for the express of Catalonia, carrying some good news to
the King, which I did not much contradict, because I found my self better used
on account of it; they demanding for each Horse but four Rials, about 2 s. 6 d.
of our Money. Few Post-masters keep above two or three horses; neither are they
obliged to more, They have Salaries of 3 or 400 Crowns; nay some 500, for the
keeping only of two Horses and a Post-Boy. The Earl of Ognate is
Post-master-General, which is very profitable to him; my Horses were every
where very good, and galloped all the way, but the Postilions often stopping to
give them breath, which they call Rezelar, is very troublesome: Besides, that
at changing Horses, especially in the night, they are very tedious. The Post
way is not the same we passed in going to Arcos, but over a very fertile Plain,
watered by the River de los Henares; 5 or 6 Leagues are often rid on the same
horses, because the Posts are not established as they ought to be at every two
Leagues.

Arriving at Madrid, after some repose, and dining with Monsieur de Mogeron, I
was forced to stop till the heat of the middle of the day passed over, before I
could endeavor any thing in my business, for all here sleeping after dinner, I
could not see the Earl of Pigneranda (with whom I resolved to begin, and for
whom I had a Letter) till about five a clock; and therefore in the interim,
went to consult of my business with some friends, and meeting in the Call
Major, a very honest Fleming, called Don Pedro, that understood this Court
well, and spoke excellent Spanish, giving him account of our accident, he drew
a Memorial to be presented by the Earl of Pigneranda to the Council Royal, not
doubting of my success, but advising me not to be impatient of delays, it being
most certain, that this people as much observe formalities in the slightest
affairs, as in those of the highest concernment, and withal letting me
understand there was great indulgence for Farmers of Customs, because the Kings
principal Revenue, rising from it, their exactions are sometimes connived at.
Indeed, Taxes on land bring up little or nothing in Spain, because the Country
is not sufficiently manured, and were Husbandmen burdened, would be less so,
even to a want of necessary sustenance. He told me more, that when the Customs
are Farmed, it is done in so absolute a manner, that nothing p^sses, not for
the Kings own use, without paying; and if he give any exemptions, they are
deducted from the Rent the Farmers agreed for. Those fellows therefore make use
of a hundred cheats (too tedious to be here related) in order to confiscation,
which if they cannot effect with justice, they forge false suppositions, and
under pretense of the Kings rights, exercise their Rapine with Sovereignty, and
are so insolent, that on all occasions they vaunt themselves to be the Kings
servants; and a wretched waiter or other spawn of a Publican, will sometimes be
fancy enough to threaten an honest man to beat him, or break open his Trunk if
he be slow in delivering the Key. In France one suffers no less by the
extravagant greediness of this kind of cattle; and I cannot forget the pains
they took at Diep, to send an Army of Guards aboard the vessel I arrived in, to
visit my Valise, tossing up and down my clothes, annd taxing a bit of cloth
that remained of a suit I had made at London two Crowns; so that if Princes or
their Ministers limit not their exactions, Travailers are miserably exposed to
them, and this is their great scourge, the more to be apprehended, because
seldom or never punished: the greatest part of those fellows in Spain are
thought to be Jews, and when their plunderings have gorged them with wealth,
the trap of the inquisition is set for them. Going at nine a clock to the Earl
of Pignerandas, he was not returned, but I acquainted his Secretary Don Martin
with my business, desiring him to move it to his Lord, and to give him the
Letter I brought from my Lord -- with the Memorial: the next day about the same
hour I went again, and found that Lord very much troubled at what had happened
to us, who after, offering me a Coach, Money, and all else in his power,
desired me to have a little patience, and told me he was very sorry my Lords --
and -- were in so bad a place, and arrested by the insolence of those Picaros,
who should be exemplarily punished, and we receive all manner of satisfaction:
the like I did to Don Lewis de Haro, and found the like civility. To make
short, my solicitations had such effect, that the King appointed a Commission
to be dispatched by the Council of Castille for an Alguazil de Corte, and a
Secretary to go along with me to Arcos and bring Francisco Salazar to the
public prison of Madrid in order to his punishment, and an ampler Passport was
given me that we might no more apprehend the like inconvenience.

The Alguazil and Secretary that were appointed to go with me, refused to
travail by night, or to ride Post, so that I was fain to tarry till the 26th of
June, and then return by Mule. Experience taught me, that this way of
travailing, is very inconvenient; for, besides that, for more expedition, the
Mules always trot, one cannot express how much their hard mouths press and
weary the hand, nor what a torment it is, going down hill to suffer their slow
progression. Being thus excellently mounted, and in this honorable company; I
neglected nothing toward my speedy arriving at Arcos, whither I came the 29th
of June, and found the Lord -- and -- already advertised of the success of my
journey by a Letter from Madrid; I immediately carried the Alguazil and
Secretary to execute their Commission; the Alcalde was much surprised, but
making use of his privilege, as Knight of the Order of St James, refused to
obey without a Mandate from the Council of the Orders. My Alguazil who was of
the higher Order, and one of those that are called Alguazil de Corte, often
summoned him to go along with him to Madrid as his prisoner, but he still
refused to obey, of which the Alguazil took witness, saying; he could not use
force, because that Town belonging to the Duke of Medina Celi, there was no
Corrigidor above the Alcalde, but that this would undo the Alcalde, and that he
doubted not to return from Madrid with power to carry him thither bound hands
and feet; and we heard afterward, that (as Spanish justice never pardons) he
was punished according to his deserts; the rest of the Officers of the
Custom-house seeing the bad condition of their Protector, were as compliable
and civil as they had been arrogant and insupportable: they returned all that
belonged to us without the least diminution, and they which before pretended to
plunder us, and threatened that we should pay for the tedious writings they had
drawn, desired now nothing more then to be quit, not only of us, but of the
prey we had redeemed from their clutches: we had no less impatience to get from
amongst such Rascals, which that we might the sooner do, we contented our
selves, to recommend the punishment of them to those other Harpies, who seldom
suffer such as they seize on to escape, giving them all damages and costs we
might pretend the more to incite them to our revenge.

As soon as freed from those troubles, we made all haste toward Arragon.
Several parts of this Province are very agreeable, and when we had left the
Mountains that enclose Arcos, we came to very pleasant Valleys, and the 29th of
June in the evening, entered Erizza or Herizo, the first Town on that side of
that kingdom: the next day we dined at Texa, that has nothing remarkable, and
lay at Callatajud* one of the principle Cities of the Kingdom, seated at the
end of a very fertile Plain, but in nothing considerable, unless in giving
birth and abode to Lorenzo Brachian Infanzon, a modern writer, very famous
amongst the Spaniards; he has published several Treatises of Morality and
Policy, amongst which, one is called el Criticon, of which, two parts only are
printed, a kind of Satyr, very ingenious in imitation of Barclais Euphormio: in
this piece his style differs much very from those small Treatises in which he
is so concise, abrupt, and strangely laconick, one would think he had made it
his business to be obscure; the Reader must often divine his sense, which
found, he perceives an enigma has been made of something not very
extraordinary. Seneca and Tacitus are very short of him in this manner of
writing, and if it be said of the former, that his Style is Sand without Lime,
and that the second is so mysterious, he contains more then he expresses: we
may conclude that of Gracian, has so little connection in its periods and so
much restraint in its words, that the conception is like a Diamond ill set,
whose flame and luster appear not so that it looses the esteem of the better
half of the work.

There lives in the same Kingdom another Virtuoso, affecting like him the
Lacedemonian eloquence, he is called Vincencio Ivan de Lastinosa. by whose
means most of the works of Gracian are printed. This Lastannosa is looked on as
the most curious person of Spain; he dwells at Huesca, the second City of
Arragon, where he is reported to have collected a Cabinet that is a very
agreeable Theater of Grecian and Roman antiquities; there are many Statues,
Vases, Urnes, Arms, Precious Stones, ancient Moneys, Medals and Rings; in which
he is so well studied, that he has written a Treatise of the ancient Moneys of
Spain, which passes for exquisite in its kind, and rare in its observations.
The first of July having dined at Ofranco we lay at Almunia, seated in a
fruitful valley, and yielding a fair prospect on which side soever it is
beheld: Saragosa is but nine Leagues from it, and we intended to dine the next
day at la Muela, and to arrive before the heat, but unhappily lost our way on a
great heath, without house, tree, bush, or water; it extended even to the walls
of Saragossa, without giving any opportunity to refresh, or to avoid the Suns
beams for 5 or 6 Leagues. It fell out well for us, that the day was not
excessively hot, so that our sufferings were not extreme, though some of the
company were in no little choler, to ride so far without drawing bit, and
complained no less then if they had traversed the Sands of Libia, but it is
folly to be troubled where no remedy can be had, and before our patience was
quite tired, half a League short of Saragosa we came to a Brook, where we all
alit to refresh our selves, and as nothing seems hard to a sharp hunger, our
vehement thirst made that water (none of the best) to be drunk with pleasure:
we came at last to Sarragossa the capital City of Arragon, seated in a largely
extended Plain; it is divided by the River Ebro, but the greatest part of it on
the side where we arrived. A little short of it is an old Castle called Alta
Feria; with a pitiful graft about it, we were told it had formerly bin a palace
of their Kings, and was then of the Inquisition. The Farmer of the Customs had
Guards at the Gate, who hearing that our servants followed with our baggage,
detained us not long: we desired notice might be given them, that they should
know where we lodged at the house of one Redmondon a Merchant, for whom we had
Letters of credit; we alit at his house and found him at dinner, he presented
us very good Wine, which refreshed us, and restored the vigor the long journey
and excessive heat had deprived us of; he afterward brought us to the best Inn
in the Town, where we had a fair and cool room, and to prevent our Valises
being detained at the Custom-house, whither they must of necessity be brought;
I went to speak with the Arrendador-General, and show him our Pass, which
obliged him to be civil and to send us our baggage as soon as it came to him;
we tarried here all day to repair our loss of baiting at la Muelan; some of the
company went to bed, others only casting off their clothes, shifted their
Linen. Monsieur -- who arrived last, was the most thirsty, though not the most
weary, therefore he lay not down; but at his first coming in, drank so much
water, and afterward so much wine to correct its crudity, he became sick,
besides too sudden an attempt to quench his thirst; he walked long unbuttoned,
and almost naked, not only about the house, but came to us in slippers and
without doublet, where we were on the banks of Ebro that ran behind the Inn,
where we sucked a gentle gale that came down the river; on the morrow a Feavor
took him which continued 5 or 6 days, and obliged us to tarry 10 in that City:
soon after our arrival we visited the Duke of Monteleon, Viceroy of this
Kingdom; he is one of the greatest Noblemen of Naples, of whom in the last
revolution of that City, the Spaniards became jealous, though he had served
them advatagiously in the former: that they might no longer fear him they sent
for him into Spain, and that they might disguise their distrust, made him
Viceroy of Arragon. This Charge is honorable, but not profitable, the King
allowing but little, and the Kingdom bringing in less, neither is any thing
splendid in his family; we delivered him the Kings Letter, and that of Don
Lewis; having read them in our presence, he made us offers of all that lay in
his power: he seemed not to us of a Genius much elevated, whither his
resentments of the Spaniards ill usage have dejected it, or whither he conceals
a part, least ostentation of the whole might be prejudicial to him. Besides the
Viceroy, whose charge ceases every three years; here is a Governor of the
City, or rather of the Country, since his power is reported principally to
extend over it; this Charge is the more considerable because for life.

Though the Viceroyalty and Government of Saragossa are the two great charges
of this Kingdom, yet no authority is equal to that of the Chief Justice, called
El Justicia, to show that he is to do justice in all and above all: so that he
determines of what concerns the King, Kingdom, Subjects, Laws and Privileges:
but for the better understanding this, and that which I shall hereafter observe
touching the great contestation here between high powers: it is necessary that
I set down what I have been told concerning the Privileges of this Kingdom.

After the Moors had entered Spain, on occasion of the Injuiry done by Don
Rodrigo to Comt Don Julian in person of his Daughter, called la Cava, whom he
ravished, Arragon was the first Province that freed it self from the yoke of
the Infidels, and that finding not only the race, but memory of its ancient
Kings totally extinct, by it self, made a recovery of its self, to it self,
without owning any Sovereign. But lest they should be a Body without a Head,
and that they might enjoy secure repose in their new liberty, they soon after
deliberated of electing a King, and cast their eyes on a private Gentleman
called Garcia Ximenez. It must yet be acknowledged that they made him rather
Prince or President of their State than their Sovereign; and in imitation of
the Spartans, so much limited his authority, that that of Theopompus was not
more straightened by the Ephori, than that of this King by the rules imposed
upon him: and it being very easy to violate the most fundamental Laws of a
State, when the supreme power is concerned so to do, if there be none with
hazard of his life obliged to watch for their preservation, they established El
Justicia, a Magistracy of which I have spoken, that who might fear nothing in
the vigorous executing his charge, they ordered he should not be liable to
condemnation either in person or goods on what account soever, but in the
general Assembly of Estates called las Cortes, that is the King and Kingdom.

Having thus bound up him they should elect for their King, they made a Law
called de la Vajon, which imported that as soon as the King infringed their
Privileges, it should be in their power to elect another, though a Pagan; and
in case of wrong to any Vassal or Subject, the Nobility and most considerable
of the Realm might assemble to protect him, and hinder any duties to be paid
the King, till the party injured were indemnified, and the Privilege
re-established in its former validity. They erected El Justicia as Guardian of
this Law, (with several others,) who for greater authority sat in a Chair with
his hat on his Head, whilst the King bare and on his knees swore their
Privileges between his hands: afterward they owned him as their King, but in
a very grange fashion; for instead of vowing fidelity, they told him nos que
valemos tanto como vos os hazemos nuestro Rey y Sennor, con tal que guardeis
nuestros fueros y libertades, sino, no: that is, We that are equal to you make
you our King and Lord, on condition that you preserve our Laws and Liberties,
and if not, not. This detestable fashion of owning a King so much disgusted Don
Pedro, surnamed the Dagger, that partly by entreaty, partly by intrigue, and
offering other Privileges in the place of it, he caused it to be abolished in
an Assembly of the Estates, and as soon as he got the Parchment in which the
Law for it was written, voluntarily cutting his hand, he said; that a Law which
imported that Vassals might elect and limit their King, was to be effaced with
the blood of a King. Ley de poder elegir Rey los Vassallos sangre de Rey avia
de Costar, these are reported to be the very words he pronounced, on which
occasion the surname of the Dagger was given to him: His Statue is yet to be
seen in Saragossa, in the Hall of Deputation, with the Dagger in one hand, and
the Privilege cancelled with his blood in the other. And indeed the sacred
blood of Kings can on no account be better employed (no not against a forain
Enemy) then in suppressing such exorbitant Privileges of Subjects as destroy
the very foundation of Monarchy.

Besides the two Privileges I have mentioned, not at all regarded by later
Kings, there is another still in force called the Law of manifestation: by this
every Subject that thinks himself injured either in goods or person, by what
Tribunal soever, may complain a el Justicia, who is obliged to make an exact
enquiry, and cause the Judge that has given a corrupt sentence to be punished.
This City at our being there was much discontented, because endeavors were
used to violate this Law. Teo Judges were accused for a Sentence by which a
certain Woman thought herself injured, who, according to custom, deputed 500
Crowns, and complained of the Judges. The King, the Tribunal d'el Justicia, the
Viceroy, the Governor, and some others that sought to augment the Authority of
the Prince, and lessen the Kingdoms Privileges, took these Judges into their
protection. The Party grieved finding she could get no remedy, for the wrong
she pretended done to her self and the Law, had recourse a las Cortes, or the
States of the Kingdom, who (though the Inquisition favored the Judges that
were accused) deputed Commissioners called here Judicantes. These are 9 persons
drawn from the four Bodies of Arragon, that is the higher Nobility entitled
Sennores, the Clergy, the Gentry called Hidalgos, or Cavalleros, and the
Cities. From the first of these Bodies three are taken, and from each of the
other two they usually make choice of the most illiterate to judge Gown-men,
whether that it may be done without partiality, or that their Laws ought to be
so plain, that even Peasants and others the most ignorant may understand their
equity, and judge if it has been observed.

These 9 Deputies or Commissaries condemned the Judges of injustice, and
ordered them to be banished, and their Estates confiscated. This Sentence made
great noise, and the Viceroy and Governor by order of the Court did their best
to hinder its effect, nay the King himself writ to the Justicia. The People
concerned themselves in the business, and Pasquils and Libels were every where
cast abroad with menaces, should it not be put in execution. Country people
flocked to the Town, entertaining themselves only with the violation of their
Privileges. Doubt that this affair going to extremity might cause great
disorders, in a time when the War of Catalonia made the People of Arragon more
fierce and hardy, caused the Viceroy and other favorers of the Judges,
without any farther unseasonable mention of the Kings pleasure to suffer them
to be dismissed from their charges, and banished the Town. Were the like
practiced in all places, there would not be so many sentences given out of
favor, passion, and interest, rather than according to law and equity, not
distinguishable but in this one part of Europe, where the Judges are reported
to tremble when they give sentence, fearing it may be their own condemnation,
either as to body or goods, if unjust or erroneous in the least.
Notwithstanding all this, justice here is sovereign; for though the Judge that
has determined amiss be punished, the Sentence he has pronounced remains in
full efficacy: so that he which accuses his Judge has only the satisfaction of
revenge, and serves the Public rather than himself, by preserving the Peoples
Privileges, in prosecuting him that has done wrong, and putting other Judges
in mind of their duties. He that is found to have accused his Judge without
cause only loses the 500 Crowns he depositated, and though it appear he have
reason, recovers little more, which in that case is levied on the Estate of the
unjust Judge. The banishment of those two Judges freed Saragossa from
apprehension of troubles, the People, by execution of the Sentence, satisfying
themselves, that at that time no attempt would be made upon their Privileges.

Had we continued longer at Sarragossa we might have seen a Ceremony observed
in beheading Murderers; for he which has slain a man face to face, receives
the stroke that beheads him before; but such as treacherously came behind him
are punished in the same manner: this is only for distinction sake, for
probably the blow behind gives less pain to the Criminal than that before.
Whilst we sojourned in this Town we received many civilities from Dom Pedro
Miranda, born at Oleron in Bearn, and one of the richest Bankers of this Town.
We had Letters of credit to him, of which though we made no use, he did us all
manner of good offices, every day sending us his Coach, and sometimes
accompanying us to what was most remarkable. The Buildings here are large and
high, and generally fairer than in Madrid: there is one long and broad Street
where the Tour is made as at Madrid in the Call Major. The most considerable
house belongs to the Duke of Villa Hermosa, who pretends to descend from the
ancient Kings of Arragon, and thinks they which enjoy the Crown do him wrong.

To speak generally of the humor of the People of Arragon, they are no less
proud than the Castilians, and value themselves above them and all other of
Spain; and it must be granted that they are equal to, and sometimes surpass the
most of them in wit, whether applied to good or evil. Their soil is barren,
and, excepting some Valleys and such parts to which the waters of Ebro are
conveyed by cut Channels to moisten it, all sand, heath and rock, so that it
hardly affords corn to sustain its Inhabitants. Though so little fertile in
fruits it has ever produced gallant men, and from their first King to
Ferdinand they reckon not one that made not himself considerable to his
Neighbors, either by his wit or courage: that last above all other was so
prodigious in the art of reigning, and vast ambition ill suited to the narrow
limits of his little Kingdom, that he endeavored to extend them, and did so
even from the foot of the Pireneans to the Streights of Gibralter. That success
with some other put him upon the design of an universal Monarchy, and his
Successors are still accused to retain the Intrigue and Model of it, which he
then imparted to his Grandchild, who was to be Heir of so many Provinces, and
in his own person unite the many Dominions, that when single had been so
formidable to their Neighbors: Besides which he had the wealth of a new World
to facilitate his enterprise, and assist toward establishing so vast an
Empire, as had never been known before. It is true, some of the curious say,
that to pretend he had a thought of this, is to accuse him of a Chimera; but
that famous Arragonian, who has given us a contracted draught of his
Politics, tells us Parecieronle a Ferdinando Estrechos sus hereditarios Reynos
de Arragon para sus dilatados desseos, y assi anhelo siempre a la grandeza y
anchura de Castilla, y de alli a la Monarquia de toda Espanna y aun a la
universal de entrambos mundos; which is to say, The vast designs of Ferdinando
being too much confined in his hereditary Realms of Arragon; he first aimed at
Castille, then at the Monarchy of all Spain, and at last of both worlds. He was
not for all this any great Captain; neither was this ambition the effect of
valor, living in a time when wit and policy bore more sway then courage. He
made use of the politics of Lewis the XI. of France, the industry of Pope
Alexander the VI. the subtilty of Lodowick Storza, Duke of Milan, the vigilance
of Henry the VIII. of England, and prudence of the Emperor Maximilian the I.
All their dissimulation and all their cunning the put into so good a cruicible,
that he separated what was solid from what was airy, discovering what was
strong and what weak in them, and extracting such an establishment for himself
and successors, that Philip the II had great reason, when looking on his
Picture, he said; We owe this man all. Spanish writers are transported when
they speak of the grandeur of their Royal Family, some of them even to impiety,
and a modern Author says of it, Casa que escogio dios en la ley de Gracia, assi
como la de Abraham en la Escrita, para Ll^marse dios de Austria, Dios de
Rodolpho, de Philippo e de Ferdinando. A Family elected by God in the new Law,
as the seed of Abraham in the old, that he might call himself the God of
Austria, the God of Rodolphus, of Philip, and of Ferdinand.

But to return to the people, amongst whom this dextrous Prince was born, and
whom the Politicians equalize to Tiberius and Lewis the XI of France, for a
third Idol of their Ragione di Stato; I must add, that they are nothing
hospitable nor civil to strangers. Their lofty humor is not allaied with so
much affibility as that of the Castilians, and it is from this Province, that
the Highway-men they call Vandaleros spread themselves even into Castille,
making the Roads very unsafe; perhaps, by reason of its being so near a
neighbor to the war, its inhabitants incline more to Arms then other Spaniards;
the Gentry certainly pretends to an effectual Gallantry, by continual
protestations, they are ambitious of nothing so much as drawing their swords in
their Kings service: neither are they free from the Rodomontados natural to all
Spaniards, and I was told that a young Gentleman having mounted himself, with
all advantages his purse would reach to, to go into to Cat^lonia, and serve a
Campagnia, pleased himself above a Month in riding about the streets of
Saragossa, sometimes on one horse, sometimes on another; and meeting any that
commended his Horses, his Arms, or his own activity; he asked whither with such
an equipage and arms as his, it were not easy to draw the Frenchmens teeth:
con estas armas y esto Brao no se sacaran las muelas a los Gavachos? He no
sooner arrived in Catalonia, but he met an opportunity of showing his courage,
but was so unfortunate, he was at first wounded both in his arm and leg, which
last was for ever lamed, and he ever since called the Tooth-drawer. In the mean
time if the war have in some manner incomoded this kingdom, it has made it
richer, for the passage of the forces and rendezvous of Ammunition have caused
the Kings money to Roll up and down in its chief Cities; and having particular
privileges, and not governing it self according to the Courts Orders, but its
own customs, notwithstanding the war with France, it ever kept up a Trade
beyond the Mountains; and the Merchants of Oleron, Toulouse, and other parts of
Bearn and Languedoc, pass and repass freely, as well to Saragossa as the
adjacent quarters, nay the greatest part of the Banquiers of Saragossa are of
those Countries. It is true they are concerned to make no noise of this, nor to
do any thing that may give the least occasion of f^lling upon them; for being
known to be rich, Justice looks on them as a prey she would be glad to have
pretense to seize on. Don Pedro Miranda is one of the most splendid of these,
and best supported, having married a Wife very well allied in this Country. He
is the most curious person in Saragossa, and by every Ordinary receives the
Gazets of Paris, and other written intelligence, but communicates them not
except to particular friends. He told us that at the time of the Siege of
Arras, there came an Order from Madrid to the Magistrate of this Town, to make
preparations for a public rejoicing for taking a place of so great importance.
None doubting to hear very suddenly of its surrender, Scaffolds were begun to
be erected for a fight of Bulls; before which were half finished, Miranda by a
particular Letter understood that Arras had been relieved: but not daring to
publish such bad news, he (with admiration) saw that work go on, yet could not
imagine but the Viceroy and other of the principal Inhabitants had the same
intelligence with him, though they prepared for a triumph before a Victory. A
while after, and when all was ready for the Festival, the Viceroy received a
Letter from Madrid that the Siege of Arras had failed, who sending for the
Governor and Magistrates of the Town, when he showed them his Letter, they were
not a little surprised, and for their better satisfaction summoned Miranda, who
acknowledged that besides that one of his correspondents in Paris had
acquainted him with it eight days before, he had then with the Gazets,
received a Print which gave all the particulars. One of the Magistrates grew
very angry and ready to affront him, that he had not advertised them to prevent
the unnecessary charge, and their being laughed at by the people, threatening
that he should be made to pay the four or five hundred pound it had cost the
Town. But the Viceroy, and such as were more moderate, pacified that man, and
sent away Miranda without ever after troubling him about it. The people in the
mean time seemed more concerned for pulling down the Scaffolds erected for the
Festival, than for the failing in recovery of Arras.

After we had sojourned eight days at Saragossa and resolved to return into
France rather by Navarre than Catalonia, where, as was reported, was neither
safety nor convenience for travailers, we took leave of the Duke of Montelion,
who gave us a Letter for the Earl of St. Stephen, Viceroy of Navarre: the 10th
of July we went away, and lodged at Halagon, a poor Village. A Factor of
Miranda called Bertrand served us as Guide in this Journey, and we had in our
company a Spaniard, a man of parts and good fellow according to that Countries
mode. He travailed in a very pleasant equipage; according to the faishon of
Spain; his Valisa he carried before him on the pummel of his Saddle, leaning
upon it, at each side and on his thighs hung his Wallet of provisions, instead
of Holsters two leathern Cases contained two bottles of wine, cooled by ice he
put in every time he filled them: for which reason such cases of leather are
called Refread^res. Every league or half league he drew out a bottle, and very
civilly invited us to refresh our selves with his wine, which when we excused
he made use of Bertrand (better accustomed to such debauches than we) to bear
him company. He told us many pleasant stories, but I have forgot all but two
gallantries of the Duke of Ossuna, so famous for wit and humor, when Viceroy
of Naples. One day, he said, to revenge himself of a Widow that had been
something cruel to him, and who, he yet knew, was not so to every body, he
caused a certain Friar suspected to be well with her, and that was believed the
consolation of her Widowhood, to be watched: As soon as he knew he was in her
house, he came, and with his Gards invested it, commandding the door to be
opened, for a search that was important to the Kings service: it was late in
the night, yet the Servants were so much surprised, that they let him in
whilst the Monk was with their Lady, without giving her any notice. He tarried
rallying with her all night, and about 8 in the morning caused the reverend
Friar to be taken up behind a Trooper, a Trumpet going before, which was to
make a stand at every turning, and after sounding to point him out and say:
whoever stand in need of a Friar to comfort Widows at midnight, let them
address themselves to this Gallant, and they shall be accommodated; afterward
he sent from Cloister to Cloister to enquire which of them had lost a Friar,
and when discovered, returned him to his Abbot, who was to be entreated at his
going to bed to take with him the Key of that good fellows Cell, least he might
wander another time. His other story was, that three Curtesans living at Naples
so excessively proud they hardly bowed when they met him, he caused them one
day to be invited to a Collation; they failed not to come dressed to all
advantages, but with difference, as well in that as in their beauties, though
alike proud; so that they played the Queens with this Viceroy, who received
them very civily; but perceiving they became nothing more humble, be obliged
them to undress themselves on pretense of heat, and being two much straightened
in their clothes, afterward causing many Comfits to be scatte^ed in the
Chamber, he made them gather them up without quitting their Chioppins, whilst
with a Trunck he shot the sugar pellets sometimes at one, sometimes at another.
The Father of this Spaniard had been the Dukes Servant, and he told us many
such tales, which I shall not trouble my self to repeat, they not deserving it
no more then these, which I have set down only to discover the Genius of this
Nation, very much taken with trifles and frothy relations. Besides such Gallant
Stories which they call Dounosas, or conceits, they have others that they style
Heroic, amongst which are reckoned all the Sentences of Ferdinand, Apothegms
of Charles the fifth, and Reparties of Philip the second: those of Charles the
fifth they say imply Courage, of Philip the second Prudence, of Philip the
third Piety, and of Philip the fourth Love; but their greatest esteem is for
those of Philip the second, whom they take to have been a Prince of the
quickest and sublimest fancy: amongst many other testimonies of which, they
with admiration report this of his wit and liberality. A certain Portughese
having brought to his Court a Diamond of great value, immediately looked on by
the Courtiers as the richest Miracle the East had ever produced, he not at all
moved, beheld it with indifference, which the Portughese perceiving, said,
Sennor setenta mill ducados que abrevie en este digno nieto del sol no son de
asquear: Sir, seventy thousand Ducats which I have contracted in this worthy
offspring of the sun are not contemptible; the King pleased in his confidence,
asked what he thought when he laid out so much upon it, and the crafty
Portughese answered. That there was a Philip the second. This sublety or
flattery was so agreeable, that Gracian who relates it in his Hero, adds that
the King immediately not only paid for the Diamond* but gave him more.
Ostendando (says he) la superioritad de su gusto en el precio y en el premio,
manifesting the height of his satisfaction in the price and in the reward. The
jollity of this Spaniard, who travalled to Biscai, has made me forget to
follow my own way; but having omitted nothing of what I saw or heard, the
follies I have now set down may pass amongst the rest. He will give me no
farther occasion of digression; for we parted at Tudela, a pretty Town, but as
standing on the Frontiers of Castile, Arragon, and Biscay, a Nest of Rogues and
Banditi, that have forsaken their Country to escape the punishment due to their
crimes; yet in some parts of it there are fair buildings, which makes us
believe it is inhabited by some people of quality amongst the exiles. At our
going away the Guards pretended to stop us, but seeing our Passport durst not
persist. We were told that the Cardinal de Rets, after he had escaped out of
France, passing from St. Sebastians to the Kingdom of Valentia, where he
intended to embark for Italy, was stayed and very straightly guarded in this
City. He came in a Litter with a small Train, and the Alcalde who was then
walking on the Bridge, sent to demand who he was, but he unwilling to be known,
refused to tell his name and quality, upon which the Alcalde set a Guard upon
him in the Inn where he alighted. This surprised him, and he knew not what to
think of such usage in a Country where he thought he had secured the liberty
lately recovered, and that he should not have lost it as soon as he began to
relish it: he therefore dispatched one of his Servants to Pampeluna, with a
letter of his arrival to the Viceroy, desiring him to punish the insolence of
that Judge, and deliver him out of his hands: The Alcalde in the mean time sent
to the Viceroy and Council of Navarre a formal Narrative of what he had done,
according to the duty of his place, hoping so to avoid the blame might be laid
upon him; for having acted rather on account of humor and curiosity, then
reason and judgment: then he had no other advantage by his Letter, than the
preventing the Cardinals enlargement one day, because the Viceroy was obliged
to assemble the Council of Navarre, where the punishment of the Alcaldes
insolence was resolved on, and he turned out of his place, and for some time
banished the Town, where the Cardinal as soon as known received many
civilities, and at his going away was attended by the principal Inhabitants
with all respect and honor. At that time came news that the French had stormed
the lines, and beaten the Spaniards from before Arras, but he maintained so
effectually that this was impossible, that he left in all places where he came
a contrary impression, which continues still amongst those people. Pedro
Miranda, or some that belonged to him, being then at Tudela, showed him Letters
of it received from Paris, but he persisted. One may easily perceive he
endeavored to cajole the Spaniards by this flattery, not at all concerned that
time would destroy it* provided it obtained him the better reception in his
passage, and made them sensible that he had entirely engaged himself in their
interests.

The 12th of July we dined at Laborosso, and traversed Olitor, where the
ancient Kings of Navarre kept their Court and something of their Palace still
remains, though the Town be now a miserable Place, ruined by wars between the
true Inheritors of the Crown, and such as invaded them: we lay at Tessalia, a
good Town, and its Territory more fertile than the rest we had passed. Next day
we came to Pampeluna, the capital City of that Kingdom, it stands at the end of
a large Plain that seems but barren; it is near the Pireneans, yet out of
command of any eminence. Its Citadel, so famous in the world, looks toward the
Plain, and is on one side environed by a great Marais. The Town is not
considerably fortified, and the ground it stands on has many little risings
and descents scarcely perceptible: there is a large Piazza where the Bulls are
fought. The people are clownish, much addicted to small Traffic, which they
freely enough exercise with France, and as if there were no war between the two
Crowns: We arrived at the end of a Fair, and met many French Merchants: we
tarried here three days as well because of the indisposition of my Lord -- not
well recovered of the Fevor he got at Saragossa as that one of our horses were
lame. The mean while we visited the Earl of St. Stephen, Viceroy and Captain
General of this Kingdom* and delivered him the Letter we brought for him; he is
a little man very civil, and no less curious of all rarities. He received us
well, and ordered the Captain of his Guards to show us the Citadel in the
afternoon. Between the Town and Citadel is a spacious place set with trees for
Walks: it has five Bastions, and was built by Philip the second with a great
deal of consideration, as a strong Rampire against France: the Bastions are
covered with Stone, the Grafts large, in most parts of them water; it has no
Outworks, neither does it need any, because of the Marais on that side where it
may most easily be attacked: it stands on a Rock, but though the most important
place of the Kingdom, and the only one that can hinder the French from marching
to Madrid, after they have passed the Pyreneans, it is not well looked after.
The works in many places want reparations, and the Garrison is very
inconsiderable, there being few Soldiers, for want of which the Country people
are to come in on the first summons: of whom they then had sent for a good
number, and mixed them with the Soldiers, that we might not perceive that
want: but we could easily distinguish, so little had they the mien of
Swordmen, some of them not wearing any, and parading with a Musket only, or an
old Pike, which they handled so ill, it appeared they were more accustomed to
the Pitchfork. The Body of the place is well designed, for in the middle of the
Bracks where the Soldiers lodge, there is a great round place to draw up in
Battaglia, from whence by five broad streets they may march straight to the
five Bastions.

They showed us the Magazins not very well furnished either with ammunition or
victual, and a very fair Towr built to keep powder, of which it is altogether
unprovided, and serves for a prison for greatest Criminals; they showed a very
fine Handmill for turning which they may also make use of horses. It is the
best Engine in its kind that I have seen, it has 4 or 5 Wheels and as many
Bins, in each of which they said they could in one day grind 24 load of Corn:
but this I thought impossible. I told them that so great a Body composed of so
many different pieces, could hardly move long without being disordered, and
consequently uselese, and that unless the Artist that made it lasted as long as
the Mill, nothing amiss in it could be amended, because I took it to be a
particular invention, and that none but himself knew the Fabric, and all the
Springs, so as to set them right when broken; but they replied they successivly
kept one that understood it, who, that they might never be destitute, still
taught some Apprentice. Here are two or three Ponds, as they say, derived from
Springs. There were not many Sentries on the Rampart, nor at the Canon. It has
a particular Governor, that immediately depends on the King: He was absent, but
we were very civily received by his Lieutenant, who after he had led us about
the Walls gave us a Collation; his frankness pleased us, and we perceived that
as by degrees we got farther from the Gravity of Castile, and severity of
Arragon, as little open to one another as to Strangers, we approached a more
sociable Country.

Nothing else being to be seen in the Castle, that we might not trespass on the
Lieutenants civility, nor tire that of the Viceroys Captain of his Guard, we
took leave of the first, expressing our satisfaction in his reception, and went
with the other to our Coach. Next day we returned thanks to the Viceroy, and
finding him at leisure, had opportunity to discourse with him more particularly
than at our first visit. Being a knowing person, and one of the Councils of
State and War, he presently fell upon the Government of the Low Countries,
making it appear he understood those affairs very well. He told us afterward
that the Earl of Pigneranda was his near Kinsman, and we could do no less than
express the esteem we had for so accomplished a person one of the ablest
Ministers of Spain, and to whom we had especially been recommended; so we took
our leaves. The 15th in the Morning when we were about to take horse, that we
might get that night to the last Village of the King of Spains Dominions in the
upper Navarre, a Servant of the Viceroys Captain of his Guards came to enquire,
if his Masters Gloves, which he thought he left in our Chamber the day before,
had been found: we ordered search to be made every where, and sent him with my
Lord -- s valet de Chamber; but having long looked for what had never been lost
he went away, and by his mien and comportment made us well enough comprehend,
he came not on that account, but to try, if we would send him some pairs of
those perfumed ones we had in our Valises, and that were mentioned in our
Passes: but none being deafer than they which will not hear, we let him go,
without seeming to understand him. But this served not our turn; for thinking
we were not ingenious enough to do so, he sent back his man with a very bad
compliment, in plain terms to beg de los nostros guantes de Ambar. We were
amazed at this, and our Valises being on the Horses, and our selves ready to
mount, let him see how troublesome it would be to take them off, and open them,
but that if he pleased we would write to our Merchant in Madrid to send him as
many pair as he desired. We thus freed our selves with all dexterity possible,
not thinking we had done any thing contrary to civility, since he that demands
too boldly, and without consideration, ought to take to himself the greatest
part of the shame of a refusal Having thus got out of Pampelone, we took the
great Road of the Pyreneans that leads to France. We were not far from the Town
ere we began to ascend a hill, and before we came to the next Village met some
Soldiers that belonged to the Garrison of the Castle, who begged, which
surprised me, for though the King of Spain wants money, yet he never meddles
with the forty thousand Crowns they say the Kingdom of Navarre brings up, and I
have been assured that all that is levied, though it exceed the sum I have
spoken of, remains in the Country to pay the Viceroy, who has a Salary of 10
thousand Crowns (though he of Arragon has but six) for the entertainments of a
President and six Counselors, and maintaining his Forts and Garrisons.

They which know this kingdom, averr that the King of Spain receives no
advantage from it, besides the securing and extending his frontiers, even to
the Pyreneans, the true and natural barricade God has placed between France
and Spain: yet were the Taxes levied here as in Castille, he might draw
something. But the privileges the people of Navarre reserved to themselves,
and the consideration that if they should rebel, they might possibly return to
the obedience of their natural Prince, for whom yet they have inclinations, son
is the reason they are not pressed with Taxes; so that the certainest Leavies
for support of the public charge come from the Custom, and are reported to be
24 thousand Crowns; but the avarice and deceit of those that finger the Money,
raised there for maintaining the Garrisons that ought to be better paid then any
others in Spain, reduce the poor soldiers to beggary, and cause the Kings
service to be so much neglected, that were an Army sent thither, it would
probably make very great progression. It is true, that if we except the
inconveniences they would give the King of Spain, there is not expectation
enough of advantages from that Quarter to cause the best Troops to be sent
thither, which might more profitably be employed in Flanders, Milan, or
Catalonia.

Before our arrival at Burguette, we rather baited then dined at a pitiful
village, where the Guardian looked on our Passes with a great deal of civility,
and discoursed with us of the times in which he had served in Flanders
un-Marquis Spinola. Having traversed Woods, Hills, and Valleys with sometimes
good sometimes bad way; we arrived in the evening at the Plain of Roncevalles,
famous for the great battle Charlemain, fought, and lost in it, against the
Sarazens. My Lords -- and -- spurring on, got to Burguette before it was dark:
They had much ado to find lodging, and were fain to adress themselves to the
Justice, who ordered them to be entertained in the house where we passed the
night. The next day being the 6th of July, without much suffering by heat in so
wide a Plain, encompassed by the Pyreneans, we traversed it, and by some
Merchants of Oleron that often pass it, were showed the place where the battle
was fought; here said they Roland was killed, notwithstanding the force of his
Lance; where this Cross stands, died the brave Renaldo, and had we been curious
of all that tradition, true or false, had taught them, I believe they would
have pointed out to us where every one of the 12 Peers of France fell, and
perhaps have showed us some of their blood, for that of Hero's never perishes,
and they went about to persuade us, that one place is still Red with it; but
we, whose curiosity never went so low as to busy it self about dumb objects,
looked on those things only as we passed by, and went not a step out of our way
to taste the air where they said so great persons had rendered, or vomited, the
prodigious souls that animated bodies ranked amongst the ancient Giants.
Spurred on by impatience to be quickly beyond the Pyreneans, we hasted over
this Romantic or Historical Valley; Coming to the end of it, we found a
Mountain, to whom it gives the name of Roncevalles; we were told this was the
highest of the Pyreneans, yet there was no snow on the top of it, though most
of the other on our right hand had hoary heads; but notwithstanding this, it
seemed to approach nearer Heaven then those that wore its Livery; and that it
changed color betimes, and in the beginning of the Summer, by reason of the
seas neighborhood; the acrimony of whose vapors aids to melt and dissipate its
snow sooner then that of such as are more remote. When we were at the height
of the Mountain of Roncevalles, Egregia contemplatione pavimus animum; and we
paused to consider, on the one hand Spain, that we had just then abandoned, and
on the other France, which we were about to enter. The first seemed a scorched
Campania, where the bald Mountains discovered only naked Rocks, and concealed
few Plains or Valleys that bore grass, or any thing else that is useful. The
later on the contrary presented us a Garden, where Nature had disposed
eminencies and depressions, Plains, Hills, Woods, and Valleys, to boast variety
on a fair Theater of universal fertility, so plentiully sowed, that the Land we
saw, though none of the best of France, was surprizingly delightful, as soon as
compared with that we had left. To conclude, without hyperbole or exaggeration,
and in a plain manner of describing things as they really are, I must declare,
that contemplating two so different objects; me thought that in the one the day
of judgment would find little unburnt; and that in the other* the flames which
shall celebrate the worlds Funeral, would be last extinguished, because it
seemed the fire of Heaven had already fallen on the first, and almost roasted
it; and that to the other, it had imparted only a cherishing warmth to animate
it: and the Italian perhaps had reason, who vexed at the Doctors that disputed
about the seat of Purgatory, said, he wondered men of learning should be so
ignorant, for had they understood Maps, they would have placed that of Europe
in Spain, and that of Africa in Lybia. I shall not determine whither he spoke
sense, or raved, but only add, that what I have said of the difference of these
two prospects; takes not off my esteem for Spain, nor hinders my admiring the
wisdom, temperance, prudence, and other moral and political virtues, that are
eminent in the greatest part of the men it produces: it is not therefore out of
contempt of the one, or too elevated an Idea of the other, that I register the
difference I observed: I know very well that the fattest soils are not ever
most beneficial, neither do they always produce the greatest personages. The
ablest of all the Grecians was born amongst the rocks of Ithaca; and in
Provence there is a certain nook, called la Crau, covered with Flint, whith its
Lord will not exchange for any other that abounds with Fruits and Flowers,
because in that very seat of barrenness there grows an herb of such virtue,
that one twig of it is worth many handfuls of those of the most luxurious
meddows; this makes appear, that fruits of perfectest savor often abound in the
defectiv'st foils, and that though Spain be lean and dry, she is yet strong and
vigorous: and experience teaches, that the Spaniards are stouter and more
capable of great fatique, then such as are born in more pleasant and plentiful
Countries, and even amongst themselves, the most courageous Races flourish
amongst Rocks and Mountains, and in the sandiest Provinces; the other being
inhabited by persons neither of so warlike spirits, nor elevated fancies,
pusillanimity being almost always the companion of fertility; and the Romans
were scarce ever more put to it, then in the conquest of this nation; its
invincible courage, the difficulty of passage, scarsity of Provisions, and
excess of heat, predominating, almost through the whole peninsula, resisted
them Sixscore years; neither could it in less time be overcome in our age, were
it still as populous as formerly.

But ere I give over, and that I may do Spain right before I loose the sight of
it; I must observe that this sterility and penury objected against it, is not
caused so much by the default (if I may so speak) of the Country, as by that
of its inhabitants; were they more industrious, and instead of feeding
themselves with smoke and vanity in their wretched Cabins, tilled better their
Land, and contemned not mechanic Arts, she would be a liberal mother of all
things necessary for life, whither to cloth or feed them, and they might have
Corn, Wine, Oil, and all manner of fruits, to suffice them, without being
beholding to their neighbors; and did they understand Husbandry, or would apply
themselves to it, it would maintain them in such abundance, that not only the
more fertile Provinces would supply the sterility of some that are barrener,
but they might vent part to forrainers, wools of Segovia, Silks of Grenada,
Cordovans of Ciudad Rodrigo; the Flax and Hemp of Andalusia; the Iron and
Copper of Biscai, with many other rich dispoils of its Cattle, Land, and Mines,
might crowd its Cities with Artificers, and fill them with the best
manufactures of Europe; but they send these abroad unwrought, which when
Forrainers have metamorphosed and disposed to humane use, part return to them
from those who double the money they first paid for them.

I have now passed the Pyreneans, and top of the high mountain that separates
France from Spain, and whilst I contemplated those two great Kingdoms, having
ventured to compare their Climates, and contract as in one mass all the remarks
of my journey; I will conclude by setting against each other the customs and
politics of this neighboring people; no less contrary then the motions that
cause fire to mount and earth to descend. Whilst I stayed at Madrid I used my
utmost endeavor to discover; if the antipathy reported to be so natural and
reciprocal, were really and substantially as strong as it seems, and is
imagined; but I found that the contrariety attributed to their humors, and
comportment, whither public or private, proceeds rather from several tempers
and Genius's, then any true and real antipathy that renders the French more
incompatible with Spaniards, then with Englishmen, Germans, Italians, or any
other nations every one of which has its particular character and specific
impression, as well in body as mind, which may (if I be permitted the
expression) be called its principle of distinction. If besides this common and
general variety, proceeding from the Air we first breath, there be any more
express and formal between one people and another; it is caused by some
accidents, conjunctures or other circumstances, which as to contempt and hatred
have the same influence on nations as on particular persons, who (that
excepted) have no more of contrariety then two Rivers that run different
courses, and ever follow their Channel with equal inclination, though not
always with the same impetuosity. This granted, I aver, that besides
competition of power and State of Rivalship, in which these people have so long
continued, and which have been animated by many wars and differences not yet
reconciled or ended, no antipathy can be observed between them, more then each
of them has with all others: and when these considerations have bern removed,
and the causes of aversion of State for State, and public animosities have
ceased they have lived as well one with another, as either of them has done
with other forrainers. My self have seen very many French inhabiting Madrid,
and Saragossa, who not concerning themselves in the interest of their Country,
agree very well with the Spaniards; and the Catalonians and Portugueses give
convincing testimonies of this verity* All the world knows that these
renouncing the Catholic Kings Dominion, and abjuring, with the fealty they
owed him, all the mysteries of the Spanish Monarchy, there followed so great
confidence and correspondence between them and France, that notwithstanding
difference of humors, they have reciprocally been as well received and looked
upon at Paris and Lisbon as they could be at Stockholme or Warsovia, where I
suppose no man will imagine any antipathy for either of them: the former of
these wheeled a little more, and cast themselves into the arms of France, the
difference of customs and inclinations not preventing their corresponding as
well as Spaniards, Neapolitans and Flemings. It is only since that emulation of
glory, which beg^n with the advancement of the Spanish Empire under Ferdinand,
increased under the Charles the fifth, and continued under his Successors, that
these people cannot brook one another either in public or particular, and that
have added to the difference of their tempers and natures, a spirit of envy,
hatred, and contempt, which make them incompatible. For one of them is not only
reserved and speculative, but impatient of the gay and sociable humor of the
other; one of them is not only slow and dilatory, but cannot suffer the others
activity and brisk temper; one of them is not only satisfied to walk as if he
counted his steps, but cannot abide the others negligent and interrupted gate:
one of them does not only salute by leaning backwards, but scoffs at the other
when he bows to do it. In a word one of them has neither humor nor custom that
displeases not the other, and which he blames not out of the principles of
jealousy and ambition I have formerly mentioned.

These different qualities caused and heightened by that emulation of grandeur,
and thirst of precedence, that has so long tormented them, and cost
Christendom so much blood, are the sourses of the diversity of their Politics.
Notwithstanding all which one of them sometimes borrows something of the nature
and qualities of the other, and imitates some of its most subtle tracings; but
the hand and pencil ever differ: neither is it possible so to settle other men's
clothes on our own backs, that it will not be discovered they were not made for
us. There is ever something in their manner of acting, which makes apparent its
principles are no more the same then its agents. They which have read the
famous contest between Pope Paul the fifth and the Venetians, and observed the
forms and ends of those great Potentates, for glory and interest, may find a
manifest proof of this verity. It is most certain that in their Politics they
now and then tread in one another footsteps; but it is more so, that their
pace is never equal which way soever they go. Spain is represented in a
Chariot, seated on a Throne of Tortois-shell, drawn by Remora's, who in tedious
traversing vast spaces of time, lose many opportunities: yet her extraordinary
patience and close application to the game, with her skill in packing the
Cards, oftentimes disturbs the designs of the craftiest Gamesters. When at
more violent exercises she never stumbles by too much haste, she waits the
rebound of the ball, and if she misses it, is satisfied to have judged it well,
and not to have lost her stroke by precipitation, and giving it before it came
to ground. By a vast speculation she embraces the whole extent of an object,
discovers the most minute parts of it, all its joints and muscles; and if she
makes not her self Mistress of it, it is never because she mistook the most
advantageous part of lay hold on, but because too intent in studying the hour
and moment, which either passes over, or is snatched away whilst she waits for
it, or deliberates on it.

It must be acknowledged that this misfortune does not often happen to her in
her Council Chamger, nor in such affairs as depend on negotiations only. Of all
parts of the art of governing she succeeds best in this, where her
considerations fixed on all circumstances are very happy, here she makes appear
the ingenious Fabric of those artificial Springs which give motion to a slow
and circumspect proceeding, that secures her of a good effect in what ever she
has leisure and time to manage. But in the field, and affairs of war, where
she has neither time nor liberty to comply with a long and mature
deliberation, such occasions as cannot easily suffer this, and where
opportunity must be anticipated, and more usually left to hazard and fortune,
than to prudence and reason, she has not the like advantage, and often comes
so short in her reckoning, that she sees her most important designs perish
because begun too late, and her self deceived in the hour she destined for
their bringing forth. I will not be busy about examples of this truth; for,
besides the Siege of Mastricht, (the opportunity of raising which she lost by
delaying to undertake it as soon as it was begun, and where she pretended so
much to force and Council, that she at last employed neither the one nor the
other, but in order to receiving a more public affront) the late wars might
furnish us testimonies so well known to all the world, that it were to no
purpose to insert them here.

But I will add that this gravity, and two great circumspection, which
sometimes makes the Spaniards fall by endeavoring to fix their feet more
steadily, is in a manner recompensed by a very considerable quality, which is
an extraordinary constancy after misfortunes that have been almost destructive
to her, and an incessant perseverance with indefatigable vigor to pursue all
advantages after good success. If we consider the rude trials of this to which
she has been exposed by insurrections of so many people, revolt of one of her
richest Provinces, and separation of a Kingdom; if we observe the great shocks
she has received both by land and sea, from the Armies of so many Princes
allied against her, and examine the many Battails she has lost, we shall find
cause enough of admiration that she is still on her feet, and that it is a
grandeur altogether peculiar to that Nation, to endure, so much without
fainting, and that no other stomach could digest so many hard morsel without
loss of appetite: that any thing of which remains is alone to be imputed to
that gentle and natural heat which acts without precipitation, and suffers
without alteration what it can neither concoct nor evacuate, casting it on time
and a more favorable conjuncture: I mean that her policies are so pliable and
constant, that if her expedients and power often fail, her heart never does so,
though contemplating her condition, she has nothing many times to comfort her,
but patience, and such other virtues as she ever makes use of both in Field and
Cabinet, how low soever. Neither has she been wont to give ove a loser, how
unfortunate soever, seldom abandoning the gave and hope of revenge. Though she
lately consented to the liberty of the United Provinces, and renounced her
right to dispute it, it was not till after a war of fourscore years, nor
without that absolute necessity which obliges of two evils to choose the least,
so that we cannot infer from it she was sick at heart, nor that she often
regorges what she has once swallowed. And perhaps if she ever disengages her
self from the many ties that restrain her, and gets leisure to make a free use
of her power and wisdom, it will appear she laid not aside the Cards, but
because she had too many Gamesters upon her hand, and that she will reassume
them with this protestation, that there is no prescription to Sovereigns; and
that the solemnest Oaths, if contrary to those of their Coronation oblige them
not, and that there may as well happen to them as to the honest Casuist, a
certain apprehension that may dispense with their making good their promise.

If we consider on the other side (to return to what I have said of the
equality of their vigor in prosperity) how we^ the Spaniards understand to
make use of the favors of fortune, and all their advantages, when heaven has
complied with that circumspection and remote foresight according to which they
act, we must needs acknowledge all other policies come short of theirs, being
boldest, activest, and most vigilant after good success, that best pursue the
gain of a battle, and carefullest secure a Town after its surrender, that most
aptly impose fetters on People they have conquered, or reduced to their ancient
subjection, if straied from it; and that better than any other accommodate to
their own interests, those of the Princes allied with them; (in a word) that
after victory are more solicitous to gather all the fruits that can be derived
from it, and draw all the good consequences it can possibly afford. Others in
prosperity languish, and their industry stackens after conquest, choosing rather
to enjoy the fruits of their good fortune, than to make an advantageous use of
it, and to lose the honor and profit of their greatest actions, then not to
repose and take breath at the end of the course. Such politics belong only to
those that have better arms then heads, and that value not the Prise so much as
the Race, nor Crowns and Triumphs as Battails and Victories; I mean that
prefer the way before the end, and great actions above the felicities they
lead to.

To the two high advantages I have mentioned of the Spanish Politics, derived
from the great circumspection that attends them, a third may be added, which is
that whenever they have any design in hand, they can so secretly give it
maturity, that nothing is discovered of it till at once it surprises and
ashonishes. They work under ground, and with much care that nothing of their
design takes vent, least which may be discovered by their mien and countenance
they counterfeit sleep when most awake, at Sentry, and ready to discharge, and
(though at other times very jealous of reputation) are not then displeased to
have their power decried, nor to be accused of weakness, that such erroneous
judgment may cause their enemies so much to neglect standing on their Guard,
they may take them unprovided and overthrow those that think them to be in a
condition neither to attacque, nor defend themselves. Shadowed by such
secrecy, and secured by such artifice, they have sometimes very suddenly
advanced, and passing by the conquest of all Sicilia, it is known that in our
days they have successfully done this, and when least apprehended appeared
before Tarragon and Lerida with more forces then they were thought to be
Masters of. In a word they have ever been secret to admiration and so
excellently practiced in that politic dissimulation, so useful in governing,
and that can so well aid it self with disguise, that they have often by it
obtained such effects, as by force they could never have arrived at. And when
these little Maxims fail of success in war, they have recourse to Treaties and
Conferences, where they so dexterously make use of them, that in one manner or
other they gain all advantages can be expected from them. On account of which I
must needs take notice, that they obtain the better in Negotiations, by means
alone of that phlegmatic and extraordinary patience, that tires and quenches
the heat of other people, leading them about through so many labyrinths, that
at last weary of conferring so long, and concluding nothing, they comply with
part of what is desired, and perhaps in conclusion yield to the rest, so to
purchase that repose Spain seems so unwilling to grant them, because sensible
of their weakness, and that they pursue with impatience whatsoever they have
once hoped for.

Thus by a judicious obstinacy they oftentimes overcome the greatest opposition
against what they design, and by compliance possess themselves of what they
cannot obtain by contestation.

But to stay no longer on consideration of Policies that have within themselves
turnings and windings very particular, I will only add that it is conceived
something might be amended in their Catholicon, I mean in that excess of zeal,
real or pretended, they make appear in matters of Religion. It is very evident
that this fire sometimes warms Spain to its prejudice, and may sooner consume
her, than convince those she would by it win to her interests: And no less
known that the Popes are not kinder to her on this account, but suspect her
passion for the Church of an humane infirmity, that stretches toward heaven
only to grow higher upon earth: and that she gains no friends entirely, but a
share only of their inclinations, by those ways that make her real enemies,
that have a perfect hatred and aversion for her. In a word her constant
design, and to which she seems engaged as by oath not to suffer Protestants in
her Dominions, and to persecute them in their own, is a state secret that has
been so well examined by Catholics, that its true price and value is
sufficiently understood by them, and no less by those against whom it is
directed, which causes them to apprehend, that on such specious principles, she
engages to their ruin, to satisfy her ambition, and that high aim of which
she is accused, by uniting in one body so many different Dominions, to become
head of Christendom. In the mean time the present composure of Europe, and form
of the establishment of Christianity considered, she ought to cast off this
thought, and recollect that the two parties into which it is divided, are
almost equal, and if they should come to a shock with the Body of their Forces,
victory would a long time hover uncertain which side to take, and perhaps not
hers, though seconded by all the Roman Legions. She ought to understand her
Catholicon to be but a thin visard to her Ragione di stato that it has often
discovered the secret, which has been known every where; and to examine how
small the advantages are of following Maxims that exasperate one party, and
gain not the other. My meaning, is she should confine her self within the
limits of temporal interest, without mixing Religion with it, which descended
not from heaven to destroy Society, and that it will nothing avail her to make
so many signs of the cross, against Protestants. Let her therefore permit them
to live, and living with them make them understand, she has absolved her self
from that vow (at least if there were any such) which obliged her on all
occasions to endeavor their destruction and that of their Church. From such a
change of conduct she would derive two great advantages, for she would be more
considerable at Rome by seeming less attached to the interests of that Court,
and more redoubted by France, by diverting part of the inclination of those of
the Reformed Religion, which it believes it self alone possesses, with
exclusion of all other Catholic Princes, never giving testimonies of open
hatred, nor persecuting with fire and faggot, that which ought to be the object
only of prayer and persuasion.

Having drawn some lines of the nature and qualities of the Spanish policies,
it remains that I give such a draught of those of the French, as may discover
part of their extent and Forces, that by comparing them we may judge which is
likely to get the better of its rival: The later are so variable, and of a form
so transient, that hours and moments, which ever fly, have no swifter
revolution; and the former are as contrary, and appropriated to fixation; it is
very difficult to paint the one because of the rapidity of its course, and no
less so to determine which of the two is more potent, by reason of the
continual conflict they have so long strugled in, without yielding on either
side. One would think they had divided between them all the skill of the
Fencing-school, and that the one comes on with better grace, and has its arm
more supple, but that the other reaches farther, and makes its thrust more
home: Thus Heaven to preserve the power of these Nations near an equality, has
opposed to the vivacity and spirit of one of them the prudence and constancy of
the other, that what the last comes short in agility, may be recompensed by its
attention to all it undertakes; and what the first wants of circumspection and
patience may be supplied by incredible diligence.

It is yet probable that the French fire so allayed, as not to dasle the
judgment, produces greater effects than the Spanish ^^eam, how considerable
soever. It is capable of all that is Heroic even to miracle, it forces an
alteration in the face of affairs, and chains fortune and victory to attend its
banners; when they seem inclining to forsake it. It is as quick in discovering
and preventing mischiefs as in applying remedies to those that surprise it. Its
eye, hand, and heart are continually directed to what may help or hurt it; the
first is useful to embrace or avoid, the second to seize whatever is
advantageous, and repel all that may be fatal, whilst the last animates to
support all burdens, and often attains what its strength could not extend to,
whilst with all three it on one side levels a way for misfortune, and banishes
it, and on the other opens a door to success and meets it: Whereas the profound
intellect of the Spaniards, by means of frosty irresolution and tedious
deliberation, suffers the fruits of its best Enterprises to be nipt in the
blossom, because not so diligent to execute as subtle to invent them. I could
draw examples from our present times conclusive enough of this truth, if I were
not desirous to make an end. I will therefore only add that that I am not
unsensible, that the French airiness often causes their designs to miscarry,
that their diligence is not always joined with prudence, and that it sometimes
hastens with so little discourse and reflection, it observes nothing, and as if
it had no other members but hands and feet, violently plunges into confusion,
and falls headlong into misfortune, by reason of that precipitation which often
astonishes, and puts it besides it self, so much that its great courage
abandoning it, it retreats in disorder. The reproach of this is nevertheless
much out of date, by reason of many modern great and courageous actions and
enterprises, where it has made appear a diligence in executions, as little
destitute of judgment as courage.

This was long ago, when experience had not purified their fire, nor moderated
that excess of it which made them begin well and end ill, on which account all
they did was attributed to fury and a blind transport, that after the first
attempt was changed into fear: but they are no more the same men, neither,
after going on like Lions, do they come off like Hares; and when their
enterprises fail of success, they many times retreat with honor, and without
confusion. And certainly the greatest promptitude when accompanied by reason
and judgment is as often the Mother as Stepdame of good fortune. Alexander
conquered all because he would leave nothing for the morrow; and Caesar allowed
but a moment between deliberation and action, apprehending that either the
greatness of the design might discourage it, or the opportunity be passed if he
took time to examine it: but as the celerity of these two Heroes was ever
fortunate, by reason of their prodigious Capacities in all they undertook, and
the circumspection and delays of Fabius Maximus and the great Gonsalvo
re-established Empire, and conquered Kingdoms, we may say that each of these
Nations, according as their predominant humor is allaied by prudence, and
illuminated by reason, can digest the toughest morsels, and difficultest
thwartings of fortune, though one of them has defects of stomach, that
sometimes cause vomitings, and the other is now and then afflicted with megrims
that oblige it to repose. Augustus had felt the pulse of both of them when he
pronounced his Festina lent: and we may infallibly conclude that a third
Constitution participating of the French promptitude and Spanish solidity, were
alone capable not only of conquering the World but governing it. And a great
and wise Frenchman having owned l interest d' Angleterre estant bien suivi
establira dans la Chretiente vne troisiem puissance: that England pursuing her
true interest will become a third Power, equal to France and Spain (and this
meant in regard of her situation and strength alone) I think I may modestly
enough add, that the equality and harmony of her temper (which neither heavily
slumbers away opportunities, nor rashly snatches at them before maturity)
considered, did not some mistaken principles, introduced by a fond doting on
such a liberty as is inconsistent with Government, make the subordinate wheels
too heavy, and the Spring (that is the supreme power) too weak to produce
regular and vigorous motions in them, by a perfect submission to her Sovereign,
she might under his conduct be able to make a farther progression toward
giving laws to mankind than any other people ever arrived at.

FINIS.

