DR. THACHER's ARTILLERY ELECTION SERMON.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE THE ANCIENT AND HONORABLE ARTILLERY COMPANY, JUNE 3,
1793; BEING THE DAY OF THEIR Annual Election of Officers.

BY PETER THACHER, D. D. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN BOSTON.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY MANNING AND LORIN IN QUAKER LANE. -- MDCCXCIII.

A SERMON.
JUDGES XVIII. 7. Then the five men departed and came to Laish, and saw the
people that were therein, how they dwelt careless, after the manner of the
Zidonians, quiet and secure; and there was no magistrate in the land, that
might put them to shame in any thing; and they were far from the Zidonians, and
had no business with any man.


ALL Scripture is written for our instruction. It is intended not only to
reveal to us the purposes of God's mercy and the requisitions of his will, but
to furnish our minds with the wisdom which is profitable to direct us in the
various situations to which by Providence we are called. The history of the
Bible contains a lively picture of human life and manners. It paints the
various feelings which agitate the heart of man at different periods. It
describes the manner in which individuals and bodies of men have conducted in
different circumstances. It points out the motives of their conduct, and the
consequences which resulted from it. And thus the word of GOD furnishes us with
maxims of wisdom, and lessons of experience, without our paying the dear price
at which they are sometimes purchased. From this history we find that mankind
have been much the same in all ages; that the same passions and principles have
actuated them all; and that the same effects have generally resulted from the
same causes.

MODERN philosophers are ready to suppose that they have made great
improvements in the knowledge of mankind, and in the various systems by which
human governments may be formed and supported with the most happy success. But
if we read the history of the Bible, we shall be ready to conclude with
Solomon, "The thing that has been, it is that which shall be; and that which
is done is that which shall be done; and there is no new thing under the sun."
In this history we shall find the same general principles laid down which are
now considered as the basis of free and happy states, and the same methods
prescribed to preserve and increase them when they are formed. It is difficult
to find any situation now to which there cannot be found some parallel in the
sacred volume.

THE maxim, "that it is necessary in peace to prepare for war," is now adopted
by every human government. Founded in reason and good sense, this maxim will be
questioned by no one who does not doubt the lawfulness of war in all cases.
Experience decides positively upon its truth, and the conduct of mankind proves
their conviction of its expediency. And a striking example of the truth of this
maxim is given us by the words of the text. The men of Laish were careless and
secure; they had no order nor government; they considered themselves as at a
distance from any enemy, and in no danger of an invasion; and these very causes
operated to incite the Danites to invade them, and rendered their conquest easy
and certain.

"LAISH," say commentators, Pool'^ Synopsi^
"afterward called Caesarea Philippi, was placed in a very pleasant situation
between the rivers Jor and Dan, almost at the foot of mount Libanus. This town
was the extreme border of Judea to the north, as Beersheba was to the south.
The inhabitants dwelt after the manner of the Zidonians. The city of Zidon was
nearly surrounded by the sea; it was strongly fortified, and thus its citizens
felt perfectly secure. The Zidonians were a very powerful people, and had
little to dread from any of the nations around them. This occasioned them to
feel perfectly at ease; and the men of Laish, who were probably a colony from
Zidon, catched the manners of the parent state, and without the same reason
felt the same security. They were distant a day's journey from Zidon, which was
sufficient to prevent them from receiving thence immediate assistance and
support, in an attack suddenly commenced and finished. When the history says
that they had no business with any man, it probably means that they did not
carry on trade and commerce with any people, and lived entirely by themselves;
or else, that they had so little care of their safety, and so high an opinion
of their own abilities, as to form no league or alliance with any other people"

THE history to which the text relates is briefly this: The tribe of Dan had
not conquered the whole portion of land assigned to them in Canaan; and being
straitened for room, they determined, by a vigorous exertion, to procure to
themselves the accommodation which they needed. They acted prudently and wisely
in the prosecution of this design; for, they did not at once commence an
emigration without having any certain object before them, but detached a small
party to find out a place adapted to their views, and a people that could be
easily conquered. Laish presented itself to them as calculated to answer both
these purposes. The motives which induced the children of Dan to attack the
place, and the reasons which made the conquest so easy, are briefly recounted
in the report of the spies: -- "Arise, that ye may go up against them; for we
have seen the land, and behold it is very good: And are ye still? Be not
slothful to go and to enter to possess the land. When ye go, ye shall come unto
a people secure, and to a large land; for GOD has given it into your hands --
a place where there is no want of any thing that is in the earth." The
fertility of the soil, and the pleasantness of the situation, animated their
wishes to possess the land. The perfect security in which the people dwelt, and
their total unpreparedness to defend themselves, calmed their fears of any
formidable resistance. They came, they saw, they conquered. And the people of
Laish fell, a melancholy proof of the danger of security, and a striking
demonstration of the necessity of preparing against violence and invasion, even
in a time of the most profound peace, and at the greatest distance from any
enemy.

THIS lesson, so strikingly delineated in the history before us, is the lesson
of the day. We are now met in the house of GOD to assist the devotions of an
ancient and respectable military Corpse, founded by our ancestors, to guard
against the very error which proved fatal to the existence and independence of
Laish. This Corpse was intended as a nursery for the officers who should command
the militia of the colony, and who might thus train them up to "fight for their
brethren, their sons and their daughters, their wives and their houses." Deeply
as these good men were impressed with the peaceful religion of JESUS CHRIST,
they still believed the lawfulness and necessity of defending the liberty and
property which GOD had given them. Brave and hardy, like the wilderness which
they subdued, they could not endure the idea of yielding their independence
even to the boldest invader; and therefore by vigilance and exertion, by order
and discipline, they guarded against the danger, or prepared themselves to
repel it. They founded therefore this Company, in which the principal men among
them cheerfully enrolled themselves, and where the man who had commanded armies
did not feel his honor injured, or his dignity impaired, by being commanded in
his turn.

THE occasion therefore, and the sentiment of the text, lead me,

IN the first place, to remark upon the folly which a people discover, and the
danger to which they expose themselves, when they live in a state of security,
unprepared to resist an invasion, or defend themselves against the attacks of
an enemy.

BUT how are we to defend ourselves when our country is invaded, and we are
threatened with the loss of every thing we hold dear, by the violence and fury
of an enemy? By declaring, with the honest Quaker, that we will not resist any
force which may come against us, because our holy religion forbids us to fight?
By long and learned and critical orations upon the injustice and cruelty of
invasion, and its inconsistency with the rights of man? Shall we send the
ministers of religion to meet an army of invaders, and to tell them that they
are not doing as they would be done by; that they act inconsistently with the
religion of CHRIST, and that GOD will punish them for their injustice? Or,
shall we spread out our supplicating hands to them, and beg them not to shed
brethren's blood, nor deprive us of the liberty, the property and independence
which GOD has bestowed upon us, and which we desire to transmit to our children?

WERE all mankind actuated by the peaceful religion of JESUS CHRIST (as they
will be at some future period) then these methods would be effectual; but under
the present circumstances of human nature they would be the subject only of
derision. So deeply is the human heart depraved, so strongly do ferocious
passions operate upon mankind, as that the still small voice of reason and
religion cannot be heard. The loud calls of ambition and avarice drown their
feeble whispers, and a torrent of violence and oppression sweep away their
warmest advocates.

IN these circumstances, our only method is to resist force with force, to
repress the violence which we do not provoke, and to let men know that we will
defend with our lives the liberty and the happiness which GOD has given us.

BUT it is strange, some will observe, that doctrines of this nature should be
preached by a minister of peace, who professes a religion which breathe the
warmest benevolence, and teaches mankind to live and love as brethren! Our
master, will they say, "came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them;" he
strictly prohibits every degree of wrath and envy, and enjoins us to follow
peace with all men."

THE lawfulness of defensive war has been so often proved from this place, upon
these occasions, as that many observations upon the subject will be needless.
We must take mankind as they are, because they will not be what they ought. We
know that there are men, and many men, who are totally destitute of moral
principle, and care not whom they wound or destroy, if they can enrich and
aggrandize themselves. We know that there are nations who wish to assume
universal authority, and subjugate their neighbors to their will. Can any man,
in the exercise of common sense and reason, suppose that the Gospel prohibits
us to resist such violence? Am I obliged to deliver my purse to an highwayman,
or my life to a murderer, when I am able to defend myself? Does the religion of
CHRIST enjoin its votaries to submit to the violence of the first ruffian
nation which will attack them; to give up their liberty, and the liberty of
their children, to those who would make them "hewers of wood and drawers of
water?" If my brother, agitated with a delirium, attempts to injure me, or take
away my life, am I to yield myself a quiet victim to his distraction? These
questions carry their own answer with them, and must strike conviction to every
unprejudiced mind; for to act in this manner will be to present our throats to
the butcher, and to court our own destruction.

WARS undertaken to gratify the lust of power, differences excited by those
"lusts from whence come wars and fightings among men," are decidedly contrary
to the law of GOD. Every good man mourns over those fatal contentions where
kindred blood is shed; and where brethren of the same family, children of the
same father "bite and devour one another." But where a people contend not for
glory or conquest; where they take every method to avoid an alternative so
disagreeable; yet where they cannot preserve their lives, their liberties,
their estates and their religion, without "resisting unto blood," they are to
do so. If they do it not, they offend against GOD, and voluntarily sacrifice
the birthright which he has given them. GOD of old commanded his people to
resist such attempts, and to make war upon those who attacked them; and would
he have done this had war been unlawful in all cases, and directly contrary to
the nature and reason of things? I am aware that he permitted many things under
former dispensations "because of the hardness of men's hearts," because the
state of human nature would not permit them to be different; but then he never
expressly enjoined men to do what was morally wrong? War he has enjoined; and
Meroz was cursed by divine command, because they "came not to the help of the
LORD, to the help of the LORD against the mighty."

IF it is lawful thus to defend ourselves, and if we have reason to expect the
divine protection and support only in the use of proper means, then it is
certainly wrong to neglect these means, and to live in a state of supineness
and security; because discipline and military knowledge are absolutely
necessary to successful war; and such discipline cannot be attained at once.
All knowledge is progressive, and military skill is to be acquired in the same
way, by the same exertions and perseverance which make us eminent in any other
science. True it is, that native bravery and ardent enthusiasm will do much to
animate men to heroic deeds in defense of their country; but with how much
greater advantage do these principles operate, when they are tempered with
discretion, and guided by experience! The first is the courage of a mastiff,
who shuts his eyes, and runs into the very jaws of destruction, but who
sometimes bears all before him; the second is the fortitude of a man, who knows
the nature of his object, and the means by which it may be accomplished. A
nation free and brave cannot be conquered; but its defense must cost more
dearly, and its distresses must be greatly protracted, if its subjects are not
acquainted with the art of war. Absurd and foolish then it is, for any people
to live in security, to flatter themselves that their tranquillity shall not be
interrupted, and to remain ignorant of military discipline! They act unwisely
when they do not learn the art of defending themselves, until that defense is
immediately necessary; and when they trust to their enemy's beating them into
skill, and instructing them to be soldiers, as the "men of Succoth were taught
with briers and thorns."

IT is certainly unwise, again, for a people to live in security, without
preparing against invasion until that invasion takes place, because exertions
for defense suddenly made will not be so effectual, nor answer the same purpose
with those which are made coolly and with time. If fortresses are suddenly
erected, they will want strength and firmness. If an army is raised, and they
are called to fight before they have been instructed in the first rudiments of
war, they will probably be defeated. Haste is no friend to wise counsels or to
effectual defense. The spur of the occasion may animate to vigorous exertions
for a short time, and despair may lead a rude and undisciplined multitude to do
wonderful things; but their violence will soon put them out of breath, and a
cool and wary enemy will be able gradually to defeat and disperse them. In
these cases, as in all others, skill and knowledge will make hard things easy,
and will save much labor and pains. By a wise and judicious mode of defense,
not hastily adopted, but carefully adjusted in all its various parts, much
damage may be prevented, and many valuable lives may be saved. What wise people
then will neglect, even in the bosom of tranquillity, to guard against every
surprise, and prepare themselves to resist the first bold intruder who may
attack them!

NO people can have any ground for security while they are destitute of the
means of defense. They lie open to every danger, and are liable to be insulted,
abused and conquered, by any nation which may think them worthy of their
attention. Such a state ought to excite alarm, and no people should be easy
while they are exposed to danger so imminent. But their listlessness, like that
of a man in a lethargy, commonly increases with their disease, and generally
terminates in the death of their liberty.

BUT, preparations made in peace, and an ability to resist invasion are,
thirdly, the most effectual means to prevent it. Their neighbors will esteem
it madness and folly to expose themselves to such a formidable resistance; and
a people thus prepared and disciplined will be an object, not only of
veneration, but of fear. Marauders, tyrants who wish to carry their despotism
into foreign countries, or to fatten on their spoils, will not choose for their
objects those hardy and skilful nations, who stand ready to defend themselves
and their country. Such men will look, as did the tribe of Dan, for some people
who dwell quiet and secure, without vigilance, without discipline or the means
of resistance. Such a people court invasion, they invite an attack, and beckon
to those who delight in spoil to "come and take away their place and nation."
Wary and prudent commanders will confider long before they attack a fortress
strongly fortified and well garrisoned; and they will count the cost before
they invade a country whose inhabitants are all trained to discipline, and
"know how to use the sword and the bow." But the weakness of a fortress, the
ignorance or security of a people, mark them as proper subjects to be attacked
and conquered.

RESPECTABILITY always attends the vigilance and discipline which I am
recommending. It is a proof of wisdom to look forward and prepare for futurity,
to guard against any danger which may arise, and to provide remedies for every
disaster which may happen. Such conduct is a proof of a healthy and vigorous
state; it discovers energy in council, and an elastic well braced government.
This people will stand high in the estimation of the world. Their alliance will
be courted, and this will give them new strength and new defenses. The saying
of our Lord, alluding however to a more important circumstance, will in this
case be fully accomplished -- "Unto him that has shall be given, and he shall
have abundance, but from him that has not shall be taken even that which he
seems to have."

THE history of mankind will furnish us with numberless instances wherein the
truth of these observations has been exemplified. Scarcely a page of this
history can be opened which does not contain full conviction of it. But we need
not go from our own age or our own times to find this conviction. The people of
America have proved it to the world, and have reaped the happy consequences of
vigilance and discipline, as well as of personal bravery. At the commencement
of our late controversy with one of the most formidable nations upon earth, we
had not the means of defense which other nations enjoy. We were without
ammunition, without money, and without allies; but we had an hardy yeomanry,
zealous in the cause of liberty, and versed from their infancy in the use of
arms. Every man had been more or less trained and disciplined; and we had a
general acquaintance with military science. We proved the benefit of this
preparation, when we met the embattled legions of Britain, and spread terror
through hosts commanded by their ablest Generals. The heights of Charlestown
witnessed the bravery of our citizens, and furnished a convincing evidence of
the wisdom of those institutions which made the people of New England soldiers
from their cradle. Superior as were our foes in equipments, "in all the pomp
and circumstance of war," yet still they paid so dearly for their victory as
that the acquisition of one or two more such victories would have ruined them.

AND how deplorable would have been our situation, had we not been thus
instructed and prepared for defense! Attacked by an enemy who claimed a right
to "bind us in all cases whatsoever," and whose high toned spirits were
exasperated at the idea of resistance, we must have fallen a prey to their
violence, and bidden an everlasting farewell to liberty and its blessings.
Taskmasters, worse than Egyptian, would have been set over us, and our children
must have toiled to support the luxury of their oppressors.

BUT when resistance had taken place, and we had declared ourselves
independent, what miseries, what exquisite distresses would have been the
probable consequences of our subjugation! An incensed soldiery would have given
way to their unhallowed lusts, and disregarded the laws of GOD and man to
gratify their cravings! Alas! -- what sound is this which pierces my heart? It
is the shrieks of a tender wife, wrested from the arms of a beloved husband, to
gratify the appetite of a lordly master! -- But whence are those soft
complainings, those deep drawn sighs? They are the lamentations of injured
innocence, of violated virtue, of the defiled virgin, who has fallen a victim
to brutal force! -- But why does busy imagination transport me to a scene still
more painful? Why does it hurry me to the field of blood, the place of
execution for the friends of American liberty? Whom does it there call me to
see led to the scaffold with the dignity of Cato, the fortitude of Brutus, and
the gentleness of Cicero marked deeply on his countenance? It is the gallant
WASHINGTON, deserted by his countrymen, and sacrificed because he fought in
their defense! -- Of whom consists yonder group of heroes? It is an HANCOCK, an
ADAMS one and the other, a FRANKLIN, a RUTLEDGE! -- but I repress the bursting
sentiment -- the bare imagination bows my soul with unutterable grief!

THANKS to the GOD of armies, and to the vigilance and bravery of our
countrymen -- these distressing scenes were never realized! Freedom, peace and
independence have blessed our land; and the very nation whom we opposed, laying
aside the bitterness of civil contention, has extended to us a friendly hand,
and now declares herself happy in our alliance. A recurrence to past scenes
should not therefore excite our resentment; it should only animate us to the
vigilance, the bravery, and the active preparation which proved, under GOD, the
means of our deliverance.

I PROCEED to remark, fourthly, on the necessity of government to the existence
and defense of any people.

ONE reason assigned for the easy conquest of Laish is, "that there was no
magistrate in the land, who might put them to shame in any thing," -- who could
punish them for doing wrong, or make any man ashamed of his want of virtue or
patriotism. Such a people must fall an easy prey to an invader; for without
government no people can remain in security, nor can any nation be defended
from its enemies.

BY restraining vice, the magistrate prevents men from contracting habits of
effeminacy. He guards them from weakness of mind, and excites them to hardihood
and patriotism. The great and noble principles of love to our country, of
sacrificing private interest to public happiness, of guarding the rights of
posterity, and disseminating universal felicity, cannot subsist in a mind
narrowed and depraved by criminal indulgence. Vice makes cowards of mankind. It
contracts and stifles the noblest principles of human action, and renders men
abject in their sentiments and conduct. As far as vice is discountenanced, as
far as men are made ashamed of doing base and unworthy actions, -- so far
general security is increased, and the aggregate of national strength is
enlarged.

THE design of good government is to form a focus to which all the diverging
rays of power in a community may be collected, and which may enable a people to
bring the force of the whole to one point. This accumulated power protects
every individual in his rights; it guards the weak from the violence of the
strong, and the few from the oppression of the many. The same power is
competent to defend the whole from invasion or other injury. Nothing can be
done by way of defense where there is no government. Money cannot be raised.
Men cannot be disciplined -- nor can any great object be steadily pursued. When
a people without government are invaded, every man will propose and pursue his
own mode of defense. A thousand different schemes will be thrown out. The
people will be distracted in their views; and before this distraction can be
calmed, a final conquest may save them the trouble of defending themselves for
the future. A nation rent with divisions, destitute of law, of subordination
and rulers, presents a proper object for an attack, because it promises an easy
if not a valuable conquest. The very people themselves who have been agitated
by different scenes, who have no rest for the soles of their feet, who find
their lives, their liberties and estates afloat, and exposed to the lawless
violence of any who may be pleased to seize them, -- this people themselves
will join an invading army, and prefer any security, any protection to none at
all. Without government, indeed, without law and order, there is no liberty, no
security, no peace nor prosperity. Men ought to guard their rights; they ought
to resist arbitiary power of every kind; they ought to establish a free
government; -- but no people can be safe, no nation can be happy where "every
man does what is right in his own eyes," and the people are driven about by the
whirlwind of their passions.

IF, again, a government is free and just, they will be cheerfully supported by
the people in defending their country. Wars too often arise from the ambition
or other passions of princes and great men, and the justice of them may be
properly doubted. Where an interest exists in the government separate from that
of the people, the latter will always feel a jealousy, and will not be ready to
give them effectual support. But where "our rulers are from among ourselves,
and our governors proceed from the midst of us;" where every man, elevated as
his station may be, returns at stated periods to the mass of the people; where
our rulers cannot injure us without hurting themselves, -- we may cheerfully
acquiesce in their calls to defend ourselves, and may be sure that they will
not wantonly engage in a war, which exposes them as well as us to heavy expense
and grievous misfortune. The conscientious soldier, who will not support a war
which he does not believe to be lawful, may here feel his mind perfectly at
ease, and may discover his skill and his fortitude in defending his injured
country, or supporting its just claims. Happy people, who are blessed with such
a government! Happy land, shadowed all around with the tree of liberty, and yet
strengthened and united by a firm and vigorous government! No wonder that thou
art envied by other nations, who are either crushed by arbitrary power, or
distressed by confusion and anarchy!

THE reasons against indulging to security, and neglecting to provide for
defense, I observe once more, operate with peculiar force upon a people whose
distant situation prevents their receiving assistance from their allies. The
people of Laish were far from the Zidonians, and had no business or connection
with any man. The sacred historian informs us also, that the Danites came "unto
Laish, unto a people that were at quiet and secure, and they smote them with
the edge of the sword, and burnt the city with fire, and there was no
deliverer, because it was far from Zidon." If a people dwelling thus remotely
do not defend and help themselves, no one can help them. Before their friends
and allies can hear of their distress, it may be complete; and they may be
subdued and ruined before the least assistance can be given them. This
consideration should operate strongly upon a nation thus situated, and induce
them to keep themselves in a constant state of defense; to cultivate military
skill and discipline among the inhabitants; to be provided with all the means
of defense; to keep a vigilant eye upon the state of all nations, so that they
may not be surprised on a sudden; and to put all their fortresses into such a
condition, as that they may be able to check a sudden attack, and give time for
the people, the natural bulwarks of the State, to assemble and resist their
daring invaders.

THE past discourse, you must be sensible, has had a respect to the situation
of this country, and the duty of this day. We, my fellow citizens, dwell in a
distant part of the world, far removed from any allies, and very little
interested in the politics of Europe. This circumstance should not only operate
to excite us to pay a close attention to the state of our militia, and the
means of our defense, but it should prevent us from engaging in their quarrels,
or adopting their wars. Our assistance can be of very little benefit to them,
but it may essentially injure us. Our country is young, and cannot bear the
loss of men, which is the certain consequence of war. It is free, and does not
wish its citizens to mix with the slaves of Europe, and catch their servile
manners. It venerates religion, and will find no advantage, should its people
associate with those who despise religion, and trample upon every divine law.
In case of a war, we cannot be supported or assisted by any European power as
they can support one another; and America may be essentially injured before our
allies in Europe can know that an enemy has attacked us. GOD in his providence
has placed us in a remote part of the world, and if our brethren in other
countries "fall out by the way," we will endeavor to reconcile them, but we
will not become partners in their quarrels. They have a right to choose their
own governments, and manage their own affairs, without our interference. GOD
does not call us to war. We are not attacked nor endangered; until we are, we
have no right to spill our own blood, or that of our children. Let us then
"study the things that make for peace." Let us unite in repressing those
restless spirits who cannot see a quarrel going on without inserting themselves
in it. Let us be ready constantly to exert our good offices in bringing about
peace; and let us devoutly pray that GOD would hasten the time when "wars shall
cease from the earth," and the peaceful kingdom of JESUS CHRIST, which breathes
nothing but good will to men, shall universally prevail.

THROUGH the goodness of GOD, America now enjoys a great degree of peace. She
has passed through an arduous contest, and having struggled long with
formidable distresses, she is effectually relieved; and while she breathen the
pure and fragrant air of liberty, her prosperity rapidly increases, and her
branches extend far and wide. On our frontiers indeed a cloud, not bigger than
a man's hand, has arisen, and has extended to a formidable and distressing
degree. Our armies have been defeated, and we mourn the brave men who have
fallen in the wilderness, and whose bones are now whitening in the sun. It is
not for me to determine upon the necessity or expedience of this war. As a
minister of religion, I can only wish and pray for peace, and anticipate the
time when "the sword of the wilderness" shall destroy no more.

IF, my brethren, we mean to guard ourselves from invasion, and to lengthen out
our tranquillity, we must cultivate a good government; we must reverence the
laws, and support the magistrate in "putting to shame those that do evil." It
is a duty enjoined by our holy religion to submit to such government and it is
a maxim founded in eternal truth, that no people can be conquered or destroyed
who are united in supporting a free and good constitution. A consciousness of
being freemen, of being protected in the enjoyment of life and property, by
laws which know not the rich from the poor, or the great from the small; this
consciousness will give men elevation of sentiment; it will inspire them with
fortitude and perseverance, and make them superior to all the slaves and
sycophants upon earth.

WHILE we support our various constitutions of government, and guard against
intestine divisions* we ought to pay a strict attention to the state of our
militia, and the other means of defense. Americans will never suffer a standing
army among them in time of peace. The militia are the natural defenders of this
country. They have a stake in it. They have a share in its sovereignty; and
they fight for their wives, their children, their liberty, and their all. Such
men cannot be cowards; they must be brave and determined; and when any of these
blessings are taken from them, or threatened to be done away, they will be
"like a bear robbed of her whelps," and will determine to conquer or die.

BUT this very ardor and impetuosity may be fatal to them, unless they are
under the direction of judgment and discipline. These are necessary to check
their effervescences, and lead their efforts to such points as may be most
beneficial. Our militia then should be disciplined. Our young men should be
early instructed in the art of war, and every one should hold himself in
readiness to "play the man for his people, and the cities of his GOD." Let us
have our fortresses in good repair, and be ready at all points to resist an
invasion; and this is the most likely method to prevent it.

YOUR institution, Gentlemen of the Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company, is
designed to answer this important purpose, and is a striking proof of the
wisdom and foresight of our ancestors. Venerable men! My heart warms when I
view the schools, the colleges, the churches which they founded; and when I see
this Company assembled, so admirably adapted "upon all our glory to create a
defense." Methinks I see them looking down from the seats of bliss, smiling to
behold this favorite institution flourishing and increasing; delighting
themselves in the good of which they thus laid the foundation, and charging us
to transmit the freedom and happiness which they have given us, a fair and a
large inheritance to the latest posterity!

YOU are citizens, Gentlemen, as well as soldiers, and you know the necessity
of order and government. These you will feel it your duty to support and
preserve, while you value and defend the liberty of your country. You know that
these duties do not interfere. You know that without government freedom cannot
subsist, because government alone can protect the helpless individual, or
restrain the lordly tyrant. You know also that a free government is necessary
to animate and direct the efforts of a people in their own defense, and that
the tree of liberty never flourishes, unless it is preserved from rude violence
by the sacred barriers of law and justice.

COUNTENANCED by the Commander in chief, who himself formerly led a corpse in
some respects similar to your own, and encouraged by the good wishes and
plaudits of your fellow citizens, you are becoming every year more useful and
respectable. The choice which you have made of men to command you, who have
known not only the parade, but the reality of war, and have bravely defended
the liberties of America, has done you and your country honor. Men of the first
abilities have been heretofore the objects of your choice; and I hope that the
elections of this day will prove, that you are still governed by the same
wisdom and prudence, which in this respect have heretofore marked your conduct.

SHOULD you be called to defend your country, or protect its rights, I have no
doubt but that you would prove your military skill to be impediment to brave
and valorous exertions. Sure I am, that you would never turn your backs to an
enemy, or suffer yourselves to be defeated. You are Americans. You are
descendants of men, who sacrificed every thing to assert their liberty. Many of
you have "jeoparded your lives on the high places of the field," and your
bosoms glow with genuine patriotism. Such men are invincible. Nothing can
subdue them but the power of that Being who has declared, "that the race is
not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong."

GO on, Gentlemen, and prosper. In peace prepare for war. Cultivate in your own
breasts, and impress upon your children, an ardent love to civil and religious
liberty. And while you discharge your duty to society, forget not the Being who
has made you what you are, at whose tribunal you must all stand, and whose
"favor is better than life." If you submit to his Gospel, and are governed in
heart and in life by its precepts, you shall be made "more than conquerors;"
your brows shall be adorned with unfading laurels, and your triumphs shall be
complete and eternal!

WE live, my brethren of this assembly, in a day when grand and important
scenes are acting upon the theater of the world. We have seen "kings led in
chains, and nobles in fetters of iron." We have seen the towers of despotism,
erected in dark ages, and sacred to the uses of tyranny and oppression,
tumbling to the ground, and razed to their foundations. We hear "of wars and
rumors of wars." Mankind "bite and devour one another." "Brother is pursuing
brother unto death," and the earth is crimsoned, deeply crimsoned, with
Christian blood. Humanity sheds a tear over the folly of her sons, but faith
lifts her keen and humble eye from earth to heaven, and anticipates the good
which shall come out of this evil: She expects the fulfillment of those precious
promises which speak of the future peace and happiness of man; and teaches us
to exclaim, "amidst the wreck of nature and the crush of worlds," ALLELUIA, THE
LORD GOD OMNIPOTENT REIGNS."

AMEN.

