AN EXAMINATION OF THE Late Proceedings in Congress, RESPECTING THE OFFICIAL
CONDUCT OF THE Secretary of the Treasury.

PRINTED WITHIN THE UNITED STATES.

UNITED STATES, 8 th March, 1793.
IT IS the right and the duty of a free people* to watch attentively the
movements of every department of public trust. Whether those whom they employ,
fill executive, judicial, or legislative stations, still they are equally the
servants of the people, and amenable to them, for their conduct. This great
political truth, is now rapidly spreading itself throughout the other regions
of the earth, and liberating mankind from the tyranny which has long oppressed
them. In America, it was never doubted.

It Is particularly their duty to watch attentively the conduct of the
legislature. Whilst that branch preserves its independence and integrity, they
are safe. They have nothing to apprehend either from the noxious quality of the
laws, or their invasion by the other departments of the government. It forms a
bulwark of sufficient strength, to baffle every danger, that may assail them
from without. But whenever it loses these indispensible qualifications, their
security is gone, unless they can immediately repair the breaches that are made.

Unhappily, this branch from which alone real danger may be apprehended, is
best fortified against the suspicion of it. It Is the nature of an executive
trust, where the operations are directed by a single hand, especially if they
are extensive and important, to inspire jealousy and distrust; to warn every
citizen to stand on his guard, and observe its course. But with the
representative, the case is different: Many considerations arising from the
mode of his appointment, and his duty, tend to connect him, in more intimate
confidence, with his constituents. This propensity should therefore be resisted
with decisive force, for otherwise it will open a door, through which the
public rights may be invaded with success.

These observations apply in a greater or less degree to every free government;
but they apply with peculiar force to the government of these States. Many
circumstances exist in our system which tend in a certain degree, to weaken the
checks of the several departments upon each other, and to lessen the
responsibility of the representative to his constituent. Of these some perhaps
will be eternal, as proceeding from causes beyond the reach of human remedy.
Others of the adventitious kind have been added. That we may however perfectly
comprehend our true situation, and the ruling policy of our councils, from the
adoption of the government to the present time, it may be proper to notice a
few of these in both respects. They will enable us to decide with greater
propriety, on the transactions which I mean more particularly to lay bare, to
the public inspection.

It Is inseparably incident to a federal government, for reasons too well
understood to require illustration, that the representation should be
comparatively thin. Hence it follows, that as each member must represent a
great extent of territory, and considerable number of inhabitants, he can in
general be but little known to his constituents in the commencement. They must
of course take his merits, and vote for him, in a great measure, in the first
instance, upon trust. And the extent of the territory over which our government
in particular is organized, will prevent their ever being well acquainted with
him afterward. It Is scarcely possible to communicate that regular and thorough
information, of all transactions, from the seat of government to the
extremities, so indispensibly necessary to enable the constituent to judge with
propriety of the conduct of his representative. This, in equal degree lessens
the responsibility; for a representative acting on a distant theater, never
seen, and seldom heard of, by his constituent, except through the medium of his
own correspondence, has little to fear from his censure.

In a single well organized government, the wisdom and purity of its
administration, are essentially promoted by the jealousy which takes place
between the several branches of each other, and especially between the
legislative and the executive. This justifies the policy of the distribution,
and preserves in full force the check intended by it. But the obvious tendency
of the federal principle is to dissipate this jealousy, and enfeeble the check
between the several departments of the national government. A coalition with
the State sovereignties, naturally unites them together, to resist a foreign
pressure. And this proportionably contributes to destroy the independence of
the legislature, and diminish the responsibility of its members.

These infirmities, and especially the latter, are in a great measure without
cure; it were however rational to expect, that the most wholesome remedies
would have been applied, so as to fortify the system against any malign effects
which could possibly be avoided. But the contrary has been the course of our
administration. Active and successful efforts have been made to increase the
evil where it was a natural one, and to accumulate others of the artificial
kind. The best expedient which policy could dictate, to remedy those
inconveniences resulting from the extent of territory, was by opening their
doors, to subject their legislative discussions to the free and common audience
of every citizen, and to promote the free and rapid circulation of the
newspapers. But has this been done? On the contrary, have we not seen with
amazement, one branch of the legislature, withdraw itself into a sequestered
chamber, and shut its doors upon its constituents, still guarding them with
obstinate perseverance, although more than one half the union have required
that they be opened? Have we not likewise seen the free circulation of the
newspapers, clogged with taxes which amount almost to a prohibition? Are these
things the mere effect of accident, or are they the result of cool
deliberation? contemplating objects dreadful to this country.

These considerations demonstrate, that it is difficult to preserve in the
members of the national legislature, that degree of responsibility to their
constituents, which the principle under other circumstances admits of; and that
those who have been called to that station, since the organization of the
government, have shown an earnest desire to rid themselves of that portion of
which it is capable. They likewise demonstrate that from causes which are
natural, the several branches, instead of forming a perfect check upon each
other, and thereby securing to the people a purity in the administration of
each, are to a certain degree impelled in a contrary direction, and forced
together, into a constrained and politic harmony, for common defense.

But this propensity, however strong it may be, has been powerfully aided by
some institutions of great force and efficacy. A charm has been formed of
sufficient strength to draw them together, if the repulsive power had been
naturally ten times greater than the attractive one really is. An immense debt
has been accumulated, from every region of the union, and of every possible
description, constituted into funds of almost perpetual duration, and subject
from its nature upon the slightest incidents, to constant fluctuation, with a
power in the Secretary of the Treasury, through the medium of the sinking fund,
to raise it at pleasure It has depended on the Secretary to say when money
could or could not be furnished for the sinking fund, out of the funds
appropriated for the purpose, and even out of moneys borrowed for and legally
applicable to no other purpose. And under his direction has ultimately fallen
the execution of the purchases.
. And upon the basis of this debt, a bank of discount has been formed, allied
by its charter to the government itself, and in a great measure subjected to
the direction of the same officer.

The experience of other countries has shown that the dealers in the public
funds, and especially those whose fortunes consist principally in that line,
have no interest and of course feel but little concern, in all those questions
of fiscal policy which particularly affect the land-holder, the merchant, and
the artist. Although these classes should groan, under the burdens of the
government, yet the public creditor will be no otherwise affected by the
pressure, than as he receives what has been gleaned from their industry. The
tax never reaches him, till the money is counted out quarterly from the public
coffers, in discharge of his claim. They are the tenants of the farm, he the
landlord and the man of revenue. The disparity of their interests, and the
difference of their sensations, respecting the objects to which they point, in
a great measure separate them in society. Knowing that they live upon the
labor of the other classes, the public creditors behold them with jealousy,
suspect a thousand visionary schemes against their welfare, and are always
alarmed and agitated with every the most trifling incident which happens. And
having one common interest which consists ^^mply in the imposition of high
taxes and their rigid collection, they form a compact body and move always in
concert. Whilst the administration finds the means to satisfy their claims,
they are always devoted to it, and support all its measures. They therefore may
be considered in every country, where substantial funds are established, and
their demands punctually paid, as a ministerial corpse, leagued together upon
principles to a certain degree hostile to the rest of the community.

But this dread of the other classes, and subservience to fiscal policy, have
been increased here beyond what was ever experienced before, and by causes
extremely natural. The trifling consideration given for the debt, by the
present holders, with the comparative merit of their characters, with that of
the officers and soldiery of the late army, and the well known sense which the
community entertain on that subject, must inspire a distrust that will disquiet
their peace for a time. The claims of justice although from motives of policy,
they may be suppressed, yet the cries which they raise, are terrible to those
who live on the usurpation. Nor can the gay festivity, nor the pomp and
splendor it supports, shield them from the admonition. This throws them
blindly into the hands of those who patronize their interests. In addition to
which, the policy and operation of the sinking fund, by which the rise of
stocks is in a great measure regulated, must contribute greatly to subject the
party interested to the control of those who direct its application.

If then the certificate-holders or dealers in the funds in general, are
subservient to the views of a department faithful to their interests, is it
reasonable to expect that such as have, or may hereafter become members of
Congress, will prove less so? Being on the great theater of speculation and
gain, and possessed of more correct information, with the means of turning it
to better account, will they abandon their occupation and slight the
opportunity offered, of becoming thrifty? In what condition would the
land-holder, the merchant, and the artist, find themselves, if they should be
represented in the national legislature by persons of this description only?
might they not count at least upon high taxes and their rigid collection? It Is
the first principle of a free government, that those who impose the tax should
feel the effect, but here it would be not only violated, but reversed. What
security would the people have in any of the departments of government, whose
checks were destroyed by an interest which supervened every consideration of
public good?

But the proprietors of bank stock, are still more subservient to this policy,
than any other class of public creditors. The institution itself being founded
on the same paper system, must communicate the same interests to those within
its sphere. And in other respects, it possesses a strength and energy, to which
the common members of the fiscal corpse, are strangers. The superiority of its
gains invigorates the principle common to all; but the constitutional
subordination to the head of that department, sanctifies under the cloak of
authority, that degree of subservience which a sense of shame, among
independent men, might occasionally forbid.

The bank however should not be considered simply in the light of an
institution, uniting together with greater force, the members of the fiscal
corpse. As an engine of influence, capable under the management authorized by
its principles, of polluting every operation of the government, it is entitled
to particular attention. In this view a concise illustration, may not be deemed
improper. The stocks are low, and the command of money for a short term only,
would enable the holder to clear with certainty such a sum. A question of
moment is depending, and a member of Congress may obtain a discount with the
bank for that sum. He makes the purchase. The party aiding this operation with
the bank, has likewise the direction of the sinking fund: its moneys are
seasonably and publicly exhibited at the market, and the stocks rise. The gain
has been made, and the demands of the bank may likewise be answered. Or perhaps
he is indigent, pressed by difficulties, and seeks to be thus relieved: or his
note has been already deposited in the bank, and to some amount, and the day
for repayment approaches, has he the means? and if he has not, how shall he be
relieved from this painful dilemma? Shall the indulgence be extended again and
again, and by the intercession of this person? Have the members of the
legislature sufficient independence, virtue, and firmness, to withstand these
temptations? And are there not occasions in the operations of every government,
when those possessed of such means of influence, will find it their interest to
avail themselves of it, to quiet the opponents to their measures? Have not such
arisen in the course of our government, which commenced, as it were, but
yesterday?

The contamination would however have been partial, and the practicable means
of influence abridged, if the alliance of the bank had been confined to an
executive department only. With a minister in that branch, a negotiation with
the members of the legislature, would have been difficult, as certain forms
subsisting between the departments of government, put them at a distance from
each other. Seduction does not operate by means direct or overt. If not
abandoned and at auction, the integrity of a member must be assailed more
gently, and without the appearance of a bribe. It must be forced on him, under
the mask of friendship. It became therefore necessary, to bring the legislature
into more intimate contact with this monied machine, and for this purpose to
appoint several of its members bank directors. In England, the minister of
finance is a member of parliament; by him negociations may be carried on in
person; but here the constitution forbade it; this then was the next best
alternative. Thus organized, the game becomes more easy. In all operations upon
the legislature, whether for the particular emolument of the bank, the fiscal
corpse in general, or any other purpose, in which the views of the party are
interested, the prospect of success is greatly improved. And in all inquiries
relative to the conduct of the officer, in the management of the public moneys,
these members of Congress, bank directors, and the bank itself, give him their
firm and uniform support. In their eyes his conduct will appear immaculate,
angelic, and partaking perhaps of something still more divine See the speech of
William Smith, of South Carolina, on the late proceedings, where he says, "That
the Secretary would in the issue rise above every calumny, as fair as the
purest angel in heaven." -- Mr. S --, it is well known, holds between three and
four hundred shares in the bank of the United States, and has obtained
discounts, ad libitum.
.

If we take an impartial review of the measures of the government, from its
adoption to the present time, we shall find its practice has corresponded, in
every respect, with this theory. The demonstration strikes us in every page of
the law, that a faction of monarchic speculators, seized upon its legislative
functions in the commencement, and have directed all its operations since. We
shall find, that to the views of this faction, an apt instrument has been
obtained in the Secretary of the Treasury, and to whose emolument and
advancement, all his measures have been made subservient. If the public debt
has been accumulated by every possible contrivance, buoyed up by means of the
sinking fund, made in a great measure perpetual, and formed into a powerful
monied machine, dependent on the fiscal administration, to this combination it
is due. If by means of this sudden elevation of fortune, a dangerous inequality
of rank has been created among the citizens of these States, thereby laying the
foundation for the subversion of the government itself, by undermining its true
principles, to this combination it is due. If those sound and genuine
principles of responsibility, which belong to representative government, and
constitute its bulwark, and preserve its harmony, have been annulled or
weakened; if a practicable means of influence, whereby the members of the
legislature may be debauched from the duty they owe their constituents, has
been formed; if, by implication and construction, the obvious sense of the
constitution has been perverted, and its powers enlarged, so as to pave the way
for the conversion of the government from a limited into an unlimited one, to
this combination they are due. The catalogue of enormities is a lengthy one,
but its truth is well known to those who have marked the course of public
proceedings, or examined the acts.

A more thorough developement of these measures with their pernicious tendency,
may perhaps be presented in a future essay; the object of the present one is
more particularly to demonstrate, that by virtue of this combination, all
regard for their constituents has been abandoned by the parties to it, and that
the public can neither count upon the independence or integrity of the
legislature, or the responsibility of the other departments, whilst it lasts.

That the Secretary of the Treasury has been faithful to this corpse, and
performed his part of the covenant, is well known. Every report from his
department furnishes the proof. Through him propositions for assumption, after
assumption, with all the properties of the debt, for the establishment of the
bank, and for loans from the bank, for the latitude of construction contended
for in the powers of the government, etc. have been ushered into Congress. By
them firm support has been given to these propositions. But it remained for an
experiment still more interesting to the parties, and alarming to the
community, to try the strength of this combination, and evince its turpitude;
the particulars of which I will now detail.

In the course of these transactions and for the term of four years, the real
state of the public finances was never searched into by the legislature. It was
however manifest to the more observant, that the affairs of that department had
gradually assumed a complexity and obscurity, which rendered them almost
impenetrable. To every succeeding session reports had been made that there was
a surplus of revenue, and yet reasons were urged for an increase of the public
burdens, and with which the legislature had complied. Foreign loans were
likewise announced, but no intimation given, how far the foreign debt had been
discharged, or in fact how these loans had been applied. In this situation,
early in the late session, a well known partizan and member of the fiscal corpse
Mr. S -- k, of Massachusetts.
, introduced a bill into the house of representatives, for applying a sum said
to be on hand, to the amount of two millions of dollars, in discharge of the
debt due the bank, on account of the shares taken by the United States. It
seemed strange how there could be lying idle such a sum, and in the course of
discussion only it appeared, that it consisted of the foreign loans, which had
been drawn into this country by the Secretary of the Treasury.

It became immediately an object worthy enquiry, why this money had been drawn
here. If it was idle, the demonstration must be deemed satisfactory, there had
been no occasion for it: Of course that the domestic resources had been amply
adequate to their objects, and in particular those of the sinking fund, to
which alone any foreign money was applicable.

The subject assumed a still more extraordinary aspect from the consideration
that a proposition was then depending, and forming a part of the appropriation
bill for the current year, for a loan from the bank of 800.000 dollars. The
motive to measures in themselves so opposite and contradictory, the one founded
on the idea of a large surplus lying idle, and the other of a poverty in the
treasury, was inexplicable. Nor could it be accounted for upon any rational
principle, why the bank should allow a payment to extinguish a loan at 6 per
cent. one tenth of which only it was bound to receive, and make one immediately
after at five. It could not be presumed that the individual adventurers in the
institution, would sacrifice their interests to the public; it is well known
that such sacrifices are seldom made, nor ought they indeed to be expected. It
was natural to infer that inducements of a different kind led to this
arrangement between the bank directors and the Secretary of the Treasury, and
which no public documents exhibited.

The draft however of the money from Holland, especially if not called for by
indispensable and legal obligations, was an interesting fact, and which
required explanation. Had our engagements been fully and punctually fulfilled
to France? and if they had, would they not have accepted and thanked us for the
service, of a reimbursement of all we owed them? The parallel in their present
situation, with our own when the money was advanced, called upon us for the
offer; and America must feel mortified and humbled if it was not made, at least
so far as we had it in our power to comply with it. In every view an
explanation became necessary, and as so much had been already confessed, in the
course of discussion, a proposition for it could not now be resisted, with even
the appearance of decency. An order accordingly issued to that effect from the
house of representatives upon the motion of Mr. Giles some time in December
last In the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES of the UNITED STATES. Thursday the 27 th
of December, 1792.
Resolved, That the President of the United States be requested to cause this
House to be furnished with a particular account of the several sums borrowed
under his authority by the United States; the terms on which each loan has been
obtained; the applications to which any of the said moneys have been made
agreeable to appropriations; and the balances, if any, which remain unapplied.
In this statement it is requested, that it may be specified at what times
interest commenced on the several sums obtained, and at what times it was
stopped, by the several payments made.


.

To this order the Secretary reported on the 3d of January following that
18.678.000 florins, equal to 7.471.200 dollars, had been borrowed. That of this
sum 4.029.217 dollars had been paid to France, about 3.000.000 dols. drawn into
America, 2.304.369 of which by bills upon our bankers, and between 6 and
700.000 dollars by a diversion of that amount to the payment of the interest of
the foreign debt, and that the residue of the sum borrowed (except about
160.000 dollars still on hand) had been, or were to be applied to different
purposes abroad It would be highly satisfactory to know with certainty that
this money is really on hand; the prevailing and probable opinion is, that it
has been turned to the actual service of the bank, and of those who have
speculated on its discounts. -- The suspicions on this subject are strongest
with those who are best acquainted with the late transactions and present
condition of that institution: And when large sums have been taken without
necessity, and put in a situation which admits of abuses with scarce a
possibility of detection, it affords sufficient ground for the strongest
suspicion, that every thing is not as it ought to be.
.

But the question still remained to be answered, Why had this money been drawn
here? where was it, if on hand, or how disbursed? The report threw no light on
these important points, but rather increased the obscurity with which it had
been inveloped. There was therefore an obvious impropriety in proceeding
further upon either of the bills, which were depending at this time, one before
each house, until the real state of the public finances should be thoroughly
understood. To vote the foreign money improperly drawn here to the bank,
thereby preventing its possible application to any object for which it was
originally intended, or to complicate our affairs further by another loan from
that institution, were by no means desirable objects, at least with those who
had commenced the inquiry. Correspondent efforts were therefore made in each
house to dispel the clouds which covered these transactions, and orders were
accordingly issued from each, for more correct information in every necessary
particular In the SENATE of the UNITED STATES, The 15 th of January, 1793.
Ordered, That the Secretary of the Treasury lay before the Senate, the account
of the United States with the bank of the United States; specifying the precise
sums, with the dates of the debits and credits, from the institution of the
bank to the day the return is made. --

That the Secretary of the Treasury also lay before the Senate, an account of
the surplus of revenue appropriated to the purchase of the public debt, to the
same period; specifying the sums and dates. --

That he lay before the Senate, a statement of the moneys borrowed by virtue of
the law passed the 4th of August, 179^, with the appropriation of the amount,
and the precise dates. --

That he lay before the Senate, the amount and application of the money
borrowed by virtue of the law of August the 12th, 1790. --

And that he also lay before the Senate, an account exhibiting the probable
surplus, and unappropriated revenue of the year 1792, stating, as far as
possible, the dates and the sums.

The 23 d of January, 1793.
Ordered, That the Secretary of the Treasury, lay before the Senate, a general
account, exhibiting the amount of all the public funds and moneys (loans
included) up to the end of the last year, and what remains of each
appropriation, either in cash, bonds, certificates, or other securities, and
stating where the balances are deposited, as far as the same can at present be
done. --

That the particularly state the amount which has been drawn into the United
States, of the moneys borrowed in Europe, under the acts of the 4th and 12th of
August, 179^, the purposes for which drawn, how any part thereof has been
applied, with the balance now on hand, and where deposited.

In the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES of the UNITED STATES, November 21 st, 1792.
Resolved, That measures ought to be taken for the redemption of so much of the
public debt, as by the act, entitled, "An act making provision for the debt of
the United States," the United States have reserved the right to redeem; and
that the Secretary of the Treasury be directed to report a plan for that
purpose.

November 22 d.
Resolved, That the Secretary of the Treasury be directed to report the plan of
a provision for the reimbursement of the loan made of the bank of the United
States, pursuant to the eleventh section of the act, entitled, "An act to
incorporate the subscribers to the bank of the United States."

December 24 th.
Resolved, That the Secretary of the Treasury be directed to lay before this
House, an account of the application of the moneys borrowed in Antwerp and
Amsterdam, for the United States, within the present year.

December 27 th.
Resolved, That the President of the United States be requested to cause this
house to be furnished with a particular account of the several sums borrowed
under his authority, by the United States; the terms on which each loan has
been obtained; the applications to which any of the moneys have been made,
agreeable to appropriations; and the balances, if any, which remain unapplied.
In this statement, it is requested, that it may be specified at what times
interest commenced on the several sums obtained, and at what times it was
stopped by the several payments made.

January 23 d, 1793.
Resolved, That the President of the United States be requested to cause to be
laid before this House, copies of the authorities, under which loans have been
negociated, pursuant to the (...) of the 4th and 12th of August, 1790; together
with copies of the authorities directing the application of the moneys borrowed.

Resolved, That the President of the United States be requested to cause this
House to be furnished with the names of the persons, by whom, and to whom, the
respective payments of the French debt have been made in France, pursuant to
the act for that purpose, specifying the dates of the respective drafts upon
the commissioners in Holland, and the dates of the respective payments of the
debt. A similar statement is requested respecting the debts to Spain and
Holland.

Resolved, That the Secretary of the Treasury be directed to lay before this
House, and account, exhibiting half monthly, the balances between the United
States, and the bank of the United States, including the several branch banks,
from the commencement of those institutions to the end of the year 1792.

Resolved, That the Secretary of the Treasury be directed to lay before this
House, an account of all moneys which may have come into the sinking fund, from
the commencement of that institution to the present time, specifying the
particular fund from which they have accrued, and exhibiting half yearly, the
sums uninvested, and where deposited.

Resolved, That the Secretary of the Treasury be directed to report to this
House, the balance of all unapplied revenues, at the end of the year 1792,
specifying, whether in money or bonds, and nothing where the money is
deposited; that he also make a report of all unapplied moneys, which may have
been obtained, by the several loans authorized by law, and where such moneys
are now deposited.


.

To these orders the Secretary reported, not a plain statement of the public
finances, but a free criticism upon the conduct of one of the members of the
House of Representatives, highly disrespectful to the House, and a series of
elaborate essays illustrative principally of the policy of our institutions,
relative to which no information had been required, and of which certainly no
panegyric from him was necessary. They contained likewise a vindication of his
conduct in certain particulars, relative to which no charge had been brought
forward. These reports too were protracted, and detailed, in such manner, as to
occupy the whole of the session, except a few days before its close.

It is scarcely necessary in this stage, and after the subject has been, so
fully and ably, discussed before the public, to mention the nature, extent, and
objects of those funds which the Secretary had to disburse, with the extent of
his authority over them. A brief statement may, however, make it more explicit,
and intelligible. The following then is the outline: Upon the domestic revenues
consisting of impost, tonnage, and excise, the current expenses of the
government, with the interest upon the foreign and domestic debt, were solely
chargeable. Two foreign loans were authorized by law, the first of 12,000,000
of dollars of the 4th of August 1790, and the second of 2,000,000 of the 12th
ensuing of the same month, destined for different purposes, and established on
different funds. The first was deemed commensurate with the whole foreign debt,
and was suggested as well from the necessity of providing for the instalments
as they became due, and which it was concluded could not otherwise be
satisfied, as by the consideration that as the debt itself was contracted in
the course of the late war, under very inauspicious circumstances, and whilst
the fate of those strenuous and manly exertions, then making for our
independence, was uncertain, it were possible in the present more prosperous
state of our affairs, to obtain a remodification of it to advantage. The second
was intended in aid of the sum of 1,374,656 dollars, being the surplus of
revenue at the end of 1790, appropriated for the sinking fund; and for this
latter purpose only, if required, could any foreign money be drawn here. The
power over these loans, was given in every respect, exclusively to the
President. In regard to them, the Secretary acted by his instruction, and under
his authority, only.

In the discharge of the ordinary duties of the Secretary of the Treasury, and
which I never considered as being very difficult or important, otherwise than
as the care and application of great sums of public money make it so, the
course appears to me to be both simple and obvious. If the revenue should at
any time prove inadequate, the deficiency could not be attributed to him, nor
the executive, unless indeed fallacious statements had been given as the ground
for additional charges, assumptions, increase of the military establishment,
and the like. In such event it became his duty to state the fact simply and
correctly to the legislature, that they might in time supply such additional
funds, as should be necessary; and if the domestic resources of the sinking
fund were exhausted, to state the fact to the President, that he might
determine whether he would avail himself of a foreign loan.

In the foreign transaction, and which was committed to the President, two
considerations were to be principally regarded -- the first, not to borrow at
all, unless, in relation to the object for which the money was designed, it
might be done with advantage -- and the second, so to arrange the business,
that the money borrowed should, immediately after it was received, be paid over
to those for whom it was procured, otherwise we would be subjected to the
payment of double interest. For this latter purpose, an accurate arrangement
became necessary with France, and the money lenders in Holland, that the amount
necessary to be borrowed, might be ascertained with precision.

It appeared, however, by these reports that he had violated the instructions
of the President, in the first instance, by borrowing upon the two million
loan, though expressly confined by them to the other, and for the purpose of
foreign debt only, precluding all idea of drawing any part of the moneys
borrowed into this country (...) of the President, (...) August, (...)
. --

That he had violated the law by blending the two loans together, whereby a
door was opened for a free use of the whole amount of the foreign money in
domestic expenditures, except so much as should be paid to France, under this
single restraint, that upon the final adjustment of the accounts of his
administration, two millions only should be credited to the sinking fund, in
case they were used See the acts of the 4th and 12th of August, 1790; and a
continuation of his report on foreign loans, page 4th.
. --

That by virtue of this arrangement, and upon the pretense of the sinking fund,
or, to use his own words, by way of instrumentality to it, although in fact, by
his own showing, not a single farthing stands thus accounted for, (the domestic
resources having been adequate, except occasionally and under particular
pressures, and which it is to be presumed any of the banks would have
accommodated) he had drawn into this country directly and indirectly, as above
mentioned, about 3,000,000 of dollars, of the foreign money, near 1,000,000
more than was authorized for the sinking fund, in the utmost extent No notice
is here taken of the payments to St. Domingo, because a part only of the money
has been even yet paid, and because the Secretary himself does not seem willing
to rest much upon this contingent item in his statements.
. --

That he had exposed the United States to considerable loss, arising from the
loss of interest for the time these moneys have been thus afloat, and which
must have produced, from the period the drafts were furnished the bank, a
correspondent benefit to those institutions This remark needs no particular
proof. The degree of loss to the public may be calculated, by any one who will
consult the dates and sums in the transaction necessary. It may however further
be remarked, that the sums deposited in the bank of the United States remain
yet to be accounted for, amounting to between 12 and 1300.000 dollars.
. --

That he had borrowed money from the bank when there was no occasion for such
loans, except upon the idea that there ought to be, beyond the pressure of
current demands, to guard against the contingencies of war, and other fanciful
dangers, at least five or six hundred thousand dollars always on hand See pages
12 and 13 of said report.
. --

That he had occasioned a violation of our faith with France, in not paying the
money borrowed in the amount, and at the times stipulated. --

And lastly, that the whole of these transactions had been carried on without
the knowledge of the legislature or the President.

That all these facts are literally and strictly true, will appear by his own
reports, and to which I have referred, except that respecting the failure in
our payments to France, and this I have taken from a view of the debt in
possession of every one, in any degree conversant with public affairs. We owed
to that nation up to the end of 1792, 5, 498, 697 dollars; the actual payments
amounted to 4, 473, 480 dollars only, leaving due on the 1st of January last,
the sum of 1, 025, 216 dollars The debt from the United States to France,
calculated to the end of 1791, computing the livre at 5 and 4-10ths to a
dollar, amounted to the sum of dols. 4,814,814 The instalment due in 1792
amounted to 683,888 5,498,702 The payments made, computing the florin at 2 and
1-2 to a dollar, were, in 1791 3,372,717 In 1792 paid in Europe 656,500 In
1792, paid at the Treasury of the United States for the relief of St. Domingo
444,263 4,473,480 Balance due to France on the 1st day of January, (...) dols.
1,025,222

This statement being taken from the Secretary's own reports to Congress, must
be admitted to be true.


.

These charges are of a high and serious import; and which require the severest
reprehension. Nor has any satisfactory explanation been given, to justify even
the motive, in any one respect. Who shall violate the law, and trample under
foot the boundary of appropriations, especially in the extent and manner herein
shown? Shall the President himself? Does an invading enemy approach your coast
and threaten the public safety? And if in case of extraordinary emergencies, he
had authorized it, would he not have announced it to the legislature at their
next meeting? Those who are acquainted with the respect always entertained and
shown, to the constitution and the laws, by the present chief magistrate, in
every station he has filled, will give the answer. But not only to violate the
law, but likewise the President's instructions, pointing out the mode of its
execution, and on the day they were given, to withdraw the money from France,
in derogation of our national faith, and at a time she most required our aid,
with the other circumstances of misconduct alleged, are not to be palliated
whilst they are acknowledged to exist.

When none are furnished, the mind naturally ranges at large, to seek for
motives to account for a conduct so subversive of all legal and other
obligations of public duty. The character of the man, and his known political
principles, must lay the foundation for conjecture, if indeed, when the facts
are apparent, there can exist any doubt of the motive. Would this money have
aided the republican cause in France, and contributed to enable that gallant
and generous people, to repel the invasion under the Duke of Brunswick? It Is
well known that the pulse of the whole party beat in unison with him, as he
advanced toward Paris, and that with him they were covered with shame and
mortification as he retreated It is an important and well known fact, that the
success of the Duke of Brunswick, was most earnestly wished for by the
principal agents of this aristocratic and fiscal party, who had not even the
decency to conceal their sentiments upon the subject. Is it possible that men
of such principles can be friends to republican government any where, and that
their influence should not be exerted to give a contrary tendency to the
administration of our own?
. Or was it intended solely to aid the bank here, and those speculators his
political associates, pressed it is true by difficulties, and which were
sufficient to excite his sympathy! Was it one or both of these objects which
influenced his measures, for both were answered? Let facts speak to an
impartial and discerning public!

The very respectable and independent member, who had been most active in
pressing this enquiry, considered it his duty to make known his sentiments of
these transactions. Although the last of the long series of reports furnished,
was not presented more than four or five days before the close of the session,
yet he deemed it incumbent on him, and consistent with that candor which has
always marked his character, to show in that stage, the extent of his
objections to this gentleman's official conduct. With this view he laid on the
table, and subject to the disposition of the house, several resolutions
specifying these objections. It was to be inferred, that on account of the
short time intervening before the adjournment, and of course, the impossibility
of examining, and thoroughly comprehending, all the various documents relating
to the subject, and of giving it that full and free discussion its importance
required, it was his wish the consideration should be postponed to the next
session. Upon this point, however, he appeared to be indifferent, because he
well knew the subject was now before another tribunal, who would do justice to
it. But the conduct of the house which I deem important in the scale of these
observations, shall now be noticed.

The fiscal corpse appeared to consider themselves more critically circumstanced
than this member. They were obviously struck with consternation. To get rid of
it altogether, they could not hope. To postpone it to the next session, was
what of all things they dreaded. It was before the public, who were interested
in the result, and who would force a trial at one time or other. They therefore
laid hold of it with avidity, and a strong hand. If we now decide upon it,
perhaps it may be deemed satisfactory, and with us who are his friends, no
danger need be apprehended. They sat day and night upon the resolutions, until
they got through them; and although they complained there was not sufficient
time for the investigation, yet they hurried the decision, in half the time
remaining. The free latitude of discussion, practiced upon other occasions was
refused; the smallest departure was censured; and whenever, in particular, an
approach was made toward the bank, the whole party tumultuously crying to
order, and, with the directors at their head, rose in arms to defend it.

The character of the vote itself, which constituted this majority, is easily
given, by every person acquainted with that of the House, or with public
transactions in general. Of the thirty five, twenty one were stock-holders, or
dealers in the funds, and three of these latter bank directors, and whose
degree of zeal was obviously in the ratio above stated, as their relative
profits; the bank directors, being considerably more active and zealous than
the other members of the corpse. That the fact, of this number being bank
directors, is true, can it is be believed, be satisfactorily shown. The public
books however must contain the evidence, unless entered in fictitious names,
and by them let it be tested The books of transfer at the Treasury, and the
books at the bank, are held secret under the obligation of an oath, on all
persons who use or inspect them, not to reveal the names or amount of
stock-holders. But from information obtained through other sources, the
following members of C -- g -- ss, are known to be stock-holders in the bank of
the United States, or in the public funds: -- N -- w-H -- pshire. Mr. G -- m --
n*. L -- gd -- n*.
M -- ssa -- s -- tts. Mr. C -- b -- t*. St -- g. A -- s*. G -- y*. G -- d --
e. S -- dg -- k.
Rh -- Is It -- d. Mr. B -- n*. F -- st -- r.
Conn -- t -- t. Mr. T -- b -- ll*. S -- rm -- n*. ^ -- ^w -- th*. W -- sw -- w
-- th*. H -- ^^h -- ^e*. L -- n -- d*.
N -- w-Y -- k. Mr. L -- r -- ce*. K -- g*.
N -- w-J -- r -- y. Mr. B -- di -- t. D -- yt -- n*. R -- hf -- d.
P -- ns -- v -- a. Mr. M -- rr -- s*. F -- zs -- s*. H -- st -- r.
D -- la -- re. Mr. R -- d.
M -- ill -- d. Mr. M -- rr -- y*. K -- y.
N -- th-C -- l -- a. Mr. J -- ns -- n*. W -- ms -- n. St -- le.
S -- th-C -- l -- a. Mr. Iz -- d*. S -- th*. T -- k -- r.
G -- g -- a. Mr. F -- w*.


Those marked thus*, are believed to be stock-holders in the bank.


For the motive of their vote, sufficient cause has already been assigned. But
for that of the other members, candor furnishes an apology. The short space of
time allowed for the discussion, to those who had not previously examined the
subject, rendered it impossible for them to understand it: and in that
situation it became their duty to vote on the favorable side. Besides, this
was an affirmative proposition of censure; had one of approbation been proposed
to sanctify these proceedings, it would have been resisted by those thus
circumstanced, with equal force, and most probably have turned the majority, in
like degree, the other way.

I have given a summary of the above proceedings, to evince the solidity of
these observations, and to demonstrate that a combination has been formed of a
powerful faction, in two departments of the government, and upon principles
dangerous to the rights and interests of the community. That being founded on
the basis of private interest, embracing a very extensive circle of society,
and which must acquire additional strength, in proportion as the public debt
shall be accumulated, its activity and force are the more to be dreaded. That
its progress in undermining the great pillars of the government, by the
establishment of an institution, in express violation of its powers, and
capable, as an engine of corruption, of sapping the foundation of public
virtue, and polluting all its measures, has been already great. And that the
consequences to be justly apprehended, unless a speedy and efficacious remedy
shall be applied, are really of the most alarming kind. In contemplation of the
pernicious tendency of these measures, with the astonishing success which had
attended them, and their probable future extent, there was a period not far
back, when I considered the cause of liberty itself in danger, and trembled for
the public safety. I feared that the glorious fruits of the revolution, had
been thrown away, by the blind confidence and temerity, of a generous and
unsuspicious people. But I trust that our day of trial has passed, and that we
may yet be secure. To the manly efforts and disinterested patriotism, of those
who maintained the conflict, against such a combination of interests, and
checked its rapid career, much praise is due. America is sensible of their
services, and will remember their virtues. Thanks, illustrious patriots, your
country greets you well, and will enrol your names upon the immortal records of
fame!

By marking the extent of the evil, the cure is in a great measure designated.
With the legislature should the correction commence, for whilst that branch
preserves its independence and integrity, we are safe. Let us cast from it
then, whatever impurities, tend to impair these qualities, or lessen its
responsibility to the people. Let the public creditors stand apart, not as a
class of men to be branded with reproach and infamy, but as constituting an
interest, which, without due restraint, may endanger the general welfare; and
if admissible at all into that branch, let them be inhibited under the severest
penalties, from a profanation of its functions afterward, by any traffic in
the public funds. Let the law establishing the bank, as a violation of the
principles of the constitution, be declared null and void, or at least let the
establishment be repudiated from its present impure connection with the
government. Let the whole system of the treasury department undergo a thorough
reform, and the most effectual guards be provided against those liberties and
abuses, which have been charged, upon its present administration. Let it be
completely subjected to the supreme head of the executive, against which it
seems to have revolted, and let its communication with the legislature be put
on a footing, more consistent with the constitution, and the dignity and
independence of the representatives of the people. Renovations of this kind,
will not violate public credit, but establish it in the public confidence; will
not impair the energy of the constitution, but restore it to its pristine
health, and proper functions; will not stain our national character, but
exhibit it, in its legitimate features, of a dignified simplicity, and genuine
republicanism.

END.

