THE QUESTION WHETHER GOD WILLS THE SALVATION OF ALL MEN, AND WHETHER HE HAS
RENDERED THE WICKEDNESS AND RUIN OF ANY OF THEM NECESSARY BY AN ABSOLUTE DECREE
CONSIDERED: IN TWO SERMONS DELIVERED AT BERWICK ON LORD's DAY, MAY 19, 1793:

By JOHN TOMPSON, A. M. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN THAT TOWN.

Published at the desire of a number of the hearers.

OH DO NOT THIS ABOMINABLE THING WHICH I HATE. The great GOD. DOVER: PRINTED BY
ELIPHALET LADD, M, DCC, XC, III.

Two Sermons, etc.
DEUTERONOMY V, 29. O that there were such on heart in them, that they would
fear me and keep all my commandments always, that it might be well with them,
and with their children forever.


WHEN GOD gave his law to the children of Israel at mount Sinai, the scene was
truly terrible. He descended upon the mount in awful pomp and terrible majesty;
with thunders, lightnings and a thick cloud, and the voice of the trumpet
exceeding loud; so that all the people in the camp trembled, and mount Sinai
was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in fire -- and
the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount
quaked greatly. This is the account Moses gave of this solemn and terrible
scene, Exodus 19th. The people terrified at the sight, requested that Moses
might be the mouth of GOD to them for the future, to declare his will; and
promise obedience, verse 27 of the context. Go thou near, and hear all that the
Lord our GOD shall say; and speak thou unto us all that the Lord our GOD shall
speak unto thee, and we will hear it and do it. GOD heard and approved of their
proposal, as is declared verse 28, I have heard the voice of the words of this
people which they have spoken unto thee, they have well said all that they have
spoken.

BUT he foresaw the said propensity of his people to backslide; and seems to
lament over them as a people who would revolt to their ruin. But in the text
expresses an ardent and pathetic wish, that they would be as good as their
word, that they would hear and do all that GOD by Moses should enjoin upon
them. -- O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and
keep all my commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with
their children forever.

FROM the text this truth is obvious -- viz -- That it is the will of GOD and
pleasing to him, that we earnestly, diligently and constantly seek happiness,
by a conscientious conformity to his requirements. My design in attending to
this subject, is that I may endeavor to vindicate the divine character, against
the aspersions of such as suggest that notwithstanding the provision made for
the salvation of fallen man, GOD never designed or desired the salvation of
many of them, that a few chosen ones will at all events be saved, and the rest
must necessarily perish; GOD has from eternity decreed their everlasting
destruction, and there is no escaping -- that three fourths of the human race
are the objects of this dreadful decree -- that Christ died only for a few,
viz. the elect, and they only can be saved; and the residue must remain objects
of divine wrath -- That every event that takes place is the consequence of an
absolute decree, and must necessarily come to pass, even all the wicked actions
of wicked men, as well as the virtuous and religious actions of good men. What
worse idea can we possibly form of any being, than to suppose an all-powerful
creator, bringing into existence millions of rational agents only to render
them miserable; designing that they should be wicked, that he might have the
pleasure of terribly destroying them. Let us my brethren never harbor such a
thought of an infinitely wise, just, merciful and good, as well as powerful
GOD. That he does not, cannot design his rational agents for sin and misery,
but for holiness and happiness, I trust will presently be rendered evident. --
That a great proportion of mankind will finally perish there is great reason to
fear. That few comparatively attend to the great, the all-important business of
religion is a melancholy truth -- but this is not because there is not
sufficient provision made for their salvation -- not because Christ did not die
for them -- not because Heaven has decreed that they should be wicked persons,
and live in the neglect of GOD and religion; but because they will not comply
with the divine proposals. -- Possibly it may be objected, it is the decree of
Heaven that men should act as they do, and it cannot be otherwise -- It appears
to me shockingly blasphemous thus to make a pure and holy GOD the author of
sin, by suggesting that he can require his creatures to pursue such a mode of
conduct, and yet by an absolute decree lay them under a fatal necessity of
disobeying him, and then terribly punish them for such disobedience -- Shocking
thought! That the people of GOD are a chosen people, will not be disputed --
they are frequently called so in scripture -- I shall mention but one text out
of many that might be quoted to this purpose, 1 Peter, ii, 9. But ye are a
chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that
ye should show forth the praises of him who has called you out of darkness
into his mavelous light. The doctrine of election is often mentioned in
scripture, and therefore should be considered as a doctrine of christianity:
but the precise sense in which it is to be understood, has been always matter
of doubt and dispute among the greatest and best men; and perhaps, the highest
angel in heaven, does not fully comprehend the subject -- On a matter so nice
and intricate, it surely becomes such short-sighted creatures as we are, to
think and seek speak modestly and with great caution -- and ever cultivate
great charity toward such as think differently from us, on a matter which none
of us can decide -- and whatever scheme we adopt, surely we should ever guard
against one that shall imply any imperfection in the great and glorious GOD --
And there can be no difficulty in concluding that that is wrong which
represents him as an hard master, an unjust and cruel being, requiring
impossibilities of his creatures and punishing them eternally for not
performing them -- This is a character of him so contrary to reason, and that
given of him in the sacred writings; that we ought to reject that scheme which
implies it. It is rational to suppose a perfect being, possessed of every thing
amiable and excellent, every thing to render him lovely in the eyes of his
rational agents; and in the most endearing light do the scriptures exhibit the
character of the glorious GOD; as an infinitely wise, holy, just, good, kind,
compassionate being -- consulting the good of his rational creatures like a
tender father; yea, with a compassion infinitely greater than the most tender
earthly parents exercise toward their children.

THAT scheme of divinity therefore which represents this gloriously
compassionate being, as rendering the ruin of his creatures necessary cannot be
of GOD, and ought to be rejected with abhorrence?

THE doctrine of the decrees, I think should be numbered among those things
which the Apostle Peter mentions in his 2d Epistle 3 chapter at the 16th verse
-- as contained in Paul's Epistles, hard to be understood, which they that are
unlearned and unstable wrest unto their own destruction. Concerning things
which are hard to be understood, it must be improper to assert dogmatically.

THE doctrine of Election has been sadly abused to the dishonor of GOD, and the
great injury of mankind; rendering some secure and throwing others into great
distress. When the man who has no relish for the great business of religion, is
called upon to attend to the concerns of the soul, to quiet his conscience
while he indulgeth himself in iniquity, he will object and say, it is doubtful
whether I am elected or not; if I am elected I shall certainly be saved, I need
not give myself any concern about the matter. If I am not elected, I shall
inevitably be damned; and it will be to no purpose, to make any attempt to
obtain salvation. This is a subtle wile of the Devil to keep men secure in his
service, and in this way they sometimes reason themselves out of religion --
because they have no heart to engage in it. On the other hand, it is sometimes
the case that those who are earnestly and diligently seeking the face and favor
of GOD, are greatly distressed through fear that they are not of the number of
GOD's elect -- and therefore shall finally perish. Thus Satan worries those
whom he cannot destroy.

THE man who lives a life of rebellion against GOD has certainly no claim to
happiness; no reason to look upon himself one of GOD's chosen ones -- but he
who lives like a christian, a life of faith and obedience to our Lord Jesus
Christ, has no reason to fear that he shall miss of salvation. We need not
worry ourselves about election if we are possessed of the character and temper
of christians, he that is holy will be happy. Let me observe farther, reason
and religion dictate that GOD governs the world agreeable to some wise and good
plan; and it is equally evident that he has made us rational agents. Our
business is, not to inquire into the secret counsels of heaven; but to labor
to know and do the revealed will of heaven; in this way shall we make our
calling and election sure, this is what is pleasing to GOD, and this is the way
to secure our own eternal happiness.

THIS is the truth suggested in the text, and which I shall endeavor to
establish you in the belief of, viz. that it is the will of GOD and pleasing to
him that his rational creatures diligently and constantly seek happiness by a
compliance with his proposals. GOD has made us capable of happiness; has given
us strong desires after it. Those desires are therefore lawful: and he has
amply provided for satisfying them.

IF it be inquired on what terms we may be happy, I answer, by a conscientious
compliance with the gospel, by faith in and obedience to the dear redeemer,
this is what GOD requires of all who enjoy gospel light and privileges -- this
he has made the condition on which we may and surely shall be happy -- and it
certainly is his will and pleasing to him that we seek and serve him in this
way. The words of the text if duly attended to must put the matter out of
dispute -- O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me,
and keep my commandments always; that it might be well with them, and with
their children forever.

ARE these the words of him who by a fatal decree has made the wickedness and
ruin of mankind necessary? Would he as it were lament that his people would be
miserable through their own folly; and express an ardent wish that they would
do as they had said; would be in all things obedient, that it might be well
with them? Those words were spoken by the great GOD himself, who must mean as
he said -- It would be blasphemous to doubt of his sincerity.

HE is a GOD who cannot lie, and is under no possible temptation to say one
thing while he means another. Therefore when he expresses his wish that his
people would be virtuous and religious, that they might be happy; there can be
no reasonable doubt that it is his sincere desire fire that they comply with
his will; that they may secure to themselves the blessings of this life, and
that to come. And it must be impudent, wicked and blasphemous to suggest that
he has by a decree rendered it necessary for them to pursue a contrary mode of
conduct.

THAT GOD wills the happiness of his rational agents is probable by a great
variety of arguments. -- This may be argued,

1st. FROM the goodness and benevolence of his nature. He is the fountain of
goodness -- goodness in the abstract. We have all possible evidence that GOD is
good, not only from the character he has given of himself; but from daily and
hourly experience, it is his glory that he is unboundedly good. When Moses put
up this petition, I beseech thee show me thy glory. The Lord answered, I will
cause all my goodness to pass before thee; and proclaimed his name the Lord,
the Lord GOD merciful and gracious, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin,
etc. We are all witnesses for GOD, that he is good. He dispenses his savors
liberally and promiseuously to the wicked and profane as well as to the
virtuous and holy; causes his fun to rise and shine on the evil and on the
good. And sends rain on the unjust as well as on the just. Surely this
infinitely good being who is kind to the evil and unthankful, cannot will the
miseries of his creatures without great and just cause; it is contrary to his
nature to be cruel or unkind. Therefore he never can by a decree render the
wickedness and misery of mankind necessary -- but his goodness must incline and
dispose him to promote the prosperity and happiness of his rational agents in
all proper ways. Therefore it is pleasing to him when we take a proper care of
ourselves by pursuing the road leading to happiness.

2d. THIS is evident because his glory is in a sense connected with the
happiness of his intelligent creatures -- we do him the greatest honor, when we
pursue such a mode of conduct as tends most to our comfort and felicity. It is
a self-evident truth, that GOD made man to honor and serve him; and this
qualifies him for happiness in the enjoyment of him; is he not pleased when men
make it their care to answer the end for which he gave them being? Is it
possible but he should be displeased when they do what in them lies, to
frustrate his designs?

3d. SUCH a mode of conduct as infinite wisdom dictates as honorary to GOD and
happy for man is infinitely wise and good in itself, the law of GOD is holy,
and the commandment holy, and just and good, a conscientious conformity to it
therefore as it is happy for man, so it must be pleasing to GOD.

4th. THAT GOD wills the salvation of mankind, and is pleased when we seek
happiness by complying with his divine proposals is evident, from a
consideration of the ample provision he has made for our salvation. He made man
upright and completely happy. Withheld no good thing from him, but the use of
one tree, this he prohibited his meddling with for a trial of his obedience,
threatened death if he disobeyed. But alas! this did not restrain him; he finned
and introduced into the world misery and death. -- Now my brethren, had GOD
delighted in the death of sinners, he would have suddenly destroyed those
revolters from his government; would suddenly have involved them in that
destruction which is the just demerit of sin: But said mercy how shall I give
him up! accordingly a gracious plan was revealed, for his recovery. This did
not imply any change of mind in the great GOD: but was agreeable to the plan
which lay in the divine mind, from all eternity, on foresight of the fall of
man; nor does it imply the least abatement of his detestation of sin, or
mitigation of the punishment threatened: for though the offender escaped the
immediate effects of divine vengeance; yet sin was not pardoned without a
satisfaction; and it was terribly punished in the person of the glorious son of
GOD, who appeared as surety for sinful man, our glorious Lord laid down his
life to ransom man from destruction. Now is it rational to suppose that GOD
would give his dear son to die for sinners, and not be pleased to have them
receive him as their savior, trusting in him for pardon and eternal life? But
the objector will say (perhaps) Christ died only for the elect, a small
proportion of mankind, but is this the language of scripture? It has been often
said. It is certainly worth while to inquire whether such a doctrine is
contained in the sacred writings. I confess I know no passage of scripture
which represents our blessed Lord as having died only for a few: but many which
declare the contrary -- He has indeed said, Matthew vii -- 14. strait is the
gate, and narrow is the way leading unto life; and few there be that find it.
That many are called but few chosen, Matthew xx, 16. But it by no means follows
from hence that he did not die to render salvation possible to all -- But these
passages intimate how awfully prone mankind are to abuse the riches of divine
goodness: neglect the things which belong to their everlasting peace.

THE Apostle represents our Lord as having tasted death for every man -- Heb.
ii, 9. we see Jesus who was made a little lower than the Angels for the
suffering of death crowned with glory and honor, that he by the grace of GOD
should taste death for every man.

1 JOHN ii, 2. AND he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only,
but also for the sins of the whole world -- The Apostle Paul frequently
mentions his dying for all. II Cor. v, 14. We thus judge, if one died for all
(which is taken for granted) then were all dead, I Tim. ii, 6, Who gave himself
a ransom for all. And in the 5th to the Romans, the Apostle represents the
recovery by our Lord Jesus Christ, as extensive as the ruin by Adam, verse 18,
as by the offense of one judgment came upon all men unto condemnation: even so
by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification
of life. It is exceeding unnatural to suppose that by the first all men are
meant, all the descendants from Adam, and by the latter only a few of them both
must be understood precisely in the same sense, to mean the whole human race
ruined in Adam and recovered by Christ. Can any thing be more arbitrary than to
say he tasted death for every man of the elect. He died for all men of the
elect. Is not this an uncouth unnatural and forced construction of these
scriptures?

I SEE no necessity of concluding from those texts with the UNIVERSALISTS, that
all men will be finally happy. I am far from this opinion, nor, do I believe
that the Apostles designed to convey this idea; but that our Lord by his death
brought all mankind into a salvable state, and that any miss of happiness will
be their own fault, and not because Christ did not die for them -- seeing GOD
has made this provision for the salvation of all men it must be his will that
we accept of his son: and it must be absurd indeed to suppose he should by a
fatal decree prevent it.

I LEAVE these broken hints to your serious consideration, and shall further
pursue the subject (by divine leave) in the afternoon.



SERMON II
P. M. DEUTERONOMY. V, 29. O that there were such an heart in then, etc.
THESE gracious words of the GOD of Israel give us the sullest assurance that
this glorious and compassionate being delights not in the sin and ruin of his
rational creatures; much less has he made sin and misery necessary by a fatal
decree. And yet this is the doctrine of some. And it is sometimes the case that
the most abandoned characters will endeavor to exculpate themselves and
connections in the commission of the most heinous and scandalous crimes, and
console themselves under the infamy of punishment with this consideration, that
these things were decreed from all eternity. -- shocking! to lay the blame upon
a sinhating GOD. But a merciful GOD has revealed his kind purpose of salvation
to fallen man, and has assured us in the text and elsewhere, that it is highly
pleasing to him that his rational agents comply with his proposals, and thus
secure their own happiness. This truth I undertook to establish. -- and argued
it, 1st. FROM a consideration of the goodness and benevolence of the divine
nature. 2d. FROM the connection of the glory of GOD with the happiness of his
people, who while they zealously and earnestly pursue the road to happiness --
glorify GOD and do great honor to his religion. 3d. FROM the fitness of such
conduct as is dictated by infinite wisdom. 4th. FROM the consideration of the
ample provision GOD has made for the happiness of mankind in giving his dear
son to die for them, to be the propitiation for the sins of the whole world.


I add

5th. HE tenders salvation to all where the gospel comes -- makes a general
offer of the blessings of the new covenant, viz. pardon of sin, sanctifying
grace, every thing that is best in this world and eternal glory hereaster --
see Isaiah 55, beginning, Ho! every one that thirsts come ye to the waters;
and he that has no money, come ye buy and eat; yea come, buy wine and milk
without money and without price. Wherefore do ye spend your money for that
which is not bread, and your labor for that which satisfies not? Hearken
diligently unto me, and cat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight
itself in fatness, incline your car and come unto me; hear and your soul shall
live, and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies
of David, verses 6 and 7, seek ye the Lord while he may be found -- call ye
upon him while he is near, let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous
man his thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord and he will have mercy upon
him: and to our GOD, for he will abundantly pardon.

Is the great and glorious GOD sincere in this gracious invitation, or is all
pretense and mockery of miserable sinners exposed to rain? O let us start at
the blasphemous thought, that an infinitely perfect being can be capable of
such solemn trifling. And yet we must believe him capable of this, if we can
suppose that he would give this general invitation to sinners to come to him
and be happy; would urge them again and again, reason the case with them,
expostulate with them on the folly of trifling with the most important
concerns, and make such promises to them of pardon and blessedness if they
would fulfill the condition, when he in fact designed no such thing with respect
to many, but it was his original plan that they should be wicked and perish
forever. Let us never harbor such a thought of the greatest, the wisest, the
kindest and the best of beings; who has declared that he does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the children of men -- Execution of judgments upon his
enemies is called his strange work. -- Isaiah 28, 21.

I SHALL mention one more general invitation to sinners to return to GOD that
they might be happy, which proves beyond all contradiction, that none are cut
off from this great privilege, a chance for salvation by a decree of heaven. --
Revelation xxii, 17, The spirit and the bride say come, and let him that
hears say come; and let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will let him
take of the water of life freely. -- As GOD cannot be deceived and will not be
mocked; so he will not deceive and mock his creatures -- as he has therefore
made such provision for the happiness of mankind, and so kindly invited them to
accept of it; it must be pleasing to him when we comply with his kind and
gracious proposals; earnestly, diligently and constantly seek the Lord while he
may be found, and call upon him while he is near; while it is an accepted time
and day of salvation. -- Beside,

6th. HE has commanded all men every where (...) repent. Is it possible but he
should be pleased with obedience to his requirements? The Apostle Peter
declares 2d Peter, iii, 9 -- that the Lord is long suffering, not willing that
any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. Was Peter mistaken?
Did he under the influence of the holy ghost commit a gross error to writing?
if not, GOD is pleased when any of his rational agents devote themselves to his
fear and service, and thus secure his favor, which is life, and his loving
kindness which is better than life.

7th. HE sent his ministers to proclaim salvation to the world, and invite
sinners in his name to accept it on his terms -- go teach all nations, preach
the gospel to every creature, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you -- this was the purport of the commission given the apostles
by their divine Lord. Was it a matter of indifference in his view, whether the
hearers of the gospel embraced it or not -- he has given us all possible
evidence to the contrary. He has by the most gracious promises endeavored to
allure sinners to embrace christianity and live as it teaches -- promises a
great, a complete salvation to him that believes; but paints in most striking
colors the danger of neglecting so great salvation -- he that believes not
shall be damned, shall be banished forever from the presence of the Lord into a
lake of fire and brimstone, prepared for the devil and his angels. Where is the
equity of this, if Christ died but for very few, and the rest are cut off from
all possibility of complying with the gospel and obtaining eternal life, by a
dreadful decree of reprobation?

8th. WE have not only the word but the solemn oath of GOD, that he is not
pleased with the ruin of sinners simply considered, Ezekiel. 33, 11, say unto
them, as I live faith the LORD GOD (because he could swear by none greater,
than himself) as I live, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but
that the wicked turn from his way and live -- and adds this gracious
exhortation and expostulation; turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, why will
ye die O house of Israel? shall we dispute the word and the oath of GOD? shall
we have the effrontory to say contrary to what he has solemnly sworn? that he
does delight in the death of the wicked; that he has made their impenitency and
ruin the dreadful effect of an absolute decree.

9th. HE is using all proper means with sinners to influence them to religion,
and prevent their destruction, exhorting, warning, counselling them; yea, by
his ministers beseeching them to repent and turn to him, that their souls may
live. We are ambassadors for Christ, as though GOD beseech you by us, we pray you
in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled unto GOD, ^ Cor. 5, 20 -- and a gracious
GOD even laments over perverse and wicked people, that they refuse to hearken
to his calls, attend to his instructions and follow his directions -- that they
will work their own ruin; and when they are guilty of aggravated
transgressions, and deserve sudden and remediless destruction, and he threatens
to bring it upon them; his bowels (to speak after the manner of men) yearn
toward a sinful people; he laments in language like this; How shall I give thee
up Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah?
How shall I set thee a^ Zaboim? my bowels are turned within me, my repentings
are kindled together. Hosea 11, 8. Our Lord lamented the blindness, obstinacy
and impenitency of Jerusalem, Luke 13, 34 -- O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which
killest the prophets and stonest them that are sent unto thee; how often would
I have gathered thy children together as a hen does gather her brood under her
wings and ye would not; behold your house is left unto you desolate. Chap. 19,
41-42 -- when he was come near he beheld the city and wept over it, saying, if
thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong
to thy peace! but now they are hidden from thine eyes. All this shows that he
delights not in the death of sinners -- that their destruction is not owing
to any want of due care in the great GOD to prevent it, much less is it the
necessary consequence of his decree; but of their own careless, shameful
negligence, horrid propensity to iniquity, and sad abuse of most important
privileges. I shall only add

10th. That it is the will of GOD and pleasing to him we seek happiness, by a
compliance with his gracious proposals -- and that he has put no bar in the way
to our obtaining the great end of religion, the salvation of our souls -- but
desires us to improve well the price in our hands to get wisdom.

ALL this is evident from this consideration, viz. That those who finally miss
of happiness will be considered forever inexcuseable -- every mouth will be
stopped -- they will have no plea to make in bar of the execution of divine
vengeance -- but be exposed to aggravated punishment in proportion as they have
enjoyed and misimproved great privileges. But how can this be just, if it is a
fact that all who are finally impenitent are so in consequence of a divine
decree: if the great governor of the world designed them to be eternal
monuments of his vengeance, and created them for this end -- if this is the
case, then Christ did not die for them: no provision has been made for their
happiness; they have not misimproved great privileges, for they never enjoyed
any -- and may, without being accused of impudently replying against GOD, offer
this plea, viz. that they had no chance for salvation, that Christ did not die
to save them -- that GOD did not design nor desire them to be virtuous and
happy -- that they cannot be justly accused of, and punished for rejecting a
Savior, when none was provided for them -- that the means of grace were never
designed for their use, and there was no possibility that they should be
benefited by them -- for it was from eternity decreed that that they should be
wicked and miserable.

BUT my brethren this is a doctrine contrary to godliness -- We have from the
sacred writings every assurance, that a gracious GOD pitied ruined man and
provided amply for his recovery. To this end sent his son to die, not for a few
only, but for the whole human race; to render salvation possible to every son
and daughter of Adam, if they could be prevailed with to act like rational
agents, and though many will be so unhappy as to neglect and miss of this great
salvation, and sink into aggravated and most dreadful destruction for such
neglect: yet it will not be because GOD has decreed their sin and misery; nor
because he is opposed to their happiness. For we have the fullest proof that he
is the Lord GOD, merciful and gracious, slow to anger, forgiving iniquity,
transgression and sin. So good a GOD never could create and design so noble a
rank of beings for sin and misery, but for holiness and happiness -- must be
pleased with the virtuous and holy because they bear his image -- and because
they pursue a mode of conduct good and fit in itself. In his word he has given
us the fullest assurance of his willingness to save sinners -- In that he has
provided himself a lamb, his dear son to take away the sins of the world, by a
sacrifice of himself; who has done and suffered every thing necessary to this
important end. He has propogated his gospel at one time or another through the
world; nothing can be more general than the offer it makes of salvation by our
Lord Jesus Christ. The invitation which is given in these general terms,
Whosover will, let him come, and him that comes (said our Lord) I will in no
wise cast out.

HE has commanded all men every where to repent; yea beseeches them to be
reconciled unto GOD.

HE has declared and sworn that he is not willing that any should perish, but
that all should come to repentance. That he has no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but that he turn from his way and live; and to effect this uses a
variety of means and arguments to prevail with men to comply with his gracious
scheme -- laments over fallen men that they are so little influenced by such
motives, but choose the road to death. Rush down to destruction through the
arms of mercy -- calls after them, urges them to flee for their lives --
reasons the case with them -- why will ye die? -- Wherefore do ye spend your
money for that which is not bread? Why will you pursue vanity and trifles, and
neglect the most important concerns? Commands, promises, threatens, all to the
same end to prevail with men to adopt his scheme -- that they may be happy
forever, in the enjoyment of him. But I need not dwell longer on a subject so
plain -- I think every impartial inquirer must be satisfied that it is the will
of GOD and pleasing to him, that we seek happiness in the way he has pointed
out -- viz. by conscientious compliance with the gospel? That it must be
unreasonable to suppose that a gracious GOD would make such provision at
infinite expense for the salvation of mankind, and have no design, no desire
that they should generally adopt his gracious plan, and obtain an interest in
the purchased salvation -- yea design and decree the contrary -- and yet at the
same time declare that he takes no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but
that they turn and live, and lament that they will foolishly turn a deaf ear to
his calls and rush down to destruction. What an idea does such a scheme give us
of the great GOD, as a most deceitful and trifling being imaginable.

O MY brethren, let us reject with abhorrence a scheme so dishonorary to GOD,
and injurious to men, and believe a GOD of truth when he assures us that he is
not willing that any should perish, but all should come to repentance.

BUT it may be objected, many will finally perish, notwithstanding all the care
GOD has taken for their salvation; is this agreeable to his plan? Or is he
frustrated in his designs, desires and expectations? I know of no way to evade
or obviate this objection, but to consider that GOD has made and deals with men
as free agents -- He made man though he foresaw that he would sin against him
and destroy himself -- But this opened the way for an astonishing and glorious
display of the divine perfections, in the plan of redemption by our Lord Jesus
Christ -- hence mercy and truth have met together, righteousness and peace have
kissed each other.

HE thus provided for the salvation of his creatures, though he foreknew that
multitudes would act an unreasonable and wicked part; would sin against light,
would reject the savior, and neglect his religion; would abuse the riches of
divine goodness, and treasure up unto themselves wrath against the day of
wrath, and the revelation of the righteous judgment of GOD. It cannot be
doubted that he foreknew all this and probably determined not to prevent it.
But this by no means implies any compliance upon the creature, much less any
decree, making such a wicked conduct necessary. This is so inconsistant with
the divine character, that such a thought should never be indulged -- nor does
the the divine foreknowledge of the unreasonable part mankind would act imply
that it was not his will that they should do better; should be virtuous and
happy. The truth is, he ever deals with mankind as what they are, not mere
machines but moral agents, rational and accountable creatures, and this
necessarily implies freedom. No man can be accountable for an action which he
is compelled to do, GOD (as we have seen) provided for the salvation of the
children of men, revealed in his word, his kind and gracious design, proposed
the terms of reconciliation! furnished us with all necessary means, promised
all necessary aids to those that ask them -- urges us by every motive to come
up to his terms -- and having thus set before us life and death, leaves it to
our choice, whether we will be virtuous and happy, or wicked and miserable --
But expresses his ardent wish that we would choose wisely. O that there were
such an heart etc. But though sinners will frustrate his kind purposes
respecting themselves, his perfect foreknowledge of events prevents all
disappointment, and he who is self-existent and independent, who is happy,
completely and eternally happy in and of himself, can not be made unhappy by
the folly and wickedness and misery of his creatures. On the whole, I cannot
doubt my hearers, if you have duly attended to the declarations in scripture,
that GOD is ready to pardon, justify and save sinners, that he takes no
pleasure in their death, etc. That they amount to a demonstration in your minds
that a good GOD wills your salvation, if you can be made willing to accept it
on the most easy and reasonable terms possible; and is it not surprising that
any should be unwilling? Surely you all desire happiness, no man can
deliberately consent to be miserable, have you any doubt whether there is
sufficient provision made for your spiritual and eternal well-being? What could
GOD have done more, to secure your felicity consistently with dealing with you
as men, than he has done. The purchase is made, a mighty savior who saves to
the uttermost all that come to GOD by him, tenders a great, a complete
salvation to you, and urges it upon you. Indulges you with his word, his
sabbaths his ordinances; calls upon you by conscience, by his word, his
ministers, his providence, strives with you by his spirit; does not suddenly
cut sinners down as cumberers of the ground when they contradict and rebel, and
treat him with neglect and contempt, waits to be gracious, seems loath to
destroy them, surely, sinners the question may be put to you with emphasis. Why
will ye die? What reason can you assign why you neglect GOD and religion. The
word of GOD declares that he is not willing that any should perish, it is
evident that nothing is wanting on his part. The fault then must be our own, if
we miss of salvation. Are his terms unreasonable? Is it unreasonable that we
should forsake our sins, which our consciences condemn; and live a virtuous and
holy life, pursue such a mode of conduct as heaven and earth will approve of?
Is it unreasonable that the glorious son of GOD who yielded to death to ransom
us from destruction, should be the object of our love, trust and obedience? O
that there might ever be such an heart in us that we might not be anxious about
those secret things which belong to GOD, but believe and practice those which
he has revealed -- always cultivate such an holy fear of him as shall influence
us to keep his commandments, that it may be well with us and our children
forever.

AMEN.

