REVEREND DAVID TAPPAN's FAREWELL DISCOURSE.

A MINISTER's SOLEMN FAREWELL TO HIS PEOPLE. A DISCOURSE DELIVERED TO THE THIRD
CHURCH AND CONGREGATION IN NEWBURY,

By DAVID TAPPAN, A. M. THEIR LATE PASTOR; ON OCCASION OF HIS INTENDED REMOVAL
FROM THEM TO THE UNIVERSITY AT CAMBRIDGE, WHERE HE HAD BEEN INVITED AND
INTRODUCED TO THE OFFICE OF PROFESSOR OF DIVINITY.

PORTSMOUTH: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOHN MELCHER, 1793.

A Minister's solemn farewell to his people.
IId CORINTHIANS, 13 Chap. 11 Verse. FINALLY, BRETHREN, FAREWELL: BE PERFECT; BE
OF GOOD COMFORT; BE OF ONE MIND; LIVE IN PEACE; AND THE GOD OF LOVE AND PEACE
SHALL BE WITH YOU.


THE occasion, which has now brought us together, my beloved hearers, is one of
the most solemn and affecting that can take place on this side eternity. The
parting farewell between a minister and people, who have been long connected in
the bonds of so endearing and happy a union, is like tearing asunder the
strings which twine around our hearts. But as it is now determined, that we
must soon part from each other, let us endeavor to fortify our minds for the
trying scene; that we may, by divine grace, endure and improve the pangs of
separation, in a manner becoming our character as men, and our profession as
christians.

I know of no passage in the whole book of God, which is better adapted to such
an occasion, than the words just read; in which, the Apostle Paul, who had been
a religious instructor and spiritual father to the Corinthians, closes his
epistle to them with an affectionate and solemn farewell; every word of which is
full of pathos and energy; and the whole sentence most powerfully calculated to
excite, direct, and encourage them to a right temper and behavior in their
present situation. Finally, Brethren, farewell: Be perfect; be of good comfort;
be of one mind; live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you.

It shall be the business of this discourse to explain the meaning of the
several branches of this valedictory exhortation, and to apply the subject to
the present occasion.

The first clause in the text, Brethren farewell, requires very little
illustration. It is a common expression of kindness, or mode of civility, by
which acquaintance and friends take their leave of each other; and it imports a
hearty desire of the welfare of those to whom it is addressed. The very
formation of the word holds up this idea. It is compounded of fare and well;
and therefore the use of it, on occasion of parting with our friends, evidently
expresses a wish, that they may fare well in our absence, or enjoy the sweets
of health and prosperity. When it is used by christian friends, it implies a
devout wish of each other's spiritual welfare. This was undoubtedly the leading
sentiment of the Apostle, when he took this affectionate leave of his spiritual
children of Corinth. In order to attain this desired end, their spiritual
prosperity, he proceeds to direct and urge them to several important and
seasonable duties.

He, first, exhorts them to be perfect. This may be considered as pointing out
the duty of each particular member, or of the society at large. First, let each
member of the church be perfect, by examining and correcting his own errors,
filling up his own defects, pushing forward and completing his own graces and
virtues. Let every one look to himself, that he be evangelically perfect, or
sincere and impartial, in his regard to truth and duty; that he have his head
and heart, his profession and practice, as nearly conformed as possible to the
great pattern and rule of perfection. This is the sure, the only method to
reform and perfect the whole society: This is the way to have a pure and
glorious church. Which leads to the other idea; be perfect in your collective
capacity as a christian society. In order to this, return to your former pure,
united and happy state. Revive that mutual christian charity which is the bond
of perfection; which, like the joints, veins and arteries of the natural body,
conveys nourishment and vigor, unity and perfection, to the whole church or
spiritual body of Christ; which draws the affections and efforts of all the
members to one point, the edification and completion of the whole. In one word,
grow in divine love, in holy affection to Christ your Head, and to one another
for his sake. This will at once perfect your character as individuals, and
complete the union, beauty and happiness of your society.

Secondly, Be of good comfort: that is, in the way of earnest endeavors after
reformation and christian perfection, take the courage and comfort, which a
consciousness of your own sincerity, and the assurance of the divine assistance
and blessing, ought to inspire. Let no present or apprehended difficulties or
dangers, attending your situation, be permitted to overwhelm your minds.
Remember that the way of duty is the road of safety; that God is with you,
while you are with Him; and that so long as you keep in this path, he stands
engaged, by promise, to guide, protect, and prosper you.

Thirdly, Be of one mind. The import of the original is, think, mind, or relish
the same thing. It may, therefore, include a union or harmony of sentiment,
affection and practice. First, it implies a union of sentiment respecting the
great essentials of religion, those which constitute or exhibit the foundation
of the sinner's hope, the necessary causes, conditions, or means of salvation.
I grant there is an absurdity in exhorting or requiring all men to think alike
in every punctilio of religious opinion. For in the present imperfect state,
many things operate to hinder even wise and good men from adopting the same
modes of thought and expression on every religious subject. Besides, a union of
sentiment among rational beings, is not to be effected by authoritative precept
or pathetic exhortation; much less by violent or compulsory measures; but by
convincing light or evidence presented to their understandings. But still, when
sufficient means of light are afforded to men (which is the case with those who
enjoy the gospel, with respect to every important article of faith and duty)
they may be properly required to think the same thing; that is, to embrace and
hold fast the same essential points; at least to adhere to the substance, the
spirit, the practical design of these truths, though they should differ in some
speculative niceties in the mode of stating or explaining them. A total
rejection of any plain and important doctrine of christianity, under sufficient
means of light, is very criminal and dangerous. For it proclaims an unfair and
dishonest, a wilfully blind and depraved heart. In short, if it be the duty of
the members of a religious society, to love the truth, to harmonize with it in
their governing taste and disposition, to keep their minds ever open and
attentive to the evidence of it, and eager to embrace it whenever duly
presented; and if right views of religion are important to right temper and
practice; if gospel truths admitted into the mind are the foundation of gospel
holiness in the heart and life; and if the united adherence of a christian
church to these truths is an important mean of preserving and increasing true
godliness, charity and peace in the society; then it is a very important duty
in the members of such a society, carefully to maintain truth and unanimity in
their religious principles. In order to this, it becomes them with united
diligence, impartiality and zeal, to attend to the word of God, as the great
fountain of orthodoxy, and the true center of christian unity.

But secondly, the precept before us includes union of affection. As if it had
been said, let your hearts be one in christian love, though about matters of
less moment your opinions and (...) be divided. This is evidently the meaning
of the same original words in Romans 12.16. -- and 15.5. Be of the same mind
one toward another. Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be
like-minded one toward another, that ye may with one mind and one mouth
glorify God. Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us. The
general spirit of these texts is this: Though your religious ideas in some
circumstantial points be different; yet I desire and pray, that you may all
have that mutual charity, which shall form in you one mind and soul, and
influence you to express the same candor, esteem, and beneficence toward one
another, which each of you manifests and wishes for himself.

In order to this, thirdly, be one in your practice, or pursuit. Let vital
practical christianity, which is the principal thing, be the great object of
your united attention and zeal; and let your agreement in this be an effectual
band of union and fellowship among all the members of your society. Such a
harmony of practical judgment and holy activity on the side of the christian
cause, is a much better foundation for mutual charity, and is far more
conducive to the edification and glory of a church, than the most zealous and
united attachment to orthodox opinions, where a correspondent union of practice
is wanting, Agreeably, this same apostle, in the third chapter of his epistle
to the Philippians, having related to them his own views and exercises, having
told them, this one thing I do -- I press toward the mark of perfect holiness,
for the prize of eternal life, proceeds to urge them to a united pursuit of the
same course. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: And if in
any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.
Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule;
let us mind the same thing. As if he had said, we have all attained to this
great point, to set up Christ, holiness and heaven, as our mark and our all.
Let it, then* be our main concern, to walk by this rule, to mind this one
thing: And if in any lesser matter you have a diversity of sentiment, you must
heartily bear with one another, and patiently wait and hope for the time when
God shall give you a better and united understanding in these controverted
points. In the mean-time, let us go hand in hand; let us join all our forces
together, in promoting these great and weightier things in which we are agreed,
in building up the kingdom of our common Lord* which consists, not in meat and
drink, but in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

But this brings us to the next clause of the text,

Live in peace. Let each one cultivate a pacific temper in his own breast: let
him manifest it in his whole deportment: let him labor to the utmost to diffuse
and promote it through the ^^^^ety. Let all the members endeavor to introduce
and maintain that christian concord, which grows out of a union of sentiment,
affection and practice in the cause of pure, vital and saying religion. In
order to this, let each one mortify and guard against those corrupt passions in
his own heart, which tend to disturb the peace, and to kindle the flame of
contention; such as pride, selfishness, anger, envy, a spirit of party, of
jealousy and prejudice. Let every one religiously abstain from all unfriendly,
injurious, provoking language or behavior. Let each one see that his own heart
be formed to a truly kind, meek, and humble disposition, to a temper of supreme
love to God, and cordial benevolence to his neighbor. This will make it easy
to deny ourselves, our own interests and wills, for the peace and edification
of our brethren* This will prompt a gentle deportment toward all. This will
make it our studious and delightful employment to contrive, to advise, to
prosecute the things which make for peace; to use the best methods for
reconciling differences, for healing divisions, for stilling tumults, for
advancing christian love and harmony. This will make it easy to observe the
fair and equitable rules prescribed by our Savior, for restoring peace between
ourselves and others, whenever it has been interrupted by any real or supposed
offense, either on our part, or on theirs. When the members of a christian
society habitually profess and cherish this spirit, and pursue this train of
conduct, they live in peace, in the true and noble sense of our text.

The remaining part of the verse enforces our compliance with the preceding
directions, by a most encouraging and glorious motive; And the God of love and
peace shall be with you. The Supreme Being is styled the God of love and peace,
because he is the prime source, the perfect exemplar, and the great patron of
them. Love and peace constitute the beauty and felicity of his own nature: they
are the native element in which he dwells. He has eminently displayed these
qualities in his works; especially in that of redemption, which is at once an
astonishing manifestation of love, and an unparalleled scheme of reconciliation
and peace. Agreeably, love and peace are the spirit and breath of the gospel,
of its doctrines, precepts, examples, motives, and benefits. They are
peculiarly congenial to the nature and undertaking, the respective offices and
works of God's Son and Spirit, the constituted Redeemer and Sanctifier of men.
On these accounts the Most High is properly and emphatically called the God of
love and peace. As such, he must approve and delight in these qualities in his
creatures: He must take complacency in them, both as his own production and his
own image. Those, therefore, who possess these virtues, have all possible
security of the special presence and everlasting favor of the Almighty: For he
can no more disregard his own image, than he can deny himself.

What noble encouragement is here for a people studiously to practice the
duties here enjoined; and what a source of comfort to those who are found
pursuing this path! To be the conscious favorites of the infinite God! to be
sure of his gracious presence statedly residing among them, as the pillar and
the Schekinah did with his ancient Israel, to guide, protect, invigorate and
comfort them! to walk daily in the light of his approving, smiling countenance!
to be visited with tokens of his love in frequent showers of temporal and
spiritual blessings, like the refreshing dews on the ancient mountains of
Hermon and Zion, where the Lord commanded the blessing, even life forevermore!
Surely happy is the people that is in such a case; yea, happy is the people
whose God is the Lord!

And now, what greater happiness can I wish for you, my beloved friends of this
society, than that you may unitedly follow the directions, and inherit the
promise of this excellent text! How would it sooth the anguish of my heart in
parting with you, if I had the pleasing assurance that the God of love and
peace would statedly reside among you! It gives me unspeakable joy to find so
much of a prudent, pacific, condescending spirit reigning among you at this
critical juncture. I rejoice to hear that this spirit appeared in your meeting
sometime since for supplying the Desk; that it visibly guided your election of
a committee for that purpose; and that the members of this committee in
general, are engaged in discharging their important trust, in so united,
discreet and faithful a manner. So far as I can learn, there seems to be a
general disposition both in them, and in the society at large, to forget the
things which are behind, to throw the mantle of charitable oblivion over any
differences of opinion, or infirmities of temper and expression, which may have
taken place during the late scene of trial and temptation. With regard to
myself, I feel that I am constantly subject to imperfections; and it is
probable that many of you have witnessed more or less of infirmity in some of
my language or deportment, in managing the late very delicate and interesting
affair between you and me. So far as this has been the case, I publicly ask
that candor and forgiveness, which I am ready, in return, to exercise toward
any similar imperfections in you. But as to the main part which I have acted,
and the leading motives which have influenced me in this great business, you
will allow me to leave with you this solemn parting declaration; a declaration
which, I think, I could confidently make, if I were now addressing you from my
dying bed: -- I solemnly declare, that my acceptance of the result of the late
Council, and of the invitation of the College, proceeded, not from any want of
affection to my people, or of a deep sense of my former sacred engagements to
them; not from an inordinate desire of worldly splendour or wealth, ease or
gratification; but from a clear conviction of conscience, that the same King of
Zion, who formerly placed me in this part of his dominions, now called me to a
different and more important department in the same great moral kingdom. And I
feel great comfort in the thought, that this glorious King, who will shortly be
my Judge, has seen all the inward springs, and leading steps of my conduct, in
the whole process of this transaction; in particular, that he is my witness,
that I did not form my judgment on this great question in a blind, hasty,
self-sufficient manner; but threw my mind open to every ray of light from every
quarter, sought the best directions both from Heaven and Earth, and exercised a
patient, candid and mature deliberation on the subject for a series of months.
It also gives me comfort that the same Omniscient Being knows the falsehood of
some reports, which ignorance, prejudice or passion have circulated; such as,
that I sought the new station to which I am chosen; that I secretly acted in
concert with some of the Electors, and also with the late Council previously to
their result: The reverse of which all those gentlemen know to be the truth.
These facts, connected with the remarkable unanimity of both those very
respectable bodies, greatly support my spirits in this trying, parting scene. I
mention them in this solemn manner, at this affecting moment, hoping they may
leave a favorable impression on the minds of some of the Brethren of this
Church, whose judgment on the final question differed from my own. I confess it
would be a very comfortable circumstance to me, to go from you in a state of
entire mutual charity and union with all my former friends in this place. The
more united you are in sentiment and feelings respecting your late Pastor and
his dismission from you, the more fair and encouraging will be the prospect of
entire affection and unanimity in year future proceedings. It is chiefly on
this account that I have touched on this delicate string. I have not felt, nor
meant to express any anxiety for my own reputation; for I bless God that I do
not find this has suffered by the late transactions: Much less have I intended
publicly to boast of my own conduct and motives, or to reflect blame upon those
who have thought and acted in a different manner. For the former character and
friendship of my dissenting Brethren both in Church and Parish, have in general
been such, as to entitle them to my esteem and grateful remembrance. Therefore,
without making any invidious distinctions, let me affectionately apply the
subject to all.

In the first place, my friends, study to be perfect. Let each individual
rectify what is amiss in his own temper and conduct; and then let him labor to
reform, to edify and to perfect the whole body, of which he is member. While
you are thus engaged, be of good comfort. Though a dark cloud should long hang
over your affairs, yet in the way of duty, cheerfully and resolutely trust in
Him, who is Head over all things to his Church. Labor to be of one mind.
Carefully maintain that union of religious sentiments, which has so long been
your honor and happiness. Be on your guard against new and strange doctrines,
which would turn you aside from the good old way. Be not too hastily carried
away with strangers, on account of their popular talents, their flowing
eloquence, or apparent religious zeal. Remember there have been instances of
agreeable pulpit gifts and fervor, yea, of excellent evangelical discourses,
where there has been but little solid judgment or sound knowledge and learning;
or where the private character of the preachers has been very imprudent,
unstable and vain, yea, perhaps directly immoral; or where dangerous principles
have been artfully concealed or varnished, until the speakers have gained a
large and firm interest in the people's affections, or have secured a good
settlement among them; and then they have assumed courage to bring forward
their obnoxious peculiarities. These notorious facts admonish you, my friends,
to exercise the greatest care and circumspection in the trial of candidates;
and in particular, to insist upon authentic written testimonials from some
approved ministers, in favor of such as come to you from any distant part of
the country. Let me further entreat you, in your probation of preachers, to
direct your principal attention to the matter of their discourses, and to
compare this, together with their private conversation and deportment, with the
form of sound words contained in the bible, and with the scriptural characters
of a good minister or gospel bishop. If you find, on such examination, that you
have a candidate, who in a good measure comes up to this standard, be ready
with one mind to embrace him. Let not an unbounded desire of novelty, or an
over-nice and difficult taste, or any consideration of mere fancy prevent you
from peaceably uniting in the choice of such a preacher.

But though you should not agree in every punctilio respecting either preachers
or doctrines, yet be of one mind, with regard to mutual christian affection. In
order to keep alive this union, be very cautious against splitting into
parties, and setting up particular favorite preachers at the head of several
contending factions. In short, let your united zeal be mainly employed in
reviving and promoting the power and practice of true godliness in yourselves
and in one another. Be of one mind in this great cause, in which all good men
are agreed. This will divert your zeal from those lesser matters, which are so
apt to divide christian brethren: It will operate as a powerful cement of
christian union and fellowship; and it will happily conduce to rectify and
harmonize your sentiments upon all matters of importance, For if any man or
body of men will do his will, they shall know of the doctrine whether it be of
God.

Finally, study to live in peace. Extinguish and forever bury every thing,
which might tend to blow up the coal of discord. Think and speak of nothing but
what may conduce to sweeten your minds and strengthen the cords of unity.
Sacrifice to peace every thing but essential truth and duty. Abhor the thought
of making christianity itself a ball of contention; of quarrelling about the
house, or the preachers, the doctrines or institutions of that religion, which
breathes nothing but love and peace, which was wholly intended to make men one
with each other, and with their God. Think how inconsistent and monstrous a
spectacle this would be! Think, on the other hand, of the beauty, the pleasure,
the advantages of christian concord! How does it embalm the name, and recommend
the character of a religious society! What an alluring charm does it present to
preachers of the best description to come among such a people, and to breathe
in their fragrant and delightful atmosphere! How does it cement, invigorate,
and fortify them, like a building or a city that is firmly compacted together!
Above all, how does it assimilate them to the God of love and peace, engage his
directing and comforting presence with them, and ripen them for his heavenly
kingdom, that region of pure, consummate, everlasting friendship and peace!

Some of the motives, now suggested, ought to have peculiar weight with this
flock. For you, my brethren, know, by long experience, the value and sweetness
of a united and peaceful state, and have enjoyed a distinguished reputation on
this account, through the whole vicinity. I hope, therefore, none of you will
lightly throw away so precious a jewel. If by losing your Pastor, you should
lose the ornament of brotherly affection and unity, will not the surrounding
world be apt to ascribe your former harmony and peace, not to any real prudence
or goodness in you, but to some other cause; and will they not reasonably
conclude, that a people who had been so long and so closely linked together,
need not, and would not have broken in pieces, had it not been for their own
criminal inattention, folly, or perverseness! I hope and pray that your future
conduct may be such, as to give no occasion for such unfavorable remarks.

I cannot prevail upon myself to close, without some more particular addresses,
suited to the subject and occasion.

First, let me direct my brotherly and christian farewell to the members of this
church. It is with a mournful pleasure that my mind runs over the many solemn
and endearing scenes, in which you and I have been jointly concerned, during my
pastoral connection with you. A great part of the members of this church, who
were active in my settlement here, are now fallen asleep. But our
ecclesiastical records give us the comforting information, that since that date
a much larger number has been added to the church, than death has taken from
it. Let us, my beloved Brethren and Sisters, look back, on this affecting
occasion, to the many weekly Sabbaths and monthly Sacraments, which have rolled
over us during that long period; and if you have formerly attended my
ministrations in the sanctuary or at the table of the Lord, with any spiritual
delight or advantage, thankfully ascribe the glory to God, and favor the
unworthy instrument with your good wishes and prayers. However your judgments
may differ respecting the lately decided question of my removal, yet so far as
you have the spirit of Christ, your professed Master, you will certainly feel
disposed tenderly to pity and pray for one who has been intimately united to
you so many years, and to beseech the great Fountain of wisdom and grace to
give him a right discernment of his duty, and a hearty practical conformity to
it, and to aid and prosper him in all his laudable views and pursuits. Such
prayers I shall esteem a precious token of your christian love; and shall not
fail to return them, so long as my powers of thought, affection, or utterance
remain. In the mean time, permit me to leave with you one word of brotherly
counsel and admonition. Remember your high and holy profession. Think how many
eyes are upon you. Consider how much the credit and interest of religion in
this place, and among your own posterity, will, under God, depend upon you. To
you it belongs to lead in the resettlement of the gospel ministry and
ordinances in this Society. Let me then conjure you by all that is sacred, to
go before the congregation in a prudent, meek, condescending, exemplary
deportment. In taking my leave of this church, I bid farewell to that sacred
table, where I have so often stood and administered the blessed memorials of my
Redeemer's dying love. It is very unlikely that we, who have surrounded that
divine board, shall all meet again in that ordinance here below. Let us then
part with a solemn resolution of standing ready to meet each other at the
marriage supper of the Lamb, where we shall eat bread and drink wine new with
our heavenly Bridegroom, in his Father's kingdom.

Let me now address several classes of persons in the Congregation. First,
those of you who are heads of families will accept my best acknowledgments for
the respect and hospitality, with which you have ever received me at your
houses; and will permit me to bring to your recollection the solemn scenes of
sickness and mourning, which have called me to most of your habitations during
my ministerial relation to you; and to inquire how you have improved these
affecting admonitions. I must also ask you, how you have entertained the many
counsels and warnings I have given you on the important subject of
family worship, instruction and government. What a happiness should I esteem
it, to be able to leave you with the agreeable assurance, that each of your
houses contained an altar to Jehovah, and a nursery for Heaven! I beseech those
of you, who have resisted all former pressing calls to these great domestic
duties, to revolve the subject once more in your serious deliberation, and to
ask yourselves, how you will meet the eye of your Judge, and of your poor
neglected children, in the day of retribution. I entreat such as have hitherto
neglected the baptismal dedication of their offspring to God, to consider
whether their excuses for this omission will bear the scrutiny of the final
judgment. I once more call upon those, who, having visibly devoted themselves
and their houses to God, yet neglect a religious care both of themselves and
their baptized offspring, or do not seriously press forward, agreeably to their
solemn vows, toward the mark of complete preparation for, and attendance on
all divine institutions: I beg such to realize how they will account at last
for this inconsistent conduct; or how they can expect to be owned as Christ's
friends, when they have not been careful to do whatsoever he has commanded.

You, who are heads of families in this place, will remember, that the removal
of your Pastor leaves a double weight of duty upon you. To you it belongs to
supply, as far as possible, the want of a public Shepherd, by taking special
care of the Lambs of the flock; by administering to them the best personal
instruction and discipline; by providing for them the best schools of
education, and by endeavoring to the utmost to guard them against those evils,
which are too apt to spring-up in the soil of a destitute Parish, at least
among the young and unthinking; I mean more especially a spirit of
indifference, forgetfulness and contempt respecting religion in general;
particularly the Sabbath and its public solemnities, or the preachers and
ministers of the gospel; or else an itching, unsettled, distracted habit, in
reference to these matters. These evils will be more l^^ely to infect the
rising generation, if their parents and superiors countenance them by their
example. I hope therefore, that every governor of a family here, will be
peculiarly watchful over his own lips and actions, from a tender regard to the
many children and youth of this flock, as well as to the general order and
peace of the Society.

Secondly, I now turn myself to the younger part of the congregation. I want
words, my dear young friends to express my tender feelings for you at this
affecting moment. My mind flies back to those solemn and endearing seasons,
when I publicly administered to many of you the ordinance of baptism; called
over you the sacred name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and set you apart
to be God's children. The yearly catechizing seasons too, in which I have with
pleasure attempted to convey divine knowledge and pious impressions into your
opening minds; these rush with peculiar force upon my memory and heart. And
now, what can I say to you in this farewell address, but what I have often
repeated both in public and private? Remember your Creator and Redeemer in the
golden days of your youth: Reverence his name, his worship, his sabbaths, his
ministers: Honor and obey your parents and teachers: Flee all youthful lusts
and vanities: Pray and give thanks to God every day for your daily mercies; and
especially, pray earnestly that God would give you another minister, much
better and more successful than he has been, who is about to leave you. At the
same time be assured, that your late Pastor leaves you, not because he does not
love you; but because he thinks his Master calls him to a place where he may do
much greater good* I hope, therefore, you will still love him, and pray for his
prosperity; and also continue to love and respect all the worthy ministers
around you. Let me particularly caution you against disaffection to those
ministers who have advised my dismission from you. Though their judgment in
this instance crosses your feelings, yet you will always find them your
faithful friends. If you treat them, and all preachers of good character with
respect, this will have great influence to encourage some excellent man to come
and settle among you as your Pastor. And let me remind you, my dear youths,
that your own interest for time and eternity, peculiarly depends upon your
obtaining such a minister. Finally, it will always give me great joy to hear
that the children of this beloved society are walking in the truth. I shall
ever welcome any of you or your parents, as visitants to my new habitation; and
shall take peculiar pleasure in assisting those of you, who may repair to that
seat of learning, with which I am connected, for a public education. And since
I know not that I shall ever address you again, let me adopt and leave with you
the parting, dying charge of David to his Son Solomon; And thou, Solomon my
Son, know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart and a
willing mind: If thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake
him, he will cast thee off forever.

I close with taking my solemn leave of those two great classes of people, into
which this, and all our religious societies are divided; I mean sinners and
saints, Those of you, who belong to the former class, have to this moment
opposed, in your hearts and practice, all the solemn and affectionate
instructions, warnings, entreaties, and persuasives, which have been used by
your late Pastor and other Ambassadors of Jesus: And though you have generally
professed to esteem and delight in the public ministrations which you have
enjoyed in this place; yet they have only pleased your ears and your fancies,
or at best made but a superficial and transient impression upon your
consciences and natural affections, without producing any hearty abiding love
and obedience to the truth. The thought of leaving any of you in so melancholy
a situation, is truly painful; especially when I look forward to that awful
day, when you and your late minister must meet again at the tribunal of our
common Judge. Then it will be known to all worlds how I have preached, and how
you have heard and treated the messages I brought you. If it shall then appear
that I have in the main (though I am sensible with very great and sinful
imperfections) delivered and enforced the important saving truths of the
gospel, what conscious guilt, what shivering horror must seize those of you,
who have ungratefully and finally rejected these truths; who have trampled
under foot all the tender reiterated offers of infinite grace and everlasting
salvation! With regard to such persons, every prayer, sermon, exhortation, yea,
every mean of religion which they have at any time attended and enjoyed, will
be a fresh witness against them, and fall like a weighty millstone on their
guilty heads! But, what a joyful day, what a rapturous meeting will that be to
those of you, who have not only professed respect and friendship for your late
unworthy, spiritual guide, but have loved and obeyed the divine truths which he
has imparted to you; have truly relished and fed upon a preached gospel, and
have found it sweeter and more nourishing to your spiritual natures, than
honey, or the honeycomb is to your animal. If I should be so happy as to be
found in the same class with you in that day, how endearing, how transporting
will be our interview! how complete our union and fellowship! how high will our
mutual congratulations and thanksgivings rise! If our affection to each other
is so great in this imperfect state; if the pleasure of meeting together in
religious and even civil communion has been so sweet; what will be the
friendship, the reciprocal endearments and joys between a faithful minister and
his pious saved people, in the world of perfect everlasting love and enjoyment!
O may these great ideas and prospects have their full effect both upon you and
me! May they sooth the anguish of our present separation! May they rouse and
constrain us all to an earnest and growing preparation for a happy meeting at
the right hand of our Judge!

Now may the God of peace, who brought again from the dead, our Lord Jesus,
that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you
that which is well pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ: to whom be glory
forever and ever.

AMEN.

