THE PRACTICAL FARMER: BEING A NEW AND COMPENDIOUS System of Husbandry, ADAPTED
TO THE DIFFERENT SOILS AND CLIMATES OF AMERICA.

CONTAINING THE MECHANICAL, CHEMICAL AND PHILOSOPHICAL ELEMENTS OF AGRICULTURE.

WITH MANY OTHER USEFUL AND INTERESTING SUBJECTS

BY JOHN SPURRIER, AN OLD EXPERIENCED FARMER, LATE OF THE COUNTY OF HERTS, IN
GREAT BRITAIN: AND NOW OF BRANDYWINE HUNDRED, COUNTY OF NEW CASTLE, AND STATE
OF DELAWARE.

WILMINGTON: PRINTED BY BRYNBERG AND ANDREWS. M, DCC, XCIII.

SUBSCRIBERS NAMES.
A.
Adams Richard, Philadelphia 1 Copy. Adams James, Montgomery county 1 Copy.
Allen Thomas, New London 1 Copy. Angel James, Baltimore 2 Copies. Armor
William, Christiana hundred, State of Delaware 1 Copy. Armstrong John, do. do.
do. do. 1 Copy. Auld Doctor Isaac, Montgomery county 1 Copy. Avery Thomas,
Groten 1 Copy.
B.
Babcock Paul* Stonington 1 Copy. Baldwin John, do. 1 Copy. Baker Pemberton,
Norwich 1 Copy. Barker Peter, Philadelphia 1 Copy. Betton Solomon, Marttro,
Stafford county, Virginia 1 Copy. Benson John, Wilmington, State of Delaware 1
Copy. Bean Joshua, Montgomery county 1 Copy. Bickerton Jesse 1 Copy. Boot^
James, Esquire. Sec. of the State of Delaware 1 Copy. Bolles David, New London 1
Copy. Booth Jonathan, Elkton 1 Copy. B^^ing Robert, Petersburg Virginia 1 Copy.
Bonsale James, B. Philadelphia 1 Copy. Bourn Benjamin, Providence Rhode Island
1 Copy. Brindley James, Wilmington, State of Delaware 4 Copies. Burn Joseph,
Mill-Creek hundred, do. do. 1 Copy.
C.
Cauffman John, 1 Copy. Cattcast William, Philadelphia 1 Copy. Channing
William, New-Port 1 Copy. Cheesman Benjamin, Philadelphia 1 Copy. Cleveland
Moses, Canturbury 1 Copy. Cook Isaiah, Preston 1 Copy. Comstock Abner, Lime 1
Copy. Combs N. Lamberton, New Jersey 1 Copy. Constable William, New York 1
Copy. Crow Robert, Port-Penn 1 Copy. Craig Frederick, Wilmington, State of
Delaware 2 Copies. Cunningham Allen, New London Cross Roads 1 Copy. Cresson
Ebenezer, Philadelphia 1 Copy.
D.
Davis William, Petersburg, Virginia 1 Copy. Dewees Jesse, Annapolis, Maryland
1 Copy. Drown Doctor Solomon, Providence, Rhode Island 1 Copy. Durfee Richard,
New London. 1 Copy. Duffield Edward, Philadelphia county 1 Copy. Duncan
Charles, Petersburg, Virginia 1 Copy.
E.
Elroy John M. Bristol 1 Copy. Emes Worsley, Philadelphia 1 Copy. Eyerly Jacob,
Jun. Nazareth, N. C. 3 Copies.
F.
Fisher Daniel, Greenville county, Virginia 1 Copy.
G.
Gebler Godfrey, Philadelphia 1 Copy. Gibson George, New London 1 Copy. Gibbons
Abraham, Sadsbury, Lancaster county 1 Copy. Gilpin I. B. Philadelphia county 1
Copy. Gilpin Samuel, Elkton 1 Copy. Goodell Samuel, Pomfret 1 Copy. Gray
William, Brewer, Philadelphia 1 Copy. Graham David, Baltimore 2 Copies. Green
Thomas C. esquire. New London 2 Copies. Griswould Matthew, Lime 1 Copy. Gorby
Joseph, Brandywine hundred, State of Delaware 1 Copy. Grubb John, do. do. do. 1
Copy. Grubb Isaac, do. do. do. 1 Copy. Grubb Amer, do. do. do. 1 Copy. Grubb
Benjamin, do. do. do. 1 Copy.
H.
Hayes John, Wilmington, State of Delaware 1 Copy. Hayward William, Eastern
Shore, Maryland 1 Copy. Hague Stephen, Burlington 1 Copy. Hammond N.
Philadelphia 1 Copy. Heath Richard, Warwick, Pennsylvania 1 Copy. Higgens
David, Lyme 1 Copy. Hollings John, Upper Providence, State of Delaware 1 Copy.
Hollingsworth Henry, Elkton 1 Copy. Horlbeck Peter, South Carolina 1 Copy.
Hoomes John, Bowling Green, Virginia 1 Copy. Hughes John, Eastern Shore,
Maryland 1 Copy. Hyndman Samuel, Philadelphia 1 Copy.
I.
Jarvis Elijah, Brandywine hundred, State of Delaware 1 Copy. Jefferson Thomas,
esquire. secretary of the United States 5 Copies. Icrom Richard, New London 1 Copy.
Inedly William, 1 Copy. Inskeep John, Philadelphia 1 Copy. Johnson Stephen,
Preston 1 Copy. Johnson Robert, Franklin county 1 Copy. Israel Israel,
Philadelphia. 1 Copy.
K.
Kean Thomas, esquire. Wilmington, State of Delaware 1 Copy. Kirwan Nicholas,
Mill-Creek hundred, State of Delaware 1 Copy. Kimball Nathaniel, Preston 1
Copy.
L.
Lambert Zachariah, Brandywine hundred State of Delaware 1 Copy. Leake Richard,
Savannah Georgia 1 Copy. Le Couteuta Lewis, Philadelphia 2 Copies. Littler John
S. Wilmington, State of Delaware 1 Copy. Livingston Chancellor, New York 5
Copies. Logan George, Philadelphia county 1 Copy. Loney Amos, Baltimore 1 Copy.
M.
Mason Stephen Tomson, esquire. Laudon county, Virginia 6 Copies. M'Bride Daniel,
Brandywine hundred, State of Delaware 1 Copy. M'Dougal, -- 1 Copy. M'Lee, --
Lyme 1 Copy. M'Kennan William, New Castle, State of Delaware 1 Copy. Moal
William, New London cross-roads 1 Copy. Medford George, Gleaves, Queen Anne's
county, Maryland 1 Copy. Milner Nathaniel, Wilmington, State of Delaware 1
Copy. Miller Jacob, Montgomery county 1 Copy. Miller Charles Edward,
South Carolina 1 Copy. Miller Charles, Mount-Pleasant, Buck's county 1 Copy.
Morris Luke, jun. Delaware county 1 Copy. Moore William, Greenfield county,
Shropshire, Massachusetts 2 Copies. Murry -- Wilmington, State of Delaware 2
Copies.
N.
Nixon Charles, Dover, State of Delaware 1 Copy. Niles Elisha, Chatham 1 Copy.
Noyes John, Lyme, New London 1 Copy.
P.
Painter Samuel, Birmingham, Delaware county 1 Copy. Pearce William,
Philadelphia 2 Copies. Potts Joseph, Plymouth 1 Copy. Powel Samuel, esquire
Philadelphia 5 Copies. Preston Shuhael, New London 1 Copy. Price Philip, jun.
Chester county 1 Copy. Pollock George, New York 1 Copy. Pryor Abraham, Dover,
State of Delaware. 1 Copy.
R
Ramsey Nathaniel, Cecil county, Maryland 1 Copy. Reichel the Rev. Charles
Nazareth 1 Copy. Rees James, Philadelphia 1 Copy. Richards Edward, Delaware
county 1 Copy. Riddle Joseph, Alexandria 1 Copy. Rittenhouse Benjamin,
Montgomery county 1 Copy. Roberton Benjamin, Philadelphia 1 Copy. Robinson
William, Philadelphia 1 Copy. Rose David, jun. Philadelphia 1 Copy. Ryans James
1 Copy.
S
Sanders Robert, Charles Town, Maryland 1 Copy. Seldus Carey, Marttro, Stafford
county, Virginia 1 Copy. Shallcross Joseph, jun. White-clay creek 1 Copy. Shute
William, Esquire. Elizabeth Town New Jersey 1 Copy. Sharp Samuel, Eastern Shore,
Maryland 1 Copy. Sill David, Lime 1 Copy. Smock Robert, Philadelphia 1 Copy.
Smith Snead, Col. Northampton county, Virginia 1 Copy. Sprogell John, 1 Copy.
Spicer Jacob, 1 Copy. Spiel Michael, Philadelphia county 1 Copy. Steward
William, New London 1 Copy. Steel Isaac, Cambridge 1 Copy. Stout Benjamin,
Kent county, State of Delaware 1 Copy. Stroud Joshua, Mill-Creek hundred, do.
do. 1 Copy. Stout Cornelius, Huntingdon township, N. J. 1 Copy. Stidham --
New Castle county, State of Delaware 1 Copy. Swift Samuel, Philadelphia county
1 Copy.
T.
Taber Job, New London 1 Copy. Talley Edward, Brandywine hundred, State of
Delaware 1 Copy. Tailor Ambrose, Providence, Delaware county 1 Copy. Tailor
James, Philadelphia 1 Copy. Thomas James W. Baltimore 1 Copy. Tilton Doctor
James, Wilmington State of Delaware 1 Copy. Turman Moore, Esquire. Trenton N. J. 1
Copy. Tussey Isaac, Goshen, Chester county State of Delaware 1 Copy. Tunis
Richard, for the Blockey and Merion Society 6 Copies.
V.
Van Reed John, Philadelphia 1 Copy. Vandever John, Jun. Brandywine hundred,
State of Delaware. 1 Copy. Voyge Michael, Charming Forge 1 Copy.
W.
Washington George, Esquire. President of the United States 10 Copies. Wayne Genesis
Georgia 1 Copy. Welling John, Esquire. Hopewell Township Huntingdon county, N. J. 1
Copy. Wharton Kearny, Philadelphia 1 Copy. Whitall Zatt. M. Woodberry N. J. 1
Copy. Williams William, Jun. Preston 1 Copy. Williams George, New London 1
Copy. Williams Doctor Frederick, Norfolk, Virginia 1 Copy. Williamson James, E.
H. Chester Town Maryland 1 Copy. Williamson Adam, Brandywine hundred, State of
Delaware. 1 Copy. Wister John, Salem county, N. J. 1 Copy.
To Thomas Jefferson, Esquire. Secretary of the United States.
SIR,
I AM happy in being permitted to dedicate the following treatise to you, as
well on account of your being a promoter of every degree of useful knowledge,
as by your judicious conduct in public and private life: setting an example
worthy of imitation. -- And as greater improvements have been made in this
country in other arts, than in agriculture, which of all sciences I conceive to
be the most beneficial to mankind: the following attempt to improve in that
line can claim no other merit than a sincere intention of endeavoring to
promote and increase, upon the most rational principles, the real strength and
wealth of this commonwealth. With this view, I flatter myself I shall obtain
your approbation and patronage; and shall think myself happy, if I may be
deemed to have been not altogether an useless member to society.

I have the honor to be, With the highest respect, Your most obedient, Humble
servant, JOHN SPURRIER.
Brandywine hundred, county of New Castle, and state of Delaware, September
1792.
CONTENTS.
I. The properties of different soils. II. The properties of manures, and their
effects. III. How to manage the farm-yard, and make composts. IV. To improve
wet lands, and clearing land from trees, etc. V. Plowing and fallowing of land,
and preparing it fit to receive the different seeds. VI. How to make
fertilizing steeps, and prevent blights and smut. VII. A description of the
different sorts of grain and grass seeds, the time and quantities to be sown;
with several experiments made on the same. VIII. How to manage upland, low and
watered meadows. IX. A comparison of different methods of farming in the
several counties of England. X. For raising turnips, preventing the ravages of
the fly, with feeding and fattening sheep on them. XI. An account of the Mangel
Wurzel, or the Root of Scarcity, its proper culture, with its use and
advantages. XII. The usefulness, culture and method of raising, drying and the
virtues of hops. XIII. Directions for sowing, transplanting and managing
flowers, herbs and vegetables in the garden, with grafting and budding of fruit
trees, and a new method of planting and improving fruit trees in the field.
XIV. A plan of a brew house, laid down with directions for placing the
utensils; with the best method of brewing beer and ale; and to make cider keep,
and be much stronger than common. XV. A description of a drill machine, and
running hoe: with the method of making and plaishing of hedges. XVI. The
management and method of fattening cows, oxen, sheep, hogs, calves, lambs and
horses; with directions and remedies, and receipts of proper medicines to cure
the several diseases they are subject to.
An explanation of provincial words made use of in this treatise.
Boughting -- Is the throwing two thoroughs against each other, by going
backwards and forwards with the plough.

Baulks -- Is fast ground that the plough missed.

An etch -- Is land that has been prepared by plowing after other grain.

Fallow plowing -- Is several plowings to clear the land from weeds, and
prepare it for a fallow crop.

A lay -- Is ground broke up that has been in grass.

Having of cattle -- Is a swelling caused by the wind in clover and lucern
grass.

Tilt or tilth -- Is when the ground is reduced by the plough and harrow to a
fineness like powder.

Tiller -- Is to branch or shoot out many stalks from the root.

Nitrous dews -- Are salts in the air which descend on the earth in form of
dews, which are beneficial to all roots they come at.

Ally -- Is that distance between the rows of grain or vegetables.

Staple -- Is that part of the earth or mould fit for vegetation above the
clay, gravel, etc.

THE PRACTICAL FARMER: BEING A NEW AND COMPENDIOUS System of Husbandry, etc.
ON AGRICULTURE.
THE numerous volumes which have already been published on agriculture, by
authors of the greatest abilities and experience, render it in some measure, a
kind of presumption to attempt making public any further observations and
experiments. -- But when I reflect that agriculture is not reduced to a regular
system (especially in this country) or arrived at that degree of perfection
which other arts, manufactures, and sciences have attained; -- and as it is
universally acknowledged, that every person who contributes, or endeavors to
contribute to the public good, deserves applause; I trust that such
observations and improvements as tend to promote the public welfare, will be
deemed worthy of some attention.

Activity and inclination, induced me to make practical agriculture and
improvements in husbandry, my amusement and principal study: and having studied
most authors in that science, and their experiments and maxims laid down,
enables my proving which are most advantageous; and as I entertain the opinion
that every member of society ought to communicate what he has discovered,
induces me to publish the present treatise, which I have endeavored to write
in such plain language as may suit the meanest capacity. The multiplicity of
improvements that are now making in arts, sciences, mechanics and manufactures
in this country, should animate the farmer to be no less attentive to
agriculture; which is so necessary for the subsistence and welfare of mankind,
in this and every other country. -- The most illustrious heroes, philosophers
and poets among the ancients, studied to encourage, improve, and even practiced
agriculture. The most noble Roman consuls and dictators, were taken from the
plough. The senators of that once flourishing people, and the most learned men
of all ages, made agriculture their chief study and employment; esteeming it to
be the original and genuine source of the strength, wealth and prosperity of
every nation.

The noble and most learned and ingenious men of the present age, animated with
the public welfare, have condescended not only to study and practice
agriculture, but likewise to encourage and promote this noblest of arts with
indefatigable zeal. It is to such men of understanding and liberal sentiments,
the public are indebted for the very great improvements made in agriculture and
all other arts.

Every man whose natural abilities have been cultivated by education, should
certainly study the improvement of such arts and sciences, as tend to promote
the public welfare.

Man was not born merely to eat, drink, sleep, or to spend his time in hunting,
shooting, gaming, idleness, dissipation, and sensual gratifications; but to be
industrious and useful to society; and ought to leave some record of his
actions as a testimonical of his endeavors, at least to be useful to the
present and future generations.

Men pursue different objects as their inclinations and fancies lead them; but
of all the arts, agriculture, when properly conducted, is one of the most
useful, profitable, pleasing, rational and healthful amusements in life.

The agriculturist, while riding or walking round his farm, fully enjoys the
sweet refreshing breeze, so necessary to the preservation of his health; and
while he attends to his business, may entertain himself with rural sports,
every field and experiment present new objects to his view; pleasing researches
into the works of providence: such as the different forms and growth of plants
and grain: analizing the great diversity of soils and manures, that he may
thereby ascertain their properties, and be best enabled to destroy the
particles injurious to vegetation, and enrich the ground.

The practice of husbandry requires precept, reflection and study. Agriculture
cannot be benefitted by theory alone; but when theory is united with repeated
experiments and facts, agriculture, as all other arts, may be reduced to a
regular system.

The operation of manures on different soils, may be accounted from their known
properties, ascertained by repeated experiments.

Hence, every agriculturist ought to study and know the qualities of different
soils, as well as manures, that they may be properly applied to each other.
This science I deem to be one of the most useful of all human arts: is similar
to a physician's knowing the cause of diseases, the properties of medicines,
and their most effectual applications.

The practice of agriculture is in general confined, either to persons who have
not had a sufficient education to enable them to keep regular accounts, or who
are inattentive and do not choose to take that trouble; without which, it is
impossible to ascertain the profits and loss thereon -- hence they cannot
possibly attain the truth.

The farmer should be very particular in keeping regular accounts; if he cannot
keep the produce of each field separate, he will find but very little trouble
to cut two square perches of the best, and the same quantity of the worst part
of his crop, which carried into the barn and threshed out, will employ but
little time; if he will proportion the amount of the perches so cut, to 160,
(which an acre contains) the produce per acre of such field may be easily
ascertained, and should be immediately minuted in his book; he will be soon
convinced of the utility of keeping regular accounts; he will thereby be best
instructed whether two or three plowings or more, if manured with lime, ashes,
dung, or composts, when applied, with the quantity per acre; the time of
sowing, and the course of crops preceding, are the most advantageous.

Should the amount of so small a quantity as four perches of land be difficult
to calculate by measure, it may be easily weighed, and proportioned according
to the weight of a bushel of the same produce: these calculations may be
expeditiously made when the hurry of the day is over, or in wet weather, when
other business does not interfere. By minuting and registering such accounts in
a regular manner, they can be referred to at any future period: the
agriculturalist will thereby be enabled to avoid the wrong, and to pursue the
best and most advantageous method. Such a plan will soon become habitual,
amusing, instructive and profitable.

Enabled from my own experience, the regular accounts I have kept of each
separate field, and observations made on the mode of other farmers cultivation;
I may venture to assert, that many real losses are sustained by improper
management: such for instance, not plowing so deep as the nature of the soil
will admit, or not allowing a sufficient number of plowings and harrowings to
pulverize and clear the land of weeds; the application of raw dung, unmixed
with earth immediately for the crop, harboring and nourishing insects and
weeds, which greatly injure and often destroy the crops of grain, not
introducing a meliorating, but an improper succession of impoverishing crops.

Most authors on agriculture have been too complex and ambiguous; but the
accounts of my experiments in this treatise, will sufficiently elucidate the
forms I have made use of, which I deem to be the most simple, easy, and best
adapted to the meanest capacity.

Farmers may be possessed of great natural abilities, and knowledge in the
common mode of their ancestors; but every farmer is not a scholar, mechanic,
chemist, or philosopher. Their knowledge, and the methods they pursue in
general, extend no further than that of their predecessors, or the custom of
the country where they reside. Any discoveries made by them are reserved to
themselves, and themselves only benefited by it; but men of ingenious and
liberal dispositions, no sooner make discoveries, than they are communicated to
the public.

Experiments can be of little use when extended no further than for our own
private instruction; and reasoning without experiments avail but little in the
practical arts; theory without practice, is similar to a shadow without
substance; but when reasoning is founded on science combined with experiments
minutely attended to, it is from thence only the ingenious artist or
agriculturist is enabled to draw such conclusions as are of real utility.

The great and general ambition of farmers is to occupy large farms; the more
they possess, the greater consequence they think themselves of; but one acre of
land, properly managed, will produce more than four, by improper cultivation.

Were farmers to occupy no more ground than they could cultivate in a masterly
manner, there would not be that general complaint of scanty crops, or of the
land being worn out; for there is no land of any sort whatever, (which has a
sufficient depth of mould for plowing) but what may be rendered fertile by
prudent cultivation, and the application of proper manures; and in proportion
to their different degrees of natural richness, be managed in such manner as to
produce luxuriant and profitable crops of some species of vegetables: and that
by bad conduct good soils oftentimes produce but very scanty crops; when the
blame is too frequently imputed to their natural poverty. Hence, for instance,
in the brewing of beer, or the baking of bread, the materials may be of the
very best quality, yet, from the want of care and proper management, both are
spoiled, or greatly injured; so it is with land.

The wearing out of land is occasioned by a continual cropping, taking off the
crops, and giving it no return or rest, which should be given by sowing in
rotation suculent grasses or pulse -- such as clover, timothy, lucern,
saintfoin, trefoil, tears, vetches, peace and beans, to recover that etherial
spirit of the world, which is lost by improper management.

For this globe of the earth that affords unto us the substance not only of
ourselves, but of all creatures sublunary, is impregnated with a spirit most
subtle and etherial, which the Original or Father of nature has placed in this
world as the instrument of life, and motion of every thing. The spirit is that
which incessantly administers to every animal its generation, life, growth and
motion; to every vegetable its original and vegetation. It is a vehicle that
carries with it the sulphurious and saline parts, whereof the matter,
substance, or body of all vegetables and animals are formed and composed. -- It
is the operator or workman that transmutes by its active heat, the sulphurious
and saline parts of the earth or water into that variety of objects we daily
behold or enjoy. It continually perspires through the pores of the earth,
carrying with it the sulphurious and saline parts, the only treasure the farmer
seeks for.

Providence most wonderfully assists the industry of man, by celestial and
atmospherical influences, which greatly tend to enrich the earth, and to
promote vegetation.

As the qualities of all soils vary considerably, every agriculturist ought to
make himself well acquainted with the nature of his land, as also the property
of manures; a judicious application of which, with a proper course of crops and
thorough tillage, are the chief and grand secrets of agriculture.

And, in order that the agriculturist may be enabled to obtain a greater
knowledge of the properties of different soils and manures, as well as other
parts of husbandry, I will first proceed to their analysis, so far as is
necessary and really useful.

The application of certain substances to analise soils and manures.
1st. -- Distill a sufficient quantity of water, or use pure rain water, which
has been received in the open air, at a distance from smoke or dust; in which
infuse the earth forty-eight hours in a gentle heat, stirring it often; when
cold, and the earth has subsided, filter the water, which will retain the taste
of any metallic or earthy salt. -- Or,

2d. -- Drop into the above filtrated infusion, the solution of fixed vegetable
alkali; if there be any metallic or earthy salt, it will precipitate.

3d -- Evaporate the infusion; if it contains any neutral salt, it will
crystallize.

4th. -- To the filtrated infusion, apply an infusion of galls; if there be any
earthy or metallic salt, the color will be read, if alum or copper; a deep
purple, if iron.

5th -- To the filtrated infusion, apply the syrop of violets; if it turns red,
the soil contains an acid; if green, an absorbent earth.

All acid bodies effervesce violently when mixed with alkaline substances, and
turn a blue tincture of violets red; whereas alkaline substances mixed with the
same tincture, turn it green.

6th. -- Clay or earth containing calcareous earth, put into vinegar will
effervesce, and blunt or destroy the acidity, in proportion to the quantity of
calcareous earth contained therein.

7th. -- Red and blackish soils frequently contain iron or other metallic
particles, which may be visibly discovered by a micriscope, and may be
perceived to glitter, by being exposed to the sun's rays.

All metallic and earthy salts are poisonous to vegetation, which with acids,
are decomposed by quick lime, alkaline manures, and good tillage.

8th. -- Clay and earths, dried and powdered, thrown on fused nitre, if a few
sparks are produced, it contains a small quantity of oil, and according to the
increase of deflagration and detonation, so, in proportion is the richness of
the land.

9th. -- Dry and powder rotten dung; throw it on fused nitre, its detonation
and deflagration will be very great.

Nitre will melt in the fire and grow red hot; is not inflammable of itself,
but when oil or any substance containing oily particles, is added to it, it
will detonate and deflagrate, in proportion to the quantity of oil contained
therein.

10th. -- Marle exposed in the open air, will fall into powder, or put into
pure rain water will dissolve; it will blunt the acidity of vinegar.

As clays cannot be discovered from marle by its appearance, the above
experiments will discover it, as the effects will be entirely opposite.

11th. -- Quick lime yields neither salt nor oil by distillation; but when
mixed with the soil, it strongly attracts moisture, saline, and oily
substances, which with metallic particles and acids, are decomposed and
dissolved by lime.

12th -- Chalk fresh dug, yields neither oil nor salt by distillation; but when
mixed with the soil, attracts oils and salts; effervesces with, and absorbs
acids.

13th -- Pitcoal ashes by distillation or infusion, yields neither oil nor
salt, but attracts moisture, absorbs acidities, greatly lightens and adds
friablity to stiff cold soils under tillage.

14th -- Wood, and all other vegetable ashes, boiled, or infused in water,
yield a fixed alkaline salt by evaporation.

15th -- Urine yields oils and salts by distillation or sublimation.

16th -- In order that I might be enabled to form some idea of the effects of
the atmosphecal influences on soils, in the month of October I pared the turf
from a very poor loamy earth, and dug up about three quarts, which was divided
into three flat pans. No. 1 was put into a close place secured from the air:
No. 2 was placed in an open situation, so as to be exposed to the sun the whole
day: No. 3 was placed near a wall with a northeast aspect, where it only
received the benefit of the morning sun till ten o'clock. The mould in each pan
was carefully turned with a trowel six times in twelve months, when I took a
teaspoonful out of each pan; the earth was pulverized and dried, and thrown on
fused nitre. -- No. 1 produced but a few sparks; No. 2 produced twice as many
with a feeble detonation; No. 3 detonated and deflagrated twice as strong as
No. 2. Hence I concluded from these experiments, that No. 1 being excluded from
the atmosphere received no benefit, that the atmospherical influences imbibed
by No. 2 were exaled by the rays of the sun, which operated on it the whole day
-- that No. 3 being shaded the greatest part of the day from the sun, it more
effectually retained the atmospherical influences which it had imbibed, than
No. 2, which was exposed to the sun.

Hence I presume, and am fully convinced, that all tilled lands are greatly
benefitted by the effects of air, rain, dew and frost; and that the more the
ground is shaded by the crops thereon, the less the exalation; of course the
more the moisture and oily particles are retained therein, and the greater is
the putrid fermentation, particularly arising from esculent plants.

The principles, of agriculture are deduced from mechanics, chemistry and
natural philosophy.

Of MECHANICS.
Mechanics are a branch of practical mathematics, which consider the nature and
laws of motion and moving powers, with their effects in machines, which are
made subservient to the various purposes of mankind; and it is by the knowledge
of this science, that the greatest improvements are made of every power and
force in nature; by which any work may be more expeditiously executed, and at
the least expense.

In all well-managed manufactories, the smallest savings of expense in
materials, as well as labor, are never neglected. Those articles which may
appear trifling and very inconsiderable at first sight, must, on a small scale,
in a few years, or in an extensive line of business in one year, amount to a
very considerable sum. Therefore, why should not agriculture admit of a similar
comparison with manufactures? -- This art is certainly of more real consequence
to the community.

The very great advantages derived from machines in manufactures, invented by
ingenious men of the first abilities in that line, are sufficiently known.

The great and good effects of new inventions in mechanics, are, by the wisdom
of the legislature well secured; individuals are protected against the
oppressions, and unjustifiable combinations of avaricious and servile
imitators; who may be compared to the drone supported by the labors of the
industrious be. -- Such security to inventions, encourages the ingenious
artist to risque his labor and property in new and useful attempts.

Of CHEMISTRY.
Chemistry is an art by which mixed bodies are separated, or reduced into their
component parts; thereby the several properties of soils and manures are
discovered, that such manures may be applied, as will destroy any bad qualities
that prove hurtful and poisonous to vegetation, and which fertilize the soil.

As all lands differ materially in their qualities, so different manures should
be accordingly applied.

SOILS.
A sandy soil, as well as gravels, have no cohesion of their parts. They too
readily admit the heat of the sun to the roots of the plants, by which they are
scorched and destroyed; and has not sufficient tenacity to afford security
against severe colds and hard frosts. Sand, without the mixture of earth,
contains no oleaginous or other particles, that can contribute to vegetation;
rain and moisture pass through it too easily to afford nourishment for plants;
therefore the dung of horned cattle and hogs (which is rich and cooling) mixed
with mud, clay or marle, is the most cohesive and enriching manure, will the
longest retain moisture, and at the same time convey proper nourishment; hence
it is best adapted to such soils; -- and in proportion to the quantity mixed
with the sand, its tenacity and vegetative properties are increased or
decreased.

Green crops of turnips, buck-wheat, clover, or any other succulent grasses,
tares, or vetches, plowed in, or fed with sheep hurdled thereon, greatly enrich
such soils -- Green crops when plowed in, should be immediately rolled with a
heavy roller, which consolidates the loosened earth, causes a speedy
fermentation, produces a mucilaginous matter, which gives tenacity to the soil,
and is converted into nourishment for plants.

Of a CLAY SOIL.
Clayey soils differ as materially as sandy soils. The oleaginous and earthy
particles of some kinds of clay, are so closely combined as to retain water,
which is permitted to escape only by evaporation. -- All sorts of clayey soils
contain more or less oil, in proportion to its tenacity.

A tough clay retains moisture so much as to rot the seeds and roots of plants.
Clay does not admit the free access of heat and air (which are essentially
necessary for promoting vegetation) and it is so baked and hardened by the heat
of the sun, as to prevent the tender roots and fibers of plants from extending
themselves in search of food. Hence such manures as will open its pores,
destroy its adhesion and correct its bad qualities, should be applied. Lime,
and coal or wood ashes mixed with lime, are best adapted for clayey and stiff
soils under the plow.

Of a LOAMY SOIL.
Loam is a medium between light and stiff soils; differs in quality as
materially as either.

Black and hazel colored soils are generally the richest, and most proper for
the support of vegetables, as they contain a sufficient degree of cohesion, and
at the same time are so friable, as readily to admit the roots and fibers of
plants to extend themselves in search of nourishment.

Red and other colored soils generally contain a mixture of iron, copper or
lead, or some acid which is poisonous to vegetation. A proper application of
quick lime (as hereafter directed, with an increase of quantity, as exigencies
may require,) will effectually dissolve and destroy those pernicious particles,
which, with the assistance of dung and sufficient plowings, will render the
most barren soils fertile.

It must be remarked that according to the quantity of metallic particles
impregnated with the soil, so in proportion should the quantity of lime be
accordingly applied.

Of SWAMPS and BOGGY SOILS.
Swamps and bogs generally consist of rotten trees, roots of weeds, and other
half-dissolved vegetable substances, which having undergone some degree of
putrefaction, are (similar to all corrupted vegetables) turned into a black,
rich, spungy kind of earth that readily imbibes moisture; and its spunginess
arises more or less, in proportion to the quantity of mud or slime carried over
it by floods, which with the acid contained in the stagnated moisture prevent a
complete putrefaction.

The first thing necessary to be done, in order to improve swampy and boggy
ground, -- is to make drains of a sufficient depth to carry off the stagnated
waters, as their surface are a composition of moss, fibrous roots and coarse
grass, they should be pared (to such depth as the roots penetrate) and burnt;
such ashes abound with alkaline salts which, must be spread over the land --
where lime can be conveninently procured, eighty bushels per acre, should be
laid on in piles of about half a bushel to a perch, and as soon as slacked, it
must be spread over the ashes (for the reason that will be assigned under the
article wood ashes) which should be plowed in, not more than four or five
inches deep. By this method a fermentation and putrefaction will ensue, and
after being exposed a few weeks to the influences of the atmosphere, the
surface should be worked with loaded harrows, which will tear asunder, and mix
the lime and ashes with the soil. The vegetable substances contained therein
will soon be dissolved, and converted into an exceeding rich and fertilizing
manure.

The specific gravity of lime and other manures are so great, as to be
continually falling downwards; therefore it is essentially necessary that the
first plowing should not exceed the depth of four or five inches.

The second plowing should be to form the ridges, by which the ashes and lime
that were plowed in, will be turned upwards, and after being thoroughly
incorporated with the soil by harrowing, may be planted with potatoes or such
other vegetables as may best suit the judicious husbandman's inclination.

As swampy and boggy lands are generally light and spungy, an addition of
marle, clay, or loam will add cohesion to their parts, and will, in a very
short time, most amply repay the agriculturist.

Of MANURES.
Lime, quick or unslacked, contains no salt; when slacked, attracts oils, acids
and salts, from the earth and atmosphere. Clayey and other soils when first
broken up or plowed, contain various mineral and poisonous particles, weeds,
worms, grubs and insects; all which lime dissolves. The oils and salts absorbed
from the earth and atmosphere, then become so intimately united with the animal
and vegetable substances already dissolved by the lime, as to be converted into
a soapy matter, by which they are rendered miscible with water, and become the
food of vegetables. Lime, by its expansive force, opens, divides, and lightens
a stiff soil, by which it is easier pulverized, and gives a greater friability
to stiff soils, than any other substance whatever. It is thus the roots of
plants are permitted to extend themselves.

Lime, when too frequently and injudiciously used, is a great impoverisher of
lands kept long under tillage. It exhausts the earth by absorbing its oily
particles; hence, the soil is rendered barren. The only remedy for such
misconduct, by which the soil can be restored, is a compost of rotten dung or
earth, or scrapings of a limestone road and dung, twice turned and properly
mixed; or a thick crop of buck-wheat, clover, vetches, or turnips plowed in,
and rolled with a heavy roller: such management will soon recruit the soil, and
restore it to its proper vigor.

Lime, when properly and judiciously applied, ranks first among the class of
manures, particularly for all sorts of stiff and loamy soils.

Of DUNG.
Dung of all sorts contains salts and oils. The dung of horses, hogs and sheep,
is the hottest and best adapted for stiff and cold soils.

Human ordure, the dung of poultry and rabbits, are all extremely hot and rich;
but are procured in such small quantities, as not to merit the husbandman's
particular attention. Hence should be mixed with other dung or earth.

The dung of horned cattle is fat and cooling; therefore most proper for light,
sandy and gravelly lands.

When dung is carried into the field, where it is intended to be used, the
highest headlands and banks should be plowed or dug, and the dung deposited
thereon, with earth thrown over. The head-land being plowed and pulverized,
will readily absorb the essence of the dung; and whatever quantity of the
dissolved salts and oils, that may be washed off by successive heavy rains,
will be carried over, and greatly enrich that part of the field adjoining to
the dung, as the head-lands are generally the highest and richest parts of the
ground, the earth being mixed with the dung will make a good compost; and for
twenty loads of dung when spread on by itself, ten loads by being thus managed,
will prove nearly if not equally as advantageous as when dung only is laid on.
Hence, two acres of land, in lieu of one, or in proportion, may every year be
manured, exclusive of the advantage of making the land even.

Of FARM-YARDS and COMPOSTS.
The middle or center of the farm-yard should be two feet lower than the
border, by this the urine and essence of the dung will be saved, which
otherwise are liable to be carried off by the rains; a pool or reservoir should
be made on the lowest ground adjoining, to receive the superfluous drainings;
which if sprinkled over the land with a watering pot will be a good dressing.
-- In this yard should be put a stratum of about six inches of rich earth,
ant-hills, scrapings of roads, sweepings of filth round the buildings, leaves
of trees, corn-stalks, thistles and coarse weeds, and all other articles that
can be converted into manure over which throw your stable dung and all the
refuse straw. This yard should have a wall or close fence eight or nine feet
high, with sheds against it, to keep the cattle warm and dry, and racks and
mangers under them as well as cribs in the middle disposed regularly to entice
the cattle to go over all parts alike, in this yard the whole stock of cattle
should be turned to brouse on hay or straw every night; in the day time they
can be turned into grass, turnips, or what feed you have for them. Those
different articles will rot and imbime the essence of the dung laid on, as well
as what the cattle make -- when convenient opportunities permit of depositing
alternate stratums in this manner, an exceeding good compost is made at a small
expense.

The foddering of the cattle in winter on this compost, will increase and
enrich it; and in hot weather there should frequently be laid a thin layer of
mould over it, to prevent the sun from exhaling from it any of its properties,
and it should be turned and mixed before it is put on the land.

Human urine and soap suds (which in general are thrown away) if they were put
on this compost, would pay the farmer some pounds every year.

MUD and LIME.
Good fat mud from rivers or the bottom of pools or ponds mixed with lime,
makes a good compost for all sorts of lands. -- To four loads of mud, (spread
regularly to the size intended for the compost heap) put twenty bushels of
quick lime spread over the mud, -- and so on alternately, to the quantity you
would wish to make. -- The mud to be the last layer or stratum.

This should be done in the fall, for it to lay in that state all winter -- in
the spring it should be turned and well mixed; at midsummer give it another
turning, when it will be ready to put on the land for wheat; ten loads to an
acre is the quantity. I have had better crops of wheat by this management than
my neighbors, who have put the same quantity of stable dung on their land.

BURNT-CLAY.
Burnt-clay is an absorbent, and acts nearly similar to lime, but not so
powerfully. The method of burning it is as follows:

Get eight loads of clay, cut into spits, about as thick as a brick; let it be
pretty will dried in the sun, and having made a heap of brush and other wood,
coal or other combustibles, laid one upon another about as large as a small
bon-fire, in a pyramidical form, bring the spits of clay, and lay them round
the same, two or three spits thick, leaving only room to put in the fire; and
then light the same. The clay, by the innate heat of the wood, etc. within,
will soon take fire, and as it advances outward, still lay on more spits of
clay, placing them in such an order, so that the fire may be pent up within the
heap, and never suffered to get out; for if you do, your labor will be lost,
and you must begin again.

After you have burnt up your eight loads of dry clay, the heat which is
within, will be so great, as that it will fire any thing, and then you may lay
on the clay green as it is dug out of the pit, being always watchful to keep a
new addition of it; laying on one after another; but not too fast, least you
smother the fire, and put it out: this you may enlarge and spread out at the
feet, as the heap swells; and if occasion be, there may be stages of boards
laid, on which the men may stand who place the spits of clay. This being done,
and the fire kept continually in, and watched night and day, you will soon have
as large a heap as you please for the improvement of land; for the larger the
heap grows, the easier it is to burn the clay. This is a most cheap dressing
for arable or grass land, and not only agrees with all sorts of lands and
situations: but also laid about the roots of young or old fruit trees, pretty
thick, enlarges, multiplies, and accelerates their fruit.

Of WOOD ASHES.
Wood ashes contain alkaline salts and absorbent earth, attract moisture and
inflammable matter from the atmosphere, and keep the earth in an open state.
Lime deprives wood ashes and other alkalines of their fixed air, increases
their purposes of a caustic, and enables them more readily to dissolve oils and
mucilaginous particles.

Wood and all other vegetable ashes, from whatever vegetables they have been
produced, are of one and the same quality for the purposes of agriculture; and
should (when conveniences permit) be kept perfectly dry till they are used;
when exposed to the rains, the salts are washed out, and of course, the ashes
are not so efficacious.

Of SOOT.
Soot is a composition of fixed and volatile alkaline salts, oils, and a small
quantity of calcareous earth, arising from the fuel, with the smoke, or may be
rather deemed the smoke itself, gathered and fixed on the side of chimnies.

Soot is a most excellent top dressing for grain of all sorts, and for cold
stiff pastures; it destroys moss and kills insects. When it can be procured on
reasonable terms, it is a cheap and effectual manure; but should never be
applied in a dry season, as it will injure the blades of grain or grass. The
most proper quantity is from twenty-five to thirty bushels per acre, sowed
early in the spring, before rain, which wash it off the leaves of the plants
into the ground: and its sudden effects will soon be perceived, by the deep
green and luxuriant growth of the crops.

Of COMMON SALT.
Common salt produced from seawater and springs, is originally the same;
differs in strength and some other qualities, according to the operation by
which it is made; the quicker the liquor is evaporated, the weaker is the salt:
when the liquor is evaporated over a strong fire, part of the strength or acid
of the salt is raised with it. Hence, the more gentle the process, the stronger
is the salt. Salt of itself is not beneficial to vegetation; when decomposed by
being mixed with a proper compost, it may then assist to promote vegetation.

Of SEA SAND.
Sea sand is a good manure for all lands and soils, particularly light sandy
lands. When carried immediately from such parts of the shores as are daily
overflowed by the tides, it is saturated with strong salts of an alkaline
nature, and putrid matters which the seawater contains; it adds tenacity to
such light soils, by the putrid saline particles attracting and retaining
moisture, which having undergone no operation of the fire, conveys its original
properties in their natural state. Hence it differs materially from common salt.

Of SEA WEEDS.
Sea weeds contain alkaline salts and mucilage; they should never be applied
without being first mixed with lime and earth to ferment and putrefy; or with
earth to ferment and putrefy -- when burnt, they yield an excellent manure
called kelp, containing vitrifiale earth, and a very strong alkali; soluble in
water, it acts as vegetable ashes.

Weeds and offals of a garden or field, when burnt, produce alkaline salts and
absorbent earth; if not burnt, should be mixed with the compost dunghill, --
when the seeds of the weeds are formed, it is essentially necessary the weeds
should be burnt, to prevent their seeds from ripening, and being conveyed into
the ground with the manure; as couch and some other weeds vegetate at every
joint or knot, they likewise should be burnt.

Of SHELLS of SEA FISH.
Shells of sea fish and all others, are composed of calcarous earth and salts,
when applied in their natural state, continue a long time without dissolving.
When burnt, they make a strong lime more efficacious than stone lime -- and as
great quantities of oyster shells may be collected in the country, and the
farmer can burn them with a trifling expense, it will make a cheap and lasting
manure for clayey and loamy soils.

Of CHALK.
Chalk is an absorbent earth, containing neither oil or salts; but when
incorporated with the earth, it attracts acids, oils and salts, thereby
enriching the soil; but as chalk does not abound so plentifully in this country
as it does in others, I shall not treat so largely on it as otherwise I should.

OF MARLE.
Marle is composed of lime, clay and sand; is increased in value according to
the quantity of lime it contains, and is best adapted for sands and light
soils. The quantity is from forty to eighty loads per acre, in proportion to
the lightness of the land.

OF BRICK AND LIME RUBBISH.
Brick and lime rubbish are good manures for cold arable lands; are absorbents,
and lighten the soils.

OF SAW DUST, TANNERS BARK, etc.
Saw dust, tanners bark and rotten leaves are best for the compost dunghill; as
well as the apple pulp, after being pressed for cider; therefore should be
carried into the farm yard, as it is good for all soils.

OF ANT HILLS.
Ants are evidently known to be very injurious to lands, particularly pastures,
and great destroyers of fruit. Observations instruct me that they multiply and
increase most in cold, clayey, or such other soils as contain the greatest
acidity; the hills they raise, produce but a very small quantity of such coarse
grass, as no animal choose to eat. The longer these hills are permitted to
remain on the soil, the more they are extended over the surface, and increase
in number. Hence, the ground they occupy is so much land lost to the farmer;
and on lands that are mowed, these hills and hillocks quickly blunt the edge of
the mower's scythe. The heavy falls of autumnal rains that saturate the earth,
oblige these sagacious but injurious insects to ascend from under the surface
of the ground, into a higher situation in their mansions, which are most
conveniently constructed for their residence and defense from rains. -- The
vernal heat of the sun does also influence them to occupy their upper
appartments; these are the seasons best adapted for their destruction.

In the months of November or December, when the earth is frequently filled
with water, their hills should be pared off lower than the surface, and carried
into the farm yard to the compost dunghill, or mixed with lime, where the eggs
and insects will be converted into a rich manure. Should any of the ants
remain, the rain and frost will destroy them, or sow some fresh slacked lime
over, which will effectually destroy them and soon produce a sweet herbage.

In the months of April or May, as the heat increases, these insects are also
influenced to ascend their upper apartments, for to enjoy the sun's enlivening
powers; at such seasons, they and their hills should be cut, carried off, and
managed as before directed. The bare spots should be sowed with grass seeds and
white clover, raked in, which will soon vegetate.

Three advantages result from such conduct; the land is made even, the insects
are destroyed, and a rich addition, far superior to common earth, is procured
for the compost dunghill.

OF WOOLEN RAGS, etc.
Woolen rags, cuttings of leather, particularly the refuse of skinners and
tanners yards; with hair, and bones ground or powdered, are exceeding good
manures, containing mucilage, oils, and alkaline salts, and will suit all sorts
of lands.

OF DEAD ANIMALS.
Dead animals should be buried in the dunghill, where they will putrify, and
greatly enrich it; they contain oil and salts.

OF URINE.
Human and animal urine are composed of water, oil and salt. Human urine should
be carefully preserved in casks or tubs, and if not used by itself as a manure,
should be thrown on the dunghill. All kinds of urine, when recently applied,
are very acrid, and rather hurtful to vegetation. When stale, their acrid
properties are corrected by fermentation, and then they contribute greatly to
fertilization.

Stale urine, and the draining from the dunghill, are greatly preferable to
dung for fruit trees, as penetrating better to their roots, and not harboring
insects; whereas dung secrets worms and insects, that are conveyed to the
roots of the trees with the dung, which mixed with the mould undergo a second
fermentation; and thereby the worms and insects acquire such strength, as to
make the tender roots and fibers of the trees part of their food. -- Hence
trees being deprived of a great part of their grand resources, (which are
conveyed to them through the pores or mouths of every root and fiber) become
diseased, and frequently die. Another disadvantage attends the application of
dung and dead animals to the roots of trees; these manures are very improper,
as they harbor worms and insects, that attract moles and other vermin, which
do much injury, by breaking the roots and tender fibers of the plants, and by
making hollow passages, which admit the cold air and frosts in winter, and the
scorching heat in summer. Hence trees and plants become sickly, and are
rendered incapable of producing luxuriant crops.

Human urine is the richest, as containing more salts and oil than any other.
As great quantities may be collected in cities and large towns, it should be
kept in casks to ferment; and if mixed, when stale with piles of earth, it will
form an excellent compost, far superior to dung. Stale urine, applied by
watering pots, over the trenched garden grounds, after being levelled in the
spring, will kill worms and insects, and prove an exceeding rich manure.

OF SOAP SUDS, etc.
Soap suds, and soap maker's ashes, is composed of vegetable or animal oil,
alkaline salts and lime, by which their original textures are altered and
become so combined, as to be easily rendered miscible by water. Hence soap suds
and soap maker's ashes are excellent manures for all sorts of vegetables and
fruit trees.

OF MALT DUST.
Malt dust is an exceeding good top dressing for corn and meadows in the
spring. Dung and other manures plowed in, loosen and divide the soil, and are
beneficial to succeeding crops. Whereas, top dressing, (excepting the alkaline
manure) principally nourish the plants, and supply food for those crops only on
which they are laid, without loosening or dividing the soils, or being
beneficial to succeeding ones. From twenty to forty bushels per acre,
(according to the richness or poverty of the soil) is the most advantageous.
When too great a quantity of malt dust is applied to grain, the straw grows so
luxuriantly, as to be beaten down and laid by high winds and heavy rains.

OF A NEW, CHEAP AND EFFECTUAL ALKALINE MANURE.
Lands adjoining cities and large towns, may be manured on very reasonable
terms; and according to the distance, so in proportion is the expense of
carriage increased. Lands situated in the interior parts of the country, are in
general manured only with the dung arising from the cattle and sheep folded on
the grounds; the quantities thus obtained, are very insufficient for the
purposes of prosecuting an advantgeous cultivation.

All or most countries produce either wood, goss, heath or peat, frequently
called turf, which are used for firing; their ashes are thrown (from a want of
knowing their real value) into some open place, where they are exposed to
rains, which wash away their salts and fertilizing properties. The great
advantages of manures, particularly when the distance is too far to procure
them from cities and towns, must be too obvious to the discerning
agriculturist, to require any comment.

The alkaline and new manure, which I have experienced to be inferior to none,
I have made as often as I could procure materials, in the following manner,
viz. Having collected from the side of ditches, and from commons, a quantity of
brush and rubbish wood, briars, thorns, etc. stems and roots of weeds, stalks
of beans, corn, and garden of-fals, which are burnt, and the ashes sifted; such
cinders as are not thoroughly consumed, undergo the second operation of the
fire, are again sifted, and immediately carried into the house to prevent the
bad effects of rain; and to every four bushels of ashes, or in proportion, I
add one bushel of quick lime, on which is thrown as much stale urine or
drainings from the dunghill, as will thoroughly slack it, when the whole is
turned and mixed as often as is necessary, so that the lime and ashes may be
completely incorporated. The ashes of all vegetables are vetrifiable, and
frequently found to contain metallic particles. Quick or fresh burnt lime is
freed from fixed air, its corrosive and acrimonious properties are so great, as
to decompose metallic particles, as also to deprive alkalies of their fixed
air, and disunite their texture, by which their powers are so much increased,
as to be the more readily enabled to dissolve oils, etc. for the purpose of
making soap. Hence, in a similar manner, they unite with, and dissolve the
oleaginous particles in the earth, by which the oils and salts are rendered
miscible with water, and thereby converted into a most nutritive food for
vegetables. When lime is exposed to the air (even in a house) it will absorb
moisture, fall into a powder, attract fixed air, and by degrees lose its
corrosive and accrimonious powers. Ashes also attract moisture, etc. Hence, if
the alkaline manure is not immediately used, it should be carried into a loft
or some dry place, well covered, and kept as close as possible from the air, by
which its virtues will be retained. If used as a top dressing for wheat, eight
or ten bushels per acre, sowed in the months of November or December, when the
manure will be soon washed into the earth, will nourish and keep warm the roots
of the plants, kill insects, and greatly fertilize the land for that and
succeeding crops.

When applied to barley, it should be sown very early in the season, for
reasons already given under the section of soot.

When applied for pastures, the land should be first harrowed with fine
harrows, in the month of March or beginning of April, if the season and weather
suits, and from eight to twelve bushels per acre, regularly sowed over.

The harrows will loosen the soil, admit the air and manure to the roots of the
grass; their effects will soon become visible, and continue for some years.

When applied for a compost, twenty bushels or more to an acre (according to
the nature of the soil) may be mixed and thoroughly incorporated with sixty
bushels of earth to an acre, and applied in the same manner as lime.

Sea shores produce great quantities of weeds, which when burnt, become a solid
substance called kelp, containing strong alkaline salts.

Such ashes, pulverized, sifted and mixed with lime, in the same manner as wood
ashes, must prove more efficacious; as kelp contains a much greater proportion
of alkaline salts, than the same weight of wood ashes; so in proportion, a less
quantity will suffice.

As the properties of kelp are very corrosive, it should be first mixed with
lime, then with earth in a compost, in preference to its being applied alone,
and should be kept in a dry place some weeks before it is used.

When wood, weeds, etc. are burnt in the open air, the volatile salts, oils,
and part of the calcarious earth, ascend in the form of smoke, into the
atmosphere.

Where large quantities of rubbish, wood, weeds, etc. can be procured, a small
building, sixteen feet long, twelve feet broad, and twelve feet high, or of any
other size in proportion, covered with an arch or dome, with a high and narrow
chimney, might be erected at a very inconsiderable expense. The rubbish wood,
etc. should be burnt therein; the volatile particles and calcarious earth would
be preserved on the dome and walls, in the form of soot, the ashes would be
kept dry, and the agriculturist would in a short time, be fully repaid such
expenses.

OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.
Natural philosophy is the knowledge or study of natural productions founded on
reason and experience. By studying the qualities of natural bodies, in relation
to their generation, motion, or other properties, the wonderful works of the
creation are discovered to our view, that we may with cheerful and divine
contemplation, sensibly feel and gratefully acknowledge the mysterious works of
Providence.

God bestowed upon man the earth, that he might employ his time by labor, and
understanding, in replenishing and subduing it.

By labor, to cultivate the ground; such employment makes him strong, active
and healthy.

By understanding, to study the most beneficial methods of replenishing and
applying such manures as are most effectual for subduing and correcting its
cohesive and injurious particles; that he may, by his industry and knowledge,
be best enabled to supply the wants of nature.

Providence most wonderfully assists the industry of man, by celestial and
atmospherical influences, which greatly tend to enrich the earth, and to
promote vegetation.

Of the SUN.
The sun is the principal source of heat, as well as light, without which, all
bodies would become rigid, lifeless and fixed. Hence, animalization and
vegetation are promoted, and the ocean and atmosphere continue in a fluid state.

Heat contributes materially to promote the growth of plants; vibrates the
parts of bodies; excites and promotes a motion in the fluids; resolves the
watery and oily particles of the earth into vapor; rarifies the juices of
vegetables; exhales the putrid, volatilized, sulphurious, saline and
inflammable particles from dunghills, other corrupted bodies, and from smoke.
Part is absorbed by vegetables which add to their increase: the remainder
ascend and float in the atmosphere, where being combined, are formed into a
saline subtle oil, which by the summer showers and dews, are converted into
nutriment, returned into the earth, and absorbed by the leaves and roots of
plants.

The life and growth of animals and vegetables, depend on a certain degree of
heat, which every year confirms. As the heat decreases in the fall, so in
proportion, vegetables loose their verdure. And as the sun's enlivening powers
return in the succeeding spring, every plant will earlier or later refuscitate,
and accordingly grow to maturity.

Excessive heat without moisture, is injurious to vegetation; as more
nourishment is exaled from the earth and plants, than is returned by that
condensed vapor which falls in the form of dew.

By a defect of heat, the circulation of the sap becomes languid, and ceases;
and according to the continuation of the cold drying winds, (without the
intervention of rain or dew) so proportionable is the perspiration and
circulation or motion of the juices stopped in the tender leaves, blossoms, and
branches; the perspiring matter thereby adhering to the external part, are
converted into a mucilage that harbors insects (which are the effects, but not
the cause of blights,) similar to all corrupted animal bodies, which naturally
secret worms.

It frequently happens that one part of a tree is suddenly scorched and
shrivelled by a sharp hoary frost or cold wind, which stops the weak motion of
its juices; while the other part appears healthy and in full verdure. Such
effects arise from inward weakness, the want of sufficient moisture or
nourishment, or from some bad quality in the soil or stock.

Soap suds, stale urine, or the drainings from the dunghill, applied to the
roots of trees after the earth has been dug or loosened, instead of secreting
and nourishing, destroys worms and insects; keep the roots of trees warm in
winter; and by their saline and oily particles, attract and retain moisture in
summer; -- hence are the most effectual preservatives against blights and other
diseases. In wet seasons these manures may be freely used, as the rains will
sufficiently correct them when too strong; but in dry weather they should be
properly diluted with water.

Of FROST.
Frost is the most severe effect of cold, but a great fertilizer of land,
particularly all stiff and clayey soils. It answers several purposes; it locks
up the surface of the earth, prevents the carrying off that substance necessary
for vegetation, checks the growth of weeds, prevents the hatching of insects,
and destroys them, lightens the earth, expands the moisture and breaks down the
texture of the soil into the most minute particles.

White frost is no more than dew frozen, which does not injure vegetables
materially.

Of HAIL.
Hail is drops of rain frozen in their passage through the atmosphere. The
greater the height they descend from, the greater is the resistance they meet
with from the air, the more globular and the smaller is the hail. Hence, vice
versa, the less the height of their descent, the less is the resistance they
meet with in the air; of course, the less globular and the larger is the hail.
It is very hurtful to vegetation, by beating the farina or blossoms off the
corn or trees.

Of SNOW.
Snow, is a meteor engendered in the air by moisture and cold; contains no
nitro nor any other salts, leaves nothing that chrystalizes after dissolution;
but contains inflammable matter, and makes the common air more noxious and
unwholesome than before.

Snow fertilizes the ground, by preventing the escape of what nourishes plants,
protects corn and other vegetables from the intenser cold air, and piercing
winds, and keeps their roots warm.

Of LIGHTNING.
Lightning is a mixture of sulphurious and nitrous effluvia, which ferment,
kindle, and occasion those explosions and vivid flames of fire, which we call
thunder and lightning; and is in the hand of Providence in some respect similar
to what electricity is in ours.

Lightning does much more good than hurt to vegetation; it frees the atmosphere
from sulphurious and other noxious particles, and produces cold. Hence, the
watery vapors floating in the air are condenced, and descend in the form of
rain, which greatly fertilize the land.

Of DEW.
Dew is a compound of moisture, oily, saline and volatile particles, exhaled by
the heat of the sun from the sea, rivers, standing waters, marshy lands, the
earth, dunghills and other putrid matters; all which are attracted by the
wonderful power of the solar rays, and carried into the atmosphere, where they
float, are intimately united, and kept in agitation by the heat of the sun, and
become invisible; but when the solar heat begins to remit, and as the air
cools, the watery compound particles are condensed, and fall upon the earth and
leaves of vegetables. The stronger the heat of the sun, the greater is the
exhalation and fall of dew at night.

As the sun ascends above the horizon in the summer, the exhalation,
particularly of standing waters and marshy lands, is extremely visible.

In the driest and warmest seasons, when the earth is parched and dried up,
then Providence most wonderfully assists and promotes vegetation, by the fall
of dews on the leaves of trees, and vegetables: as the heat of the sun
increases, it excites and promotes a motion in the juices, the leaves imbibe
the fertile pearly drops, and convey them through the vessels, by which
vegetables are nourished.

Of CLOUDS.
Clouds are a collection of vapors exaled from the sea, other waters, and from
the land, by the sun or subterraneous heat, or both, which when exhaled, are
too small to be perceived; but when they ascend into that region of the
atmosphere of the same specific levity, there they float, are driven together
by the agitation of the winds, condensed by the cold, and rendered opake by the
union of their parts. Hence, they visibly appear in the form of clouds, which,
being heavier than the air, of course fall through it; and according to the
height they descend from, and the resistance they meet with from the
atmosphere, are broken and divided into proportionable small drops, called rain.

Of RAIN.
Rain is a precipitated cloud, broken and divided into innumerable drops. The
greater the height they descend from, the greater is the resistance they meet
with from the air, the more are they divided, and lesser are the drops of rain.
Hence, vice versa, the less the height of their descent, the lesser is the
resistance they meet with in the air, of course the larger are the drops of
rain.

Vegetables cannot grow without water. Rain promotes vegetation, by furnishing
salts and oils from the atmosphere, by dissolving and uniting the oily and
saline particles in the earth, by expanding the imbibing vessels, by
attenuating the glutinous substances, by promoting the intestine motion of the
juices, by loosening the earth, that the roots of plants may enjoy access of
air, and be better enabled to extend themselves in search of those nutritive
particles, conveyed to them, by means of heat and that most useful watery
menstruum.

Excess of rain is hurtful to vegetation, particularly when waters remain any
considerable time on the ground, which lessen the warmth in the earth, and
thereby prevent vegetation; or destroy the roots of plants, and render such
places barren; or produce such rank unwholesome weeds as are nourished by
stagnated waters, which become putrid by the heat of the sun.

Too much moisture yields a thin vitiated food, prevents the access of air to
the roots of plants, impedes their natural growth, and prevents their seeds
from being perfected.

If heavy rains fall when the plants are in bloom, their farina is washed off,
and consequently there can be no impregnation. Hence, wet seasons produce the
smallest crops.

The want of rain is also hurtful to vegetation. Heat dissipates the moisture
in the earth, which becomes too dry. Hence, it is baked and rent by the
scorching rays of the sun, which destroy the roots of the plants, or so harden
the earth, as to prevent the fibers from extending themselves in search of food.

Of AIR.
Air is a thin invisible elastic vapor, imperceptible to all our senses,
except of feeling.

The colder the weather, the more is the air condensed, whereby the heat of the
fires are more confined, and become stronger in winter than in summer.

When water is converted into vapor by distillation or exalation, the water
becomes lighter than the air. Hence, watery vapors are raised to a considerable
height, and float in the atmosphere, where its weight, density, and pressure,
is less than near the surface of the earth.

Moist vapors lessen the elasticity of the air, because the force of repulsion
in the particles of watery vapors, is less than in the particles of air.

A moist atmosphere is heavier than a dry and clear atmosphere, in proportion
to the quantity of suspended watery particles; and according to its component
parts, its weight varies, which barometers discover.

The elasticity of air is increased by heat, and decreased by cold. -- Hence
appears the use of thermometers, which indicate the various degrees of both.

Air is absolutely necessary for the support of animal and vegetable life;
without it there could be no existence, which experiments with air-pumps
sufficiently demonstrate. No seed can vegetate nor vegetable grow in any place
deprived of air.

Fresh air is impregnated with a particular vivifying spirit, essentially
necessary to the preservation of animal life.

Every time the air passes out of the lungs, part of the vivifying spirit is
either destroyed or left behind. -- Hence, animals die when confined in noxious
air, as well as from the want of it.

Air is changed by the corruption and putrefaction of the vivifying spirit: as
the properties of things putrefied are different from the properties they
contained before putrefaction; so, in proportion, is the health of animals
affected. Hence arise epidemical diseases amongst the inhabitants and animals
of such countries as are marshy, and are surrounded or intersected with
stagnated waters, which of course putrefy and destroy the vivifying spirit in
that air.

The different effluvias diffused through the air, produce a variety of
different effects. In all large cities, the air abounds with sulphurious,
acrid, and corrosive particles, which rust metals sooner than in the country;
and near mines of copper, its effects are so great as to discolor silver and
brass.

Air not only acts upon all bodies by its common properties of weight and
elasticity; but also by the peculiar qualities of the ingredients whereof it is
composed, greatly promotes vegetation; for the more vegetables enjoy the free
access of air, (not only to their leaves, stalks and branches, but also to
their roots) the more they grow and thrive; such is the vivifying power of air,
that it was considered by the ancient philosophers as the first principle of
all things.

As the learned and ingenious Dr. Hunter, of York, in Great Britain, first made
those important and interesting discoveries, relative to the putrid and noxious
particles of the air being consumed by the vegetable creation, and which were
published in the year 1769, and 1770, I will beg leave to present the reader
with such extracts as are necessary for my present subject.

"It is pleasing to observe how the dissolution of one body is necessary for
the life and increase of another. All nature is in motion. In consequence of
the putrid fermentation which is every where carried on, a quantity of
vegetable nutriment ascends into the atmosphere -- summer showers return much
of it again; but part falls into the sea and is lost: to this we may add the
animal and vegetable substances consumed on board of ships, all of which are
buried in the ocean. The industry of man restores them to the earth; and we may
presume that the fish taken out of the sea, leaves a balance in favor of
mankind. Thus Providence with the most consummate wisdom, keeps up the
necessary rotation of things."

"Hitherto I have considered plants as nourished by their roots. I shall now
take a view of them as nourished by their leaves. An attention to this part of
the vegetable system, is essentially necessary to the rational farmer.
Vegetables that have a succulent leaf, such as vetches, peace, beans, and
buckwheat, draw a great part of their nourishment from the air, and on that
account, impoverish the soil less than wheat, cats, barley or rye, the leaves
of which are of a firmer texture. Rape and hemp are oil-bearing plants,
consequently impoverishers of the soils; but the former less so than the
latter, owing to the great succulency of its leaf. The leaves of all kinds of
grain are succulent for a time; during which period the plants take little from
the earth; but as soon as the ear begins to be formed, they lose their
softness, and diminish in their attractive power. The radical fibers are then
more vigorously employed in extracting the oily particles of the earth, for the
nourishment of the seed. Such I apprehend is the course of nature."

"In order that we may have a distinct view of the motion of the sap, it will
be necessary to reflect that the root, stem, branches and leaves are
constructed in the same manner. Sallows, willows, vines, and most shrubs, will
grow in an inverted state, with their tops downwards in the earth. Dr. Bradly
describes the manner of inverting a young cherry tree, the roots of which will
put forth leaves, and the branches become roots. Hence it is obvious that the
nutritive matter may be conveyed as well by the leaves as the roots, their
vascular structure being the very same.

"Air is to be found in every portion of earth: and as it always contains a
solution of the volatile parts of animal and vegetable substances, we should be
careful to keep our stiff soils as open as possible to its influence. It passes
both in its active and fixed state, into the absorbent vessels of the root, and
mixing with the juices of the plant, circulates through every part. Dr. Hales,
in his statical experiments on the vine, discovered it ascending with the sap
in the bleeding season."

In the year 1773, the ingenious and indefatigable Dr. Priestly, presented to
the royal society, his experiments on the different kinds of air, which clearly
proves that putrid air arising from dunghills, and that the perspiration of
animals, are not only absorbed by vegetables, but also add to their increase.
As those experiments are of too interesting a nature to be passed over
unnoticed, for the benefit of those who have not had an opportunity of seeing
the original, I shall here transcribe part, referring the curious to the
learned Doctor's publication.

"When air has been freshly and strongly tainted with putrefaction, so as to
smell through the water, spriggs of mint have presently died, upon being put into
it, their leaves turning black; but if they do not die presently, they thrive
in a most surprising manner.

"In no other circumstances have I ever seen vegetation so vigourous as in this
kind of air, which is immediately fatal to animal life. Though these plants
have been crowded in jars filled with this air, every leaf has been full of
life; fresh shoots have branched out in various directions, and have grown much
faster than other similar plants, growing in the same exposure in common air.
This observation led me to conclude, that plants instead of affecting the air
in the same manner with animal respiration, reverse the effects of breathing,
and tend to keep the atmosphere sweet and wholesome, when it is become noxious,
in consequence of animals either living and breathing, or dying and putrefying
in it.

"In order to ascertain this, I took a quantity of air, made thoroughly noxious
by mice breathing and dying in it, and divided it into two parts; one of which
I put into a phial immersed in water; and to the other (which was contained in
a glass jar standing in water) I put a sprig of mint. This was about the
beginning of August, 1771, and after eight or nine days, I found that a mouse
lived perfectly well in that part of the air, in which the sprig of mint had
grown, but died, the moment it was put into the other part of the same original
quantity of air, and which I had kept in the very same exposure, but without
any plant growing in it. -- This experiment I have several times repeated,
sometimes using air in which animals had breathed and died; sometimes using air
tainted with vegetable or animal putrefactions, and generally with the same
success.

On the IMPROVEMENT of WET LANDS.
The first and principal improvement of wet land is draining, without which,
the greatest quantity of the best manure will prove ineffectual. Coarse grass,
rushes, horse-mints, and other noxious weeds, are the general productions of
lands overcharged with moisture, proceeding from the water being retained by a
stiff impervious clay, or from cold hungry springs, which are frequently loaded
with minerals and acids; and from want of proper drains, the stagnated waters
corrupt the natural nourishment, so essentially necessary for producing sweet
herbage; but when the cause is removed, the effects will cease. Those
luxurious, noxious weeds being deprived of their nourishment, of course die,
and sweet wholesome herbage naturally succeed, without manure.

The greatest attention should be paid to the situation and declivity of the
ground; the ditches at the lowest part of the land should be first opened of a
sufficient depth and size, (according to the nature of the soil) at least three
feet perpendicularly deep, two feet wide at the bottom, and four feet wide at
the top, gradually increasing from the bottom to the surface; which slope will
prevent the sides from falling in with rain or frosts. The mould thrown from
this ditch or drain will make a bank on one side, on the top, a dwarf hedge may
be made with some brush-wood at a very trifling expense, that will be superior
to a post and rail fence -- lands by that means may be put into small lots,
which will be of great advantage to the farmer. Directions for making the
hedge, I shall give hereafter -- see hedging.

Small or leading drains should be made (according to their declivity) from
twenty to twenty four inches deep, nine inches wide at bottom, and from fifteen
to eighteen inches broad on the surface; extending through the most hollow, and
from the lowest to the highest parts of the land. These branches or smaller
drains should be from twenty to forty or fifty feet apart (in proportion to the
springs and wetness of the soil) cut across the ground, with a hanging level,
sufficient to convey the water into the large drains.

If stones can be conveniently got, they are the most effectual for this
purpose: when the work is properly executed it will last for ever. The best
method I have experienced is, to place flat stones standing on the bottom as
perpendicular as the sides of the drains will admit, with other flat stones on
the opposite side, placed with the top part to rest against the upright stones,
in the form of should this cavity be insufficient for the current of water,
another flat stone may be placed in a reversed form, as by which there will be
a double vacuum, fully sufficient for the greatest current; the remainder of
the drains, when in arable lands, may be filled up with stones, to within about
eight inches of the surface, covered with straw or stalks of any sort, to
prevent the earth from falling between the stones, and filled up with the mould
that came out of the drain; the remainder may be scattered over the land.

In draining pasture lands, the turf is carefully laid aside, the drains filled
with stones to within four or five inches of the surface; and the grass part of
the turf is placed thereon, which saves the trouble of laying straw, and as
effectually prevents the earth from falling between the stones into the drains.

The effects of draining are too obvious to require any comment.

Of CLEARING LAND from TREES, etc.
The next improvement is, the clearing of lands from the stumps and roots of
trees, grubbs, thorns, briers, etc.

When lands are encumbered by any of those before mentioned, it is impossible
to plow land as it ought to be -- when land is only scratched, and these
rubbish receiving part of the nutritive food, good crops cannot be expected.

Timber and pollard trees are injurious to arable and pasture grounds; they
obstruct the free circulation of the air and the effects of the sun. The
leaves, particularly of ash, render the grass, whereon they fall, coarse and
sour; which, when eaten by cows, affect their milk with a strong disagreeable
taste.

Trees attract, and their shade and roots retain moisture and acidity in the
soil; their wide extended fibrous roots, particularly of ash and hickory strike
horizontally, near the surface, to a very considerable distance; they greatly
impoverish pasture grounds, and impede the plow in arable land.

The roots of trees grow in proportion to their trunks and branches; therefore,
no more than two or three should be left in a field for cattle to rub against,
and for shade.

When trees are planted, or permitted to remain for timber or for firing, the
northern and eastern sides of fields, and irregular corners, are the most
proper situations; where they afford shelter, and serve as a screen against
cold winds, and do not obstruct the influences of the sun and air.

When lands are cleared from superfluous trees, etc. attention should be paid
to the surface and condition of the ground -- where ants inhabit, their hills
should be pared off as before directed, carried to the middle of the field, and
there mixed with the ashes made from the rubbish wood, etc. and lime, when
thoroughly incorporated, it must be spread over the ground equally.

By placing the manure in the middle, it is the sooner, and at less expense
carried over. But should there be any uneven land or banks, such should be
plowed and harrowed, the pared hills should be deposited thereon and levelled,
the ashes and lime should be laid on the middle of the bank, and as soon as the
lime is slacked, it should immediately be mixed with the ant hills, ashes, and
earth; and when well incorporated, should be applied in proportion as before.

Plowing of ground is of such absolute necessity in all lands where grain and
artificial grasses are sown, that whoever is wanting in this work, to get the
earth into a fine, hollow sweet condition when the grain is sown, may depend
their crop will fall very short: and as I conceive, the neglect of that most
useful and necessary part of husbandry in this country, to be one of the
principal causes of the produce not to be equal to that of other countries, I
shall be very particular in laying down the different methods I have used, as
well as quote different authors: I shall first give a descripion of the
different ploughs used in several counties in England.

The plough most used in Middlesex, Hertford, Berkshire, Bedfordshire, etc. is
the two wheeled plough -- as I have not seen one of them in this country, I
shall give a description of it.

The two principal parts of this plough, are the head and the tail; the plough
head contains the two wheels and their axis, or spindle passing through a box,
and turning round in it, and in the wheels; there are fixed perpendicularly in
this box two crow staves, as they are called, which are flat and narrow boards,
each having on it two rows of holes, whereby to raise or sink the beam of the
plough, by pinning up or down the pillow, to increase or diminish the depth of
the furrow.

Behind are a pair of gallows, through which the crow-staves pass at the top by
mortises, into which they are pinned, and to these are fastened what they call
the wilds, which are rings and crooks of iron by which the whole plough is
drawn in the working.

From the box to the center of the beam, there is carried an iron chain,
consisting of four, five or more long links, and called the tow-chain: this
fastens the plough-tail to the plough-head.

It is fixed to an iron collar, fastened in the beam at one end, and at the
other passes through a hole in the middle of the box, and is pinned in with a
wooden pin.

From the same iron collar to which the tow-chain is fixed, there is also
another chain fastened, called the bridle-chain: this runs above the beam, as
the tow-chain does below it, and is composed of smaller and more numerous links.

At the upper end, as the tow-chain enters the box of the plough there is a
perpendicular stick, carried up parallel with the left crow-staff, and pretty
near it, and fastened to it by a with, or rope, or by the end of the
bridle-chain itself, when that is long enough. This stake is also fastened in
its lower part, under the gallows, to the same crow-staff, by another with or
piece of rope.

Those are the parts of which the head part of the plough is composed. The
plough-tail consists of the beam carried from the head to the very extremity,
and serving as the support and base of all the rest.

A little below the collar to which the tow-chain and bridle-chain are
fastened, this beam is pierced with a large hole, which lets through the
coulter: this is long and narrow, terminating in an edge, and reaching just to
the share; and it is fixed immovable in its place by a wedge, which is driven
into the hole of the beam with it: the office of this coulter is to cut the
earth as it is thrown up by the share.

Behind these, the same beam is pierced with two more holes, one very near its
end: these give passage to two ablong pieces, called the fore-sheat and
hinder-sheat, by which the plough-share is supported in its place.

To the top of the hinder-sheat there is fastened a short handle by a wooden
pin.

Parallel to the hinder-sheat, there runs up a piece of wood of much the same
form, called the drock; and to this is fastened another horizontal piece,
called the ground-wrist; these are all on the right hand side of the plough,
and parallel with the fore-sheat.

There runs another piece of much the same form with it, on the right hand; and
the bottom of this is the earth-board. The long handle of this, which reaches
as far as that of the sheat, is fastened to the drock, by a pin, the other end
of which goes into the beam.

Near the lower end of the fore-sheat, there are two flat pieces of iron, which
pass from the two sides of it up to the beam; and being let through, are
fastened to the upper part by screws and pins. -- These keep the sheat in its
place.

The structure of the four-coultered plough, is different, in some respects to
this, though in general founded on it. Its beam is ten feet long, whereas that
of the common plough is but eight. The beam is straight in the common plough;
but in this it is arched in one fourth part of its length, near the plough-head.

At the distance of three feet four inches from the end of the beam at the
plough-tail, the first coulter, or that next the share, is let through; and at
thirteen inches from this, a second coulter is let through; a third at the same
distance from that; and finally, the fourth at the same distance from the
third, that is thirteen inches.

The crookedness of the upper part of the beam in this plough is contrived to
avoid the two great length of the three foremost coulters, which would be too
much, if the beam was straight all the way; and they would be apt to bend and
be displaced, unless they were vastly heavy and clumsy. Ash is the best wood to
make the beam of, it being sufficiently strong and yet light.

The sheat in this plough is to be seven inches broad. The fixing of the share
in this, as well as in the common plough, is the nicest part, and requires the
utmost art of the maker; for the well going of the plough wholly depends upon
the placing this. Supposing the axis of the beam, and the left side of the
share, to be horizontal, they must never be set parallel to each other; for if
they are, the tail of the share, bearing against the trench as much as the
point, would cause the point to incline to the right hand, and it would be
carried out of the ground into the furrow.

If the point of the share should be set so, that its side should make an angle
on the right side of the axis of the beam, this inconvenience would be much
greater; and if its point should incline much to the left, and make too large
an angle on that side with the axis of the beam, the plough would run quite to
the left hand; and, if the holder, to prevent its running quite out of the
ground, turns the upper part of this plough toward the left hand, the pin of
the share will rise up and cut the furrow diagonally, leaving it half unplowed.

To avoid this, and several inconveniences, the straight side of the share must
make an angle upon the left side of the beam; but that must be so very acute a
one, that the tail of the share may only press against the side of the trench
than the point does.

The great thing to be taken care of, is the placing the four coulters: for on
this the success of the whole depends. These must be so set that the four
planes, as the plough moves forward, may be all parallel to each other, or very
nearly so; for if any one of them should be very much inclined to, or should
recede much from either of the other, then they would not enter the ground
together.

In order to the placing them thus, the beam must be carefully pierced in a
proper manner. The second coulter-hole must be two inches and an half more on
the right hand than the first: the third must be as much to the right of the
second; and the fourth the same measure to the right hand of the third: and
this two inches and an half must be carefully measured from the center of one
hole to the center of the other. Each of these holes is a mortise of an inch
and quarter wide, and is three inches and an half long at the top, and three
inches at the bottom. The two opposite sides of this hole are parallel to the
top and bottom, but the back is oblique, and determines the obliquity of the
standing of the coulter, which is wedged tight up to the poll.

The coulter is two feet eight inches long, before it is worn; the handle takes
up sixteen inches of this length, and is allowed thus long that the coulter may
be driven down as the point wears away.

The single wheel plough used in Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, etc. is a fine light
plough calculated for two horses. The wheel is fixed to the beam by a piece of
iron with holes in it, whereby it may be set near or off, deep and shallow. It
has an iron earth-board made rounding, which turns the turf better than any
other plough.

The single wheel plough used in Surry, Kent, Sussex, Hampshire, etc. is a
clumsy heavy plough, very wide in the breech, consequently the draught of it
must be very hard.

The swing plough used in Worcestershire, Gloucestershire, Warwickshire,
Northamptonshire, etc. is much the same as that used in this country.

The hoe ploughs are two, one of them is that used in Essex, etc. only light,
as it is often worked with one horse, to plow between the rows of grain. --
This is to go one bought, taking the mould away next the roots of the grain and
throwing it up in a ridge in the middle of the alley.

The other plough has a share with a sin on each side; it has two earth-boards,
they are equal on both sides, and made to let out to any weadth, or contracted
in: -- This plough is for going right in the middle of the alley between the
grain, which throws up the mould equally up to the grain on both sides, and
does as much work in half a bought as the other does in a whole one.

It is evident that earth often dug, and skreened in a garden, produces the
best tillage; so is it the principal reason that plowing and harrowing of land
makes it the most fruitful; for by this means the spirit of the earth, or the
Sal. Terroe is collected, as also that of the air, dews, and rain; when several
vegetable salts are put into a condition to act, by the fineness of the earth,
which are the life and nourishment of all things that grow therein; and for the
want of these two qualifications, many crops have been lost. So that upon the
due knowledge of plowing and the right practice thereof, depends chiefly the
right benefit of farming. A light earth is capacitated to receive the nitrous
dews and celestial influences, which coagulate and fix on the same; when a
heavy sour earth misses, and goes without the benefit.

And therefore I shall endeavor to supply in some measure, I believe I may
say, what most authors have been hitherto chiefly wanting in; and the chief
reason for their omission, I presume, is, their not being acquainted with the
practical part of plowing, although it is certainly the most necessary branch
of farming.

When the soil has been well loosened by deep repeated plowings and harrowings,
its particles are minutely divided, and the roots of plants have liberty to
spread freely. Hence are enabled to acquire such nourishment, as could not
possible be obtained when confined between large impenetrable clods of earth.

Strong clayey ground cannot be too often plowed, and exposed to the sun aad
frost. Gravels, sands, and such light grounds, are much sooner brought into a
tilth; therefore less plowings will do. All grounds should be plowed as deep as
the staple will allow: therefore the two horse farmers seldom cultivate the
land as it should be, because their strength renders them incapable of doing
this work to the purpose, so that the roots of large weeds are left, which
shoot up with the grain and grass, whereby is the occasion of great part of the
crop being lost; for if only a poke root will set four horses, what chance has
a pair with strong roots? It is therefore a farmer's interest to keep a horse
extraordinary.

When land is plowed well, and the weeds killed, then is there greater room for
manures and dressings, which in weedy grounds help to multiply and enlarge
their product, and often is the cause of such weeds spoiling the crop.

PLOWING OF FALLOWS, OR FALLOWING,
Is preparing the land by plowing and manuring, recovering that spirit lost in
tillage; or sweetening, and destroying those particles hurtful to vegetation.
Experience enables me to say, that summer fallows are unnecessary on lands that
can be brought into proper tillage for fallow crops.

The most attentive observations and experiments, have instructed me, that when
pastures are intended to be broken up, the latter part of September, or
beginning of October, is the most advantageous season. At that time vegetation
begins to decline, consequently the produce of the land is but of little value,
till the succeeding spring.

The ground, as soon as broken up, should be rolled with a heavy roller; the
sward by that means, will be so closed that the heat and moisture will cause a
speedy fermentation, and rot the sward more in October and November, than it
would in the four following months. It should be harrowed, that the earth may
be loosened, and prepared to receive the benefits of the air, rain, and frost.

The latter end of November, or the beginning of December, it should be
obliquely plowed as deep as the staple will admit. By this mode, the baulks
that were made at the first plowing will be corrected.

The land being thus left in its rough state, will be exposed to the winter
frost, which will penetrate the hard clods, and by its expansive force, greatly
assist in pulverizing the soil.

As soon as the weather will permit in the spring, it must be well worked with
heavy harrows, by which the clods will be greatly, if not totally reduced; and
by being thus divided, will receive farther benefit from the influences of the
atmosphere.

In the month of March, or April, according to the season or climate, the land
should be again rolled, to break the remaining clods; which being pressed into
the ground, must be loosened and pulverized by harrowing. In this state the
earth should remain for six or seven days, to receive further benefit from the
atmosphere. Then plow for the crop.

After the land has been prepared in this manner, I have sown peace in drills at
four feet distance -- have given them two plowings with the hoe-ploughs, the
produce per acre was seventy-five bushels, which I sold for 5s. 6d. sterling.
When the peace were off, I plowed it up, sowed it with wheat in drills, at one
foot distance, gave it two hand hoeings; the produce was fifty three bushels,
which I sold for 7s. and 3d. pence sterling; so that the produce in two years,
fetched me 39l. 16s. 9d. per acre; from which deduct the expenses, four
plowings, at 8s. two rollings, at 1s. six harrowings at 1s. two bushels of peace
for seed, at 5s. 6d. one bushel of wheat for do. 7s. 6d. drilling of the peace
and wheat 4s. two years rent and taxes 2l. two horse and two hand hoeings 1l.
4s. hooking, reaping and housing 1l. 4s threshing and carrying to market 1l.
10s. makes the expenses 9l. 0s. 6d. which deduct from 39l. 16s. 9d. the
balance is 30l. 16s. 3d. being the clear profit per acre for two years.

This method of cultivation fully proves the great advantage of good tillage.
The advantages arising from drilling in of grain are great, compared to the
broad cast. -- By the drill, the seed is deposited at such a certain reguired
regular distance and depth in the ground, as to meet with moisture. Every seed
will soon vegetate, and even in the driest season will produce one
extraordinary crop, from five to twenty bushels per acre, more than by the
common mode. The seed, by drilling is also secured from birds. The intervals
admit being hoed and cleaned from weeds, while the ground is preparing for a
succeeding crop, besides by hoeing, the ground is so pulverized as readily to
imbibe the dews and rains, keeps the pores open, so that in the driest seasons
plants are kept in a moist state.

FALLOWING OF LAND THAT IS UNDER TILLAGE.
In order to illustrate the superior advantages accruing from good management,
thorough tillage, and changing of crops, to improper management, and the
erroneous savings of labor and expense, I shall revert to other of my
experiments to prove the most beneficial method of culture.

After a field had produced its regular rotation of crops, I fallow plowed it,
that is, as soon as harvest was done, I plowed in the stubble and laid it up
in one bout ridges, and let it lay in that rough state, till the following
spring; as soon as the weather would permit, gave it a good harrowing, which
made the seeds of the weeds vegetate. In May obliquely plowed it; the latter
end of June, gave it another good harrowing, then hauled on the manure, and
spread it and plowed it in, and sowed turnip-seed, broad cast, every day what
was plowed.

The seed was steeped in fish oil for twelve hours, which hinders the fly from
hurting the plant, (In New England, the beginning of July is the best season
for sowing; in the middle states, about the middle of the month; and to the
southward, the latter end.)

As soon as the plants were pretty large, before they bottled, I had them hoed,
all the supurfluous ones cut up, and left at about fifteen inches apart. In
October I gave them another hoeing: the two hoeings cost me 10s. per acre. The
latter part of November they were at their full growth, so large, that they
covered partly all the ground.

This field contained ten acres, which I penned, and fed off with sheep. I
bought fifty weathers for 45l. and thirty ewes, with lamb, for 18l. The turnips
were sufficient for fattening the weathers, and cupples, exclusive of feeding
sixty store sheep, that followed those that were fattening, and eat up their
leavings. The weathers I sold to the butcher for 112l. 10s. and the cupples for
57l. and the feed of the store sheep, I reckoned to be worth 9l. so that the
profit of this fallow crop was 110l. 10s. which is 11l. 1s. per acre, exclusive
of a good dressing from their manure, for a succeeding crop.

The following spring, I gave this field two plowings, the first as shallow as
possible, the second obliquely deeper, which turned up the sheeps dung. I then
harrowed it as flat as possible, to lay it even fit for mowing. I then sowed it
with spring barley, pretty thick in the drills, at a foot distance in the rows,
which took six pecks to the acre, and sowed, broad cast, at the rate of six
pounds of clover, and four pounds of trefoil seed per acre, and harrowed it in
at once with light harrows.

This method of sowing the grass seeds with the grain, hindered me from hoeing
of the barley; but its filling up the intermediate spaces, prevented the weeds
from growing.

This barley tillered amazingly, at harvest the spaces were filled up, the
straw was so strong, that it was with difficulty I could get it mowed; the ears
were remarkably long, from fifteen to twenty grains on a side, and very full
and plump.

I had it put in a bay of a barn by itself, had it threshed; the produce was
675 bushels, which I sold for 3s. 3d. per bushel, which is 109l. 13s. 9d. or
10l. 19s. 4d. per acre profit; for the clover and trefoil growing up with the
barley, made the straw fine fodder, superior to bad hay, therefore more than
paid all expenses.

What grass growed after harvest, I left the winter to keep the roots warm. In
the succeeding spring, early, I sowed ashes all over the field on the grass,
and rolled it. I had two fine crops of hay, which I stacked by itself: the
first cutting was upwards of eighteen tons, the second about twelve tons; so
that the produce was three tons per acre, which that year was worth 5l. per ton.

As soon as the last crop of hay was off, I gave it one deep plowing, and sowed
red Lammas wheat in drills, at one foot distance, one bushel of seed to the
acre. The beginning of May following, I had it hoed with a running hoe (of
which I shall give a description hereafter) and had the weeds pulled out of the
rows, which together cost me 5s. per acre.

At harvest there was not a weed to be seen, and the ears of the wheat were so
full and heavy, that they hanged downwards. I had it reaped, and housed by
itself, and threshed; the produce 565 bushels, which is 56 bushels and an half
per acre, which I sold for 7s. per bushel, is 19l. 15s. 6d. per acre; from
which deduct the expenses of once plowing, 8s. seed 8s. drilling in the grain
4s. hoeing 5s. reaping 10s. houseing 6s. threshing and carrying to market 15s.
the whole amounting to 2l. 16s. deducted from 19l. 15s. 6d. leaves a profit of
16l. 19s. 6d. per acre.

As soon as harvest was done, I plowed in the wheat stubble, and let it lay in
a rough state the winter. In the spring early I harrowed it, and gave it a deep
plowing, and sowed, broad cast, twenty bushels of the white Poland oats, and
harrowed them in. In May had them weeded by four boys, who were a week, which
cost me 12s. Had them cut at harvest, and put by themselves and threshed; the
produce was 640 bushels, which I sold for 3s. per bushel, is 96l. or 64 bushels
per acre, is 9l. 12s. from which deduct the expenses of once plowing, 8s. two
bushels of seed, 6s. sowing and harrowing, 3s. weeding, 12s. mowing, 4s.
houseing, 6s. threshing and carrying to market, 12s. the whole amounting to 2l.
11s. deducted from 9l. 12s. leaves a profit of 7l. 1s per acre.

The land having gone under its regular course, is ready to begin with
fallowing and manuring again, which will continualy keep the land improving,
instead of impoverishing; and as it is five years going through its regular
succession, the land under tillage, should be divided into five parts -- for
instance, we will suppose a plantation to be 50 acres, or 500; if 50 acres,
there will be 10 fallowed every year, 10 under grass, and 10 under barley, 10
under wheat, and 10 under oats; if 500, there will be 100 acres under each.

I am fully convinced, that 50 acres of land properly managed, will produce
more than 500 badly conducted. The profits of the 10 acres, if you examine the
above accounts, you will find brought upwards of 120l. a year, clear profit. If
50 acres were conducted in the same manner, the profits would be 600l. a year.

I think that those observations evidently confirm, that savings of manure and
labor, in husbandry, produce poverty; and that lands are too frequently
brought into disrepute, from the want of proper management. I am well
convinced, that there is no land (that can be plowed) let it be of what sort or
nature it will, but may be made to produce a profitable crop, either of grain
or grass (if the proper sort was adapted to the soil) and that it would be much
more advantageous to cultivate one hundred acres, in a complete manner, than
two hundred acres, in a slovenly and imperfect manner.

It appears to me, that Providence never intended tilled land should remain
uncropped; because weeds will naturally grow on the poorest, as well as better
soils; and occupy land, which, with judicious management, may be advantageously
cultivated, by meliorating hoed crops; and those vacancies in the fields where
grain has been sown too thin, or destroyed by birds or insects, are generally
filled with weeds, which impoverish the soil more than grain. Hence fallows are
unnecessary, where fallow crops can be introduced.

I have made numerous experiments on fallow crops, which if I was to insert the
whole, would swell this treatise far beyond its limits; and as they might tend
more to perplex than to convey useful knowledge, I will only select the most
useful.

Curious researches into the works of Providence, will investigate the cause,
why some crops improve lands more than others: let this enquiry be our present
attempt.

Beans, peace, potatoes, tares, vetches, clover, lucern, saint-foin, burner,
trefoil, and every other vegetable and grass that produce a succulent leaf,
imbibe much nourishment from the atmosphere; their shade prevents the solar
rays exhaling the moisture from their roots, which are numerous.

Horse beans are a very good fallow crop, but will not grow on all lands; a
strong loam or clay are most suitable: sands and gravels are contrary to their
nature. On a soil that suits them, their tap roots will grow from twelve to
eighteen inches, or more, perpendicularly deep. Their numerous fibers, or
laternal roots, will extend themselves horizontally in a well loosened soil, as
long as their roots and their size will be in proportion. Consequently the
increase of produce, will also be in proportion to the roots and fibers.

I have particularly observed in dry summers, that the greater the distance
between, and the thinner the beans grew in the rows, the more they were
blighted; but when thick they were not much affected. This convinced me, that
there was not a sufficient shade to prevent the sun from exhaling more moisture
from the roots, than what is returned by dews. In order to remedy this, where
the beans grew thin, I have given them deep and frequent hoeings, which had the
desired effect; for the ground being kept open, the dews easily penetrated to
the roots.

The blight is occasioned by the plants being deprived of nourishment, that for
want of a proper supply of juices, they become sickly, the circulation being
stopped in the leaves and extreme parts of their stalks. Hence the perspiration
is converted into a sweet mucilage, which harbors the black insect called the
Dolphin Fly, but vulgarly termed the Blight.

As beans are a profitable crop, as well as great benefit to the land, and will
grow on stiff lands in the driest summers, observing the cautions above. I will
give directions for their cultivation. They may follow any grain; and to
prepare the land for them, plow in the stubble after harvest; a month after,
harrow it well, and late in the fall give it another plowing, as deep as
possible, crossways, in one-bout ridges. In the winter, haul on the manure, and
as soon as the weather will permit, in the spring, spread the manure, and plow
it in, and set or sow your beans as soon as possible.

If you have a drill, sow them at a foot distance between the rows, and at
three inches in the rows. If you have no drill, strain a line, and set them
with dibbers, at the same distance about three inches deep in the ground. It
will take four bushels of seed to the acre. As soon as they are up three or
four inches high, they should be hoed, and as soon as they begin blossoming,
should be hoed again and molded up.

By this method I have had 90 bushels on an acre, which I have sold at 5s. the
bushel, and an excellent crop of wheat the following year. They are the best
feed for horses, and hogs, far exceeding any other grain for fattening.

The next fallow crop that ranks on my list is peace; their effects as a
meliorating crop are great; their shade prevents the solar rays exaling the
moisture from their roots. In a well pulverized soil, the roots of peace will
extend horizontally from twelve to eighteen inches; for the closer the peace are
planted in the drills, the more they thrive and enrich the land: and instead of
robbing each other of their food, they become combined into a formidable body
-- Therefore, by supporting each other, they are better enabled (than when
single or few in number), to force their passage through the earth in search of
food.

The more numerous are the plants of peace, the thicker is the shade, and the
more is the moisture retained in the ground. Hence they cause a putrid
fermentation which fertilizes the soil.

Early hoeing kills weeds, prevents their growth, so as to be soon stifled by
the drilled peace; it also loosens the soil, and admits the extention of the
roots; and as they are generally cut early, time permits to give the better
tillage for wheat. They will grow in all soils; but in a stiff fertile ground,
they yield the greatest crops.

There are several sorts of field peace; but the most useful are the
Marlborough, maple, horn-grey, blue poplar and Dutch admirals. The Marlborough
and maple, are large peace; the former is speckled, and the latter of a hazle
color; the horn-grey, and blue, are small peace; the former of a gray color, the
latter of a blue. The poplar, and Dutch admiral, are white peace; the former
small, and the latter large.

Of all pulses that are sown or propagated, peace claim the pre-eminence, not
only for their general use, both by sea and land, for man and horse, but also
for the diversity of their kinds suited to different soils. The large sort
require a rich moist earth, and the small will grow on sands and gravels. If
the crop is sufficient to shade its roots, once or twice hoeing will be
sufficient; but if not, and the summer should be a dry one, they will require
frequent hoeings to prevent the dolphin fly from taking of them.

The land should be prepared in the same manner as I have directed for beans;
the small sort are hardiest, therefore may be sown early in the spring; the
others should be sown some time in April at furthest; the large sorts of peace
should be sown in drills, one to every inch and half, and three feet between.
The small sorts should be one inch apart in the drills, and two feet between;
four bushels of seed is the quantity for an acre. I have had 90 bushels on an
acre, which I have sold for 5s. per bushel, and have had a very great crop of
wheat the following year.

The next fallow crop on my list is potatoes, which are generally supposed to
impoverish land. My crops of wheat after potatoes, have, in every experiment,
proved as good and fine as after any other vegetable, or fallow equally
manured. I had two successive crops of potatoes, the last of which produced 30
sacks more than the first; with an excellent succeeding crop of wheat, and the
ground being left in good order, gives me reason to conceive, that potatoes do
not impoverish the land.

In order that I might have an opportunity more conveniently and minutely to
investigate the growth of potatoes, and to attain some further knowledge of the
most advantageous method of their cultivation, I made the following experiment,
viz.

On the second of May I had six large potatoes, that weighed two pounds and two
ounces, cut into thirty three sets, with two eyes each, which were planted in a
stiff deep soil, with a small quantity of rotten dung scattered under and over
the sets, which were placed about six inches deep, at the following distance in
the rows, divided by pegs; No. 1. Eleven cuts, at six inches distance. No. 2.
Eleven cuts at nine inches distance. No. 3. Eleven cuts at twelve inches
distance.


They were hoed twice. On the tenth of October, the earth was carefully drawn
from off the plants, which were extended across the rows, each measuring alike
one foot. The produce was as follows: No. 1. Contained 124 potatoes, which
weighed 28lbs. 10 ozs. and occupied six feet in length. No. 2. Contained 130
potatoes, which weighed 32lbs. 2 ozs. and occupied nine feet in length. No. 3.
Contained 145 potatoes, which weighed 31lbs. 2 ozs. and occupied 13 feet in
length; the total weight was 91lbs. 14 ozs. which is in proportion to 123
hundred weight to an acre, and at 4s. the hundred, comes to 24l. 12s. per acre.


Although the ground was dug about a foot deep, the plants and fibers did not
grow perpendicularly, but horizontally across the rows, so far and so high as
the loosened or hoed earth extended.

Hence it evidently appears, that the soil being continually moved by the
growth of the potatoes and hoeings, its particles are so minutely divided, as
to permit the free admission for the atmospherical influences, which fertilize
the land, and renders the succeeding crops more productive after a fallow crop;
for the soil being more pulverized, the roots of the succeeding plants can the
easier range in search of food; which, in proportion to the nourishment they
acquire, fills the grain, and makes it weigh heavier, than when its roots are
confined; and is the most certain proof, that good tillage is one of the
greatest secrets in agriculture.

I am convinced from the many experiments I have made, that on good loamy or
stiff soils, wheat may alternately succeed either beans, peace, potatoes, or any
other meliorating hoed crops for any number of years, provided the stubble is
immediately, or soon after harvest, plowed as deep as the stratum will admit,
into one bout ridges, by which the soil will be kept dry and exposed to the
frosts, that will pulverize it. This mode, with the addition of proper manure,
once in about four years, will keep the land in excellent order, and improve
it. I have experienced, that one plowing in the fall, is of more benefit, than
two plowings in the spring.

As manures cannot always be procured in sufficient quantities to dress all the
land the farmer would wish, I will put him in a way, from my own experience,
which, with a few shillings, and a little labor, he may dress an acre of land,
or as many as he pleases.

In sands and gravels, buck-wheat plowed in while green, is a good dressing.
The land should be plowed in the fall, and laid up in ridges as before
directed, to bring the land into a fine tilth, harrowed and plowed in the
spring, and the beginning of May should be sown with a bushel and an half of
buck-wheat, and harrowed in, in July. When in full bloom it should be well
rolled and plowed in, in broad lands. When this is done, there will some appear
above ground, between the furrows, that the plow did not cover. This must be
struck down with an iron instrument, like a paddle, or paring-shovel, and let
it lie in that state for a month.

In this time it will smoke, so as to be seen a great way, like a dunghill;
and as it is a green dressing will quickly rot in the ground. The next thing is
to harrow it; then plow and sow wheat in broad lands; if you have a good crop
of buck-wheat, it will be a good dressing for three years.

This great improver of land is such a friend to the farmer, that if its value
was more generally known, this method would be more practiced.

When the crop of wheat is off, you may plow in the stubble and sow winter
barley, and the succeeding year oats, and after that a turnip fallow, to clear
it well from weeds.

Clover plowed in, is a good green dressing. You may mow the first crop; and if
you have a good second crop, do not be afraid of plowing it in, as it will
fully repay you in your crop of wheat. It should be rolled and plowed in, the
same as the buck-wheat. After it has lain some time to rot, you may harrow in
your wheat; for it should not be plowed again, as directed for the buck-wheat.

I had near my house a small field which contained three acres and a quarter,
two acres of it were saintfoin, and the remainder acre and a quarter was
lucern. These grasses served eight horses (which was in continual work) for
green meat; during the summer, it was cut and brought to the stable, a small
patch every day, and by the time they had gone over the field, where they had
first began was ready for cutting again.

In about ten years the lucern began to wear out; that is, the twich and weeds
had got the better of it; therefore in the fall of the year, I had that acre
and quarter plowed up; it was so tough and matted with the twich grass and
weeds, that the furrows were solid from one end to the other. I had it tore to
pieces with heavy harrows, and with rakes had the rubbish collected together in
heaps, got some dry brush wood and put it under the heaps and set it on fire;
spread the ashes and gave it another plowing, and laid it up in one bout ridges.

In the following spring harrowed it well, and raked the stuff together and
burnt it, and spread the ashes as before, and gave it another plowing; the
latter end of May, harrowed and plowed it again. By this time it was as fine as
a garden. The beginning of July plowed it and sowed it with turnips; had a very
great crop, which paid me upwards of 20l. by feeding it with sheep. In the
following spring, sowed spring barley, and lucern, each at 12 inches apart in
the rows, that is, a row of lucern, between every row of barley, and a row of
barley between every row of lucern; so that there was 6 inches between the
barley, and lucern. At harvest I had upwards of 80 bushels of barley cut off
the acre and quarter, and a very promising crop of lucern left, and so clean
not a weed to be seen; in the following spring had it hoed, cut it the latter
end of May, had a ton and half of hay. As soon as the hay was off, had it hoed;
the latter end of July cut again, had about a ton of hay; had it hoed as
before, in October cut it again, had upwards of half a ton of hay.

This method I pursued, and the crops increased every year. The following year
I had about a ton more, and the third year when I reckoned it had come to
maturity, I had upwards of five tons. This proves as I said before, that good
tillage is the grand secret of agriculture, and the crops will amply pay the
husbandman for his labor.

OF PLOWING AND HARROWING.
Plowing is the action of breaking up, opening, and pulverizing the soil, that
the roots and tender fibers of plants may be enabled to extend themselves in
quest of food.

When the soil has been well loosened by deep repeated plowings and harrowings,
its particles are minutely divided, and the roots of plants have liberty to
spread freely. Hence they are enabled to acquire such nourishment as could not
possibly be obtained, when confined between large impenetrable clods of earth.

Thorough plowing, in a great measure, supplies the want of manure, by keeping
the earth in a loose state, ready for the reception of atmospherical influences.

Duhamel says, "It is much more profitable to increase the fruitfulness of land
by tillage than by dung:

"1st. Because only a certain quantity of dung can often times be had, the
produce of 20 acres being scarcely sufficient to dung one; whereas the
particles of the earth may be divided and sub-divided, ad infinitum. The
benefit that can be procured from dungs is therefore limited; whereas no bounds
can be set to the advantages which arise from tillage

"2d. Most plants that are reared in dung, have not the fine flavor of those
that grow in a good soil, which has not been dunged. Greens and fruits are
seldom so good in the neighborhood of great cities, where dung abounds, as in
country gardens, where it cannot be so lavishly bestowed. But nothing is more
striking, than the difference between wine produced by a vine that has not been
dunged at all, and that which is made from a vine that has been greatly dunged.

"3d. Dung, which according to Mr. Tull, acts by fermentation, causes indeed an
internal division of the particles, which may be of great use; but the plough
not only divides the particles, but changes the situation, by turning the earth
upside down. The part which was exposed to the influence of the air and dew,
takes the place of another part which is removed from underneath to the
surface, and the earth that is turned up is penetrated by the rain and dew, and
by the rays of the sun; all which greatly conduce to render it fertile.

"4th. Dung harbors insects, which afterward feed upon the plants and spoil
them. It is well known, that when lands are dunged in which trees are planted,
their roots are in great danger of being hurt by insects; and this is one of
the chief reasons why florists banish dung from their gardens.

"5th. It is true, that dung is equally beneficial to light and stiff grounds;
but the same may be said of tillage.

"Too strong land is that of which the parts are so close, that roots cannot
penetrate them without great difficulty.

"Now, if roots cannot extend themselves freely in the earth, they cannot draw
from it the food of plants, which, for want of that food, will droop and
languish. But when those lands shall have been divided by tillage, when their
particles shall have been so separated, that roots are at liberty to extend
themselves, and traverse all those small spaces, they will be able to supply
the plants with their necessary food, and they will thrive apace."

Tillage is equally beneficial to light lands; but for a contrary reason. The
fault of these lands is their having too great spaces between their particles;
and as most of those spaces have no communication one with another, the roots
traversing the great cavities, without touching the particles of the earth,
draw consequently no nourishment from it. But when the particles have been
broken by repeated plowings, the lesser intervals are multiplied at the expense
of the greater: the roots have liberty to extend themselves, and they glide in,
as it were between the particles, meeting with a certain resistance which is
necessary to their taking in the nutritive juice which the earth contains.

Mr. Evelyn, quoting Sir. Hugh Platt, says, "That if you take a certain
quantity of even the most barren earth, you can find, reduce it to a fine
powder, and expose it for a year to the vicissitudes and changes of the season,
and influences of the heavens, it will acquire such a generous and masculine
pregnancy, within that period, as to be able to receive an exotic plant from
the farthest Indies, and to cause all vegetables to prosper in the most exalted
degree, and to bear their fruit as kindly with us, as they do in their natural
climates."

We are to suppose these exotics to have their due degrees of heat and moisture
given them. To what shall we ascribe this great fertility? To the great
division of the particles of the earth, and the multiplication of their
surfaces.

"By this toil (viz. pulverizing the earth,) adds he, "it is found that soil
may be so altered from its former nature, as to render the harsh, and most
uncivil clay, obsequeous to the husbandman, and to bring forth roots and
plants, which otherwise require the lightest and hollowest mould.

"But what proves how beneficial plowing is in strong lands to facilitate the
passages of the water, of the rays of the sun, and of the roots of plants, is,
that their fertility is sometimes increased by mixing them with sand instead of
dung.

"Sand itself affords no nourishment, but by preventing the particles from
returning, it produces the desired good effects. It does not appear, that light
grounds require quite so many plowings. It might even be feared, least by
frequent turnings of such lands, and exposing their parts to the sun, they
might be exhausted.

"But though the sun robs the earth of its moisture, yet few of the particles
fit for the nourishment of plants are exhausted with it; and experience shows,
that light lands are bettered by being plowed; either because the breaking and
stiring of their particles renders them fitter to receive the moisture of rain
and dew, to profit by the influencees of the air, and be penetrated by the rays
of the sun; or that the internal pores are better fitted for the extension of
roots; or again, because frequent plowings destroys weeds, which are more apt
to grow in light grounds than in strong, especially when they are dunged.

"To prove by an experiment, what we have just advanced, with respect to light
soils: let one half of a field be indifferently plowed, and the other half be
plowed extremely well. Some time after, and in dry weather, let the whole field
be cross-plowed. The land of that half the field which was thoroughly plowed,
will be of a darker color than that of the other half, which was but slightly
plowed. This shows the benefit the land has received by plowing.

Some think to supply the want of plowing, by harrowing their land greatly
after it has been sown; but this way of scratching the earth is of little
service; and, when it is moist, the horses poach and damage it considerably."

In the year 1759, Mr. Delu gave five plowings to a wheat field, which had not
been dunged; and at harvest, had taller and finer grain there than any the
neighboring grounds produced, which had been dunged and cultivated in the usual
way.

I knew a farmer, who had not sufficient quantity of dung to cover more than
half his fallow, which he sowed with wheat; the other half he intended for
spring barley, but was advised (rather than leave the ground uncropped) to give
two extraordinary plowings, and sow that also with wheat, which he did; and
reaped a greater crop of better grain off the undunged than the dunged land.

In short, the advantage resulting from thorough pulverizing the land is so
great, particularly when plants are growing, that in some places it has been
found fully to repay the expenses, even of hoeing between grain sown broad cast.

FERTILIZING STEEPS.
As I have made numerous experiments with steeps; to recapitulate the whole,
might tend to bewilder the imagination. Therefore as I have found the following
to be the most fertilizing, and effectual to prevent blights and smut, I shall
confine myself to them only.

Take one peck and an half of fresh and dry wood ashes, and one peck of
unslacked lime, which put into a tub that will contain about 40 gallons of
water, then add as much water as will slack the lime, and render the mixture
(which should be well incorporated) into the consistence of stiff mortar; in
this state it should remain ten or twelve hours; afterward add as much water
as will reduce the mortar to a pulp, by stirring; then fill the tub with water,
which must be stirred for two or three days; then draw off the clear lie into a
proper vessel for steeping the grain, and gradually put the grain into it,
skimming off the light grain that swims.

After it has steeped six hours, let it be taken out, and immediately spread on
a clean floor to dry, when it will be sufficiently prepared for drilling or
sowing. The lie will retain its full virtue, and the same may be repeatedly
used.

On examining the grains of wheat and barley through a microscope, I have
frequently observed the animalcules which appeared like small quantities of
black powder on the flat or hollow part, or on the downy and germinating end of
the grain.

In order to discover what effect the steep lie would have on insects, I
procured two common red worms, alike in size and strength, one was put into a
glass of spring water, the other into a glass of the lie; the last immediately
appeared to be in great agonies, and died within forty minutes. The worm that
was put into the spring water, was alive and active at the expiration of three
weeks.

From this experiment I conclude, that as the lie operated so violently on an
amphibious insect, animalcules, that are not amphibious, must naturally be
destroyed in a much shorter time. And in every experiment, I have found this
lie to answer fully my expectations as a fetilizer, killing the animalcule and
preventing blights and smut.

I shall add one more, by using of which, I have had amazing large crops:

Take half a bushel of the grain you intend sowing, put it to five pails-full
of water, and boil it in a copper till the grain bursts, and the water thereby
becomes impregnated with the essential salt of such grain; strain the liquor,
(you may give the grain to the poultry, that there may be no waste,) while the
liquor is hot put three pounds of nitre, or refined salt petre, that it may
dissolve, and add four or five pails-full of water which drains from the dung
hill, or stale urine of any sort. And in this prepared liquor steep the grain
twelve hours.

Let the liquor be four inches above the grain in the fat or tub, as the grain
will swell and imbibe it. This liquor must be warm when the grain is put in,
and stop all as close as you can, for that causes the salts to be put in
motion. Imbibe the grain in the morning, and in the evening take it out, and
spread it on a clean floor to dry, and by morning it will be fit to sow. The
liquor that is left, will serve again, with the addition of 3 lbs. of nitre,
and when you have done with it, it is admirable to sprinkle over a garden.

The excellency of this receipt, is obvious in several cases. 1st. It saves
seed. 2d. It in some measure supplies the defect of full dressing the land, by
the seed being full of riches when sown. 3d. It produces a greater quantity
than ordinary; lastly, by this steeping, the grain will make its way out of the
ground, if drought should succeed, which often is the case in spring grain, to
lay a long time before it vegetates. From this receipt, I have had from thirty
to forty ears from one root.

The present mode of cultivation in this country, is very imperfect and
erroneous. I shall first observe the meadows, which, in general, are swamps,
bogs, or other parts where stagnated waters lay, which kills the natural grass
and sweet herbage, and forces up in its room a sour coarse grass full of
tussucks, that has no nourishment in it, either for creature or beast. If that
sort of land was properly drained, according to the directions before given,
that noxious grass would die of itself, and sweet herbage grow in its room. The
watered meadows, likewise, produce a sour washy hay, that has in it very little
nourishment.

I will maintain that there is more nourishment in one ton of good upland hay,
than there is in three tons of that sort.

Every farmer might choose some of his upland for natural grass, and as for
foreign grasses, they might be adapted to the different soils. The poorest land
will bring good crops of some of them, of which I shall treat hereafter. See
foreign grasses.

Secondly, on arable land. The farmers in general, in this country seem to have
studied the cultivation of no grain but maize or Indian corn: the culture of
that they appear to understand well. It suits the Indians, as they have such a
plenty of land, but being of a roving disposition they are not longer in a
place than just to have two or three crops, and then remove to another spot.
That cultivation may suit some of the farmers here, as well as the Indians
(from whom they learned) as long as they can do like them; that is when they
have wore out their land, to remove to another place; but when this country
increases in population, and gets thicker inhabited, the case will be altered.

There is no grain so great an impoverisher of land as Indian corn; yet I have
seen it planted on land that would have brought an excellent crop of wheat; and
if they had two succeeding crops of wheat, it would not have impoverished the
land so much as one of corn.

Wheat in general follows the corn, sown among it as it stands: and so on
alternately, till the land is worn out. By this method, there is seldom above
two or three good crops at first; every succeeding crop dwindles, which on the
contrary, were they to follow the dictates of reason, in changing the crops
from impoverishing to a meliorating, proper plowing, manuring, etc. they would
soon find the benefit.

By perusing this treatise with proper attention, every thing that is necessary
may be known: but as there are several obstinate and conceited people, some
very ignorant men that I have discoursed with -- who have told me, they know as
much of farming as any one -- such people I do not expect will give themselves
that trouble.

For a new and advantageous mode of culture, I refer the reader to my
experiments on fallows and fallow crops, wherein is proved by occular
demonstrations, the advantages accruing by proper pulverizing the earth,
changing of crops, and letting grain and grasses grow in rotation, which will
continually keep the land in sufficient heart to support its crops.

I shall now proceed to explain the nature and properties of grain, and
grasses, with their proper culture: first I shall begin with the most noble and
useful of all grain,

WHEAT.
There are several sorts; but I shall only mention those most useful, which are
the red and yellow lammas, the cone or bearded, and the Siberian or spring.

The red lammas has a red straw and a red ear. This is the best wheat, as it
makes the finest flour.

The yellow lammas, has a red ear and a white straw, and is the second best.

The cone or bearded, is hardy, and will stand the inclemency of the weather,
better than either, neither is the fly so apt to take it; besides the long
beard protects it from the mildews; but the flour is harsh and coarse;
therefore that sort of wheat sells six pence in a bushel, cheaper than the
other. The spring or Siberian is very useful, as there is more time to prepare
the land, that it may be sown after the winter fallow; there is one caution I
beg leave to notice, that the grain of spring or Siberian wheat, is much more
liable to drop out of the ears than the winter wheat. Hence, it should be
particularly attended to, and cut before it is too ripe.

When wheat is planted or sown early in the fall, less seed is required to the
acre, than when planted late; because less of it will die; and poor land should
always be allowed more seed than rich, because a greater number of the plants
will perish on this land than the other. The least quantity of seed is
necessary for rich land, that is sown early; for, in this case, very few of the
seeds will fail to produce a plant that will live and flourish.

The unskilful husbandman considers none of these things: he goes by a general
rule; at all seasons, and on all sorts of lands, the quantity is the same sown.

Another thing to be considered, is, that some wheat of the same species has
its grains twice as large as others: in this case, a bushel, containing but
half the number of grains that it does in smaller grained wheat, one bushel of
the small grained will go as far as two bushels of the large; it is not the
measure of the seeds, but the number of the grains being the thing to be
considered in regard to the sowing.

It is a very natural thing to suppose, that a large grained wheat will produce
larger and finer plants, and larger grain than a small grained one; but my
experiments have proved that there is nothing in this; for the smallest grained
wheat has produced full as large plants as the largest, and those with as great
ears and as large seeds; but the young plants appeared smaller and poorer.

Wheat is the properest grain of any to follow clover, lucern, saintfoin, or
any other grasses: because it will best bear with sour tilth, to harrow it in
after one plowing.

The best method for those who keep sheep is to plow about half an acre at a
time; sow that, and pen the sheep on it; then plow half an acre more and do the
like, and so on till the field is done. The larger the fold the better, for the
field will be sooner finished; and by that means the sheep will be gone from
thence before the wheat is much up. -- This dressing with the fold has several
conveniences; it not only enriches the land, but treads the grain in, and so
preserves it from dying, makes it stand fast against the winds, and keeps it
from spewing out in the winter.

The season for sowing winter wheat, is in the fall in moist weather, from the
middle of August to the middle of October; the quantity of seed is from three
pecks to a bushel and half per acre. The spring wheat should be sown in the
spring, as soon as the season will permit; from a bushel to a bushel and half
per acre.

The imperfections of the old or common method of cultivation appearing to me
very erroneous, caused me to make many different experiments on wheat, as well
as other different grain, to endeavor to find out a remedy, and if possible to
adopt some new or better method of culture: by observations and close
attention, I soon succeeded. I fixed together with a pole three harrows, which,
when measured I found would cover the breadth of nine feet.

I accordingly had my fields formed into eight feet ridges, the three harrows
completely covered these ridges; and instead of the horses treading the
pulverized land, four horses were parted, two walked in the furrows each side
of the ridge, by which the soil was properly harrowed without being trod or
hardened, and the ground made sufficiently fine. The repeated trials I have
made of this new mode of culture, has sufficiently confirmed me of its utility.

One recent experiment will, I presume, as well as one hundred, illustrate its
superior advantages. -- A field of four acres which had a crop of potatoes,
which I could not get out of the ground before the middle of November;
therefore the land could not be got into proper order before the beginning of
December, as it was in an excellent tilth, curiosity induced me to sow it, even
so late in the season with cone or bearded wheat; for which purpose my drill
machine was used on part of the field; which was planted with a proportion of
three pecks to an acre, the rows at one foot apart, on ridges eight feet broad;
but such an excessive fall of rain commenced, as soon reduced the soil to a
mere quagmire, the horses sunk up to their knees in the ridges. Hence the drill
could not be any more worked.

This part of the field being drilled, and no prospect of more favorable
weather at so late a period of the season, my servants and myself (attending
the operation of the machine) were thorougly wetted. The weather being rather
warm, my people continued in the field, sowed the remainder with a bushel and
half per acre, and even in such a wet state harrowed in the seed with three
harrows covering the ridges, two horses walking in each furrow. And that I
might be further convinced of the disadvantages attending the horses treading
on the ground, I had two ridges harrowed by the horses walking thereon.

The beginning of May, I had the drilled wheat hoed, which cost me four
shillings per acre; the other part of the field was weeded, at an expense of
five shillings per acre; and during the whole time of its growing, the drilled
wheat, vissibly appeared superior, in every respect, to the broad cast; the
straw was in size similar to reeds, many measured six feet in length, and the
ears contained from ninety to one hundred and twenty grains.

The beginning of September, I had three perches each, of the drilled, the
broad cast by the new mode of culture, and the broadcast sown in the common
way, carefully cut, carried into the granary, and there threshed; and although
such a number of inconveniences attending it, such as bad weather for sowing,
the late season, the birds, instigated by hunger, at that season, pick up a
great deal of the grain, will even scratch off the snow and get at the milky
grain, which they feed on; under all those disasters the produce was as
follows: the drilled, four pecks and half a pint; or per acre, fifty-three
bushels and three pecks. The broad cast, new mode, three pecks and ten pints;
or, per acre forty-eight bushels, one peck and five pints. The broad cast, old
mode, two pecks and six pints; or, per acre, thirty-one bushels, two pecks and
ten pints.

This comparative view, clearly illustrates the disadvantages attending horses
walking on the grain, after it is sowed; which old mode produced near seventeen
bushels per acre less, than by the new method of the horses walking in the
furrows; and although the drill worked to every disadvantage, in what might be
partly called mortar, with only depositing half the seed, and at twelve inches
distance between the rows; yet it produced five bushels one peck, and eleven
pints more than the new broad cast mode, and twenty-two bushels six pints more
than the common old broad cast mode: which plainly shows the superiority of the
drill husbandry.

There is not any part of husbandry which requires the farmer's attention, more
than that of keeping his land clean from weeds; and yet there are few who
trouble themselves about it, or who understand the proper method of doing it.
Few of them know those weeds which are annual, so as to distinguish them from
those that are perennial; and, without this knowledge it will be much more
difficult for a person to clean his land, let his industry be ever so great:
for annual seeds may soon be destroyed, if taken in time; whereas, if they are
neglected, their seeds will soon ripen, and scatter; after which it will
require three times the labor and expense to get rid of them, as would have
been sufficient at the beginning; and then the crop would have had no bad
neighbors to rob it of its nourishment.

There is also another great advantage in keeping grain clear of weeds, which
is, -- it is not so liable to blight or take the smut, as when it is full of
weeds, as I have frequently observed; for cleanliness is as essential to the
well doing and growth of vegetables, as in animals -- And the changing of seed
annually is also as necessary as the change of air is to all sorts of animals:
for where this has been carefully practiced, there has rarely happened any
smutty grain on the farm.

When wheat is not sown after grasses (which is the best method,) the land
should be fallowed and dressed; the method is to plow it into narrow ridges, in
the fall, and let it lay in that rough state all winter. In the spring, as soon
as the weather will permit, harrow it down, and as soon as the weeds begin to
vegetate, plow it again; then harrow it and give it another plowing before you
sow; for the more it is plowed and harrowed, the better will be the crop, and
the fewer weeds will be produced.

There is also a very absurd method in common practice with the farmers, which
is the carrying of their dressing and spreading it on the land in the summer;
where it lies exposed till the sun has dried out all the goodness of it, before
it is plowed into the ground, so that the dressing is of little value or use;
the dung should never be laid on the land faster than it can be plowed in; for
one load of dung so managed, is better than three in their usual method.

As wheat remains in the ground a longer time than most other sorts of grain,
it requires a greater stock of nourishment, to lengthen and fill the ears;
therefore if the dressing is exausted in winter, the grain will have but short
ears, and those but lean, nor will the grain afford much flour: so that it
frequently happens, that a light dressing of foot or ashes in the spring, at
the time when the wheat is beginning to stalk, proves of great service.

Deep plowing, where the staple of the ground is deep enough to admit of it,
will also be of great service to the wheat or any other grain; for the small
fibers of the roots, which are the mouths that supply the nourishment, extend
themselves very deep into the ground: I have traced many of them upwards of
three feet, and do believe they spread much farther where the ground is light;
therefore it is of great advantage to the crop to have the ground loosened and
stirred to a proper depth.

RYE,
Is a grain that delights in a dry warm land, and will grow in most sorts of
earth, so that it is brought into a fine tilth; it does not need so rich a
ground, nor so much care or cost as wheat, only it must be sown in a dry time,
for rain soon drowns it: wet is a great enemy to it; therefore dry, gravelly,
or sandy, warm land, is usually termed rye-land, being more proper for that
than for any other grain. It is quick of growth, soon up after it is sown, and
sooner in the ear, and ripe, than other grain: the best time for sowing of it,
is in September, or October will do if it is dry. It should be sown after a
summer fallow. It requires more seed than wheat, as it does not tiller so much;
from a bushel and an half to two bushels and an half of seed is the quantity to
be sown on an acre. It is ripe when the straw is yellow, the ear bends, and the
grain feels hard. It should be well dried before it is housed, as it is a grain
that will grow in the ear sooner than any other if it be wet.

BARLEY,
If cultivated in a proper manner, is a very beneficial crop even equal to
wheat. And as malt spirits, and beer are likely to become more general in this
country, by which a great deal of money will be kept here, that is annually
sent out for importing these articles. To encourage the growth of this grain,
will be a benefit to the nation at large.

Barley is a grain that delights in a fine tilth and rich soil, and will do as
well with a bushel and an half of seed on such land, as well as two bushels and
an half on a rough and sour soil.

The land for winter barley should be managed the same as for wheat; potatoes
prepare the land suitable for it, or fallow and dress it with a compost manure,
which is equal to stable dung.

Spring barley makes the best malt, if the grain is but large and plump, which
if you give it proper cultivation, you may have it so in the driest summers. It
thrives best after a fallow crop of turnips; but if your land is good, in a
fine tilth, and drill it, you will be sure to have a great crop of fine barley.

To make the ground ready for barley after wheat, presently after harvest plow
in the wheat stubble, in four-throughed lands; early in the spring harrow it,
and bought it up; let it lay a little, then bought it down; harrow it and plow
it into broad lands, and sow it with barley; I have taken this method on a
loam* and it proved a tilth as fine as a garden.

A single cluster of barley growing in a field planted with peace attracted my
attention. The numerous stalks appeared to be the produce of several grains,
but when pulled out of the ground, I clearly perceived they were only the
produce of a single grain, which had been dropped by accident; curiosity
induced me to count the number of ears, which were twenty-eight, containing in
the whole three-hundred and thirty grains. Such an amazing increase, astonished
and made me reflect, if one grain produced upwards of three hundred, how came
it that farmers could procure no more, and be well satisfied in obtaining a
crop from thirty to forty bushels per acre from two or three bushels of seed on
good land? The greatest of such product, is only twenty for one, and of course
less by three hundred for one, than the produce of the single grain.

Being fully convinced that the old mode of cultivation was very erroneous, I
determined to endeavor to find out where the errors lay. I had a bushel of
barley measured, it weighed fifty-two pounds and a quarter, and according to
the grains in 1 oz. the whole bushel contained five hundred and fifteen
thousand grains.

I next had a bushel of wheat measured, it weighed sixty-two pounds, and
contained five hundred and sixteen thousand grains. A bushel of poplar peace
weighed sixty-four pounds, contained one hundred and seven thousand peace. A
bushel of horse beans weighed sixty-four pounds, contained thirty-five thousand
beans. A bushel of the Poland oats weighed thirty-two pounds, containing one
million two hundred and sixty thousand grains. These were all large sized
grains; therefore the smaller ones must contain a considerable quantity of more
grains in the bushel.

Having thus far proceeded, I next reflected, that admitting every grain sowed,
was to vegetate, and produce no more than forty for one, the produce of two
bushels of barley seed, ought to be eighty bushels per acre. -- Therefore I was
fully determined as soon as possible, particularly to investigate the future
growth of grain. Opportunity did not permit my making any experiments till the
following spring, when I had beds dug eight feet three inches long, and two
feet wide, which occupies a space of one sixteenth part of a square perch.

I thought it necessary for my future conduct and experiments in agriculture,
to reduce the weight of the bushel of barley, being fifty-two pounds and a
quarter, into drachms, that I might the better be enabled to proportion to an
acre, the quantity of seed most advantageous for drilling, and sowing broad
cast; accordingly found that fifty-two pounds and a quarter, contained thirteen
thousand three hundred and seventy-six drachms. Then reduced an acre into
sixteenths of a perch being two thousand five hundred and sixty; and dividing
the drachms (thirteen thousand three hundred, and seventy-six, the contents of
the bushel,) by the number of sixteens, (being two thousand five hundred and
sixty in an acre) found the quotient to be 5 2560/157^ part of a dram.

Therefore on the 17th of April, sowed broad cast five drachms and a quarter,
as being the nearest proportion of a bushel to an acre of land, on the first
bed; and in proportion to two bushels on the second bed, and to three on the
third bed, and to four on the fourth bed; -- the soil a stiff unmanured loam,
had been cropped with peace, the last year was winter fallowed, and dug a spit
deep.

August 23d, cut the four beds, and the produce was as follows: -- that sown at
the rate of one bushel to the acre, 184 drachms, or 35 bushels per acre. That
sown at the rate of two bushels contained 207 drachms, or 39 bushels per acre.
That sown at the rate of three bushels contained 261 drachms, or 49 bushels per
acre. That sown at the rate of four bushels, contained 289 drachms, or 55
bushels per acre.

In order to prove the efficacy of the steeps before recommended, I divided
four parcels of seed, the same quantities as before enumerated, and steeped
them in the prepared steep of the liquor of the barley boiled, nitre, and stale
urine, according to the directions there mentioned, and sowed them in the same
manner as that not steeped: it was up in a few days, and the plants looked much
more luxuriant than that not steeped; it tillered and branched double as much:
that which was sown the thinest, was much stronger, had longer and fuller ears,
and branched much more than the thick sown, but was not ripe for near a
fortnight after the other which was not steeped.

The beginning of September, cut the four beds, and the produce was as follows:
-- that sown at the rate of one bushel to the acre, produced in proportion to
66 bushels per acre. That sown at the rate of two bushels produced in
proportion to 69 bushels per acre. That sown at the rate of three bushels,
produced in proportion to 58 bushels per acre. That sown at the rate of four
bushels to the acre, produced in proportion to 56 bushels to the acre.

This experiment proves the steep to be a great fertilizer; which saves a great
deal of seed.

From many experiments I have made, I find a bushel and an half of seed barley,
steeped is the proper quantity, whereas by the above experiment of the
unsteeped, four bushels is the quantity which produces the most. And that did
not produce so much by eleven bushels per acre, as that which was only sown at
the rate of one bushel steeped.

In drilling of grain, experience has convinced me, that one inch is the best
distance for dropping the seed in the rows, and two inches deep; and in order
more fully to be convinced which is the best distance in the intervals, for
steeped, and unsteeped, I tried the following experiments: I sowed three beds
of each at six eight, and twelve inches, between the rows. I shall first give
the quantity of seed (as the steeped and unsteeped took equally the same
quantity) that with the six inch intervals had four drills in each bed, which
took nine drachms and an half: near two bushels to an acre. That with eight
inch intervals had three drills in each bed, which took seven drachms, at the
rate of a little better than five pecks per acre. That with twelve inch
intervals, had two drills in each bed, and took four drachms and an half, which
is at the rate of three pecks and an half per acre. It was each cut and
threshed apart. The produce was as follows: -- the steeped sowed in the six
inch intervals, produced in proportion to 90 bushels per acre. That in the
eight inch intervals produced in proportion to 84 bushels per acre. That in the
twelve inch intervals produced in proportion to 72 bushels per acre. The
unsteeped in the six inch intervals, produced in proportion to 83 bushels per
acre. That in the eight inch intervals, produced in proportion to 70 bushels
per acre. That in the twelve inch intervals, produced in proportion to 56
bushels per acre.

These experiments prove the superiority of the drill to the broad cast, and
that the most advantageous distance between the rows is six inches; and the
steeped is far superior to the unsteeped, particularly where it was sowed
farthest apart in the rows, as it had there more room to gather or branch. In
the twelve inch intervals it gained 16 bushels. In the eight inch it gained 14
bushels. In the six inch, it only gained 7 bushels. I presume the reason was
that it had not room in the six inch intervals, to increase itself as it had in
the rest.

Every experiment was left without being weeded or hoed, that I might the
better be enabled to observe the growth of weeds. In the broad cast where it
was sown with four bushels of seed to the acre, contained but few: likewise
that drilled at six inch intervals, contained very few or none.

When the barley was cut, the ground which was sown thickest broad-cast, and
the ground on which the six inch drills grew, appeared more hollow, blacker and
moister, than the other; and according to the increase of distance between the
drills, so in proportion was the increase of weeds and dryness of the soil.

The roots of the thick sown, as well as that drilled at six inches, were so
matted or combined together, as to keep the soil more hollow, and had extended
themselves farther than any of the others; and I presume, that the thickness of
their shade prevented the moisture being exhaled, which caused a kind of
constant fermentation in the soil. Hence, the ground appeared more hollow,
moister, and blacker, than between the drills at greater distances.

I have found great benefit in the lye-steep made from ashes and lime, but not
so equally fertilizing for barley as the other; but for wheat and peace, by the
experiments that I have made, it appears superior.

OATS,
Are a profitable and necessary grain, and are principally recommended for
horses, and commended for that use above all others, being of an opening
nature. Poultry also love them, and makes them lay more eggs than any other
grain -- There are several sorts, but I shall distinguish them under three: the
black, red, and white; black oats are commonly sown upon an etch crop, or a
lay, as soon as the spring will admit, when the earth is moist, taking care to
turn the turf well, and to lay it even and flat. If sown broadcast, they must
be harrowed the same way as the furrows lie, if a lay, or but a very little
across, for fear of turning the turf; but upon an etch, as soon as the land is
plowed on an edge, sow and harrow it in at once, and harrow it five or six
times over, observing to harrow once or twice across, which breaks the clods,
and covers the seed better than harrowing all one way, they are in general sown
after one plowing. Three bushels of seed is the quantity for an acre. If they
are drilled, six inches between the rows is the best distance, and two bushels
to an acre at least, as oats will not tiller and spread like other grain; they
are ripe when the stalk turns yellow, the grain feels hard, and the husk begins
to open and show the seed. After they are cut, they should lie for the dew and
rain to plump them, and make them thresh well: and, if weedy, to dry the weeds;
but if there happens much rain, they must be got in as soon as dry, otherwise
the oats will soon fall out of the husks, and great part of the crop be lost.

This black oat is a hardy grain, and will bear a great deal of wet and cold.
There is no land too rich, or too poor, too hot nor too cold for them.

The red oat is most common in northern countries; it is a sort of naked oat,
and is very proper for making oat-meal, because the kernel threshes out of the
hull without carrying it to the mill or drying of it. This oat is cultivated in
the same manner as barley.

The white oat is commonly sown on an etch, after wheat, rye or barley. The
best method to prepare the land is, to plow in the stubble in the fall, and lay
it up in narrow ridges; early in the spring, harrow it well, and give it two
plowings before you sow, which is to be managed the same as the black oat on an
etch, and the same quantity of seed. -- They will bear sowing later than the
other, as, the dryer the weather is when they are sown, the better.

The white oat grows best on high dry grounds, either gravels or sands, and
they are the best of all to be sown on land very subject to weeds, because,
being sown late, they allow a very late plowing, and growing very quick after
this, they overtop the weeds sooner than any other plant.

BUCK OR FRENCH-WHEAT,
Is a grain exceeding advantageous on barren, sandy ground. It is usually sown
as barley, but later, from one to two bushels of seed to an acre; from May,
till the latter end of July is the season for sowing of it. It is late before
it is ripe. If the soil suits it, and is not poor, it will yield a great
increase, from 60 to 70 bushels to an acre, and is excellent food for hogs,
poultry, etc. There is no danger of the seeds failing, nor of suffering by wet;
after it is mown, it must lay several days to dry, that the stalks, (which are
hard) may wither before it is housed.

If buck wheat is sown very thick, and suffered to grow till it is in blossom,
and then rolled down and plowed in, makes an excellent lay for wheat or rye.

HORSE BEANS AND PEACE.
I have before given full and proper directions for their cultivation in the
management of fallows, and fallow crops, therefore here shall pass them over,
and proceed to

MAIZE OR INDIAN CORN,
Is a very useful grain, either for the house, horses, cattle, or hogs: and it
requires a less quantity of seed than any other, and will grow if two or three
years old, but is a great impoverisher of land.

I have made several experiments in order to find the most advantageous method
of planting it. The following has exceeded all others.

I prepared my land by plowing it up in the fall of the year, in single
boughts; in the spring I harrowed it down as smooth as possible, and plowed it;
then I harrowed it again, and marked out the furrows at eight feet distance: in
these furrows, I dropped the seed single, at about the distance of every foot
-- my cart loaded with manure from my compost heap, followed in the alley
between, and covered the seed in the two furrows, about three or four inches
thick, with the manure. This was done almost as expeditiously as in the common
way, covering it with mould by the hoe.

By this method, the plants came soon up, and flourished very vigorously. When
the plants were about six inches high, I plowed between, taking the mould from
the plants, and throwed it up in a ridge in the middle of the alley; and with a
hand hoe cut up the weeds and superfluous plants. If they are left at two feet
distance in the rows they will be thick enough. The stirring of the mould so
near the plants, makes them thrive and grow surprisingly.

The next plowing, I took the mould from the middle, and throwed it up to the
plants. Every time of plowing, I used the hand hoe to stir the ground between
the plants, and destroy the weeds. The third plowing I did as the first,
throwing up the mould in the middle of the alley. This is of more use than a
person would imagine; for it admits the influences of the air and nitrous dews
to penetrate to the roots.

The fourth plowing, (which was the last) I managed as the second, by throwing
up the mould to the stalks of corn. -- If this last plowing could be so
contrived, as to be done early in the morning, before the sun has exaled the
dew, it would bury those riches in the ground which would afford a double
nourishment. My land, where I tried this experiment, is between a loam and a
clay.

Sands, and light lands will not require so many plowings.

By the above method, middling lands will produce from fifty to eighty bushels
per acre.

TARES AND VETCHES.
Tares are a very useful pulse; the haulm is something like the pea, but
exceedingly sweet and nourishing for horses and cows, best for cutting and
bringing into the stable and cow house. They are a great sweetener and enricher
of land, by their long luxuriant haulm covering the ground. The time for sowing
is early in the spring, three bushels of seed to an acre; the land should be in
a fine tilth. If left for seed, they will be ripe in August. In good land there
will be from 50 to 60 bushel per acre.

There are two sorts of vetches, the winter and the summer vetch. Their haulm
and seed are much like the tare, and their cultivation and quantity of seed
exactly alike.

The winter vetch is sown in the fall, and the spring vetch early in the
spring; the former will stand the severity of the winter; but the latter is
tender.

They are sown to much advantage in some places: they are good, strong and
nourishing food for horses, or cattle, either green or in the straw.

GRASSES.
The great improvements that are made by sowing land in tillage with grass
seeds, do more encourage the use thereof, and especially those of clover,
trefoil, saintfoin and lucerne, because the harrowing in of grain upon only one
plowing, saves a great expense and time, besides the produce of large crops;
and as some of these grasses will suit all soils, the farmer, if he has no
meadow, either wet or dry, may, by the help of these grasses be able to make
hay enough for his creatures and stock, and to spare; which will be a great
improvement to dry farms, and be the means of reducing the price of meadow
land, which at present is very high. I shall first begin with

CLOVER.
Clover grass has been the name a great while, both for the great improvement
it brings by its prodigious burden, as also for its excellent sweetness both
in grass and hay, and the riches with which it impregnates the ground, by the
stalk and roots; the former by receiving the nitrous dews, which descend by
them to the roots and ground about them; the latter also affords a sort of
dressing to the ground after it is plowed up; and above all, saves that expense
which many are at yearly for weeding their ground, which is by this grass
entirely got under; and also the damage prevented that the grain generally
sustains by the weeds growing amongst it: so that it may be depended on,
nothing better clears the ground of trumpery and weeds than a good crop of
clover, as I have often experienced. It enriches and is of great service to
stiff foils, either clay or loam by its deep and lateral roots opening and
hollowing the ground, and will in that sort of land, if it is in good heart,
bring a very great crop; but in sands or gravels, if a dry season, the crop
will be very short, as it will burn.

The land for sowing this on, as well as all other sown grasses, should be made
very fine, that is brought into a fine tilth, otherwise above half the seed
will be wasted. Fallow crops are best to prepare the land; turnips, potatoes
and peace, I have found to be the best, and I have had better crops by sowing it
by itself in August.

If it is sown with grain, spring grain is the best; after the grain is up, sow
the clover seed and roll it in, for that method new moulds the grain, and makes
it grow amazingly, and then there is no danger of the clover getting a head,
and damaging the grain as is often the case in wet springs.

If you sow it among your winter grain, it must be sown in the spring, and bush
harrow it in; this method moulds the grain and covers the seed. -- The land in
the spring is often settled and baked hard, therefore there cannot be so good a
chance of having so good a crop of grass with winter grain as with spring. In
the choice of this seed, that which is of a bright yellow, with a good quantity
of the purple and brown colored, seed amongst it; for that shows the ripeness
of the seed; when the white and light yellow colored, is that which has not
come to its full maturity, or not ripe. When it is thorough ripe, and well got
in, the seed will be good for five or six years. The quantity of good seed to
be sown per acre, is from six to ten pounds, according to the fineness and
richness of the soil.

In May, or the beginning of June, this grass will be fit to cut, and there
should be great care taken in making of it; for it will require a great deal
more labor and time to dry than common grass, and will shrink into less
compass; but, if it be not too rank, it will make extraordinary rich food for
cattle. The time for cutting it is when it begins to flower; for if it stands
much longer, the lower parts of the stems will begin to dry, whereby it will
make a less quantity of hay, and that not so well flavoured.

I have cut three crops of this grass some years; but the best way is to cut it
once in the spring, and feed it the remaining part of the year, whereby the
land will be enriched, and the plants will grow much stronger.

One acre of this grass (if a good crop,) will feed as many cattle as three or
four of common grass; but great care must be taken of the cattle when they are
first put into it, lest it hoves and bursts them: to prevent which the best
method is, before they are turned in to eat it, let them fill their bellies
with some other food, and at first turn them in only for a few hours, and stint
them as to quantity; and this by degrees, letting them first be in the middle
of the day, when there is no moisture on the grass, and so every day, suffering
them to remain a longer time, until they are fully seasoned to it: but great
care should be taken never to turn them into this food in wet weather; or, if
they have been for some time accustomed to this food, it will be proper to turn
them out at night in wet weather, and let them have hay or straw, which will
prevent the ill consequences of this food.

The best method of making clover hay, I have found to be thus: -- after it is
mowed, put it up with the fork or rake in little separate parcels, about the
bigness of a bushel, then turn it bottom upwards several times, till it is
made; so that you never separate it till it be carted home; by this means the
leaf and flower is kept on, which otherwise would be mostly lost, which is the
best part of the hay.

If clover is kept for seed, and it is a favorable season, you may have two
crops; but in general there is but one crop saved, and that is the second, as
it grows more even and has less weeds in it than the first. When it is kept for
seed, it must stand till the heads are very brown, and full ripe, which may be
known by rubbing them between your hands. I have had from two crops of seed in
one season, upwards of six bushels on an acre, and from one crop near four
bushels. It is a seed that is hard to get out by threshing, therefore the
spring is the best time for this work when the drying winds blow, which should
be let into the barn as much as possible.

I have made experiments to know the profits of a clover crop; the first was as
follows: Six acres of clover I cut, and fed cattle in racks, from the latter
end of April, to the latter end of October following, which maintained ten
oxen, thirteen cows, three horses, and twenty-six hogs; which after the rate of
2s. per week for each kine and horse, and 4d. per week for each hog, which came
to 3l. 1s. 6d. 1-2, or 80l. for twenty-six weeks. The summer profit then of
each acre was 13l. 6s. 8d. besides the latter-math.

The next experiment was on four acres of clover, which I let go to seed. At
twice mowing I had twelve tons of hay and twenty four bushels and a half of
seed. The hay was not near so good as if it had been cut green, therefore I
allowed it to be worth only 2l. per ton. The clover seed I sold for 50s. per
bushel, so that the amount of the produce of the four acres was 85l. 5s. or
21l. 6s. 3d. per acre. When a clover lay is plowed up, if the land is not rich
or in good heart, it is an excellent method to plow in the last crop, and you
may depend on having a good crop of wheat after it; this I have experienced
often.

A top dressing is of great benefit to clover, if sown over early in the
spring; on stiff soils, ashes or soot is the best; on light lands, the plaster
of Paris. If any of those are sown over ever so thin, it will nearly double the
crop.

TREFOIL.
Lands naturally kind for grain, and unkind for common grass, are undoubtedly
kind for trefoil; and though it be much impoverished by long sowing, that it
will bear grain no longer, it will bring a crop of this grass. Experience
convinces me that it will grow in any soil: even rocky, hilly, or gravelly
ground, of a very small value, may be improved by this grass; but if the land
be a clay, and it lays wet, it must be drained and made as dry as you can.

That the pasture is as good and better on trefoil than clover, for cattle, and
especially cows; for it will not only cause them to give more milk in quantity,
but better in quality, and also makes butter and cheese of a delicate yellow
color. The hay thereof is nourishing and makes oxen and other cattle as fat as
any other hay, if it be made in good season, that is, whilst it is full of
yellow blossoms, and not over dry (for it is soon made.) It does not loose its
color, or shrink in making, as clover grass does; but is much finer, greener,
and in all points better than clover is. It is particularly good for fattening
of ewes and lambs, and free from breeding rottenness, which other pastures are
apt to do. And as clover makes sick and kills many cattle, this is free from
any such danger; the cattle are so sensible of it, that where they are sown
together, they will not touch the clover, till they have eat the trefoil bare.

Trefoil will endure much longer than clover, if it stands not for seed; for
that is destructive to the root; because being cut in the heat of summer, the
heat draws out the sap which should nourish it.

The crop is not so bulky as clover, but the many good qualities enumerated as
above, makes it a beneficial crop. It is most profitable fed green, as it
fattens oxen, cows or sheep in a short time. If made into hay, it should be cut
when in full blossom; it is soon made, as it need not be dried so much as other
hay. The quantity of seed to be sown per acre, is, if in the hull, two bushels;
but if the seed is naked and clean, from ten to twelve pounds is the quantity
per acre; or if sown with clover, half of each.

Trefoil is sown the same as clover, on a fine tilth, with, or without grain.
The making the hay and every particular management the same as clover. The seed
is of a bright yellow color, not any purple or brown seeds like clover, but in
shape and size like it.

SAINTFOIN,
Took its name from the French; for the word Saintfoin, translated into
English, is Holy-Hay, which name they gave it from its excellent nutritive
quality.

There may be more benefit reaped from this grass, than any other; as you may
get a very great crop in the most dryest land, on hills, gravels, sands, or
even barren ground; and it will so improve all those lands in such an
extraordinary manner that they will bring great crops of any sort of grain
after it.

The stalks of the plant in poor land will be two feet high, and in rich land
it will grow as high as six feet. It has tufts of red flowers, of three, four,
or five inches in length of the honey-suckle kind: they are so beautiful, and
sweet, that I have seen them much esteemed in a garden, and called the French
honey-suckle.

This plant will make twenty times the increase in poor ground than the common
turf; and this is owing to its having a long perpendicular root called tap
roots, as well as numbers of horizontal ones: the perpendicular ones sink to a
great depth to attract its nourishment. The length of this root is scarce to be
credited by any but those who have seen it; I have drawn it out of the ground
near fourteen feet; and some have told me they have traversed it to double that
length. This is the reason, I presume why this plant will bear drouth, when all
other grasses have been burnt up by the excessive dryness of the season. I have
at one cutting got two tons of this hay per acre.

Cold, clay, or wet land is not suitable for this grass, as it would chill and
rot the roots. The long root of saintfoin, has near the surface, many
horizontal roots issuing from it, which extend themselves every way; there are
of the same kind all the way down, as the roots go, but they grow shorter and
shorter all the way.

Any dry land may be made to produce this valuable and useful plant, though it
be ever so poor; but the richest and best land will produce the greatest crops
of it.

The best method of sowing it is by drilling, but the earth must be very well
prepared, and the seed well ordered, or else very little of it will grow. The
heads of these seeds are so large, and their necks so weak, that if they be
above an inch deep, they are not able to rise through the incumbent mould, and,
if they are not covered, they will be malted; that is, it will send out its
root while it lies above ground, and be killed by the air.

The best season for planting it is the beginning of spring; and it is always
strongest when planted alone.

If barley, oats, or any other grain sown with the saintfoin, happen to be
lodged afterward, it kills the young saintfoin. The quantity of seed to be
drilled or sown broadcast upon an acre of land will depend wholly on the
goodness of it; for there is some seed, of which not one in ten will strike;
whereas, in good seed, not one in twenty will fail. The method of knowing the
goodness, is by sowing a certain number of the seeds, and seeing how many
plants are produced by them. If it is above two years old, it will not grow.
The external signs of the seeds being good, are, that the husk is of a bright
color rather of a purple, and the kernel plump, of a light gray or blue
color. If the kernel be cut across, and appear greenish and fresh, it is a
certain sign it is good. If be of a yellowish color, and friable, and looks
thin and pitted, it is a bad sign. The quantity of seed allowed to the acre in
the drill way, is much less than by sowing broad-cast. A bushel of seed to an
acre of land, is 20 seeds to eack square foot of land if sown broad-cast, which
would be sufficient; but there must be an allowance made for casualties.

The quantity of good seed I have found by experience is, for sowing
broad-cast, two bushels, and for drilling, one bushel. And as the saintfoin
does not cover all the ground the first year, which spaces are generally
occupied by weeds; to remedy this, when I have sown it broad cast, I have sown
four or five pounds of clover seed with it to the acre, which has answered a
very good purpose, as I have then had a crop the first year.

The Saintfoin is but a slow grower at first, the second year perhaps will not
exceed a clover crop, but afterward it increases every year, for six or seven
years before it comes to its full perfection; and as that increases, the clover
goes off, and makes room for it.

This valuable plant will keep in perfection for twenty years, if you only give
it a slight top dressing with soot or ashes, once in four or five years. The
first summer, nor early the next spring, it should not be fed, because it will
be apt to bleed itself to death: for the sweetness of it is such, that it will
entice cattle to bite into the knot in the ground and spoil it; but afterward,
when it has gathered strength, the best method will be to mow the first crop,
and feed it after, which is excellent for cows and sheep.

This plant, as well as trefoil, will not thrive in a wet moist soil; and as
saintfoin thrives best on high grounds, it is a great advantage in the article
of making it into hay, as it has greatly more advantage of the sun, and less to
fear of mischief from wet, than grass which grows in low grounds. -- On the
high grounds, the wind will dry more in an hour, than it will in meadows that
lie low, in a whole day; and often the crops of saintfoin make a very good hay
in the same seasons in which all the grass hay is spoiled. The sun on the high
grounds has also a more benign influence, and sends off the dew there, two
hours earlier in the morning, and holds it up as much longer in the evening; by
these advantages, the saintfoin has more time to dry, and is made with half the
expense of common hay.

Saintfoin for hay, should be cut when it is half blossomed, and managed the
same, as before directed for clover. If saved for seed, it must be the first
cutting. You may know when it is ripe by the seeds coming out easily in your
hand; dry it in the field, and thresh it there on a cloth, as it will shed, and
you will loose great part of the seed if you carry it to the barn. The straw
will be as good as hay for horses; and the hay, when it has been well got in,
my horses that have worked hard, have been kept on it alone without any grain,
have been so fond of it that they have refused beans and oats mixed with chaff
in the common way for it. Sheep also will be satted in pens in winter, with
only this hay and water, better than with corn, peace, oats, and the like. In
short, there is no hay that is made, is equal to it, and the produce will be
double that of clover. The land where it is sown should be very clean from
weeds, under a fine tilth; which is best done by a turnip fallow.

LUCERNE,
Is the same plant which the ancients were so fond of, under the name of
Medica, and in the culture of which they bestowed such great care and pains.
Its leaves grow three at a joint, like those of the clover; its flowers are
blue, and its pods of a screw like shape, containing seeds like those of the
red clover, but longer, and more kidney shaped, and the color all yellow. The
stalks grow erect, and, after mowing, they immediately grow up again from the
parts where they were cut off. The roots are longer than the saintfoin, and are
not single, but some times they run perpendicularly, in three or four places
from the crown.

It is the only plant in the world, whose hay is equal to the saintfoin for the
fattening of cattle; but its virtues in that respect are very great. It is the
sweetest grass in the world, but must be given to cattle with caution, and in
small quantities, otherwise they will swell, and incur diseases from it.

Though the common methods of husbandry will not raise lucerne to any great
advantage, yet the drilling and the horse-hoe husbandry will raise it, annually
increasing in value to the owner, and make one of the most profitable articles
of his business.

The soil to plant it on, must be either a hot gravel, or a very rich and dry
land, that has not an under stratum of clay, and is not too near springs of
water. The natural poorness of gravel or sand, may be made up by dung, and the
benefit of the hoe, and the natural richness of the other lands, being
increased by howing and cleansing from grass, the lucerne will thrive with less
heat; for what is wanted in one of those qualities, must be made up in the
other.

The best season for planting of it is early in the spring, the earlier the
better; for then there is always moisture enough in the earth to make it grow,
and not so much heat as would dry up its tender roots, and kill it after the
first shootings. About a pound and an half of seed will be enough for an acre.

The planting it in autumn, in some climates, might do; but here the winters
are too cold, which would kill great part of the tender plants, and greatly
stunt and injure those it does not kill. The number of the lucerne plants
should be less than those of saintfoin, to an acre, because they grow much
larger in this way of management, and each occupies a greater space of ground,
and produces a larger quantity of hay.

The quick growth of this plant, requires that it should have large supplies of
nourishment, and good room to grow in; and it is better in all things of this
kind to err in setting the plants too far distant, than in setting them too
near.

The most fatal diseases incident to lucern, are starving and smothering; for
this reason, good cultivation is necessary to it, and the often turning the
earth with the hoe all about it. By this means, a plant, that in the common way
of sowing, would not have been more than eight or nine inches high, will be
four or five feet, and will spread every way, so as to produce a quantity of
hay, more like the cutting of a shrub, than a plant.

The plants should stand at five inches distance in single rows, and the
intervals between these rows, must be left wide enough for the use of the hoe
plough, (if managed according to the horse-hoe husbandry;) but if hand hoed,
one foot between the rows will do: for which I will refer you to my experiments
on fallow crops, where you will find, that by this method, I had at the rate of
four tun of lucern hay per acre. But lucern sown in drills so near, will in a
few years, meet in the rows, which will hinder the mould being stirred, when it
will starve for want of nourishment, and thereby wear out.

Lucern is of much quicker growth than saintfoin, or any other grass. I have
cut it four times in a season; whereas the others are seldom cut above twice.

Lucern is to be made into hay, the same as saintfoin or clover; but this must
be observed, that it is always to be cut just before it comes to flower. It is
a fine food, if cut for the cattle green, it is so sweet and full of
nourishment: but it must be kept clean from natural grass, as that soon choaks
and kills it.

RYE-GRASS.
Rye-grass, when young in the spring, is proper for fattening of horses or
beasts, and is of very great advantage for milch cows, as it causes an
abundance of milk, making excellent butter and cheese, and is of great service
for ewes and lambs, or to feed any large cattle in the early part of the
season, before clover and the other grasses come in; it being much more quick
in growth than they.

As for the soil, clay, or any other sour and uncultivated land, is proper for
it; nor it does not take so much tillage as other grass seeds do, growing well
amongst the most stubborn clods that lie in the way: on which account, where
any person has any cold sour lands, they cant be better employed than in such a
way; it being always to be observed, that those lands which will not suit
clover, trefoil, saintfoin, or lucern, will well suit this grass. It will last
some years, and for the feeding of cattle, it is of great advantage, as well as
the great bulk of hay it makes, which is double that of common grass; but if it
should be a dry summer, there will be but a short crop in the fall. Being sown
in the fall, it will be fit to graze the following year, for horses and beasts,
without danger of making it bleed.

If this seed be sown on land entirely devoted to it, and on which, in all
probability, no grain, at least but little, will grow; then two bushels of seed
is the least that can be sown there.

Although rye-grass is proper to be sown upon cold, coarse, austere ground
only, I have frequently seen it admitted into lands whose soil was suitable for
the other more valuable grasses, which would have been much more advantageous.

I have frequently sown rye-grass, mixed with clover seed, with my spring
grain. The quantity has been one bushel of rye-grass, and six-pounds of clover
seed, by which I have found great benefit, as it has greatly increased the bulk
of hay; and when I have fed it, has prevented the pernicious effects that
clover has alone.

Rye-grass seldom wants any assistance, till after it has been sown two or
three years; when it does, you may dress it with shovellings of streets or
roads, or earth dug from the sides of roads, or any compost whatever.

The hay of rye-grass must be cut and managed as common grass hay.

TIMOTHY-GRASS,
Is a species of grass, something like rye-grass, and makes the best hay and
the greatest quantity of any known at present in this country. It is supposed
to be a native here. I cannot find any author, that has given any account of
it. The best time for sowing the seed is from the middle to the latter end of
August. A moist rich land will produce from two to four tuns of hay per acre;
one peck of clean seed is sufficient to sow an acre, some sow it with grain,
but the best method is to sow it by itself.

BURNET.
Burnet is a hardy grass, and will stand the frost and severity of the winter,
better than any other; and like rye-grass makes an early pasture, it being of a
quick growth. It will grow on any soil, but a loam suits it best. The land
intended for it, should be brought into a fine tilth; from 16lbs to 20lbs of
seed is sufficient for an acre. The seed must be covered with a very light
harrow, and the ground rolled; the time for sowing it is from April till
September. It should be mowed but once the first year.

The time for mowing of it (if not saved for seed) should be when in full
blossom. When the seeds of the plant are to be saved it must be neither fed or
mowed in the spring. The seed will be ripe about the middle of June, when it
must be reaped like wheat, and threshed on a cloth, before it is too dry,
because it is apt to shed, and it should afterward be dried perfectly. It does
not lose its leaves in drying; and though the hay made of it be sticky, it will
after threshing be very agreeable to horses, which are so fond of it, that they
never waste any. The seed is so nourishing that it fattens them presently. I
have had from one acre upwards of three tuns of hay and above forty bushels of
seed.

The before mentioned grasses may all be seen growing at the author's place of
residence.

UPLAND MEADOWS.
For upland meadows that are sown with common grass, the land should be rich
and good; and before it is lain down, should be well cleaned from weeds, and
brought into a fine tilth; which is best done by a crop of turnips or potatoes.

When the land is prepared, there is a caution very necessary, that is, to be
very particular in your seed, that it came from a clean meadow; for if you sow
seed that came off a foul piece, you will fill your meadow with weeds and couch
grass, which will ruin your land. Two bushels of grass seed will be sufficient,
mixed with three pounds of white clover seed, and three pounds of trefoil seed.
It may be sown in the fall, or early in the spring. If sown in the fall, it
should be done the latter end of August, or the beginning of September, that
the grass may be well rooted before the frost sets in, which is apt to turn the
plants out of the ground, when they are not well rooted.

This seed should be sown, in moist weather. The following spring, if there
should be any troublesome weeds come up among the grass, they should be
carefully cut up with a spaddle before they grow large; and this should be
repeated two or three times in the summer, which will effectually destroy them.

LOW OR WATERED MEADOWS.
Low or watered meadows require the same management and precaution as the
upland. I have often seen good meadows spoiled by improper treatment, such as
flowing the low grounds all the winter, whereby the roots of all the sweetest
kinds of grass are destroyed, and only such grasses left, as are natives of
marshes, which are coarse and sour; and, if people were curious to examine the
herbage of these water-meadows, they would find the bulk of them composed of
bad weeds, such as grow by the sides of rivers, brooks, and ditches. The seeds
of those obnoxious weeds falling into the waters in the autumn, are carried by
the stream, and deposited on the land, where they grow, and fill the ground in
every part: but so incurious are the generality of farmers in this respect,
that, if the ground is but well covered, they care not what it is; few of them
ever taking any pains to weed or clean their pasture.

The method which I propose for the management of these meadows is, never to
flow them till the middle or latter end of March; and after the hay is carried
off the ground, no cattle should be turned into the meadows, till the surface
of the ground is become firm; for otherwise the grass will suffer more from the
treading of the cattle, than it will receive benefit by the flowing. Another
great improvement of these lands might be procured by rolling them with a heavy
roller in spring and fall. This will press the surface of the ground even,
whereby it may be mown much closer; and it will also sweeten the grass.

A comparison of different methods of farming, in the different counties of
England.
The county of Hertford is allowed by the exactest observators, to be a most
healthful situation, abounding with red clays, loams, chalks, gravels, and
sands, that lie in many hills and a few valleys, which are most of them
naturally poor soils of themselves, but of late greatly improved by the
industry of its farmers, who living within a day's journey of London, many of
them have been encouraged to employ their teams at vacant times to carry meal,
bran, chaff, grain, wood, and other vendables thither, in order to load back
again with soot, ashes, hoofs, horn-shavings, rags and other manures for
dressing their land, and by the help of these and good plowing, many have the
benefit of grain, grass, turnips, etc. yearly, without the loss of one summer
for the fallow season; which of late has become so profitable, that the hilly
farms let for more than the vale ground, that are in themselves richer than the
hilly lands, being a black mould mixed with a bluish clay, that will with half
the dressing return the most plentiful crops of wheat, barley and beans; but
then there is this difference in the hill country, they have sometimes three
crops in less than a year and an half; as clover, turnips, wheat or barley; or
else, peace turnips, wheat or barley, etc, by means of their convenient
enclosures; whilst they in their valley open fields, are confined to lose a
year and an half, before they must set on a barley crop after their beans. They
are not under the necessity of much brain work to study the improvement of
their land in their open fields because every farmer acts commonly as his
neighbor does, and that year after year in one and the same sort of
management. For if they would do otherwise, they are hindered by the want of
enclosure: so that in the open vale ground the science of farming is as easy
and plain, as it is hard and difficult in the hilly lands, where an acute
farmer is obliged to form a plan of his future proceedings three years at least
before hand, that each crop may succeed one another in such order as to
impoverish the ground as little as possible; not but both vales and hills vary
much in many places, in the several ways of husbandry.

In Bucks, Berks, Bedford, Oxford, Worcester, Gloucester, Hereford and
Somersetshire, in the vale parts, some fallow their ground every third year;
others every fourth year; some set their horse beans with a dibber, some drill
them, and others sow them broad-cast, and plow them in. Some plow up their
sward or grass ground, and sow wheat, which they sell at an extraordinary
price, as coming off fresh earth, or virgin mould, which the hilly farmers buy
for the sake of the change of ground, and being clean from the seeds of weeds
and other trumpery.

In the hilly parts they cut up their turf or peat, and burn it to ashes to
dress their ground with. Here they drill and hoe their hog-peas. Some again
follow the ingenious Mr. Tull's way of drilling in wheat, and other grain, and
grass seeds, in order to sow the interspaces the next year that lay vacant the
preceding; which is a good way, and would answer in this country if the charge
of hoeing could be avoided; but that is such an expensive article, as will not
suit the farmers mind nor pocket. The method also of drilling in horse-beans at
six feet distance, has been practiced, and the hoeing part supplied by the
plough; but the attempt proved unsuccessful, because as they managed it, the
weeds came up and choked the beans. If a proper method had been made use of, I
am confident, from my own experiments, it would have answered very well.

In Cornwall, Devonshire, and several other maritime countries, they dress with
sea sand oar-weed, sea mud or vaes, shells and sometimes fish; as I knew it
once done in Cornwall, where there were such numbers of pilchards affrighted to
the shore by the porpoises, that several laid them on their lands, and afforded
a great improvement by the oily, sulphurious parts of the fish.

In Cambridgeshire, Northamptonshire, etc. several make use of rape-canes,
ground at the oil mills into powder, which is of great service to their land.

In Berks, and the hilly parts of Bucks, several sow them for their cattle.

In Essex, Sussex and several other counties, they send from ten to twenty
miles for lime to manure their ground with, as they do in Herts etc. with
chalk, rags, horn-shavings, sheeps trotters, hoofs, hair, ashes and foot.

In Surry, Suffolk, and many other places, the marle-pits excel, as well as
others, that dress their clays with sand, and sands with clays. The marles in
Warwickshire and Northamptonshire are of two colors, red and blue; the red is
as hard as an earth floor, which obliges them to dig it out of the pits with
mattocks and crows of iron; from thence they lay it in heaps in their fields,
and in three or four nights time, its small pieces and bits, will shoal by the
help of the dews and rain in August and September. The blue sort being softer,
is much easier managed.

In Surry, Kent and Berks, their French wheat is a great improvement, by being
plowed in to dress their ground. In Middlesex several do the same by their
clover.

In the vales, their way of cleaning wheat and other grains, is very different
from theirs in the hills; the former following their ancient way of
wind-fanning it; the latter, by throwing it, which is done with as much
expedition and with fewer hands.

Their hedging in the low countries varies much from that of the high lands; in
the low countries they cut half the side of the hedge for fuel, and leave the
other half for fence: but in the hilly countries they plaish all that is left,
and make a sort of a wall-hedge, about four feet high from the ground, which
makes an excellent fence, far exceeding the other.

In the vales, their wheat and beans are larger bodied than those on the hills,
by reason of their excellent, strong black soils; but their barley and oats are
not so good, because their ground is so rank as runs them mostly into straw,
and less into grain, that often lays them flat to the ground, by the greatness
of their bulk, and then it is generally lean, poor grain.

In Kent, their ploughs that have two broad boards, are excellently well
adapted to the culture of their hilly grounds, because they turn a thorough or
furrow all one way, and thereby leaves no bendings as the wheel Hertfordshire
plough does; which renders them very useful in turning the ground from the
lower part toward the upper part; -- But there is a new invented double plough
answers extraordinary well, especially in barley and turnip ground, and in
sterile seasons; for then there may almost double work be done in half the time
that a single plough is employed; and thus to save time and labor in those
seasons when the farmer's great benefit lies in expedition, must certainly be
of great value.

In the vales, they are in many places under the misfortune of having rotten
sheep, by their watery situation, and loose sticky earth, that easily washes
about the grass, and communicates a poisonous quality into the blood, which
sweeps away thousands in a year. To prevent such disasters in this country, I
have given receipts in this treatise to prevent and cure the rot, and the red
water; as well as other diseases, which if properly attended to, I am confident
will be efficacious from my own experiments.

For RAISING the TURNIP, and preventing the FLY taking them.
First, to prepare the land to receive the seed. The ground should be broken up
in the fall if new ground, if old ground, under grain, the stubble should be
plowed in as soon as possible after harvest, and lay in that state all winter;
in the spring as soon as the weather will admit, give it another plowing
crossways; in about a month give it a good harrowing: in June carry on your
dung, for if it is old land, it must have a good dressing.

The seed may be sown from the latter end of June to the latter end of July;
the best method is to spread the dung as you plow: then plow it in, and sow as
you plow: that is, what you plow in the morning, sow in the afternoon; the land
should be harrowed twice in a place before you sow; then sow and harrow it in.
One pound of seed would produce plants enough for an acre; but it is better to
sow two pounds; for it is better to have too many plants than too few.

Steep the seed in oil for twelve hours; fish oil is the best. When you sow,
drain the oil from the seed, and mix the seed with dust or dry sand to separate
it. The oil makes the seed quickly germinate, and makes the plants healthy and
luxuriant, which prevents the fly from making ravages among it; for all flies
attack the sickly plants, the healthy outgrows them: it is when it is in its
single leaf they do the damage; when it is in the rough leaf, it is out of
danger.

I have sown large fields from twenty to thirty acres, and the fly has
destroyed them. I have sown again and again, and they have done the same, which
induced me to try experiments. I have mixed the seed with brimstone, soot,
ashes, etc. I have steeped the seed in lies, urines, etc. but found none so
efficacious as oil, which I found never to fail.

When the plant is strong, just before it begins to bottle, let them be well
harrowed landways and across, and when they are bottled as big as a raddish,
give them a hoeing, to free them from weeds, and cut up all the superfluous
ones; and leave them at proper distances, which is from nine to twelve inches.
Light land suits them best, and by observing the above rules, you may depend on
a good crop.

FEEDING AND FATTENING SHEEP ON TURNIPS.
Feeding sheep with turnips is of great advantage to the farmer, as they soon
fatten on them, and their dung is of great service to the land; and it would
likewise be a national benefit, if it was made a common practice of, as in
Great Britain; for by this method there might be a hundred sheep kept on a
small plantation, where now they have not above ten.

The meat that is fatted with turnips, is superior in flavor to that fattened
on the best meadows; and by the increase of the stock, our wool would be
sufficient for our manufactories, which at present the greatest part we are
obliged to import.

In Great Britain, they reckon turnips the basis of agriculture: therefore if a
farmer there keeps no sheep, they predict his destiny.

There is some difficulty at first to make sheep that has not been used to
them, eat them; they will sometimes fast two or three days; but after they have
tasted them, they devour them voraciously -- the young lamb fall to at once.

To turn a flock of sheep at large into a field of turnips, would be very
disadvantageous, for they would destroy as many in a fortnight as would keep
them the whole winter.

There are three other ways of feeding them on this food, all of which have
their several advantages. The first way is to divide the land by hurdles, (a
description of which I shall give hereafter) and allow the weathers, ewes and
lambs you intend to fatten, to come upon such a portion only at a time, as they
can eat in one day, and so advance the hurdles further into the ground daily,
till all be eaten. They will eat the tops, and scoop out the middle of the
turnip; what is left, the bottoms and out sides, should be picked up with an
iron crook, and given to your store sheep, which may follow those you are
fattening, and they will eat all clean up.

The second way is by enclosing the sheep in hurdles as before; but to pull up
the turnips you suppose the sheep can eat in one day, and so on till all be
eaten.

The third manner is to pull up the turnips, and remove them in a cart or
wagon to some other place, spreading them on a fresh place every day; by this
method the sheep will eat them up clean, both roots and leaves. The great
advantage of this method is when there is land not far off that wants dung more
than that where the turnips grow, which perhaps is also too wet for the sheep
in winter. The expense of hurdles, and the trouble of moving them, is saved in
this case, which will counterbalance at least the expense of pulling and
carting the turnips.

There is one caution necessary, that is, to house or bury a quantity of
turnips, in case it should happen to be a severe winter, that your stock may
not suffer. I have frequently observed, when the snow has been a foot high,
that the sheep have scraped off the snow, and found the turnips.

For making the hurdles, and placing of them; with the benefit received by the
sheep's dung and urine.
The hurdles are made of thin light poles, split in two, any wood will do that
will rend easy; the common length of the hurdle is eight feet; it is made like
a gate, with five bars or slotes. There are two ends mortised, that the ends of
the bars, or slotes go into: the feet of those ends are eighteen inches long,
cut peaked or sharp to go into the ground: then there is a flat piece that is
nailed to the bars right in the middle horizontally, and two other flat pieces
which are also nailed to the bars, in a sloping manner as ties; they go from
the feet on each side up to the top of that piece nailed in the middle, which
keeps the hurdle from rakeing. The height of the hurdle is four feet; if they
are made of light stuff, a man can carry four of them. For placing of them,
there are holes made in the ground with a sharp iron crow, for receiving the
feet of the hurdle, which is drove down with a wood-maul, and the ends are
fastened together with withes: for fifty sheep, place five hurdles on every
side, so that forty feet square will be so taken in, and so in proportion
according to the flock. A man, when he has been used to this work, will remove
one of these pens in an hour.

There are many other benefits received by folding of sheep exclusive of
feeding off the turnips. In many parts of England they fold upon their wheat.
Every day they plow for wheat, they sow broad-cast and harrow it in. Their
flock every night is brought from the pasture and folded on it: the sheep tread
the ground down firm that it does not spew out in the winter, and their manure
makes it grow vigorously, that they have generally great crops.

Sheeps dung is one of the best manures I know of. It succeeds upon all sorts
of lands; but as it is not so conveniently collected as the dung of larger
animals, it is commonly conveyed to the land it is intended for, by folding the
sheep upon it. The urine as well as the dung, is thus given to the land, and is
of great advantage.

In Flanders, they make many thousand loads of manure annually from their
sheep: they cover the bottom of the folds considerably deep with some light and
spungy earth, and when this has received the dung and urine of the animals for
seven or eight days, they remove it and lay fresh in its place: the earth thus
impregnated, becomes an excellent improvement to land, and they raise large
crops by means of it, in places where very little could be expected without it.
I have myself had contrivances something like it, which was covering the
bottoms of the folds deep with sand, and changing it once a week; which I found
was an excellent dressing for my clayey lands; both the sand and this peculiar
kind of dung being appropriated things for it.

I hope the foregoing hints and experiments will open the farmers eyes, and
make them attentive to their interest, by increasing this useful animal.

The MANGEL WURZEL; or, ROOT OF SCARCITY.
This root is a native of Germany, from whence it took its name Mangel Wurzel,
or root of scarcity. Its cultivation in that country is great, for the use of
all sorts of cattle, as well as for culinary uses. It was introduced into
France, and from thence to England by that ingenious horticulturist, John
Coakley Lettsom, whose laudable endeavors to encourage the growth of so
valuable a root, did not meet with that encouragement it deserved, as it
interfered with the profits and interests of some oppulent gardeners, who would
at any time sacrifice the public good to their own private emolument.

What makes this plant more valuable is, that every part of it is edible and
salutary; and besides allowing nutritious fodder for cattle, affords a supply
for the table both in summer and winter. The leaves exceed spinach, and the
roots those of parsnips. The stalks and ribs of the large leaves, divested of
the leafy part, and peeled, eat like asparagus; or may be used in soups, which
they greatly improve. The leaves tied up in a bag or net, with slices of meat
interlaid and boiled, make a dish both pleasant and salutary; or with plumbs,
damsons, sliced apples, quinces, etc. afford a diet that is highly esteemed by
many.

This root ought not to be put into the class with turnips, or carrots,
although by its external appearance, and its seed, it very much resembles the
beet root; it is superior to it in every respect, and appears to form a
distinct species. Its culture is so easy, its advantages so numerous, and it
will answer so completely the purposes of any other fodder, that it seems to me
to deserve to be adopted every where, and to have the preference even in the
best years, over all other roots with which beasts are nourished. It will grow
in all climates and soils. Those lands that are moist and light are most
suitable. If in hard and clayey grounds, it is prevented from making its way
far into the earth, it will extend itself horizontally, and will produce above
the surface that which the nature of the soil hinders from being produced
beneath it.

This most valuable root is not affected by the vicissitudes of the seasons,
and has no destructive enemy; the insects and vermin which make ravages on all
other kinds of vegetables, neither touch nor injure it. It is not attacked by
blasting or mildew, and the greatest drought does not affect its vegetation; it
does not injure the soil that nourishes it; but prepares it to receive, before
the winter, the grain and other seeds that are intended to be deposited in it.

The time of sowing the seed is in April or the beginning of May; let the land
be well prepared by plowing, and manured, and made light; steep the seeds in
water twenty-four hours; lay the line upon the field, and plant the seeds at
eighteen inches apart every way; you may set them with a stick, but they must
not be buried above one inch deep. After ten or twelve days, it will be up, and
every grain will have from two to four roots growing together. As soon as these
small roots show their fourth leaf, the feeblest of them must be carefully
plucked off, and the finest and most vigorous root only left.

In a little time the growth of the roots thus selected will be astonishing;
not one will fail.

As the roots naturally grow a little above the ground, notice those which do
not so appear, and bare them by removing the earth from around their top; they
must be hoed and kept clean from weeds.

In July, when the outward leaves are become about a foot long, the first crop
of leaves is to be gathered, breaking them off round and near the root. For
this purpose, the thumb should be placed within, and at the origin of the
leaves, in order to strip them off, close to their insertion into the stem.
Those leaves only should be gathered which bend toward the earth, and care
should always be taken to leave those of the heart of the plant: they will
thereby be reproduced, and grow more quickly.

Immediately after this first crop, the ground should be stirred. It is from
this moment that the roots begin to grow large, and to increase in an
astonishing manner. In good land the leaves may be plucked off every fortnight
or three weeks.

The commencement of sharp frosts determines the time of the crops of these
roots: a fine day must be chosen for gathering them in, as it is necessary they
should be got in dry. I have had the roots average seven pounds each on an
acre. Which produce was fourteen tuns and an half per acre, and the leaves I
reckoned weighed as much, which was twenty-nine tun of excellent food for
cattle, from one acre of land.

In order to cause these roots and leaves to be eaten by all kinds of cattle,
it is necessary to cut them in small pieces, after having well washed and
cleansed the roots. I employed for this purpose a sharp instrument, made of a
blade of iron a foot long and two inches broad, and twisted into the form of
an; in the middle of the two branches of the was soldered a socket of about two
inches long; in this socket was fixed a wooden handle of about three feet six
inches in length; with this instrument they are cut with great facility. This
operation was performed in a trough made for that purpose. A man may in one
hour's time cut into small pieces a quantity of roots, sufficient for the
nourishment of twelve oxen for a day. Before the roots are cast into the
trough, it is necessary to split them, and cut them into quarters.

For horned cattle prepared in this manner, these roots, or leaves may be
given, without any mixture; but if you want to husband the roots, you may mix
one quarter of chaff with it cut from the hay of trefoil, lucern, saintfoin, or
clover.

For horses during the summer, they may be fed with the leaves chopped, and
mixed half with chopped hay, the same as before mentioned, and in the winter
with the roots and hay cut in the same manner.

Hogs will also readily eat these leaves and roots, when cut small and mixed
with any fat or milky drink, which is generally given them. They will become as
fat by eating those, as other swine will by different kinds of food.

There is one caution necessary respecting these roots, which is to bury them
or put them in a good cellar, to hinder the frost from spoiling them.

For RAISING and DRYING of HOPS.
The principal use of hops is well known to consist in preserving beer from
growing sour, and to make it keep a long time. Hops boiled in the wort also
makes the beer wholesomer and more grateful to the taste, as they communicate
to it a diuretic virtue, to purge the blood, and is good for the jaundice and
hypochondriac affections. And as it is expected that beer will be the common
and general drink of this country, I would advise those who are in a capacity,
to make plantations as soon as they can.

There are four sorts of hops, the wild garlic hop, the long and square garlic
hop, the oval hop, and the long white hop: the two former are not worth
propagating; the latter is more fertile and beautiful.

Any soil, except stony, rocky, and stiff clay will suit them; the best
however, is that which is light, deep, and rich, and the better for sand being
mixed with it: a black garden mould is excellent. An open situation to the
south-east and south-west points agree best with hops, if they are defended
with trees planted on the east, north and west sides the better. The sets may
be planted in the fall or early in the spring, either in October, March or the
beginning of April: as the season and climate suits. The distance of the hills
in dry hot ground may be six feet; but in moist and rich ground eight feet.

The largest sets are to be chosen from seven to ten inches long, with three or
four joints each. These are to be set in holes about fourteen inches over, and
at each corner of the hole and a fifth in the middle, raising the earth two or
three inches about, leaving two or three joints above the ground.

If the ground be poor, or stiff, some good mould, or a compost of manure and
earth must be laid in the holes, and it is a great expense and trouble in
watering of them, that may be saved by putting in the bottom of the hole some
horse litter or straw, and covering it with mould in the shape of a basin. In
the summer keep all weeds, between clear with the hoe, and about June twist
them together, and let them lie, that they may not bear the first year, by
which means the plants will be much stronger. To make good such lost time, you
may plant the interspaces with garden beans.

In November, either dig or plow those interspaces, and give the land a
dressing of rotten dung, cutting the hop vines down to the earth, covering them
with fat mould. In March, the second year, if the weather will permit, open the
hills and cut away all the new suckers, then pole them with twelve feet poles;
the third year they are in full perfection, and will last about twenty years;
one pole will do for the first year you pole them, but afterward they must
have three poles to a hill, twenty feet long; but do not pole till the shoots
are ten inches high, making first a hole with an iron crow to put the poles in,
that must be cut three square at their ends.

When the vines are about three feet, and all are not taken to the poles, guide
the rest to them, and tie them with withered rushes or yarn to the empty poles,
and at a proper distance therefrom, but not so close tied as to hinder their
climbing; two or three strings are sufficient for a pole. The poles are to lean
outward, particularly toward the south, to receive the sun's beams; it being
observed, that a leaning pole will bear more hops than an upright one.

About mid-summer, when the hop begins to branch out, such as have not got up
to the tops of the poles, should have their heads nipt off, or else diverted
from the pole, in order to branch the better, for the increase of the hop. They
blow in July, and are ripe in August: their ripeness is known by their
fragrancy, change of color, by being easily pulled, and by the brownish color
of the seed.

Hops should be gathered when somewhat brownish, and that without delay. In
order to this, make a frame with four short poles or sticks, laid on four forks
driven into the ground, to contain a hair cloth, or blanket tacked round it
about the edges. On this device, the poles with the hops may be laid, and at
each side the pickers may stand and pick the hops into it. When the blanket or
hair-cloth is full, untack and carry it away, and place it, when emptied, into
the same frame again; and this frame may be removed to some new place of the
garden.

Hops should not be gathered when wet; but if dew or rain be on them, shake the
poles, and they will dry the sooner. As fast as the hops are picked, they must
be dried. The general expeditious way of drying hops, is by the kiln, which
extracts their humidity in a little time; but then such violence is not so
natural as the heat of the sun, that is the best of all other ways, where
convenience will allow; for the spirituous parts of this plant are so nice,
that it cannot endure any violent heat without prejudice to its fine virtues,
that are of a friendly, opening quality, when its aromatic, subtle spirits are
thus mostly kept in.

If they are kiln dried, the common one in a hair-cloth is not so proper as one
made of a bed of flat ledges, an inch thick, and two or three inches broad,
sawn and laid across each other, chequer ways, the flat way, about three inches
distant; the ledges so entered, are put into another, that the floor may be
even and smooth: this bed may rest on two or three joists, set edgeways; then
covered with large double tin plates soldered together at each joint, and order
the ledges so, before they are laid, that the joints of the tin may always lie
over the middle of a ledge: then fit boards about the edges of the kiln, to
keep up the hops, only let one side be to remove for shoving off the hops. They
may be very safely turned on this tin bed, and with a small expense of fuel;
besides, any manner of fuel will serve for this purpose, the smoke not passing
through the hops, but conveyances made for it, at the several corners of the
kiln.

After hops have lain a month to cool and toughen, in order to bag them, there
is a round or square hole made in an upper floor, big enough for a man to turn
himself in; then tack a hoop about the mouth of the bag fast with pack thread,
so as to bear the weight of the hops and the man that treads them; that done,
let the bag down through the hole; the hoop above will keep it from sliding
quite through. First tie a handful of hops at each lower corner, with pack
thread, to serve as a tassel, for conveniently moving the bag; then go into the
bag, and tread the hops on every side, another still casting in the hops as
fast as you require, till it be full; when it is well trodden and full, let the
bag down by unripping the hoop, and close the mouth of the bag, filling the two
upper corners as you did the lower. This bag, if well packed and dried will
keep several years in a dry place; only care must be taken that the mice do not
make their nests in the hops.

The profits of a hop-garden per acre, if the blight and fly does not take
them, is from thirty to fifty pounds.

How to manage the KITCHEN and FLOWER GARDEN.
Some ingenious men have hinted to me that they would wish me to give a
botanical description of herbaceous plants and flowers in the Linnaean system,
(which I conceive myself fully capable) and should have been happy if I could
have obliged my curious patrons; but it would have swelled my work far beyond
its limits; and when I consider that my treatise is chiefly intended for the
farmer, who has not time to study so laborious a science, which is not like an
unactive and sedentary science, like geometry or history that may be acquired
by a recluse and solitary application, within the narrow precincts of a closet;
or, like chemistry, anatomy, and astronomy, requiring only such operations as
may be performed without a great deal of exercise, toil and fatigue.

The botanist must wander over mountains and valleys, range the gloomy forests
and wilderness, climb the steepest rocks, and expose his life to the brinks of
hideous precipices, in quest of knowledge.

I shall therefore confine myself at present, to the cultivation and management
of the most useful vegetables for the table, and herbs for the house, with
these flowers that will require the least trouble.

To the curious in botany, I recommend the perusal of some of the best authors
on that science, which are Boerhaave, Grew, Bradley, Miller, Dillenius,
Linnaeus, and Sir Hans Sloane.

Mr. Humphry Marshall has given a very good description in the Linnaean system
of forest trees, and shrubs, natives of this country, and promised in the
introduction to his work, that if the work then published, met with the
encouragement of the public, he would also treat on our native herbaceous
plants. By his silence I fear his work did not meet with that encouragement it
deserved. I hope I shall never find this country stigmatized for not giving
encouragement to merit, and genius.

I have only to say (like Marshall) if this present work meets with
encouragement, in my next edition, I shall add many useful and interesting
subjects, particularly in agriculture, horticulture and botany.

The introduction of many foreign shrubs and plants into this county, will be
of particular benefit. The diversity of climate and soil here, will suit any of
them. The vine, the almond and fig tree will grow as well here, and be as
productive as in France, Portugal or Spain; only give them proper
cultitivation. So will liquorice, rhubarb, madder, and many other foreign
useful shrubs and plants.

I shall now proceed to give directions for managing the kitchen and flower
garden, but shall not treat this subject as most authors have on that science,
beginning the calendar January and so on; for the seasons are different in this
country in the different states. My intention is chiefly intended for the
benefit of the farmer: therefore shall begin with the proper seasons for sowing
the seeds, and secondly, how to transplant and manage them.

It is first necessary to prepare the ground to receive the seeds and plants,
which is best done by digging it up in the fall of the year, and laying it up
in ridges, which is done by trenching; this meliorates the earth, and then it
requires but little labor to make it fit for sowing, and planting, which is
done by throwing the ridges into the trenches and levelling of it; this will
enable you to take the first opportunity in the spring, whereby you will be
able to get early crops, besides having your ground mellow, which will make the
seeds vegetate in half the time.

To the Southward they have the advantage over the colder parts, as many of
their seeds may be sown in the fall of the year as they will stand the winter,
such as cabbage, colliflower, spinach, onions, lettuce, endive, radishes, peace,
beans, etc. but where the frost is severe, these must be sown early in the
spring.

I will here set down alphabetically the different plants to be propagated;
first the kitchen garden plants are asparagus, artichokes, beans, beets,
brocoli, cabbage, colliflower, capsicum, cucumbers, coleworts, celery, chervil,
carrots, endive, kidney beans, lettuces, melons, mustard, onions, parsnips,
potatoes, parsley, purslane, peace, radishes, rape, savoy, spinach, shallots,
squashes, turnips, turnip-cabbage, water melon. Sweet pot herbs, anise, balm,
borage, bugloss, basil, carraway, chamomile, clary, dill, fennel, hyssop,
lavender, marjoram, marigold, mint, orach, pennyroyal, rosemary, savory,
tansey, tarragon, thyme.

Flowers, first the biennial and perennial: aster, apocynum, astragalus,
aconite angelica, batchelor's button, balm of Gilead, bell flower, Canterbury
bells, carnations, cyanus, cyelamen, chalone, columbines, Christmas rose,
clarey, everlasting pea, golden rod, geranium, hollyhocks, iris, lupins, lilly
of the valley, lilly French, polyanthus, peony, pinks, Solomon's seal, sweet
William, valerian, violets, wall flowers: the above flowers are propagated by
off sets, layers and slips.

The following biennials may be raised from seed. Auriculas, agremone, aloes,
columbines, campanula, French honysuckle, globe thistle, globularia, gentian,
holy hocks, horned poppy, honesty, Indian pink, monks hood, nettle leaved bell
flower, polyanthus, pulsatilla, rose campion, rockets, stock gilliflowers,
sweet William, snap dragon, sweet scabious, tree primrose, tree mallow,
valeran, veronicus.

The following are annuals which come up, flower, produce seeds and die the
same year: African marrigold, amaranthus, basil, bottle goard, china after,
chryoanthemum, convoliulus, Capsicum, Chinese holyhock, French marigold,
minionetta, palma christi, sweet sultan, tree amaranthus, ten week stocks,
yellow balsom, zennia.

Bulbous and tuberous rooted flower plants. Anemonies, amaryllis, asphodel
lilly, belladonna lilly, crocuses, corona imperiallis, colchicums, corona
regalis, cyclamon, dogs tooth, hyacinths, iris, bulbosa, molly allium,
muscaria, narcissus, lillies, naustrums, jonquils ranunculus, snow drops,
squills, tuberose, tulips. Those roots if the climate is not too severe, should
be set late in the fall; but where the frost is intense, they must be set as
early in the spring as possible.

The ground where the seeds are sown both for flowers and for the kitchen
garden, should be made rich and very fine: and as I observed before, where the
climate will not admit of the following seeds being sown in the fall, they must
be sown early in the spring, such as cabbage colliflowers, coleworts, early
cucumbers, celery, carrots, endive, lettuces, onions, parsnips, early peace and
beans, radishes, spinach, shallots, anise, balm, carroways, dill, fennel,
hysop, lavender, marjoram, marigolds, mint, pennyroyal, rosemary, and thyme.

When the cabbage, colliflower, brocoli, savoy, green and bore-cole, and
colewort plants, grow strong in the seed beds, they may be removed and
transplanted where they are to stand.

The cabbage plants, must be set two feet apart every way, and kept hoed, and
as they grow, the mould should be drawn up to the stems.

For the reception of the colliflower and brocoli plants, let a piece of the
richest ground be chosen, and spread thereon some good rotten dung, and then
dig the ground one spade deep, and as you go on let the dung be regularly
buried. The plants are to be set in this copartment at two feet and a half each
way asunder; and they must be watered as soon as they are planted. If the
ground is pretty clean from weeds, you may sow a thin crop of spinach on the
same ground.

The savoy, green and boorcole, and colewort plants, may be planted the same as
the cabbage plants. The dwarf peace may be set at two feet distance in the rows;
but the large high sorts, that require sticking, should be set at four feet
distance between the rows. The small garden beans may be set at fourteen inches
between the rows; but the large broad sort, must be set at two feet distance.

As there are several sorts of peace and beans, as well as cabbages and
lettuces, I shall enumerate their names. The early sort of peace, are the
charlton hot spur, golden hot spur, Reading hot spur, and master's hot spur.
The others are, nonparel, Spanish moratto, the large and dwarf marrowfat.
Leadmas dwarf, is of a very low growth, but a plentiful bearer. The brown,
green, white, and gray rouncival.

The early beans are the Mexican, Spanish, and Portugal. The next are the
nonparel, long podded, sword long pods, Windsor, toker and Sandwich. The late
are the white and red blossom, and the mumford.

The kidney beans, the dwarf sorts, are the early white, Battersea, and
Canterbury white, red and black speckled, tawny, dun colored, Chinese
speckled, red, black, brown, and white. The runners are the Dutch, scarlet, and
the large white.

The cabbages are the small early, the dwarf sugar loaf, early York, Battersea,
long sided, large Scotch, large hollow, large drum, and the red Dutch.

The lettuces are the green, white, and red, cos, Aleppo, common cabbage, brown
Dutch cabbage, white Dutch, grand admiral, Cilicia, imperial curled, and black
Spanish. The Brocoli are, the early, and large purple, the brown, green and
white. The turnips are the early Dutch, white, common, large white, the yellow,
the large red, and green topped, field turnip, the long rooted, and the turnip
cabbage.

The cucumbers are, the early, short prickly, short cluster prickly, the long
and white, green Turkey, and Smyrna. The onions are, the Strasburg, the white,
red, and silver skinned Spanish; the Portugal, Deptford, and Welsh. The
raddishes are the early short top, salmon, Italian, white, and red, turnip
rooted, long rooted white, and large black Spanish turnip rooted. The potatoes
are the early dwarfs, large round red, large long white, ladies fingers, round
white, white kidney, and clustered American. And as some of those plants
require particular management, I shall here give proper directions.

First, asparagus, is a fine vegetable. In making plantations of these plants,
one great article to be considered, is, to make choice of a proper soil; choose
the best the garden affords; it must not be wet, nor too strong or stubborn,
but such as is moderately light and pliable, so as it will readily fall to
pieces in digging and raking, and in a situation that enjoys the full sun.

The ground where you intend to make asparagus beds, should be regularly
trenched, and a large quantity of good rotten dung buried equally in each
trench, at least twelve or fifteen inches below the surface of the dug ground.
The ground being dug and laid level, divide it into beds four feet and an half
wide, with alleys two feet wide between bed and bed; four rows of asparagus are
to be planted in each bed, and ten or twelve inches distance to be allowed
between plant and plant in the row, and let the outside rows of each bed be
nine inches from the edge; the latter end of March or in April, as the season
is, is the time for planting.

The following is the method: strain your lines lengthways the beds, nine
inches from the edge, and then with a spade cut out a small trench close to the
line, about six inches deep, making that side next the line nearly upright; and
when one trench is opened, plant that before you open another, placing the
plants the distance of ten or twelve inches in the row.

In planting these plants, observe they must not be placed flat in the bottom
of the trench, but nearly upright against the back of the trench or drill, that
the crown of the plants may stand upright, and two or three inches below the
surface of the ground, and let them be placed all at an equal depth, spreading
their roots somewhat regular, against the back of the trench, and at the same
time drawing a little earth up against them with the hand as you place them,
just to fix the plants in their due position, till the row is planted, then
when one row is thus planted, immediately with a rake, draw the earth into the
drill over the plants, and then proceed to open another drill or trench as
before directed, plant it in the same manner, and cover in the plants as
before, and so on till the whole is planted. When they are all planted, let the
surface of the beds be raked smooth, and clear them from stones. At each corner
of the bed, let a firm stake be driven in the ground, to serve as a mark for
the alleys.

The asparagus being planted, the next care is, when the plants come up, which
will be in a month, to keep them clean from weeds, which must be well attended
to during the summer season.

Let it next be observed, that it will be three years from the time of
planting, before the asparagus plants produce buds large enough for use; though
sometimes a few of the largest buds may be cut the second spring after
planting; but I should advise to let it be the third year, before you make a
general cutting.

A plantation of asparagus, if the beds are properly dressed every year, as I
shall hereafter direct, will continue to produce good buds for ten or twelve
years.

The seeds for these plants may be sown in the spring of the year in rich mould
at five or six inches apart, and it must be observed they are not to exceed two
years old before they are planted as before directed.

The manner of dressing the asparagus beds is as follows: in October, cut down
the stalks close to the surface of the beds; carry them immediately off the
ground; then with a sharp hoe cut up all the weeds, and draw them off the beds
into the alleys. This done, stretch the line, and with a spade mark out the
alleys from about eighteen inches to two feet wide, according to the width they
were first made. Then dig the alleys one spade deep, and spread the earth
evenly over the beds; and as you advance in digging, let the weeds which were
raked off the beds into the alleys, be dug into the bottom, and cover them a
proper depth with earth; but when the beds are old they will need an augment of
old rotten dung once in two or three years; this is the time to do it, but the
manure or dung must be applied before the alleys are dug, or the beds landed
up.

Every spring the asparagus beds must be dressed and forked, which is done by
slightly digging them with a three pronged fork; this work should be done very
early in the spring, before the buds shoot out. The beds being forked, they
must be immediately raked even.

For artichokes, the land must be good and well dressed with dung. The slips or
suckers slipped off from the old plants are the properest sets to plant. There
are two sorts, the large globe artichoke, and the French or green oval; but the
former is greatly preferable, the heads being considerably larger, and the
eatable parts more thick and fleshy. They should be planted in an open
situation; plant the sets with a dibble in rows a yard asunder, and not less
than two feet, nor more than a yard distant from one another in the row. Give
them some water immediately after they are planted, to settle the earth about
the plants.

The above plantation, if kept clear from weeds, and now and then watered in
dry weather and in the beginning of the summer, will not fail to produce good
artichokes the following autumn.

A plantation of artichokes will continue to produce good heads six years, and
sometimes longer; but it must be observed, that if required to have a
succession of these fruits for four or five months in the summer, should make a
new plantation every spring; for the old stocks which have been planted a year
or two or more, produce heads in June and July; and those planted now, produce
heads in August, September, and October.

JERUSALEM ARTICHOKES.
These roots will thrive in almost any soil, and multiply so exceedingly that
it is not easy to clear the ground of them, for the least bit will grow. The
root, the eatable part of this plant, being large fleshy tubers, bearing some
resemblance to a potatoe, but of a more irregular form, and tastes somewhat
like the bottom of an artichoke, (hence probably the name) are in perfection in
autumn and all the winter, and are very good and wholesome to boil and eat with
butter, etc. Let them be planted in rows a yard asunder, four or five inches
deep, and eighteen inches distant in the rows. Observe the same method in
preparing the sets, and planting them as is hereafter directed for potatoes.

PLANTING POTATOES.
Be careful to procure some good sets, that is, to pick a quantity of the best
kind of potatoes perfectly sound, and of a tolerable large size: these are to
be prepared for planting by cutting each root into two, three, or more pieces,
minding* particularly that each piece be furnished with at least one or two
eyes, which is sufficient. Being thus prepared, they are to be planted in rows
not less than eighteen inches distance: if they are to be plowed between, they
must not be less than three feet, and if four feet apart, the more eligible.

The best method I have found by experience is to make a trench either with the
spade or plough, about five inches deep; and putting long dung or straw at the
bottom, and laying the sets on it at their proper distances, which is from nine
to twelve inches, covering them with mould. They must be kept clear from weeds.

PEACE and BEANS, to have a regular supply, should be sown from the first
breaking up of the winter to the beginning of June. Those late sown, the peace
should be of the dwarf kind, and the Toker, Sandwich, and the white blossom
beans are the properest.

RADDISHES, some of them should be sown in the fall, as they will grow well at
that time.

TURNIPS may be sown from the beginning of May, till the latter end of July.

GRAFTING AND BUDDING OF TREES.
Grafting may be begun any time after the first of March, if the weather will
permit. The sorts proper to begin with are pears, plumbs, and cherries; apples
may also be grafted at the same time, or they may be deferred a fortnight or
three weeks longer. It should be observed, that where grafting is to be done,
you should begin to prepare for it the middle or latter end of February.

The first thing to be done toward this work; is to collect the grafts: and it
must be observed these must be young shoots, such only as were produced last
year; for those that are more than one year's growth never take well. These
shoots or grafts you may begin to cut from the trees from the middle of
February, in mild weather, and lay the lower ends of them in dry earth, in a
warm border, till the grafting time; and if severe weather should happen in the
interim, cover them with long litter. The reason for cutting the grafts so
soon, is, because the buds will now begin to swell fast; and if the grafts were
not to be cut off in proper time, the buds would be too far advanced, and the
grafts would by that means, not take kindly with the stock, or, at least, not
shoot so freely.

Before I proceed to the methods of grafting, it will first be necessary to
mention what stocks are proper to graft the different kinds of fruit upon; for
instance, apples should be grafted upon stocks raised from the kernels of the
same kinds of fruit, i. e. any kinds of apples; for the grafts or buds of these
trees will not take well upon any other stocks.

The time for sowing the kernels of any sorts of apples or wild crabs, is
either in November or March; but if not sown till March, they must be kept in
sand till that time. These are to be sown in beds three feet and a half wide,
observing to sow them moderately thick, and cover them about an inch at least
with earth. The plants will come up in five or six weeks, if sown in the
spring; and in the autumn or spring following, some of the largest plants
should be drawn out and planted in nursery beds; and in the second or third
year after, they will be in order to ground graft on; but those that are for
head grafting you may let stand four or five years.

Pears are generally grafted or budded upon stocks raised also from kernels of
any of their own kinds of fruits; likewise upon quince stocks, which do very
well. Sometimes they are grafted upon white thorn stocks; but this is not
commonly practiced, as these stocks have an ill effect on several sorts of
their fruit: the season for sowing the kernels of the pears and quinces to
raise stocks, the transplanting, and time of grafting, is the same as mentioned
before for apples.

Cherries are propagated by grafting or budding them upon stocks, raised from
the stones of the common black or red cherry, or upon stocks raised from the
stones of any other kind of these fruit; but the two first are most esteemed
for that purpose, because they generally shoot much freer than any other. The
season for sowing the cherry-stones, and the management in every respect, is
the same as before mentioned for apples and pears.

Plumbs are also grafted or budded upon plumb stocks; that is, stocks raised by
sowing the stones of any of the common sorts of the same fruit; also raised
occasionally by suckers, sent up from the roots of any kinds of plumb-trees.
The time for sowing the stones to raise the stocks, and the management in every
respect, is the same as the fruits before mentioned.

Thus observe as before, let the stocks for grafting, both of fruit trees and
others, be always of the same family or genus as that of the respective trees
which are to be grafted.

Note, stocks raised from seed, being mostly of a stronger growth, are commonly
called free stocks.

General OBSERVATIONS for performing the WORK.
There are several methods of grafting, but I shall only take notice of four,
which are practiced with the greatest success, such as whip-grafting,
cleft-grafting, crown-grafting, and grafting by approach or in-arching.

Previous to grafting, you must be provided with a proper grafting knife; a
quantity of strong bass-strings for bandages, to tie the stocks and grafts
firmly together; and some well wrought clay, to clay them round over the tying,
to secure them from the air and wet.

Observe that the stocks intended to be grafted, must previous to the insertion
of the graft, be headed down; which, if intended for ground grafting, must be
headed pretty low within five or six inches of the ground; but if for head
grafting, they may be headed at four, five or six feet. If ground grafted, you
must train up one strong shoot from the graft for a stem, till it is five or
six feet high, then topped or cut off at that height, to cause it to throw out
branches to form the head.

FIRST. WHIP-GRAFTING.
This kind of grafting is practiced with the greatest success upon small
stocks, from about a quarter or one third of an inch to half an inch, or near
an inch in diameter: but commonly prefer small stocks of about half an inch or
near equal in size with the graft; and the method of performing this work is
this, have your cions or grafts, etc. ready; then begin by cutting off the head
of the stock at a convenient height, according to the above rules; this done,
fix upon a smooth part of the stock, where headed off, and there pare off the
rind with a little of the wood, in a somewhat sloping manner upwards, about an
inch, or near an inch and half in length; then, having the cions cut into
lengths of four or five eyes each, prepare one to fit the stock as above, by
cutting it also a little sloping, so as to exactly fit the cut part of the
stock, as if cut from the same place, that the rinds of both may join in every
part; then cut a slit or tongue about half an inch in length upwards in the
cion, and cut a slit the same length downwards, in the stock to receive the
said tongue; in that manner fix the graft in the stock, taking care that the
sap or rind of both may meet, or join as exact as possible in every part.

Having thus fixed the graft, let it be immediately tied with a string of soft
bass, bringing it in a neat manner several times round the graft and stocks,
taking care to preserve the graft in its due position; and let the bandage be
neatly tied, and immediately cover the place with some grafting clay, observing
to bring the clay near an inch above the top of the stock, and a little lower
than the bottom part of the graft, leaving a due thickness on every side of the
graft, and stock, making it a roundish oval form, and take care to close it
well in every part, that no wet, wind, or sun can enter, to prevent which, is
the whole intention of the clay; for without that precaution, the operation
would prove fruitless; and in this manner proceed with the rest.

In performing the operation of whip-grafting, some grafters first cut and
prepare the cion, and then cut and fit the stocks to that; but it is not
material which, provided it be done in an exact and somewhat expeditious manner.

Next it must be noted, that the grafts must be now and then examined, to see
if the clay any where falls off, or cracks; if it does, it must be renewed with
fresh clay. By the last week in May, or first week in June, the grafts and
stocks will be well united, and then take off the clay, and loosen the bandages.

SECOND. CLEFT-GRAFTING.
The next general method of grafting is, that by clefting the stock, commonly
called cleft or slit-grafting, because the stock is cleft, and the graft put
into the cleft part; and is performed in the following manner:

The proper sized stocks on which this kind of grafting is performed, are
generally about an inch, or an inch and an half, and even two inches, or more,
in diameter. First, with a strong knife, or small saw, cut off the head of your
stock, and pare it very smooth; this done, fix upon a smooth part of the stock,
just below where headed, to place your graft, and on the opposite side to that,
cut away part of the stock, about an inch and an half, in a sloping manner
upwards, so as the crown of the stock may not be more than about half an inch
broad. This done, prepare your graft or cion, which is done in this manner:
observe to cut your grafts into due lengths, leaving four or five eyes to each;
then take your sharpest knife, and pare away the bark and some of the wood, at
the lower end of the graft, in a slooping manner, about an inch and an half, or
near two inches in length; and then cut the other side in the same form, making
it to have a wedge-like shape; but let one side of it, which is to be placed
outward in the stocks, be left near double the thickness of the other side.

The graft being prepared, take your strong knife, and place it on the middle
of the stock, cross-ways the top of the sloped part, and with your mallet
strike your knife to the stock, observing to cleave it no farther than what is
necessary to admit the graft readily; then place the grafting chissel, or some
instrument a little way into the cleft at the sloped part of the stock, to keep
it open for the reception of the graft, which then directly introduce into the
cleft on the uncut or upright side of the stock at the back of the slope,
inserting it with great exactness, as far as it is cut, with the thickest edge
outward, and so that the rind may meet exactly every way with the rind of the
stock.

The graft being placed, then remove the grafting chissel, taking care not to
displace the graft; this done, let it be tied and well clayed in the manner as
before directed, in the work of whip or tongue-grafting; or, if in this
cleft-grafting, you choose to put in two grafts, it may be performed on large
stocks, and which must be twice cleft, and the clefts must not be across, but
parallel to each other, and so fix the grafts in the stock, observing to bind,
and clay them as before. This kind of grafting may likewise be performed on the
branches of trees that already bear fruit, if you desire to change the sorts.

THIRD. CROWN-GRAFTING.
This way of grafting is commonly practiced upon such stocks as are too large
and stubborn to cleave, and is often perfomed upon the branches of apple and
large pear trees, etc. that already bear fruit, when it is intended to change
the sorts, or to renew the tree with fresh bearing wood.

The manner of doing this sort of grafting is as follows: first to cut off the
head of the tree or stock level, or of any particular branch of a tree which
you intend to graft, and pare the top perfectly smooth, then prepare your
grafts, which is done by cutting one side flat and a little sloping about two
inches in length, making a kind of shoulder at the top of the cut, to rest on
the head of the stock; and pare off only a little of the bark toward each edge
of the other side of the graft; then raise the bark of the stock, first by
slitting it downwards, and then having a small wedge of hard wood, or rather
iron, one side of it formed somewhat roundish, the other flat; let this
instrument be driven down gently between the bark and wood of the stock or
branch, the flat side toward the wood, driving it far enough to make room for
the graft; then drawing out the wedge, slip down the graft, placing the cut or
sloped side toward the wood, thrusting it down as far as cut, resting the
shoulder thereof upon the top of the stock; and in this manner you may put
four, five, or six grafts, or as many as may seem convenient, upon each stock
or branch, and bind them round with strong bass.

When the grafts are all thus fixed, you must then immediately apply a good
quantity of well wrought clay; bringing it close about the stalk and grafts,
observing to raise it at least an inch above the top of the stock, in a
rounding manner, so as to throw the wet quickly off, and prevent its lodging or
getting into the work, which would ruin all.

These trees which are grafted this way, will take and shoot very free; but
there is, for the first year or two after grafting, an inconvenience attending
them, and that is the grafts being liable to be blown out of the stock by
violent winds; but this may be remedied by tying two or three sticks to the
body of the stock, or branch, that is grafted, and the grafts tied to the
sticks.

FOURTH. GRAFTING by APPROACH, Or, IN-ARCHING.
Another way of grafting occasionally practiced, is generally called
in-arching, or grafting by approach; but is not near so commonly, practiced as
the three ways beforementioned, and was chiefly invented for such trees, as are
not easily propagated by any other method.

The method of performing the operation is this: when it is intended to
propagate any kind of trees or shrubs by this manner of grafting, it must be
observed, that the stock you would graft upon, and the tree from which you
would take the graft, must stand so near, or can be placed so near, that the
body of the branch you would in-arch, can, as it grows, be brought to approach
and join readily to a convenient part of the body of the stock; for the graft
is not to be separated from the mother plant, till some months after performing
the operation; nor is the head of the stock to be cut off till that time,
except you cannot otherwise conveniently fix the graft.

For instance, either having the stocks and the trees designed to in-arch from,
growing on the same ground near together, or in pots, or that you want to
in-arch some branches of trees, etc. and that the said branches are three,
four, or five feet or more from the surface of the ground, and suppose the
stalks you would graft upon to be in pots; in that case there must be a kind of
^light stage erected, close to, and as high as the branches of the tree: upon
this stage the pots which contain the stalks must be placed.

Thus far observed, then, in either case, proceed to the work, take one of the
branches you desire to in-arch, and bring the body of the said branch to touch
that of the stock at such a convenient height, where the stock and graft is
nearly of a size, and mark the parts where the graft and stock will most
readily join together; then in that part of the branch pare away the bark and
part of the wood, about three inches in length, and in the same manner let the
rind and wood be pared off that side of the stock where the branch is to be
joined, the same length and breadth, so that both the cut parts may exactly
join rind to rind; then cut a slit or thin tongue upwards in the branch, and
make a slit of the same length to receive it downwards in the stock; then let
them be joined, placing the branch with the top upright, slipping the tongue of
the graft into the slit made in the stock: and see that the cut parts join in
an exact manner, and let them be immediately tied together with some bass, and
afterward cover over the place with a due quantity of well wrought clay, very
well closed, that no air nor wet can penetrate.

After this, let a stout stake be driven into the ground, and that part of the
stock and graft must be fastened to it, which prevents the graft from being
displaced by the wind. Remember that the stock and graft are to remain in that
position for at least fifteen or sixteen weeks, when they will be well united.
The graft is then to be separated from the mother plant; being careful to do
this with a perfect sharp knife, cutting off the branch with a slope downwards
to the stock; and if not done in grafting, the head of the stock to be cut
close to the graft. The old clay and bandage are at this time to be taken off:
and at the same time it will be advisable to tie them again gently, and also
to put some fresh clay which will be of great service, and let them remain so
for a month or five weeks.

By this kind of grafting, you may raise almost any kind of tree or shrub; as
is often practiced by way of curiosity, to ingraft a fruit bearing branch of a
fruit-tree upon one of the common stocks of the respective sorts; by which
means, there is raised a new tree, bearing fruit in a few months: this is
sometimes practiced upon orange trees, etc. by grafting fruit branches on
stocks raised to a proper size, from the kernels of the fruit.

Note, in this method of grafting, the stocks may occasionally be both in the
full ground or in pots, the latter is necessary where the branches of the trees
you would in-arch are not near enough the ground, or for orange and other
green-house trees and shrubs; but as for such trees and shrubs as grow in the
common ground, and whose branches are favorably situated for that work, there
may be stocks placed either in pots, or planted in the ground near the said
trees, etc. or it may be performed on stocks or trees that grow accidentally
near.

BUDDING OR INOCULATING.
The proper time for budding or inoculating, is from the latter end of June to
the beginning of August; first begin on stone fruit, the early kinds, such as
apricots, peaches, and nectarines; cloudy weather best suits this work; but if
no such weather happens, it will then be most proper to do it principally in a
morning or evening.

The proper stocks on which to bud the above kinds of fruit trees, are
principally those of the plumb, raised from the stones of the fruit; and when
two or three years old, are of a proper size to bud upon; or these stocks may
be also raised from the suckers of plumb-trees.

It will be of particular service in this country to bud the peach on
plumb-stocks, as it will make the peach trees lasting; for the worm that
destroys the peach-tree raised from the stone of that fruit in a few years,
will not hurt that raised on the plumb-stock. -- The buds must be inserted one
in a stock at about six inches from the ground, if the tree is intended to be a
dwarf; but for a large standard, the budding may be performed at the height of
three, four, five or six feet.

Cherries are to be budded principally upon cherry stocks, which must be also
raised by sowing the stones; and all sorts of plumbs should be budded on plumb
stocks; pears may be budded on pear stocks; and these must be raised by sowing
the kernels. Oranges and lemons must be budded on stocks raised from the
kernels of the same fruit. Roses, jessamines, myrtles, and any other curious
shrubs, may be inoculated; the curious sorts budded on the common ones of the
same species;

Budding may also be performed upon trees that bear fruit. What is meant by
this, is where there are trees, that produce fruit not of the approved kinds;
such trees may be budded with the sorts desired; and the budding is to be
performed upon strong shoots of the same summer's growth. Several buds may be
put into every such tree, by which means the tree will be soon covered with the
desired kinds, and in two or three years after budding they will begin to bear.

The manner of performing the work of budding or inoculating is this: in the
first place, be provided with a sharp penknife, with a flat ivory haft. The
haft should be somewhat taper, and quite thin at the end; which knife and haft
is to be used as hereafter directed; and also provide some new bass mat, for
bandages; and let this, before you use it, be soaked in water. In the next
place, you are to provide a parcel of cuttings of the respective trees from
which you intend to take the buds: these cuttings must be shoots of the same
summer's growth, and must be cut from trees as are in health, bear well, and
shoot freely, minding to choose such shoots as have strength, and are free in
their growth, but not luxuriant.

Having your cuttings, knife, bass, and every thing ready, then proceed in the
following manner: With the above knife, make a cross cut in the rind of the
stock, minding to make the cut no deeper than the bark; then from the middle of
the cross cut let another be made downward, about two inches in length, so that
the the two cuts together form a, in which insert the bud. Then get one of your
cuttings, or shoots, and take off the bud in this manner: you are to begin
toward the lower, or biggest end of the shoot; and in the first place, cut off
all the leaves, but observing to leave part of the foot stalk of each
remaining; then, about an inch below the lower bud or eye, make a cross cut in
the shoot, almost half way through, with the knive slanting upwards, and with a
clean cut, bring it out about half an inch above the eye or bud, detaching the
bud with part of the bark and wood thereto: then immediately let that part of
the wood which was taken off with the bud, be separated from the bark, in which
is contained the bud; and this is readily done with your knife, placing the
point of it between the bark and wood at one end, and so pull off the woody
part, which will readily part from the bark; then quickly examine the inside,
to see if the eye of the bud be left; for if there appears a small hole, the
eye is gone with the wood, and is therefore useless: take another; but if there
be no hole, the bud is good, and is to be immediately inserted in the stalk,
observing for the reception of the bud, to raise gently, with the haft of your
knife, the bark of the stalk on each side of the perpendicular slit, from the
cross cut above, and directly thrust the bud gently in between the bark and the
wood, placing it as smooth as possible, with the eye of the bud in the middle,
observing, if the bud be too long for the incission in the stalk, shorten it
accordingly when inserted, so as to make it slip in readily, and lie perfectly
close in every part.

Having thus fixed the bud, let the stalk in that part be immediately bound
round with a string of new bass mat, beginning a little below the cut, and
proceeding upwards, drawing it closely round to the top of the slit; but be
sure to miss the eye of the bud, bringing the tying close to it below and
above, only just leaving the eye of the bud open; and this finishes the work
for the present.

In three weeks, or a month after the inoculation is performed, the buds will
have united with the stalk, which is discoverable by the bud appearing plump;
and those that have not taken, will appear black and decayed; therefore let the
bandages of those that have taken, be loosened; and this is done in order to
give free course to the sap, that the bud according as it swells, may not be
pinched; for were the bandages suffered to remain as first tied, they would
pinch the buds and spoil them. To prevent this, it would be most advisable to
loosen them all in about three weeks, or, at farthest, a month after budding,
which concludes the work till the March following, as, until which time, the
bud remains dormant, then shoots forth with vigor.

At the time, i. e. the beginning of March, you are to cut off the heads of the
stocks; observing to cut them off about a hand's breadth above the insertion of
the bud; and this part of the stock left above the bud is to remain till the
next spring, and will serve to tie the shoot to, which the bud makes the first
summer: for the buds never begin to shoot till the spring after budding. Or, in
the spring, as aforesaid, you may cut the head off at once near the bud, behind
it in a slanting manner.

The fruit trees which were grafted and budded a year ago, should have their
shoots, which were produced the last summer, shortened, that they may send
forth lateral shoots, or branches, to form a regular head near the stock.

Examine the trees; which were budded the last summer, and let all shoots that
arise from the stock, besides the bud-shoot be displaced; for these would rob
the proper shoot of some nourishment.

Having dwelt very fully on the proper methods of propagating all the sorts of
fruit trees as is necessary for the farmer, which by proper attention, every
one, even of the meanest capacity, may plant nurseries of young trees of their
own, and bring them to that perfection fit for planting out in the field, which
will save them that money; for the nursery will be of no expense, and attended
with very little trouble.

There are some very ignorant men, who raise those trees which they sell to the
farmer. These men make you believe there is some great art in propagating these
species, when at the same time nothing can be more plain and easy. The plants
for the stocks to graft on, may be picked up in your orchards, fields, or
gardens, which if taken up at the proper season (spring and fall) and planted
at fifteen or eighteen inches apart in the rows, and five feet between the
rows, which will admit of its being plowed between to keep them clear from
weeds. By this method there may be collected in a short time, a sufficient
quantity of stocks, fit for grafting or budding. Observe when those young
plants are planted, let them be well watered.

I shall now proceed to show the great advantages accruing to the farmer by
planting fruit trees in the field: it furnishes him with a good beverage for
common use; and likewise if he chooses to distill his cider, it will make a good
wholesome spirit; and what the farmer has to spare, will always fetch him ready
money.

PROPER METHODS of PLANTING and MANAGING TREES in the FIELD.
The proper time for planting them out, is, from the beginning of October, till
the beginning of May, in mild open weather; they should not be planted too near
or close together, two pole or perch is the nearest distance, but if they were
planted three perch apart every way it would be much better, as they would not
be so apt to blight, neither would they hurt the grain or grass that grow
underneath.

I shall first give directions for planting those fields that are under the
plow; and secondly, those fields that are under grass, or has a sward.

The method of planting fruit trees in the plowed fields is to open a wide hole
for every tree about a spade deep, at the proper distances you intend planting
of them, and loosen the bottom well; then prune the roots of the trees; that
is, cut off bruised or broken roots, and trim the ends a little of all, the
very long straggling roots in general; and prune out irregular shoots of the
head: then place the tree in the hole, put some good mould to the roots and
cover them about four inches, then get some long dung that is moist, or wet
straw and fill up the hole with it, then throw some good mould over the dung or
straw, which raise in form of a hill, and make a trench round the tree at the
distance of about eighteen inches from the stem of the tree, to receive, and
retain the wet; which will save the trouble of watering in dry weather.

To support the new planted fruit trees from the violence of the winds, let
stakes be drove down in those trenches, and fastened atop to the stem of the
tree, with straw bands, as they are soft and will hinder the tree from chafing.

The method of planting fruit trees in those fields under grass, or turf,
should be done in the following manner; pare as thin a turf off as possible,
then take up all the mould even to the clay, gravel, or sand; this done, put
the turf at the bottom of the hole, the grass downwards, spread a little good
mould on the same, on which plant the tree as before directed: Then with a
spade first give a circular cut about the bason-heap of mould; then six or
eight inches back from that, give another circular cut, and turn up all the
turf, letting it lie with the grass part downwards, slopeways, and joining the
said bason-heap; by this, there will be a round gutter, which at all times is
ready to receive and make a lodgement of all rains that shall fall, and will
sufficiently supply the fibrous roots with moisture as they gradually proceed
from the master-roots.

The dung or straw being placed between the two moulds, becomes a watering pot
to the root, and by the help of the uper mould, laid in a basin form, shelters
and shades the same, both from the sun and air's too violent influences.

There is another method which I have tried with success; I had a field that
was 40 poles or perches square, all round this field next to the fence I
planted with apple trees, at the distance of two perch asunder, and twenty feet
from the fence, so that I had eighty trees in one row, in the form of a square.
The middle of the field was plowed in general, and sowed with grain, the border
all round for forty feet was laid down with grass, so that the trees stood in
the middle of the grass plat. These trees bore abundantly; the cause of which I
imagine was by their having a free circulation of the air; and I had great
crops of grain in the middle of the field, from its not being shaded too much,
and by the trees fending off the cold winds.

To make a COMPOSITION for curing INJURIES and DEFECTS in TREES.
Take one bushel of fresh cow dung, half a bushel of lime rubbish of old
buildings (that from the ceilings is preferable) half a bushel of wood ashes,
and one gallon of pit or river sand. The three last articles are to be sifted
fine before they are mixed; then work them well with a spade, and then with a
wooden beater, until the stuff is very smooth, like fine plaster used for the
ceilings of rooms.

The composition being thus made, care must be taken to prepare the tree
properly for its application, by cutting away all the dead, decayed, and
injured part, till you come to the fresh found wood, leaving the surface of the
wood very smooth, and rounding off the edges of the bark, with a draw-knife, or
other instrument perfectly smooth, which must be particularly attended to; then
lay on the plaster about one eighth of an inch thick, all over the part where
the wood or bark has been so cut away, finishing off the edges as thin as
possible; then take a quantity of dry wood ashes, mixed with a sixth part of
the ashes of burnt bones, put it into a tin box with holes atop, and shake the
powder on the surface of the plaster, till the whole is covered with it, and
in half an hour shake on more, and rub it with your hand, and repeat it till
the whole surface is dry and smooth.

All trees cut down near the ground, should have the surface quite smooth and
rounding as before; and the powder as before should be mixed with an equal
quantity of powder of alibaster, as the growth of the tree will gradually
affect the plaster, by raising up its edges next to the bark, care must be
taken where that happens, to rub it over with the finger, that the plaster may
be kept whole to prevent the air and wet from penetrating into the wood. If any
of the composition is left, it should be put in a tub, and covered over with
urine.

DIRECTIONS for BREWING of BEER.
I would wish to introduce the drinking of beer in this country, for the common
drink; knowing by experience that it is the most wholesome beveradge made use
of; therefore recommend it to private families, to brew their own beer.

The high price beer is sold at by the brewers, may deter some from undertaking
it: thinking it may be very expensive; but I shall here lay down the expense,
which will satisfy them to the contrary.

If the farmers were to let their men have good beer, or ale, at hay and
harvest time, to drink instead of cider and spirits, they would be able to go
through double the labor, with half the fatigue to themselves. In order to
prepare for the breewing of beer, the utensils must first be procured, and
fixed. For those that can afford it, and would wish to have a handy and
complete brewhouse, I will give them a sketch of one, with the proper utensils
on a plan fit for family use.

First, the brew house should be erected on the northern side of your
buildings, for shade and coolness; the ground plan should be twenty feet, by
fifteen feet; three sides out of the four should be open, especially of the
upper part, to let in the free circulation of air: these open sides should have
brackets slanting downwards, to fix or nail battons on about three or four
inches wide, to keep out the wet. The copper, which at least should hold forty
gallons, should be fixed at the close end, with a chimney to go through the
roof. This copper should have a brass cock, and the copper should be set pretty
high. The mash ton should hold double the quantity of the copper, in order to
hold the malt, as well as the water; this ton should be circular, and largest
at the bottom, and should be so placed that the water from the copper may run
through a shute into the top of the mash ton. And underneath this mash ton,
there must be placed an underback, made in the same form of the mash ton, but
need not hold more than the copper, then there must be two coolers made square
and shallow, not above six inches deep, and placed one above the other; the top
of the highest must not be higher than the top of the copper, and each of them
must hold as much as the copper, and underneath, or near the coolers, must be
fixed a working ton, of the same form of the mash ton, and the same size; there
should be a false bottom to the mash ton, and a cock fixed below the false
bottom, to let the wort out into the underback; and in this underback should be
fixed a pump, to pump up the wort, back into the copper; then there is wanting
a mashing oar, pails, bowl, etc.

METHOD of BREWING BEER, or ALE, from MALT.
The process of brewing is as follows: a quantity of water being boiled in your
copper, is emptied into the mash tub; and as soon as the vapor is spent, the
malt is poured upon it; but it must not be stirred till the malt has settled
gradually, and the liquor, on pressing it down with the hand, appears above it,
then it must be stirred well and worked with the mash oar, for a quarter of an
hour, then cover it close with bags, etc. which must continue undisturbed for
half an hour; then draw the wort off into the underback, and put your quantity
of hops into it, which should be put into a large net. As soon as your water
boils again, empty it into the mash tub, which is to be stirred and w^^ked with
the mash oar for half an hour, and cover the top with fresh malt; then cover it
up with bags. etc, as before, when it must stand for an hour and an half before
it is let into the underback.

Observe, that as soon as the second copper of boiling water is emptied into
the mash tub, then the first wort mixed with hops must be returned into the
copper and boiled an hour for strong beer, if to be drank new; an hour, and an
half if to be kept some time; always taking care to make the wort boil
reasonably fast; for if it simmers long, it will waste more and ferment worse.

This first wort or strong beer when boiled enough is put into the upper
cooler, and from that let into the lower one. If it is in the summer, it must
be drawn off very cool into the working ton, but if it is in the winter, it
must be blood warm when you set it to work. The second wort is for table beer
and common drink, which is let into the underback, from that to the copper,
etc. the same as the strong beer; the same hops, with only a few fresh ones
will do for it.

When the wort is cool enough for the fat, a little yeast is mixed with a
sufficient quantity of warm wort to make it ferment in the hand bowl, and this
fermentation is put into the working tub, and when it has raised a thick yeast
or scum upon the wort in the fat, it should be mixed again with the hand-bo^l.
When it is sufficiently fermented in the fat, it must be put into your casks or
barrels, and there suffered to ferment a few days longer. After which the
vessels must be stopped close, and not opened till fit to drink.

Soft water is the best for brewing: rain water exceeds all others; therefore,
if it could be so contrived to have a back, what the brewers call a liquor
back, on the top of the brew house, and the rain water conveyed to it by
gutters from all parts of your house, you might save a sufficient stock; which
might be let into the copper by a pipe with a cock at the end, which would save
a great deal of labor.

The beer may be brewed to what strength you please. I have used six bushels of
malt to make one barrel of strong beer, and one barrel of middling; but the
strong beer, when I have kept it till it was two or three years old, has been
almost as strong as brandy. I have found that three bushels of good malt has
made me one barrel of strong beer, and one barrel of common, and was very good.

The quantity of hops to be used is according to their quality, and the time
you would wish to keep it. If the hops are good, and the beer is intended to be
drank new, two pounds will do for two barrels. If you would wish it to keep any
time, you must use four pounds; and if to be kept till it is old, six pounds of
hops to the two barrels of beer, will not be too much.

There are many who cannot afford to build a brew house, or to buy the utensils
as beforementioned; therefore I will endeavor to put them in a method to do it
at a small expense. A back kitchen or any outhouse, where a small copper can be
put up, will serve instead of a brew house; for if the copper is small, it is
only boiling it the oftener. Rum hogsheads may often be bought at the stores for
five shillings or a dollar a piece: four of those hogsheads properly cut, will
serve for all the utensils, for mash tub, underback, coolers and working tub;
then two bushels of malt, and two pounds of hops, will make two barrels of good
beer, if the first and second worts are mixed together.

To make CIDER keep, and be much stronger than common.
It is of great importance in making cider to have the fruit thoroughly ripe.
The juices of unripe fruit, retain their harsh, sour state in spite of all
endeavors, and never acquire that racy, mellow flavor, which the sun only can
bestow. It should therefore be the first care of every one concerned in making
cider, to let his apples hang on the trees, till they arrive at their full
maturity.

When your apples are fit for gathering (which should always be done by hand)
it is essential to choose dry weather for that purpose; for water is a bad
ingredient in all vinous liquors: one general rule for all fruits is to press
their juice for fermenting, when the fruit is in the greatest perfection for
eating.

Apples that have lain any time in heaps to sweat, are generally covered with a
clammy moisture; this should be wiped off, for it is a watery juice, which would
impoverish the cider; the rotten parts of the apples should all be cut out, for
they communicate to the cider a putrid taste.

In breaking of the apples, that engine is best, which least bruises the skin,
pulp, and kernels of the apple; because from an immoderate breaking of them in
some kinds of apples, there proceeds such an austerity and bitterness, as the
cider never can be cured of. In pressing of them, they should not be pressed
too near, and the pulp should be wrapped up in clean hair cloths, instead of
the common custom of this country, enclosing it with bands of straw, which
straw, when it has heated in the mow or stack, gives the cider a bad flavor.
And in order to avoid a great deal of trouble, and to perform the work more
effectually, by divesting the new made cider of what pummice and other
impurities which remain; after straining it through a hair sieve, on its coming
from the press, it is necessary to be provided with a large open vat, which
will contain a whole making, or as much as can be pressed in one day. After the
cider has remained in this vat a day, or some times less, according to the
ripeness of the fruit, of which it has been made, and the state of the weather,
you will find rise to the top, the pummice or grosser parts of the pulp, etc.
of the apples; and in a day or two more, at most, grow very thick; and when
little white bubbles or fermentations of the bigness of the top of your finger,
break through it, then presently draw it off through a cock or faucet hole,
within three inches of the bottom, that the lees may not be drawn off, but
quietly remain behind.

If the cider is not immediately drawn off, on the first appearance of these
white fermentations, all the head, which is then become a thick crust, will
sink to the bottom; so that, if this crisis, which happens but once of the
first separation of the cider from its lees is neglected, the opportunity of
making sweet cider will be lost and irrecoverable.

On drawing off the cider from the vat, it must be tunned into close casks well
scented, and a match burnt in them before the cider is put in.

To have cider perfectly sweet, after it is tunned into close casks, you are
again carefully to watch and observe its state, and when you find white bubbles
or fermentations as aforesaid, at the bung-hole, immediately rack it off again
into another clean and well scentted cask; after which most probable, it will
be March before it ferments again, when it must be racked off as before: and to
hinder its fermenting again, put a handful in each barrel, of powdered loam or
clay, and to strengthen and make it keep, put a quart of apple brandy into each
barrel; and every cask must be filled up to the bung, and closely bunged down.

To make CIDER STRONGER than the common method.
Take a cask of cider, or more, managed as before directed, and make a stand
for it in your garden, or any other place where it will be exposed to the
weather: before the frost sets in, let the cider be set on the stand, but not
filled full by two or three gallons, and when you find that all the aquae parts
are frozen, draw off the oily and spirituous part, and bottle it, putting two
or three raisin in each bottle, and you will find it excellent strong cider;
and you will not loose above one third of your cider: Indeed it cannot be
properly called so, as it is only the watery part of the cider that is lost.

A DESCRIPTION OF A DRILL MACHINE.
The use of this machine is for planting all sorts of grain, grasses, turnips,
etc. in equidistant rows.

It consists of a box in which the cilinders and hoppers are confined to keep
the grain, etc. dry, and that the wind should not affect the delivery, an
axle-tree goes through this box which is square, and the cilinders are fixed on
it, which is so contrived to slide off and on: for there is two sets of
cilinders, one set for the large sorts of grain, such as indian-corn, peace,
beans, etc. the other set for wheat, barley, oats, etc.

This axle-tree is worked by a pair of wheels, four feet in diameter, which
supports the box; and as the cilinders have holes cut in them to receive the
grain from the hoppers, the wheels turning round as it is drawn by the horses,
it drops from these holes, into tin funnels, that are placed underneath, that
goes to the back part of the iron coulters, which are hollow behind; those
coulters open a furrow to receive the grain which falls through the tin
funnels, whereby it is deposited regularly.

These coulters are put into a frame, which is fastened by two bolts and screws
that go through holes that are in the top of the coulters: so that these
coulters may be removed to any distance apart, from six inches, to four feet.
When at six inches, there are six coulters fixed in the frame; then it sows six
rows at a time; if at twelve inches, four coulters, and if at its utmost weadth
only two coulters.

The two wheels that work the machine are set at four feet, six inches apart,
and there are sharp iron spikes, fixed round the rim to keep it from slipping.
By this pair of wheels, and a small one before fixed in the frame two feet
diameter, this machine is worked. This small wheel's gudgeons goes into holes
in ears, which are fastened to the frame; these ears have four holes in them an
inch distant from each other; which raises and lowers the frame, whereby the
grain is deposited, from one inch to four inches deep into the ground. This
frame has two handles behind to turn the machine round at the land's end, so
that if the two wheels were taken from it, it would have the appearance of a
long wheel barrow with a high box fixed on it. There is a flap at the top of
the box, for the purpose of opening to put the seed into the hoppers: and
another flap before it, that is for the convenience of opening to get at the
works: there is a small harrow fixed with chains at the back part of the frame,
that follows the coulters and covers the seed. The two sets of cilinders as
mentioned before, consist of four and six; the four is for the large seed,
which never require the seed to be set nearer than twelve inches between the
rows; the six are for small grain or seed, and may be set as near as six inches
or at nine, twelve, etc. There are also two sets of hoppers made to fit each
set of cilinders, and at the back of those hoppers there are regulators with
brushes, that slide down on the cilinders, which are fixed to any height by
screws, which lets the seed through slow or fast, according as they are fixed,
by which means may be sown from half a bushel to three bushel of grain to an
acre.

The coulters are fixed on two bars in a triangular manner, which when set at
six inches, makes it twelve, which admits of stones, clods, and weeds, to go
through, which hinders them from clogging. Before the fore wheel, there is a
bar fixed in the frame with a hole in the center, this is for a pin to go
through to fix a whipple tree, for two horses to go a breast: likewise iron
rings at each end for chains, for one horse to draw it, or for two, one going
before the other.

DESCRIPTION of a RUNNING HOE.
This hoe is for cutting weeds between the drilled grain, and adding earth up
to the vegetables; if the ground is mellow, and free from stones, a man will
hoe a great deal with it in a day. The construction of it is some thing like a
breast plow, to shove on forward. The two corners are points, which extend out
about four inches more than the middle, it goes in a circular manner from the
corners to the middle, so that it forms a half circle; at the other end of the
hoe is a socket for putting in a wooden handle; in this part of the hoe, the
socket rises gradually up, in order to raise the handle to go against the
thighs, or breast, for shoveing it along; and at that part of the plate of the
hoe, next the handle or socket, is fixed a plate of iron, rising high in the
middle, and goes off to nothing at the sides, in the form of a half moon; this
throws up the mould on each side, and moulds up the grain, etc.

The edge being in a circular manner, collects the weeds and are in a manner
enclosed, and are more effectually destroyed than when the blades is square or
angular, and it works much easier.

The handle should be three feet six inches long, with the socket six inches,
makes it four feet; the end of the handle next the hoe should bend downwards to
raise the other end to its proper height; at the other end of the handle must
be a cross piece, and in the middle of this cross piece must be fixed a pad
stuffed, about one foot long, and at each end must be six inches left to lay
hold of with the hands, which will make this cross piece two feet long.

This hoe may be made of any breadth, according to the weadth of the alleys
between the grain, etc. if the rows are at six inches apart, the hoe must not
be above four inches; if at nine inches, the hoe must be six, and if twelve
inches, eight, and so in proportion.

FOR MAKING and PLAISHING of HEDGES.
This manner of fencing will be found a cheap and excellent method, and if
properly made will excel a post and rail fence, for no sort of cattle can go
through it, neither will they attempt to leap over it. On many plantations they
have not wood enough to make posts and rails for fencing, therefore are at a
great expense in purchasing of them. There are very few plantations but has
sufficent for hedging; and those that have not, may in a little time raise
enough, by sowing acorns, the haw, or beech, or planting of alder, willow,
poplar, etc. where the hedge, or hedge row is intended; for the largest wood
that is required, need not be above four or five inches in circumference.

The method of making this hedge or fence is as follows: first dig a trench or
ditch, three feet wide at top, which should be dug down in a sloping manner,
till it comes to two feet at bottom, and the ditch should be two feet deep,
where the ground will admit of its being dug so deep. There should be three or
four layers of turf laid upon one another on the top of the edge of the trench,
on that side you intend to make the hedge, and the mould that is dug out of the
ditch should be thrown up on the turf, to make a bank for the hedge; the turf
that is placed on the edge grows, and the roots of the turf extend themselves
into the bank, which prevents the frost in the winter from making it scarf in.

On the top of this bank, nine or ten inches from the edge, the hedge is made;
first cut the stakes five feet long, of any sort of wood, from two inches and a
half, to five inches in circumference. If the stakes exceed five feet in length
that will not signify, as the tops may be cut off to their proper length after
the hedge is finished. The bottom of those stakes should be cut sharp in a
three square manner. They should then be drove in the bank with a maul about
eighteen inches deep and not to exceed two feet apart between them; if they are
put in a straight line, they will look the better.

Then cut the eithers, which should be out of your longest and straitest poles,
and pretty stout, but not so stout as the stakes; these eithers are for putting
on the top in a wicker manner, to keep the brush in tight that is put between
the stakes.

In cutting out these stakes, and eithers, you will cut a good deal of brush,
which will all do for filling up; you must cut some more small brush, to have a
sufficient quantity. This brush should be twined in between the stakes in a
wicker manner as well as the eithers, that is before one stake, and behind the
next, and so on, and it should be pressed down tight. All the live wood that is
growing near the hedge, and can be lain down and trained to it, should be cut
about half off, and laid down in the hedge among the brush in a wicker manner
as before directed; and if there is any vines, twine them in the same manner:
all those will make fresh shoots, and grow up in the hedge, and strengthen and
make it more lasting.

This hedge will last six years, and by that time your wood where you cut, will
be grown up again, and will serve to make a new fence. The ditch on the side of
the fence, may be made to serve two purposes; for where the land is wet, and
wants draining, it will serve for that purpose, and carry off the water.

How to manage and fatten Cows, Oxen, Sheep, Hogs, Calves, and Lambs.
First cows, and oxen. Cows very much vary, not only in their make and shape,
but also in their bags or udders, which the buyer should have a particular
regard to: some have their leathers thick and fleshy, others thin and lainge.
The thick leathered one will often seem big, and give but little milk, and that
very hard to be got, when, a thinner one shall give much more, and be easily
milked; therefore when a person is master of a right cow, it concerns him to
keep her on; cows if well kept, will pay on an average about six pounds a year.
In the winter, when you cant get grass for your cows, give them turnips,
potatoes, grains, or malt dust; all of which are great breeders of milk; the
malt dust must be prepared as follows: to one cow put two quarts in a tub,
pouring boiling water on it, and so three times a day.

A cow in a middling case, that is fed with straw in the winter, need not have
hay above a month before she calves, for that she will give more milk than if
she had it longer; because the fatter the cow, the less the milk; and yet, if
too poor, it is dangerous, least she falls in calving; a heifer will spring
about three months before she calves, but a seven years old cow only three
weeks; as soon as she has calved, throw a handful of salt on each side of the
calf, which the cow will swallow, by licking of it; this will cause her to
glean speedily.

When a cow is bulled, as soon as it can be done, when she comes home, throw a
pail of cold water on her udder behind, and keep her up from any other that
night, because she will be apt to ride them, and so miss her bulling.

If you would fat a cow that has calved in the springtime, dry her the
beginning of August, and then she will get fat with the after-pasture. Bullocks
turned in to the pasture at the same time may be fatted. Cows and bullocks may
be fatted in the winter in stalls with turnips and oil cake; they should be
both chopped small. Let them have as many turnips as they will eat, and two
quarts of the oil cake twice a day; they should have a little good hay now and
then to brouze on.

Sheep, are a cattle that are kept at the least expense of any to the farmer,
and will thrive upon almost any ground, and for this reason they ought to be
prefered before the larger cattle. The best sort of sheep for fine wool are
those bred on high dry ground. The marshes or low lands breed larger sheep, but
their wool is not so good.

The farmer should always buy his sheep from a worse land than his own; they
should be big boned, and have a long greasy wool, curling close and well. Those
sheep always breed the finest wool, and are also the most approved of by the
butcher, or sale in the market.

For the choice of sheep to breed, the ram must be young, and his skin of the
same color with his wool, for the lambs will be of the same color with his
skin. He should have a large long body, a broad forehead, round and well
rising, large eyes and straight and short norstrils.

The polled sheep, that is those that have no horns are found to be the best
breeders. The ewe should have a broad back, a large bending neck, small, but
short, clean and nimble legs, and a thick deep wool covering her all over. To
know whether they be sound or not examine the wool, that none of it be wanting,
and see that the gums be red, the teeth white and even, and the brisket skin
red, the wool firm, the breath sweet, and the feet not hot. Two years old is
the best time for beginning to breed, and the first lambs should not be kept
too long to weaken them by suckling; but be sold as soon as conveniently may
be. They will breed advantageously till they are seven years old.

To know the age of a sheep, look in his mouth the same as in a horse's; when
he is one shear, he has two broad teeth before; when it is two shear it will
have four; when three, six; when four, eight; after this their mouth begins to
break.

As to the time of putting the rams to the ews, the farmer must consider at
what time of the spring his grass will be fit to maintain them and their lambs,
and whether he has turnips to do it till the grass comes; for very often both
the ewes and lambs are destroyed by the want of food. Many thousands of lambs
and many ewes are lost some winters in this country from the same cause. If the
lambs are only stunted in their growth by it, it is an accident that they never
recover. Numbers in my travels last winter and spring complained to me of their
losing their lambs daily. They said the ewe would not take to the lamb, or let
it suck, and that they never knew any thing like it. The reason was obvious to
me; the ewe was starved, therefore had no milk for her lamb, which was the
reason of her running from it, and taking no notice of her young.

The ewe goes twenty weeks with lamb, and according to this it is easy to
calculate the proper time you would have them to yean in.

Ewes that are big should be kept but bare, for it is very dangerous to them to
be fat at the time of their bringing forth their young. They should be well fed
indeed, like cows, a fortnight before hand, to put them in heart.

The method of fattening sheep and lambs on turnips you will find by turning
back to the account given of the turnip and penning of sheep. I have only to
add that there should be racks and mangers placed in the field that may be
easily moved; in the racks there should be some good upland hay, and in the
manger some grain. The tare or vetch is the best.

There is another method of fattening lambs, which is done in the house,
therefore it is called house lamb; it is more delicate than that fatted in the
field; which makes it fetch a greater price. This is done by suckling; the ewes
are brought into the house to them twice a day, perhaps two or three for each
lamb, that they may have their bellies full: they are fastened by their head,
that they cannot run from the lambs.

Sheep, as well as bullocks and cows, should frequently have salt given them,
which purifies the blood and keeps them in health.

Hogs are one of the most increasing and profitable species of animals that can
be kept on a farm, therefore deserve the husband-man's particular attention.
From experience I have found that swine prefer saintfoin and lucerne, to
clover; those grasses will fatten them with a small quantity of corn, peace, or
beans. Potatoes boiled in an iron pan, mixed with a small quantity of Indian,
pea, or bean meal, is a good fatner for them. Peace makes the meat of swine
sweeter and firmer than any other diet whatever. Pumpkins with a small quantity
of corn or grain, will likewise fatten them.

When they are fattening in pens, it is necessary twice or thrice a week to add
about three table spoons full of salt, to half a bushel pail full of food,
which assists digestion, consolidates their food, and increases their
appetites. About once a week, I have mixed two spoons full of madder, which
prevents obstructions, and on some other day in the week I give an equal
quantity of flowers of salt petre and sulphur well pounded and mixed; which
purifies and cools the blood; which entirely prevents the meazles, keeps the
swine extremely healthy, and fattens them more expeditiously.

Calves may be made very fat by the following method: The first week they
should not have their fill; but afterward as much as they will suck; at three
weeks or a month they should suck two cows; when they are five or six weeks
old, they should have three cows to suck.

The calf should be kept in a close pen, sheltered at much as possible from the
cold and the light, and have some clean wheaten straw every day to lay down on,
should have some powdered chalk, with some wheaten flour in a trough, and some
large pieces of chalk hung up for the calves to lick at pleasure, in order to
whiten their flesh, make them suck, and keep them from being laxative; and if
then they should scour, (which hinders their fattening) give them four ounces
of bole armonic, powdered and mixed with milk, through a horn.

Give them now and then some black pepper mixed with urine, to cause a drought,
that they may suck the more, and with bleeding them often, helps to fatten them
the sooner. Bleed them when a month old; at six weeks do the same again; and so
every week after you keep them, it whitens their flesh, and makes them fatter
with less milk. I have had calves by these means at seven weeks old has weighed
better than three hundred weight; which I have sold to the butcher for 7l. 15s.
sterling.

There are two ways of breeding calves that are intended to be reared: the one
is to let the calf run with its dam all the year round: this is the method in
the cheap breeding countries, and is generally allowed to make the best cattle.

The other way is to take them from the dam after they have sucked about a
fortnight, they are then to be taught to drink fleet milk which is to be made
but just warm for them, it being very dangerous to give it them too hot.

The best time for weaning of calves is from January to May; they should have
milk for twelve weeks after, and a fortnight before that is left off, water
should be mixed with the milk in larger and larger quantities. When the calf
has fed on milk about a month, little whisps of hay should be placed all about
him in cleft sticks to induce him to eat.

The latter end of April or beginning of May, they should be turned out to
grass only for a few days; they should be taken in for the night, and have milk
and water given them; the same may be also given them in a pail sometimes in
the field, till they are able to feed themselves, that they do not regard it.
The grass they are turned into must not be too rank, but short and sweet, that
they may like it and yet get it with some labor.

Calves should be always weaned at grass, for if it be done with hay and water,
they often grow big bellied on it, and are apt to rot. When those among the
males are selected which are to be kept as bulls, the rest should be gelded for
oxen: the sooner the better, twenty days old is a very good time.

BREEDING and FATTENING HORSES.
A horse is a most noble and useful animal; and in order to have a good and
beautiful race, it is necessary to choose for a stallion a fine barb, free from
hereditary infirmities; such as weak eyes, bad feet, spavins, pursiness and the
like. Disorders that arise from accidents are of no consequence, nor is the
horse to be at all the less valued for them as a stallion.

Three months before this horse is to cover a mare, he should be fed with found
oats, peace or beans, or with coarse bread, and a little hay, but a good
quantity of wheat-straw; he should be led out twice a day to water all this
time, and after every watering walked about an hour, but not over heated. If he
be not prepared and put in heart in this manner, the colts will be weakly, and
the horse himself will be spoiled, growing pursy and broken winded.

If he is put to too many mares, he will not last long; his mane and tail will
begin to fall off through weekness, and it will be difficult to get up his
flesh again by the next year. The number of mares should be proportioned to his
strength; and twelve, fifteen, or at most twenty, are as many as a horse will
well serve for in a season.

Mares go with foal eleven months and as many days over as they are years old.
This being certainly known, it is easy to contrive so that all your foals may
be brought forth at a time, when there is plenty of grass.

About the end of May the mares are to be put into an enclosure capable of
feeding them, as long as the stallion is to be with them, or that they are in
season. In this enclosure all the mares are to be put together, as well those
which are barren as others.

The stallion's hind shoes are to be taken off, but the fore shoes should be
left on to preserve his feet; then lead him forth and let him cover a mare
twice in hand, to render him more tame and gentle: after this, take off the
bridle, and turn him loose among the rest, where he will become familiar with
them, and not one of them will be horsed, but when they are in season.

There should be a little lodge built up in some part of the enclosure, and
corn, peace, beans, oats, bread, and other good food put into the manger in it,
that the horse may retire into it in the scorching heats, and eat what he likes
best. He must thus be entertained during the whole time he is with the mares,
which is to be about six or seven weeks.

Mares that are very fat and gross do not hold well; but those which are
moderately fat, conceive with the greatest success and ease.

To bring a mare in season, give her two quarts of hemp seed night and morning
for a week before she is brought to the horse. If she refuses it alone, it may
be mixed with oats, corn, beans, etc. and if the stallion eat of it also, it
will make him the better.

The stallion should not cover before he is six years old, nor after he is
fifteen. A mare should never be covered before she is three years old: they
should be always sound and healthful, and of a good breed: such as these will
bring forth better and finer foals than any others.

The colts produced from these should not be used as stallions, for they will
degenerate, and the race will soon become exactly the same as this country
breed. If a barb is not to be had, an English or Spanish Horse is to be chosen.

The first backing of a horse is a thing of great consequence, as his value
afterward very much depends on it. After a colt has been exercised some time
morning and evening, and becomes somewhat obedient, he is to be taken to some
plowed lands, the lighter the better; he must be made to trot over these in the
hand, by that means to tire him and abate his wantonness. When this is done,
care must be taken that all the tackling be good and firm, and every thing in
its due and proper place; then a person is to hold his head, and another to
mount him, but this must not be done suddenly, or at a jerk, but very gradually
and slowly, by several half-risings and heavings. If he bears this patiently,
the person is to seat himself firmly on his back; but, if he be troublesome and
not tamed enough, the person is to forbear the attempt to mount, and he is to
be trotted hard in the hand over the same plowed lands again, till he is
willing to receive the rider quietly on his back. When this is done, the person
who is on his back must cherish him, and the man who has his head must lead him
a few paces forward; then he is to be cherished again.

The feet are to be fitted well in the stirrups and the toes turned out;
afterward the rider is to shrink and move himself in the saddle, and the
person who holds his head is to withdraw his hand a little further from the
mouth.

As the rider moves his toes forward, the holder must move him forward with the
rein, till he is made to apprehend the rider's motion of body and foot, which
must always go together, and with spirit, and will go forward without the
other's assistance, and stay upon the restraint of the rider's hands. When this
is accomplished let him be cherished and have grass and bread to eat; and then
let the rider mount and alight several times, cherishing him between each time;
and thus he is to be managed till he will go on or stand still, at pleasure.
This being done, the long rein may be laid aside, and the band about his neck,
which are always used on this occasion, and nothing will be necessary but the
trenches and caveson, with the martingale. A groom must lead the way before; or
another horse, going only straight forwards, and making him stand still when
desired. In this manner, by sometimes following and sometimes going before
another horse on the trot, the creature will by degrees be brought to know that
it is his business to be quiet and governable.

FATTENING OF HORSES.
The being able to do this speedily requires some art, and indeed is one of the
greatest niceties of the whole management of that creature.

There is many methods; but the following may be most depended on: Take
elecampane, cimmon seed, tamarisk, and aniseed, of each two ounces, common
groundsel one handful. Boil all these very well, with two hands full of garlic
scraped and cleaned, in a gallon of good beer; strain the liquor well off, and
give the horse a quart of it every morning made hot; keep him warm after it.
After he has taken this for four or five mornings, he may be turned out to
grass, or kept in the house as the season will permit; but whenever provender
is given him, a quantity of a powder is to be prepared of equal parts of cummin
seeds and elecampane, and give him half an ounce of it every time, sprinkling
it in by degrees, as he eats, that he may not nauseate the whole.

If this method does not succeed in a short time, then take two spoons full of
diapente; brew it in a pint of sweet wine, and give it the horse for three
mornings. This will take off any inward sickness, and make the other things
take effect. After this, feed him with good provender three times a day: that
is, after his watering in the morning, after his watering in the evening, and
at nine o'clock at night. If he does not eat the provender well and freely, it
must be changed for some other kind.

If all this does not succeed, let the horse be blooded; and then take half a
bushel of coarse barley meal, put it into a pail full of water, and stir the
whole together very well, then let it settle by standing. Pour off the clear
liquor into another vessel, and let him drink it for his common drink, and eat
the remainder which falls to the bottom of the pail.

If he refuse to eat this alone, there may be some bran mixed among it. This
should be given him three times a day, morning, noon, and night. If he does not
rightly take to the meal with the bran, some oats must be mixed with it, and
this will readily bring him to feed on it; but which ever way is used, they
must be by degrees diminished in quantity, till at length he is brought to eat
the meal alone; for that is the thing that must fatten him up.

Care must be taken that the barley be fresh ground, for it quickly grows sour;
and when this has once been the case with one parcel, no art will ever bring
the horse to touch it afterward. Scarce any horse but will be fattened by
keeping him to this diet about twenty days. Barley cools and purges the
creature; but the greatest efficacy, as to the fattening him, lies in the
water, which by this management takes up all the rich part of the barley into
itself.

When the horse grows lusty on this diet, it must be taken from him by degrees;
giving him at first oats at once, and barley meal twice a day; and then oats
twice, and the barley meal once, till he is perfectly weaned from it. In the
mean time he must have good hay, and he must not be rid, only it will be proper
to walk him gently about an hour or two in the heat of the day.

If it be found that the horse wants a good smart purging during the time of
his continuing on the barley diet, the best time to give it him is after the
first eight days, and the following is a very proper sort of physic: take of
the finest aloes one ounce, agaric in powder half an ounce, and powder of
florentine orris one ounce. Let all these be mixed together, and put into a
quart of milk warm from the cow. This will work very briskly, and after it is
over, the usual diet is to be continued. Give him a pint of linseed, or half a
pint of linseed oil mixed with his feed now and then, which will keep him clear
from the botts, as well as the more speedily fatten him.

How to know the AGE of a HORSE.
This is known from his teeth, hoof, coat, tail, and ears. The first year he
has only small grinders and gatherers, of a brightish color, which are called
foal's teeth. The second year he changes his four foremost teeth, viz. two
above, and two below, and they appear browner and bigger than the rest. The
third year he changes the teeth next these, leaving no apparent foal's teeth
before, but two above and two below on each side, which are all bright and
small. The fourth year he changes the teeth next these, and leaves no more
foal's teeth before, but one above and one below on each side. The fifth year
his foremost teeth are all changed, and the tushes on each side are complete;
and those which succeed the last foal's teeth are hollow, with a small black
speck in the middle, which is called the mark in a horse's mouth, and continues
till he is eight years old. The sixth year there appears new tushes, near which
is visible some young flesh, at the bottom of the tush; the tushes being white,
small, short and sharp. The seventh year his teeth are at their full growth,
and the mark in his mouth appears very plain. At eight, all his teeth are full,
plain, and smooth, and the black mark but just discernable; the tushes looking
more yellow than ordinary. The ninth, his foremost teeth show longer, broader,
yellower, and fouler than before, the mark quite disappearing, and the tushes
bluntish. At ten, no holes are felt on the inside of the upper tushes, which
till then are easily felt. At eleven, his teeth are very long, yellow, black,
and foul, and stand directly opposite each other. At twelve, the teeth of his
upper jaw hang over those of his under. At thirteen, his tushes are worn almost
close to his chaps if he has been much ridden; otherwise they will be long,
black and foul.

With regard to the hoof: if it be smooth, moist, hollow, and well sounding, it
is a sign of youth; but if, on the contrary, it be rugged and as it were
covered with seams one above another, and withal, dry, foul and crusty, it is a
sign of old age. If a joint about the stern of the tail, near the buttock be
felt to stick out more than the rest by the bigness of a nut, you may conclude
him under ten, but if the joints are all smooth, he may be fifteen. If the eyes
are round, full, and, as it were starting from his head, having no pits over
them, but smooth and even with his temples, and free from wrinkles, both under
and above, it is a certain mark of his youth.

If the skin be taken up in any part between the finger and thumb; and being
let go, returns suddenly to its place, and remains without wrinkles, he may be
judged to be young. You may also judge of a horse's age by looking on his
palate; for if he is old, the roof of his mouth is lean and dry toward the
middle, and those ridges which in young horses are pretty high and plump,
diminish as they increase in age; so that in very old horses, the roof of the
mouth is nothing but skin and bone. This last is a very necessary remark
especially in mares, which seldom have any tushes to discover their age by.

DISEASES HORSES are subject to, with the METHOD of CURE.
As this noble animal is subject to many disorders, it is necessary every owner
should know how to treat them; therefore I shall give a short treatise on them,
with some approved receipts for their cure. I will arrange them alphabetically.

ANTICOR is a dangerous disease, proceeding from a fullness or inflammation of
the blood, occasioned by high feeding, without exercise, or by over hard riding.

In this disease the corrupt and inflamed blood raises a swelling in the middle
of the breast, just against the heart. Upon the first appearance of the
swelling, a large quantity of blood should be taken from the palate veins, or,
if they lie hid, from both sides of the neck. Then give to drink diapente with
beer, adding thereto one ounce of sugar candy, and half an ounce of treacle.
Anoint the swelling every day with a mixture of basilicon and hogs lard; and
when the swelling is soft, let out the pus or matter, washing it with copperas
water; then heal the sore in the common manner.

BOTTS are a species of worms which infest horses more in this country, than
any other. They have large heads and little tails, and generally breed in the
straight gut, near, the fundament: which if not destroyed, are the death of the
creature.

To prevent their breeding, give your horses in the spring and fall, one ounce
of powdered antimony and three ounces of the flour of brimstone, which will not
only prevent the botts breeding, but also purify their blood. And at times make
a decoction of spice wood: that is, cut the spice wood small, and boil it in
water, and the decoction or liquor mixed with the horse's feed, and now and
then a pint of flax-seed. By this method, your creatures will always be kept
healthy, and free from botts.

If the botts should have got ahead, and are troublesome to the horse, (which
may be known by his uneasiness and frisking of his tail) get one ounce of the
best indigo, and divide it into two doses; when powdered, give him one in the
morning and the other in the evening: or, get a handful of the leaves of
tobacco, and chop them small, and give it him in his feed.

The FARCIN proceeds from different causes; as from feeding on unwholesome hay,
corn, or grain; from too high feeding, without suitable exercise; from over
hard riding attended with sudden heats and colds; or from infection from
another horse. It is a kind of venom or corruption of the blood, that appears
in form of knots or cords along the veins, and by ulcers; these last are cured
with a red hot iron; and the former by bleeding, purging and proper exercise.

The best preparation for the Farcin is, to steep the regulus of antimony in
beer, with a little of the spice called the grains of pararadise, and a little
sugar; of which give a horse about half a pint at a time, three times a day,
with a day or two's intermission between each day.

The GLANDERS consists in a running of corrupt matter from the nose, being
first white, then yellow, green, and lastly black, when at its utmost
malignity. It procceeds from various causes; from infection, a disorder in the
lungs, spleen, liver and brain, and in its last stage from the spine, and hence
it is called the mourning of the chine.

In the first stage of this disease it may be easily cured, as its chief seat
is in a little, soft, spongy flesh which is easily dilated by the least influx
of blood. In the last stages there is no cure.

GRAVELLING is a disorder which traveling horses are liable to; when little
gravel stones get in between the hoof and the shoe, they settle to the quick,
and fret and fester the part. It is cured by pulling off the shoe, picking out
the gravel, and drawing the place to the quick, then stopping up the foot with
horse-grease and hot turpentine.

GALLING is very troublesome to the horse and rider on a journey, and the best
horses are most subject to it; so that it concerns every traveller that goes
long journies to prevent it, which may be done if the saddle fits well, and
take a hind's or deer's skin, well furnished with hair, and fit it neatly
beneath the panel of the saddle, so that the hairy side may be next to the
horse; this does not harden by sweat, but keeps the horse from galling. This is
also a method that should never be omitted with horses that are newly cured of
such a hurt, as it will prevent their falling into it again.

It is always proper to take off the saddle as soon as the horse is brought in,
and if in hot weather, to wash his back with cold water, and examine whether
the back be at all pressed, or pinched in any part: and it will be well to
examine it an hour after, to see what effect the standing has had; for often
the part hurt will not show it at first, but will swell violently afterward.
In this case, where the skin is not fretted, but a swelling comes on, a bag of
coarse cloth should be filled with horse-dung, and tied on the swelling, which
will not only prevent it from growing worse, but will take it quite down; or
rub the swelling with good brandy, laying on a paper soaked in it. If the skin
be broken, a mixture of red wine and sallad oil, is a good remedy.

The HAW is a gristle growing between the nether eyelid and the eye, which, if
not timely extirpated, will put the eye entirely out. It owes its origin to
tough phlegmatic humors, which falling from the head, and uniting together,
form, at last, this infirmity.

The method of cure is as follows: The creature is to be held fast by the head,
and a needle with a strong thread, is to be thrust through the upper eyelid,
and tied to his mane. Then the needle with a long thread, must be thrust
through the haw, and the skin cut round it with a sharp knife: the haw is
plucked out by means of the thread; after which the eye must be cleansed from
the blood, and washed with beer, with salt dissolved in it.

The hoof of a horse is liable to many infirmities, such as casting of the
hoof, hoof-bound, hoof-loosend, hoof-swelled, and brittle-hoofed.

Casting of the hoof, is when the whole coffin of the hoof becomes loosened,
and falls off from the bone. This arises from some prick, stub, foundering,
surbating, etc. that causes an imposthumation in the foot, whereby the hoof,
and sometimes the coffin-bone, being spungy, falls off in large pieces.

Hoof-bound is the shrinking in of the hoof a-top and at the heel, which makes
the skin grow over it. It is caused by keeping a horse too dry in the stable,
straight-shoeing, or some unnatural heat after foundering.

Hoof-loosened, is a dividing of the horn of a horse's hoof from the flesh, at
the setting on of the coronet. If the parting be round about the coronet, it
comes by foundering; if in part, then by a prick, quitter-bone, gravelling, etc.

Hoof-swelled, is an infirmity that befalls young horses, when over ridden, or
wrought hard, which makes the hoof swell, by reason of the blood falling down
and settling there; which, if not speedily removed, begets a wet spavin.

The brittle-hoof comes sometimes naturally, and sometimes artificially. When
it comes naturally, it is generally hereditary, the sire or dam having had the
same complaint. When it comes on accidentally, it is sometimes owing to a
distemper falling down into the feet; and sometimes to the creature's being
much foundered. The hoof, in this distember, is so friable and rotten, as it
were, that it cracks and flakes off on every slight occasion. The cure in these
several disorders is as follows: take bees wax, refined turpentine, suet, and
hogs lard, of each four ounces; sallad oil a quarter of a pint, and of dog's
grease, half a pound; let the whole be melted together and strained through a
piece of canvass into a gallipot. The hoof is to be thoroughly anointed with
this every day, morning and evening, especially at the root; and, if there are
any large cracks, they must be filled up at every dressing, with a mixture of
equal parts of cows-dung and hogs lard.

The LAMPERS is a swelling in a horse's palate, that hinders the creature from
feeding, and makes him let his oats or corn fall half chewed out of his mouth.
It arises from abundance of blood resorting to the first furrow of the mouth,
and from heat, etc. The cure is by burning it with a red hot iron, and
afterward anointing the place with olive oil.

The SPAVIN is a disease of which there are four kinds: two of them are seated
on the inside at the bottom of the ham. The other two on the inside of the hoof
under the joint. The two former is called the ox and dry spavin, and the two
latter is called the bloody or wet spavin, and the bone spavin. The ox spavin
is a callous tumor hard as a bone, and very painful. The dry spavin is more
easily perceived by the horses raising one of his hind legs, with a twich,
higher than the other. The blood spavin is a soft tumor which grows through a
horse's hoof, and is usually full of blood. The bone spavin is a crusty
substance growing on the inside of the hoof under the joint. The ox and dry
spavin is occasioned by a kick or some hurt, and the blood and bone spavin, by
some infirmity in the hoof. The method of cure is by blistering the part, and
if that does not cure it, firing is the only resource left.

The STAVERS or STAGGERS is a giddiness in a horse's head, which ends in
madness. The signs of it are dimness of sight, reeling and staggering, watery
eyes, etc. at length for every pain he beats his head against the wall, thrusts
it into the litter, rises and lies down with fury, etc. The method of cure is
as follows; the creature is first to be blooded largely, then a glyster is to
be given him, composed of two quarts of emetic wine, and four ounces of the
unguentum popalneum. When he has reposed an hour or two after voiding the
glyster, let another be given him, made of two ounces of the scoriae of the
liver of antimony finely powdered, boiled a little while in five pints of beer,
and with the addition of four ounces of the same ointment, or of ointment of
roses. This last glyster is to be frequently repeated, and his legs to be all
the while rubbed strongly with wisps of hay, wetted in warm water, to make a
revulsion. His food should be bran and white bread, and he should be walked
from time to time in some temperate place. If these methods do not succeed, let
an ounce of venice treacle be dissolved in a quart of some cordial waters, and
given him; and, after this, let the following glyster be given warm: take
venice treacle and salpoly crestum, of each two ounces; dissolve them in two
quarts of a decoction of mallows and camomile flowers; add a quarter of a pint
of oil of rice. This repeated two or three times after bleeding, and the other
methods, will often cure the worst stages of this disease.

WIND-GALL are bladders full of corrupt jelly, which, when let out, is thick,
and of the color of the yolk of an egg. They vary in size, but are more
usually small than large. Their place is about the fetlock joint, and are often
so painful, especially in the summer season, when the weather is hot, and the
ground dry and hard, that they make the creature frequently stumble, or fall
absolutely down. The wind galls that are situated near the sinews, are much the
most painful of all, and soonest make the horse lame. The general cause of
wind-galls is extreme work, or violent exercise in very hot weather, and those
horses which have long joints are most subject to wind-galls.

The method of cure is to open the swelling about the length of a bean, and to
press out the jelly: when this is done, apply a mixture of the oil of bays and
the white of an egg, covering it with tow. Another method is, after the jelly
is all squeezed out, to wrap round the part a woolen cloth, then applying a hot
iron; this is to be rubbed over till all the moisture is carried away; it is
then to be daubed all over with pitch, mastick, and resin boiled together,
laying tow in plenty over all.

The roweling of horses is a method of cure frequently had recourse to in
inward strains, as well as those about the shoulders and hips, as also for hard
swellings not easily to be resolved. I shall therefore give proper directions
for rowelling. The operation is thus: a little slit being made through the
skin, about a hand's breadth below the part aggrieved, big enough to put a
turkey's quill in. The skin is raised from the flesh, the end of the quill put
in, and the skin blown from the flesh upwards, and all over the shoulder. Then
the hole being stopped with the finger, the place blown is beaten with a small
stick, and the wind spread with the hand all over, then let go. This done,
horse hair, or red sarsenet, half the thickness of the little finger, is put in
a roweling needle, seven or eight inches long; the needle is put into the hole,
and drawn through again six or seven inches higher; then the needle is drawn
out, and the two ends of the rowel tied together, anointing it every day, as
well as before the putting it in, with fresh butter and hogs grease and drawing
it backwards and forwards in the skin, to make the putrid matter discharge
itself more plentifully.

Horse balls is a cordial medicine, administered in the form of balls, of great
virtue for feeding and strengthening sound, as well as healing and raising
unsound horses -- the preparation is as follows: take anniseeds, carthamus,
elicampane, cimmon seed, and tamarisk, of each an equal quantity, wrought into
a stiff paste, and thence formed into balls -- They are cleansing and
emollient, efficacious in colds, surfeits, and hard labor, and especially
useful where any of the chief viscera are decayed: nothing raising a lean
creature so soon, being partly food, and partly physic.

Chewing balls, are those which the horse is to keep champing, or masticating
in his mouth, a considerable time, without swallowing. These are chiefly used
for a lost appetite, a thing very incidental to horses. The preparation for
these balls is this: take liver of antimony, and of assafoetida, of each one
pound; wood of the bay tree, and juniper wood, each half a pound, pellitory of
Spain, two ounces: let all these be powdered together, then add as much fine
grape verjuice as is necessary to make the whole into a paste. This is to be
formed into balls of about an ounce and half in weight, which are to be dried
in the sun.

These are the chewing balls, and are to be used one at a time in the following
manner: the ball is to be wrapped up in a linen rag, and a thread is to be
fastened to this, in such manner that it may be tied to the bit of the bridle,
and kept in the mouth: when the bridle is taken off, the horse will immediately
eat, and, when one ball is consumed, another is to be tied up, and put in its
place, till the intent is answered.

DISEASES CATTLE are subject to, with the METHOD of CURE.
For a cow that strains in calving, when her calf haulm, udder, or bag will
come down and swell, as much as a blown bladder. Take new milk and strew
thereon lin-seed bruised to powder, put it up with your hand, and let her
hinder part stand higher for two or three days, than her forepart.

For a cow, who, by lying on the earth and two soon drinking cold water after
calving, her calf-haulm swells, and lies over the neck of the bladder, stopping
the urine that she cannot stale, or stand on her feet. Take two sacks, and put
them under her body, fasten ropes to the ends, and put them over the beam of
the barn, and draw her up, that she cannot touch the ground with her feet; then
let a woman anoint her hand with hogs lard, and work the calf's haulm from the
bladder, that the water may have a passage, give her warm bedding, warm drinks,
and warm cloths.

For a cow that cannot glean -- Take germander and pennyoyal, a large handful
of each, half an ounce of ginger, and one dram of saffron, boiled in three
pints of beer; strain it, and when cooled, give it her to drink.

For a cow that pisses blood -- Take oak, shave off the outer bark, and boil it
in spring water till it be red; also comfrey, shepherd's purse, plantain, sage,
green hemp or nettles, of each a good handful, and boil them with the bark;
strain it, and put a handful of salt into the water; also, some alum, bole
ammoniac and chalk. If the beast is weak, give only a quart lukewarm; but if
strong, more; once given often serves, but twice will surely cure.

For the black or red water in cows; a distemper next to the pissing of blood
-- Take a piece of iron, heat it hot in the fire, and put it into two quarts of
milk; after let the milk cool, and give it the beast blood warm, and it will
bind up the bloody issue, after two or three times giving.

For the blain in cows -- When first taken, they will stare, and foam with
their tongues out of their mouths; then immediately prick her in the nose, or
bleed her in the neck, which will keep her alive twenty-four hours; then take a
handful of salt in about a pint of water, and give it her, then directly ram a
whole egg down her throat. Sometimes they have it behind, under their tail,
when a blister will appear; this is cured by running a hand down her fundament
close fingered, and brought wide out; which breaks the blain within; if not
discovered presently, it kills them in half an hour sometimes.

To cure swellings, or snarled bags of cows. -- Take rue, and adder's-tongue,
stamp them together, and squeeze out the juice; this mix with a pound of
fresh-butter from the churn, without salt, and make it into an ointment; of
which anoint the part affected.

The rot in sheep is the greatest misfortune belonging to them. It is caused by
too much moisture, by water and snows, which by their weight and dissolution,
mix and wash the grass in with the earth, and so cause a froth or scum, which
the sheep, through hunger and novelty, greedily devour, to their destruction;
it is also occasioned, in the spring or summer, by a putrefaction in the air or
grass, especially in the valleys and marshes, and is known, oftentimes by the
cobwebs on the ground, and hedges, which hold a wet, or moisture, and are of a
poisonous nature. These cause a corruption in the blood, which breed plaises in
the liver and head: this plaise is a live worm, about the breadth of one's
finger-nail, and feeds and preys on these parts.

I have opened sheep that have died with the rot, and found the liver all
consumed by these worms.

I had a weather sheep took with a giddiness, which increased so that it could
not stand: I immediately knocked off that horn that lay next the ground, and
there appeared a small bladder, like that of a fish, which I took out, and put
a little wool in the place, dipped in tar, and sewed it up, and the sheep did
well afterward.

Rotten sheep will, in the beginning of the rot, fatten sooner than sound ones;
and the way to know if they are sound, is to feel the cod of the weather, and
between the legs of the ewe; if they are moist and wet they are sound: but if
there is a dry wax or scurf, they are rotten. Also if the innermost part of the
eye has streaks of red, it is a sign of soundness. Also if the gums are red,
they are sound; for the gums and mouth of a rotten sheep are always white.

When the cause of distempers are known, remedies are more easily prescribed. I
have before shown that the cause of the rot is occasioned by too much moisture,
and their devouring those cobwebs that appear early in the morning.

If the sheep was not turned into those places till nine or ten o'clock, the
sun by that time will have exaled or dried up this moisture which contains this
poisonous quality, so that the sheep will not receive any injury; and as a
preventative, give them frequently some good hay, oats, or other grain, and
salt two or three times a week. If you find the rot has begun, remove them if
you can conveniently to some high dry ground, that will often knit and recover
them.

To prevent and cure a rotten sheep, that is not too far gone. -- Take bay
salt, and stamp it well, and after the sheep has fed a day or two on clean, dry
oats, put some of it among them, and after that a greater quantity, till such
time as they dislike it; then give them clean oats a day or two, and, after
that, serve them with the salt as before: this course being followed, until
their eyes have recovered their natural color, they will be perfectly cured.

Another receipt which I seldom found to fail, is the regulus of antimony sold
at the chemists or apothecaries. This regulus of antimony is a universal remedy
for most disseases in men and beasts; it is a chemical preparation, made with
crude antimony, nitre, and tartar, and should be corrected with spice and
sugar. I have before mentioned it for the cure of the farcin or farcy in
horses. Take this regulus of antimony, and steep it in beer, with a little of
the spice called grains of paradise, and a little sugar; give it two or three
times, with a day or two's intermission between each time. To a sheep, about
two or three ounces at a time. This must be done in time, before the liver is
too much knotted, and that may be partly known, by killing one, by which a
judgment may be made of the rest.

Another receipt to prevent the rot in sheep. Take a peck of malt and mash it,
the same as you brew it into beer, and make about ten gallons of liquor: then
boil in this liquor, a good quantity of herbs, such as shepherds-purse,
comfrey, sage, plantain, pennyroyal, wormwood and bloodwort, of each a good
quantity, and boil them in the said liquor very well; then strain them and put
a little yeast therein; and after that put a peck of salt, and tun, and put it
up in a vessel. Then give it your sheep in the spring or fall in wet weather;
seven or eight spoonfuls apiece once every week. If the weather is dry, you
need not give it them so often. If you give them now and then a lick of tar
mixed with herb-de-grace chopped, it will cleanse the bowels of much
corruption, and be healthful to the blood.

For the skit or looseness in sheep -- Take salt, alum and chalk, and give it
in small drink or water, and it will knit and help them presently.

By frequently seeing my sheep in the pen collect together in a circular
manner, with their heads or noses close to one another, made me make
observations to know what could be the reason. I have seen large flies about
the heads of the sheep, and their attention or direction seemed to be at the
nose of the sheep, which was the cause of the sheep huddling so close together
to prevent them. This female fly, when she has been impregnated by the male,
knows that the nose of a sheep is the only place for her to deposit her eggs,
in order to their coming to good. The frontal sinuses above the nose in sheep
are the places where these worms live and attain their full growth. These
sinuses are always full of a soft white matter, which furnishes these worms
with a proper nourishment, and are sufficiently large for their habitation; and
when they have here acquired their destined growth, and come to the state in
which they are fit to undergo their changes for the fly-state, they leave their
old habitation, and falling to the earth, bury themselves there; when these are
hatched into flies.

The head of a sheep makes a good dish: but these live worms found in the head,
(which is mistaken by many for maggots) has brought that part of the sheep into
disrepute. I happily found a remedy which prevented the fly from laying her
eggs; which was mixing flour of brimstone with salt, and giving it frequently
to the sheep to lick. The fumes of the brimstone ascending into that part of
the head made it noxious to the fly. My sheep afterward fattened much sooner;
for the worms plagued them much by tickling the part, which might be seen by
the sheeps uneasiness, and frequently shaking their heads.

To cure the scab or itch, all maggots, and worm in the claw. Let the sheep
blood in the eye veins. Take tar and hogs lard of each a like quantity, mix
them well together with some flour of brimstone and the juice of cherville;
bring it to a salve, and with the same (after you have bared, cleansed, and
made all the sore places raw) anoint all the grieved places.

To cure broken bones, or bones out of joint. After you have placed the member
right (which you may do by the example of the sound member) bathe the grieved
place well with butter and beer; then make a sear-cloth of patch-grease and
yellow wax, and warming it very hot, lap it about the member, and if need
require, splinter it; and in case the member be broken, renew it not till
fifteen days be past, otherwise once in three days.

To cure griefs in the mouth, and looseness of teeth. Let the sheep blood in
the gums, then take of earth, sage, and salt of each an equal quantity, beat
them well together, and with the same rub the mouth of the sheep very well, but
especially where it is grieved.

To rear weak lambs, and cure lambs that are yeaned sick. Take up the lamb, and
breathe into the mouth thereof. Then put it to its mother's tits; if the ewe
has no milk, or the lamb has not strength to suck, feed it with mare's milk and
a little water mixed together made lukewarm, and in any case during the
sickness, or weakness, keep it very warm; for that is the greatest nourishment
that can be given, and agrees the best.

TO MAKE CHEESE.
The English method is as follows. To let the runnet be prepared by soaking the
calve's bag in cold water and salting it enough to keep it sweet -- To the
milk, first made blood warm, add enough of this to turn the milk into a curd in
half an hour. Which quantity will soon be found by experience; then heat it as
hot as you can well bear your hand in it; and having strained the whey well
from it, break or chop the curd to pieces; and to every five pounds of cheese
put a teaspoonful of refined salt petre, and a large spoonful of common salt.
Experience will soon teach you how much milk or curd will produce five pounds
of cheese. It must now be put into the press, which you may have of any size
from ten pounds to eighty: the cheese must be turned within an hour after it is
first put in, and kept in the press two days. Turn it twice the first day, and
once the last. They should while drying be kept in a dark room, or some other
place where the flies cannot come; they should be turned on the drying shelf
once every day. If any crack come in them when drying, let them be filled with
paste, made of butter and flour, to keep the flies from coming at them, if any
should get into the room.

A new method to make BUTTER from St. Foine Grass.
In the first place the land where you intend for sowing of this grass must be
prepared for its reception, by bringing it into a very fine tilth, and cleaning
it well from all sorts of weeds: for weeds will soon choke and kill the young
plants. This grass will grow on the driest land you have: wet lands, as I have
before observed, on the cultivation of this valuable grass, will rot the roots
and kill it.

The time required for preparing the land, and before it comes to its proper
perfection, will be three years; for it must not be cut the first year. This
will give you time to erect your dairy and collect a stock. For the proper
cultivation of it, I refer the reader to my description of that grass.

To know the quantity of land sufficient for your stock. Observe the worst acre
of twenty, which quantity of land is most suitable for this purpose, improved
by this grass, will very well maintain four cows from the first of May to the
first of December, and afford, besides a sufficient store of hay, to make good
part of their subsistence the other four months. Nothing is so sweet, nothing
so innocent, as this St. Foine; but above all, it is observed to increase milk,
in quantity and quality, beyond any grass yet known in the whole world; and it
is for this reason that I advise you to keep cows upon it, and make you a
dairy. A small plantation of thirty acres, improved by this grass, will be
sufficient for a hundred cows.

These cows should be fresh, or new milch ones. The cows will keep fresh for
twelve months, when they should be sold, and fresh ones bought in their room;
-- this may be done with very little loss, if any. I have frequently sold them
for more than what I have bought a fresh one for, as they have been fat and fit
for the butcher; you will find it will be to your advantage to have no bulls.

For one hundred cows, you must erect two sheds rising sufficiently in the
middle to carry off the water; the height in the middle may be twelve feet, and
the sides seven feet, and the breadth thirty feet; each of the sheds should be
one hundred and twenty-five feet long; and under the highest part, directly in
the middle, must be a partition, which will support the ridge of the roof; on
either side of the partition, let there be fixed a rack like those in stables,
which is to run the whole length of the shed, and must be placed as high as a
cow can reach her fodder from. The shed must next be divided into stalls of
five feet broad; the length of these stalls must be exactly fitted to that of a
cow, that a cross bar being placed at the outer end, may keep the beast from
running backward.

Thus each shed will hold fifty cows, five and twenty on each side of the
partition; to each of these sheds you must appoint a man whose business will be
to clear the place, and carry off the dung; as also to mow the St. Foine every
day, and give it to the cows in the racks before mentioned. This man beginning
at one end of his proportion of ground, and going gradually on to the other;
the first place will always be fit to mow again by that time he has gone
through the whole.

Your cows will be thus fed at discretion, with neither too much nor too
little, and they will not be so much pestured with the scorching heats, or the
stinging flies, which in open pastures, often makes them whisk about, and
trample down more grass than they eat.

Your dairys must be erected in the center of these sheds, that it may have a
communication at the end of each shed, or cow house.

The dairy must be the same breadth of the cow houses, and thirty feet long,
and ten feet high, which is to be divided the cross-way by a partition, which
will make two separate dairy's, whose dimensions will be thirty by fifteen
feet, and must be paved with brick, stone or tiles: each dairy will require two
dairy maids.

All along both sides of the partition, at about a foot above the ground, let
there be fixed, close to the wall, a strong pipe of lead, a little less than an
inch diameter; both which pipes, being somewhat raised exactly in the middle of
the shed, must have a gentle and almost an invissible descent from that raising
to the dairies, through the wall of which their nether ends are to be brought,
and there wrought into one another, that whatever descends through them, into
either of the dairies, may have issue but at one mouth. This mouth of the
pipes, must be made very small, and neatly fitted into the hollow end of a
strong wooden axle-tree; which, whilst it is turning swiftly round the mouth of
the pipe, may by no means strain by the motion, but receive, into its own
hollow, the milk which descends through the leaden pipes, without spilling any,
and passes so far through a wheel, or vessel like a barrel, only much larger in
its circumference. The axle-tree which this vessel is to turn upon, is bored
very full of round holes, through which it delivers the milk into the vessel,
as fast as it receives it from the pipe.

The vessel must be capable of containing* at least three times the quantity of
milk, which it is designed to receive; and there must be six wings, or thin
pieces of wood, glued on edgeways to the wooden axle-tree, whose length and
breadth, must be so contrived, as to leave a free space of six inches at either
end of the axle-tree, and a foot between their edges lengthways, and the smooth
inside of the vessel; in the most convenient part of which, must be contrived a
door, to open and shut down upon occasion, as closely as if there was none.
This door will perform its work very neatly, if you line the inside and edges
with some kind of cloth, which is commonly used in the pressing of cheese.

The other solid end of the axle-tree must extend itself above five feet
longer; and the whole length may be supported by square wooden posts, and turn
in their tops, which are to be made hollow, and kept greased for that purpose.
This end of the axle-tree is to be fastened into a wheel, exactly like those
which are used in many places for roasting of meat. The diameter of this last
wheel must be within six inches of the height of the dairy, and two large dogs,
being put into it at a time, will turn it with extraordinary swiftness; which
will bring the butter in a short time.

The dogs will be easily taught, and will at last take delight in the exercise.
I have seen a large buck, brought to the practice of this labor, and it was
wonderful to see the force he would run round, for an hour or two together.
This wheel must be hollow, properly enclosed, with a door for the dogs to go in
and come out, and it must be made as light as it possibly can, for it to hold
together.

I have but one thing more to say, and shall finish this direction; pretty near
that side of every stall in your shed, to which the maid must come to milk the
cow that belongs to it, let a hole, as small as will serve the occasion, be
contrived by your plumber, in the uppermost part of the leaden pipe, to shut
and open with a little screw, which screw, for fear of looosing it, may be
fastened by a little iron chain to the body of the pipe.

I have endeavored in the description of all this, to make my meaning as plain
as possible; If you do not comprehend it at first, you will after two or three
times reading, and considering it.

The author having more room than he first imagined, is willing to introduce
something useful, and being of opinion that many foreign shrubs and plants,
might be easily imported into this country, and that the introduction of which,
would be attended with very great profits to the planter; and the advantage
that may be derived to the commonwealth from their introduction, increase and
culture, must appear sufficiently obvious, when we consider the enormous
expense we are at, in purchasing foreign wines, drugs, dye stuffs, etc. The
many advantages we have more than any other country, having such a diversity of
climate, of soil, and of situation, leaves not a doubt, but they may be
cultivated here, to as great an advantage, as they are in their own native
soil, and climate.

I regret in not having room to treat on all of them, that is useful; but as
that would swell my treatise far beyond its limits, I must defer the remainder,
to my next edition; contenting myself with a few of those that rank first;
therefore shall first begin with the vine.

VINEYARD.
The best situation for a vineyard is on the declivity of a hill lying to the
South: and the soil most suitable, is the hottest gravel, sand, or dry rocky
ground, provided it be well watered and shaded. To mend a soil that wants those
qualities, it is good to throw in the rubbish of old buildings, well mixed with
twice as much earth, and sifted about the roots of the vines. The vines most
suitable for the midling or colder climates are the white Muscadine, the
Burgundy, the Claret, the Parsley, the Muscadine, the white and red Frontigniac,
and the Arbois, or French sweet water grapes. The southern climates will
produce all the rest as well as those.

The vine is propagated by slips, layers, or cuttings. If you propagate them by
cuttings, let such be chosen as are strong, and well ripened shoots, of the
last year's growth, and should be cut in the fall of the year, from an old
vine, just below the place where they were produced, taking a knot of the two
years wood, which should be pruned smooth. The upper part of the shoot must be
cut off, so as to leave the cutting about sixteen inches long. If for
exportation the lower parts of these cuttings must be put in mould in a tub and
should be kept in some part of the ship till their arrival where the air could
be admitted to them. If cut for a new plantation, in the same place these
cuttings are to be placed, with their lower part in the ground in a dry place,
laying some litter about their roots to prevent them from drying. In this place
they should remain to the beginning of April, which is the time to plant them.
They are then to be taken up and wiped clean, and their lower parts to stand in
water six or eight hours. Then having prepared your ground to receive them.
They are to be planted in lines running North and South, five or six feet a
part; only two vines in each hole. You must have spare ones in your nursery, to
make good them that miss; those you have planted must be kept clean from weeds.
The fall following, if the cuttings have produced strong shoots, they should be
pruned down to two eyes. In the spring following the ground is carefully to be
dug up about the shoots, and the stalks to be earthed up to the first eye.
During the summer all the lateral shoots must be rubbed off as they appear, and
only the two from the two eyes, which were left must be encouraged; these as
they grow, must be supported, with stakes and laths in the manner of an
espalier; and in the middle of July these must be shortened by nipping off
their tops, and this will greatly strengthen the shoots. In the following fall
these should be pruned, leaving them each three eyes, if they are strong, but
if they are weakly, only two. The next summer there will be two shoots from
each shoot of last year's wood; but if there should be two from one eye, which
is sometimes the case, then the weaker is to be rubbed off. At midsumer the
ends of the shoots are to be picked off, as before; all the weak lateral
shoots, are to be displaced, as in the preceding summer; and the whole
management is to be the same.

If, notwithstanding due pruning, they do not seem inclinable to bear large
bunches, the ground must be helped with a dressing from the compost heap, with
an equal quantity of drift or other sand. Thus managed, a vineyard in five or
six years will produce a good store of grapes.

A vineyard at Bath, in Great Britain, containing about six acres of ground,
planted with white muscadine and black cluster grapes, by such management as
before mentioned, has produced or yielded sixty hogsheads of wine at a vintage;
as good wine, and as fine flavored as any ever imported.

As to the management of grown vines, it is to be observed, that these rarely
produce any bearing shoots, from wood that is more than a year old, the great
care must therefore be, always to have plenty of this wood in every part of the
tree.

The bearing shoots for the following year, should be left at the pruning with
four eyes each. The under one of these does not bear, and consequently there
are only three which do. Many leave more eyes on the shoots, that they may have
the more fruit, which is the consequence; but then the fruit is much poorer;
and this is so well known in the wine countries, that there are laws to direct,
that no more than such a number of eyes are to be left on each shoot, for the
grapes would else be of a poor juice, and destroy the reputation of the wine.

Each of the three eyes left, will produce two or three branches; so that each
shoot will produce six of nine bunches, which is as much as it can bring to any
perfection.

These shoots must be laid in at about eighteen inches asunder on the espalier;
for if they are closer, when the side shoots are produced, there will be no
room to train them in against the espalier: and the largeness of the leaves of
the vine, requires also that the shoots should be at a proportionable distance.

The best season for pruning vines is in October. The cut is always to be made
just above the eye, and sloped backwards from it, that if it bleed, the juice
may not run upon the bud; and where there is an opportunity of cutting down
some young shoots to two eyes, to produce vigorous shoots for the next year's
bearing, it should always be done.

In May, when the vines are shooting, they should be looked over, and all the
shoots from the old wood rubbed off, and also the weaker, whenever there are
two produced from one eye. -- During the month of May, the branches must be
fastened to the espaliers, with withes or bass, as they shoot; and toward the
latter end of the month, the ends of the bearing branches should be nipped off,
which will greatly strengthen the fruit. Those, however, which are to bear the
next year, should not be topped before the beginning of July.

WINE.
The difference of flavor, taste, color, and body, in wines, is as much owing
to the different manner and time of pressing, gathering, etc. the grape, as to
any difference of the grape itself.

In Hungary, whence tockay and some of the richest and highest flavored wines
come, they are extremely curious in these respects. For their prime and most
delicate wines, the grape is suffered to continue upon the vine, till it is
half dried by the heat of the sun; and if the sun's heat should not prove
sufficient, they are dried by the gentle heat of a furnace, and then picked one
by one from the stalks. The juice of this grape, when pressed out, is of a fine
flavor, and sweet as sugar; this, after due fermentation, is kept for a year,
and then racked from the lees, when it proves a generous, oily, rich wine, and
is sold at a very high rate.

The Hungarians prepare a second sort of wine, by collecting together the
better kind of grapes, carefully picking the grapes from the stalks, and then
pressing out the juice. -- This is extremely sweet, and is made richer by
infusing in it after it has fermented some days a sufficient quantity of
half-dried grapes. This wine is very sweet, oily, and of a grateful taste, and
retains these qualities for a long time. There is a third sort made from the
pure juice of the same kind of grape, without any addition. This is a more
brisk and lively wine, and far less sweet.

They likewise prepare a fourth sort, from grapes of different goodness mixed
together; this, though not so generous, is nevertheless an excellent wine. --
These Hungarian wines are remarkable for preserving their sweetness, and for
the delicacy of their taste, and smell; they likewise do not grow easily vapid,
and may be kept in perfection for many years.

RAISINS.
Raisins are the fruit of the vine suffered to remain on the tree till
perfectly ripened, and then dried, either in the sun, or by the additional heat
of the oven. Grapes of every kind, preserved in this manner, are by authors
called pa^^ulae, and accordingly distinguished in several kinds, according to
the species of grape.

What we have at present, differ, as they are better or worse dried, and are
called raisins under different additional denominations.

The difference between raisins dried in the sun, and those dried in ovens, is
very considerable and obvious. The former are sweet and pleasant, the others
have a whitishness, and a latent acidity, with the sweetness that renders them
much less agreeable.

The raisins of the sun, and what is called jar raisins, from their being
imported in earthen jars, are all of the former kind.

The common raisins are the fruit of several species of grape, which are better
or worse, according as they have been more or less carefully cured, by drying
them in ovens.

The common way of drying grapes for raisins is to tie two or three bunches of
them firmly together while yet on the vine, and dip them into a hot lixivium of
wood-ashes, with a little oil of olive in it, this disposes them to shrink and
wrinkle, and after they are left on the vine three or four days, separated on
stalks in a horizontal situation, and then dried in the sun at leisure, after
cut from the tree.

FIGS.
The fig tree, ficas vulgaris, or ficus sativa, in botany, is one of the
cryptogamia of Linaes, and the abores flore fructuque aggregato of Ray. These
trees are propagated from the seeds: the method is to sow the seeds in the
nursery at one foot distance in the rows, and four feet between. When planted
out, if in warm countries, they are planted as standards; but in colder
climates, they are generally planted against walls or espaliers. Its flowers
are contained within the very fruit itself.

The espaliers will be best for the middling and colder parts of this country;
but to the southward, standards.

In Germany, although so cold a climate, they are cultivated to a great
advantage. Their method is, in the fall of the year to untie the fig tree from
the espalier and lay them down, covering them from the frost with straw or
litter, which prevents their shoots from being injured by the frost; and this
covering is taken away gradually in the spring, and not wholly removed, until
all the danger of frost is over; by which management they generally have a very
great crop of figs.

In Italy and the other warm countries, the first crop of figs is little
regarded, being few in number; for it is the second crop of figs, which are
produced from the shoots of the same year, which is the principal crop there.

It is singular that the wounding of the fruit of the fig by insects is a great
means of its ripening well. In some of the islands of the Levant, they collect
the fruit of the wild fig in June or July, at which time the worms, produced in
them by the eggs of insects, begin to change into flies. They hang these fruits
on the branches of the domestic fig tree; and the flies, as they come out of
them, naturally settle upon the growing figs about them, making punctures or
wounds in the fruit, which causes them to ripen in much greater numbers and
perfection than they otherwise would. But these figs are baked, before they are
packed up for use, in order to destroy the eggs deposited in them by the flies,
which would otherwise hatch into worms and spoil them. The best season for
pruning of fig trees is in autumn, because, at that time the branches are not
so full of sap; so they wiil not bleed so much, as when they are pruned in the
spring, and, at this season the branches should be divested of all the atumnal
figs; and, the sooner this is done when the leaves begin to fall off, the
better will the young shoots resist the cold of the winter.

There are some seasons so cold and moist that the young shoots of the fig tree
will not harden, but are soft and full of juice; when this happens, there is
little hopes of a crop of figs the succeeding year; for the first frost in the
fall will kill the upper part of these shoots for a considerable length
downwards: whenever this happens it is the best way to cut off all the decayed
parts of the shoots, which will prevent the infection, from destroying all the
lower part of the branches; and by this method I have seen a moderate crop of
figs put out from the lower part of the shoots, where if the shoots had not
been injured, there would have been no fruit produced; because it is chiefly
from the four or five uppermost joints of the shoots that the fruit comes out;
and it is for this reason, that as many of the short lateral branches should be
preserved as possible: those being the most productive of fruit; for where the
long straight shoots are fastened up, there will be no fruit, but at their
extremities; so that all the lower parts of the trees will be naked, if there
is not a particular regard had to supply young shoots in every part of the tree.

The trees which are laid down from the espaliers, should not be fastened up
again, till the beginning of April, for the reasons before given: during the
summer season these trees will require no pruning, but the branches are often
blown down by winds; therefore, whenever this happens, they should immediately
be fastened up again, otherwise they will be in danger of breaking; for the
leaves of these trees being very large and stiff, the wind has great power on
them: so that where the branches are not well secured, they are frequently torn
down

Those trees which are planted against espaliers, may be protected from the
injury of frost in the spring, by placing reeds on each side of the espalier,
which may be taken down every day, and put up again at night; but this need not
be practiced in warm weather, but only at such times as there are cold winds,
and frosty mornings; and, although there is some trouble and expense attending
this management, yet the plentiful crops of figs, which may be this way
obtained, will sufficiently recompense for both.

The best way of making this covering is, to fasten the reeds with rope yarn,
in such a manner, as that it may be rolled up like a mat, so that the whole may
be with facility be put up, or taken down; and if these reeds are carefully
rolled up, after the season for using them is over, and put up in a dry place,
they will last several years.

There is another method, by fastening as many of the branches together as can
be conveniently brought into a bundle, and winding some hay or straw bands
round them, which in the spring may be gradually taken off, so as not to expose
the shoots all at once to the open air; and if there is some such light
covering, laid round the stems, and upon the surface of the ground, about their
roots, it will more effectually secure them from the dangers of frost; but when
this is practiced, great care should be taken, that no mice, or rats, harbor
in this covering; for these will eat off the bark from their shoots, and kill
them.

The fig is cured in much the same manner as the grape into raisins. They must
first be dried in the sun, and then put in the oven, to kill the insect, that
breeds in them.

ALMONDS.
The almond tree, called amygdalus, in botany, is a beautiful tree which
produces the almonds; the fruit is pleasant as well as medicinal; it is
contained in a hard stone full of little cells, which is enclosed in a tough
cottony skin. The tree which produces this fruit, nearly resembles the peach,
both in leaves and blossoms. It grows spontaneously, only in the warmer
countries, as Spain, and particularly Barbary, flowering in the spring, and the
fruit is ripe in August.

Almonds are chiefly of two kinds, sweet and bitter. -- The species are: 1.
Amygdalus sativa, fructu majore. C. B. P. the common large almond. 2. Amygdalus
dulcis, putamine mollion. C. B. P. the sweet almond with tender shells. 3.
Amygdalus amara. C. B. P. the bitter almond. 4. Amygdalus sativa, flore albo.
The white flowering almond.

They are propagated by inoculating a bud of these trees into a plumb, almond,
or peach stock, in the month of July. (The manner of this operation you will
find under the article Inoculating, page 236.) The next spring, when the bud
shoots, you may train them up either for standards, or suffer them to grow for
half standards; though the best method is to bud them to the height the stems
are intended to be; and the second year, after budding, they may be removed to
the places where they are to remain.

The best season for transplanting of them (if for dry ground) is in October,
as soon as the leaves begin to decay: but for a wet soil, March or beginning of
April is much preferable; and observe always to bud upon plumb stocks, for wet
ground; and almonds or peaches for dry. The almond with white flowers, is more
difficult to increase than any of the other, and will not take upon a
plumb-stock, so must be budded on either peach or almond.

The common large almond produces almost every year large quantities: therefore
will yield the greatest profit to the planter.

The almond is cured the same as walnuts, first dried and then separated from
the cottony skin.

LIQUORICE.
Liquorice, or siquoritia, glycyrrhiza, and radix dulcis, is a sweet root of
considerable use in medicine. The plant is one of the diadelphia decandria of
Linnaeus, and of the herbae flore papilionaco sew, leguminosoe of Mr. Ray. It
grows wild in many parts of France, Spain, Italy and Germany, and is cultivated
in England in great abundance, and to much profit: and by the good order they
keep the soil in, produces better roots, longer, evener and more succulent than
any from any other part of the world: but the rest of Europe as well as
America, is in a great part furnished by what grows about Bayonne and Saragossa
in Spain, made up into rolls and cakes, covered with bay leaves, and is in
general called Spanish juice. A great deal of it is adulterated with a mixture
of sand and other filth. If it is good it will be firm but not tough, hard, and
when broke, of a fine, shining surface, such as perfectly melts in the mouth,
and does not taste of burning, nor leaves any harsh or gritty particles between
the teeth.

The cultivation of this plant is as follows: -- The ground designed for it
must be well dug and dunged the year before, that the dung may be thoroughly
rotted in it* and just before it is planted the earth is to be dug three spades
deep, and laid very light. The plants to be set must be taken from the sides or
heads of the old roots, and each must have a very good bud or eye, or otherwise
they are subject to miscarry; they should also be about ten inches long, and
perfectly sound.

The season for planting them is as early in the spring as the weather will
admit, and this must be done in the following manner: the rows must be marked
by a line drawn across the bed at two feet distance; and the plants must be set
in these rows, by making a hole of their full depth and something more, and the
eye of the root may be an inch below the surface; they must also be set two
feet distance from each other in the rows. When this is done, the ground may be
sown over with onions or turnips, which not rooting deep, will do the liquorice
roots no injury for the first year.

In the fall, when the stalks of the liquorice are dead, a little very rotten
dung should be spread over the surface of the ground. Three years after the
time of planting, the liquorice will be fit to take up for use; and this should
be done just when the stalks are dead off: for, if taken up sooner, the roots
are very apt to shrink greatly in their weight. -- There is one necessary
caution, that is, the ground must be kept hoed, and free from weeds.

The manner of preparing the juice in Spain is this: they take up the roots in
the month of July, they clean them perfectly as soon as taken out of the earth,
and then hang them up in the air till nearly dry; after this they cut them into
thin slices, and boil them in water till the decoction is very strong; they
then press it hard out to obtain all the juice they can from the root. They set
this decoction by to settle a little, and when it has deposited its coarsest
parts, they pour it off into vessels, in which they evaporate it over a fire
strong at first, but milder afterward, till it becomes of the consistence of a
thick extract; they then let the fire go out, and, when the extract is so cool
that they can handle it, they take out large parcels at a time, and working
them well in the hands, they roll them out into long cylindric masses, which
they cut out into such lengths as they please, rolling them over a parcel of
half dried bay leaves, which pick up enough of them for a covering, which are
in that condition laid in the sun till perfectly dried; there is great nicety
required, at the end of the evaporation to get the extract to a proper
consistence without letting it burn.

MADDER.
Madder is a small red root used in medicine and dying. -- The plant which
produces the madder root is of the number of the tetrandia monogynia of
Lynnaeus, and one of the herbae stillatae of Mr. Ray.

It grows to two feet high, its stalks are square and rough; its leaves are
oblong and narrow, and stand four in a joint in the manner of a star. Its
flowers grows in clusters at the upper parts of the stalks, are very small and
of a pale yellowish green color; these are followed by a fruit consisting of
two seeds. It has been described by all the botanical writers under the names
of rubia stava, and rubia tinctorum.

Madder is cultivated in vast quantitities in several parts of Holland; the
Dutch supply all Europe with it, and make a vast advantage of the trade in it;
it is very wonderful no other nation has attempted the cultivating of it, as it
would succeed in almost any country, particularly in this, and much ground
might be employed in this way, to ten times the advantage it is at present.

A flat loamy soil suits it best. -- The method of cultivating this useful
plant, as practiced by the Dutch, is as follows: In the fall of the year, they
plow the land where they intend to plant madder in the spring, and lay it in
high ridges, that the frost may mellow it.

In march they harrow it down and plow it again; and at this season they work
it very deep, laying it up in ridges eighteen inches asunder, and about a foot
high; then about the beginning of April, when the madder will begin to shoot
out of the ground, they open the earth about their old roots, and take off all
the side shoots, which extend themselves horizontal, just under the surface of
the ground, preserving as much root to them as posble; these they transplant
immediately upon the tops of the new ridges, at about a foot apart, observing
always to do this, when there are some showers, because then the plants will
take root in a few days, and will require no water.

When the plants are growing, they carefully keep the ground hoed, to prevent
the weeds from coming up between them; for if they are smothered with weeds,
especially when young, it will either destroy or weaken them so much, that they
seldom do well after. In these ridges they let the plants remain two seasons,
during which time they keep the ground very clean; and in the fall, when the
tops of the plants are decayed, they take up the roots and dry them for sale.

The experiments I have made on the culture of madder in England, convinces me
there is no necessity for planting it on ridges, except the land is very wet,
as is the case in general in Holland, where their land is often floated in
winter. In dry land the best method is to plow between the ridges, therefore
should be planted at a greater distance, than is practiced by the Dutch. The
rows should be four feet between, and the plants eighteen inches asunder in the
rows, as they extend themselves pretty far under ground; for where they are
planted too near, their roots will not have room to grow. For I find, that if
all the horizontal roots are destroyed from time to time, as they are produced,
it will cause the large downright roots to be much bigger, in which the
goodness of this commodity chiefly consists; for, if the upper roots are
suffered to remain, they will draw off the principal nourishment from the
downright roots, as I have experienced; for I planted a few roots upon the same
soil, and situation, which were of equal strength, and rooted equally as well:
half of these I hoed round, and cut off the horizontal roots, and the other
half I permitted the horizontal roots to remain on; and when I took them all
up, those which I had hoed about, and kept clear from horizontal roots, were
almost as large again as the other, and the roots were double the weight; which
plainly proves the necessity of cutting off those superfluous roots, so that
where this plant is cultivated in quantity, it will be an excellent method to
use the hoe-plow I have before described: for with this instrument a large
quantity of ground may be kept clean at a small expense: and as this will stir
the ground much deeper than a common hoe, it will cut the superficial roots and
thereby improve the principal roots.

The crop of madder should be shifted into fresh land; for the ground which has
had but one crop, will not be fit to receive another in less than four years;
during which time, any other annual crop may be cultivated on the land.

The manner in Holland, of drying and preparing these roots for use, is as
follows. They pare off the outside rind of the roots, which is dried by itself,
and is called mull madder. Then they pare off another fleshy part of the root,
which is made into another madder, and is called number O: but the inside or
heart of the root, is called crop madder. The first sort is worth about twenty
shillings per hundred weight, the second sort about forty shillings, and the
third sort five pounds. This method I believe they do not now practice: but the
whole is dried and ground together, which answers the dyers purpose full as
well.

These roots must be dried on a kiln, before they are ground to powder. What is
for medicinal use, comes in the whole root, which is only dried, without any
preparation.

By my experiments which I made, I imagine that one acre of good madder when
fit to take up for use, will be worth upwards of one hundred pounds. So that it
will well pay for any method of culture; but if performed by the plow, will be
no great expense, the principal charge being, in the first preparing of the
land, and the planting.

RHUBARB.
Rhubarb, is a thick root, of an oblong figure, large at the head, and tapering
pretty suddenly, as it extends in length. It is sometimes single, but more
usually divided into two or three parts at the lower end; it is from four to
six inches in length, and three or four in diameter at the top. It is of a
tolerable smooth and even surface, and externally of a faint yellow color,
with a large admixture of brown; it is moderately heavy, but not hard: when
fresh cut, it is found to be of a marbled and variegated appearance; its
colors are a pale, but bright yellow, and a faint reddish; the yellow is the
ground color, and the red is disposed in short irregular veins, much in the
manner of the darker color in the common nutmeg.

It is of a somewhat lax and spongy texture; it has an agreeable, and somewhat
aromatic smell, and a bitterish, astringent, and subacid taste.

The plant which produces the true rhubarb, is of the ennardria, tryginia of
Linnaeus, and the Rhabarbarum folio oblongo crispo, undluato, flabellis sparis,
of Juffieu, and thelapathum bardanae folio undulato glabro, of Mr. Rand.

The root of the native rhubarb plant is long, thick and perennial; its bark,
while growing, is of a brownish red color, but under this the substance of the
root is of the true color of dried rhubarb, only deeper.

A number of large leaves are first produced from the root; they are of a fine
green, elegantly undulated at the edges, of an oblong figure broadest at the
base, and somewhat auriculated; they stand on very thick and fleshy pedicles,
moderately long, unequal in their under part, and flat on the upper; these
divide each into five large and prominent ribs, running with many divisions
through the whole leaf; in the midst of these leaves rises a stalk of an
angular compressed figure, streated and rising to about three feet high, which
from the middle to the top, is furnished with a cluster of little flowers,
surrounding it at certain distances; they are very small and white, and are
succeeded each by a single seed of a triangular figure. It flowers in June, and
ripens the seed in July and August. It is produced in great plenty on the
confines of China and Tartary, and in many parts of Tartary itself: the
mountains of Tibet abound with it, and a very considerable part of what is sent
to Europe and America grows there. This plant will grow best in high, dry, warm
land; it will stand the severest colds unhurt.

The cultivation of this plant is the same as the madder before described, only
they require a greater distance between the rows.

The Chinese are very careful in their manner of drying it; they take up the
root only in winter, or early in the spring before the leaves begin to appear;
they then cut it into small pieces as they think proper* and lay it on a table
in a shady place, turning it once or twice a day, for two or three days; after
this they string the pieces on a cord at a distance from one another, and then
hang them up in a shady place, where they may dry leisurely. It is by this
management the rhubarb is rendered so firm and solid as we find it; for, if it
were hung up to dry at once in a warm airy place, it would become light and
spongy; likewise if the roots were to be taken up in summer, they would be
light and of little value, and would not have the reddish marbling: which is
one of the greatest characters of its goodness.

The rhubarb plants, are now growing in the public gardens of Paris and
Chelsea, where it thrives extremely well; and I have not the least doubt, but
it will do the same here, and be a very profitable crop.

TURMERIC.
Turmeric is a small root of an oblong figure, usually met with in pieces from
half an inch to two inches in length, and at the utmost surface the thickness
of a man's little finger; its surface is uneven, and rises into knobs in many
places, and the longer pieces are seldom very straight; it is very heavy and
hard to break; it is not easily cut through with a knife; but when cut, leaves
a glossy surface.

Its color, externally, is a pale whitish gray, with some faint tinge, of
yellowness, and when broken, is of a fine yellow within; this color is bright
and pale, and without admixture when the root is fresh; but in keeping, it by
degrees becomes reddish, and at length is much like saffron in the cake. Thrown
into water, it speedily gives it a fine yellow tinge; and, chewed in the mouth,
it gives the spittle the same color. It is easily powdered in the mortar, and,
according to its different age, makes a yellow, an orange color, or a reddish
powder. It has a kind of aromatic smell, with something of the odor of ginger
in it -- The taste is acrid and disagreeable, and has a considerable bitterness.

The plant which produces it, is of the number of the monandria monogynia,
according to the Lynnaen system, and of the herboe bulbosis assines of Mr. Ray.
It is described in the Hortus malabaricus, under the name of the manjalla kua,
and by Herman under that of kuba.

The leaves are a span long, and three or four inches broad, of a fine green
color, and pointed at the end. The flowers grow on a peculiar stalk of eight,
ten, or more inches high, and of the thickness of a goose quill; They are
collected in a kind of squamous cone, and of an oblong figure, resembling those
of the cannacorus, but vastly smaller, and are of a pale redish color; these
are succeeded by tricapsular seed vessels, containing a quantity of small
roundish seed, from which it may be propagated, or by the roots which are
perennial; if from the seeds, it is two years before it comes to perfection.

The seed must be sown early in the spring, and the plants produced from the
seed, are to be planted out in the fall, in rows from six to nine inches
distance; with sufficient room between the rows, for the hoe-plow.

The roots are to be dug up for use, soon after the flowers are fallen, and
dried in the sun.

It is a native of the East Indies, and requires high, dry, warm land. It is
generally imported from Java and Malabar, and in many other parts they
cultivate it, where they use a great deal of it in their sauces and food.

It is of great service in dying, and in many other arts. The glovers use it to
color their leather, and the turners to give an agreeable yellow to several of
their works made in the whiter woods.

SAFFRON.
Saffron, is made from the flower of the crocos. It is not the entire flower of
the plant that produces it, but only some of its internal parts. It is met with
in the shops in flat and thin cakes; into which it has been formed by pressing,
and which consist of many long and narrow filaments, that are smaller in their
lower part, where they are of a pale yellow color; in their upper part they
are broader and indented at their edges, and of a very strong deep orange
color approaching to redness. They are somewhat tough, moderately heavy, very
easily cut, of an acrid penetrating, but not an unpleasant smell, somewhat
affecting the head, and of a bitterish, and hot, but highly cordial taste.
Thrown into water, they almost instantaneously give it a strong yellow or
reddish color, according to the quantity used. These filaments are the
cristated capillaments, into which the pistol of the flower divides at its
head: they are of a deep reddish orange color, while growing, and there are
only three of them in each flower.

The crocus, or plant which produces it, is one of the triandria monogynia of
Lynnaeus, and one of the herbae bulbosa radice praeditae of Mr. Ray. The best
way of propagating is by the bulbs, of which it annually produces new ones.
These are to be planted out in trenches at four inches distance, and they
seldom fail. They only produce leaves the first year; but in September, or
October of the year following, they flower.

The saffron is gathered as soon as the flowers open; but the best crop, is
always from the old bulbs; of which the largest, plumpest, and fattest roots,
are to be chosen, throwing by the longest pointed ones, which are called
spickets, or spickards: for the round flat roots, always produces the best
flowers.

The land where it is intended to be cultivated, should be in an open, level
country, the soil not poor, nor a very stiff clay, but a temperate dry mould,
of a hazle color, or of a loamy nature. The ground being made choice of, about
the latter end of March, or beginning of April (according to the season) it
must be carefully plowed, the furrows being drawn much closer together, and
deeper, if the soil will allow it, than is done for any sort of grain. -- About
five weeeks after, or during any time in the month of May, lay between twenty
and thirty loads of short rotten dung, or manure from the compost heap upon
each acre; and having spread it with great care, plow it in as before. About
midsummer, plow a third time, and between every sixteen feet and half, or pole
in breadth, leave a broad furrow or trench, which serves both as a boundary to
the several parcels, and to throw the weeds in at the proper season.

The next general part of the culture of safron, is planting or setting the
roots: the best instrument to be used for which is a narrow spade, commonly
termed a spit-shovel. The time for planting is in July, a little sooner or
later, according as the weather answers. The method is this: one man with his
spit-shovel raises between three or four inches of earth, and throws it before
him, about six or more inches: two persons, (women or boys will do) following
with heads, place them in the farthest edge of the trench he makes, at four
inches distance from each other, or thereabouts. As soon as the digger or
spitter has gone once the breadth of the ridge, he is to begin again at the
other side, and digging, as before, covers the root last set, and makes the
same room for the setters to place a new row, at the same distance from the
first, as they are from one another. Thus they are to go on till a whole ridge
is planted; and the only nicety, in digging is, to leave some part of the first
stratum of earth untouched, to lie under the roots, and, in setting, to place
the roots directly upon their bottom. There should be some regard had to the
size of the roots, placing the largest at a greater distance than the smaller
ones.

These roots are to continue in the ground three years; the first year the crop
will be the least. About the midsummer after the third crop is gathered, the
roots must all be taken up, and transplanted into fresh ground, prepared as
before mentioned.

The most expeditious method is to plow them up with a small plow that has a
narrow earth-board: and people to follow and gather the heads as they are
turned up. They are next to be carried to the house in sacks, and there
cleaned: this labor consists in cleaning the roots thoroughly from earth,
separating the young suckers or bulbs from the old ones, and from the remains
of old roots, old involucra and excrescences; and thus they become fit to be
planted in new ground immediately, or to be kept for some time without danger
of spoiling. One acre when broke up, will have a sufficient quantity of roots
to plant four. The young roots or bulbs must be planted by themselves.

The quantity of roots to be planted on an acre is generally about 128 bushels,
which according to the distances left between them, as before assigned, and
supposing all to be an inch in diameter one with another, ought to amount to
392,040 in number.

From the time that the roots are planted, till about the beginning of
September, there is no more labor about them; but as they then begin to spire,
and are ready to show themselves above ground (which is known by digging a few
out of the earth) the ground must be carefully pared with a sharp hoe. The
running hoe before described, will be best, and the weeds, etc. raked into the
furrows, otherwise they would hinder the growth of the plants. In sometime
after, the saffron flowers will appear, which are gathered as well before as
after they are full blown, and the most proper time for this is early in the
morning, when the whole flowers are to be gathered, and thrown handful by
handful into a basket; having then carried home all you have got, immediately
spread them upon a large table, and fall to picking out the filamenta stylis,
or chives and together with them a pretty long proportion of the stylus itself,
or string to which they are joined; the rest of the flower may be thrown away
as useless. The next morning return into the field again, whether it be wet or
dry weather, and so on daily, till the whole crop be gathered.

The chives being all picked out of the flowers, the next labor about them is
to dry them on the kiln. The kiln may be built on a thick plank (that it may be
removed from place to place) supported by four short legs, the outside of eight
pieces of wood, about inches thick, in form of a quadrangular frame: about
twelve inches square at the bottom, on the inside, and twenty inches a top;
which is likewise equal to the perpendicular height of it. On the foreside must
be a hole about eight square, and four inches above the plank, through which
the fire is to be put in. Over all the rest lay laths pretty thick, close to
one another and nailed to the frame already mentioned; and then must be
plaistered over on both sides, as also the planks at bottom very thick to serve
for an hearth. Over the mouth or widest part, put an hair-cloth, network, or
iron wire, fixed to the sides of the kiln; and likewise to two rollers, or
moveable pieces of wood, which must be turned by wedges or screws, in order to
stretch them.

The kiln is to be placed in a light part of the house; and you are to begin by
laying five or six sheets of white paper on the hair cloth or net work, etc.
upon which you must spread the wet saffron, betweeen two and three inches
thick; this is to be covered with other sheets of paper, and over these lay a
coarse blanket five or six times doubled; or instead thereof a canvas pillow
filled with straw; and, after the fire has been lighted for some time, the
whole is covered with a board, having a large weight on it.

At first you must give it a pretty strong heat, to make the chives sweat, but
must be careful you do not scorch them, for that will spoil all that is in the
kiln. When it has been thus dried about an hour, take off the board, blanket
and upper papers, and take the saffron off from that which lies next it;
raising at the same time, the edges of the cake with a knife; then, laying on
the paper again, slide in another board between the hair cloth, etc. and under
papers, and turn both papers and saffron upside down; afterward covering them,
as above.

The same heat is to be continued for an hour longer; then look at the cake
again, free it from the paper, and turn it; then cover it, and lay on the
weight as before. If nothing happens amiss, during these two first hours, the
danger will be over, for there is nothing more to do, but to keep a gentle
fire, and to turn the cakes every half hour, till thoroughly dry; for the doing
of which as it ought, there are required full twenty four hours.

The fire may be made of any kind of fuel, but that which smokes the least is
best; and charcoal, for that reason, is preferred to any other.

In England, saffron is cultivated in large fields, and is no where raised with
so much success. Their crops frequently paying them sixty pounds per acre. What
is consumed here comes chiefly from England. Which by the proper cultivation
they give it, is allowed to be greatly superior to any other. It is a root that
will grow and thrive in any climate and almost any soil; why then, when the
cultivation is properly known, may not a sufficient quantity be raised here for
our own consumption, if not for exportation.

These roots or bulbs are very cheap in England: how easily they might be
imported by the spring ships; when they would arrive in proper time for
cultivation.

IPECACUANHA.
There are two kinds of ipecacuanha, distinguished by their color, and brought
from different places but both possessing the same virtues, though in a
different degree; the one of these is gray, and is brought from Peru; the other
is brown, and brought from the Brasils. The gray or Peruvian ipecacuanha, is a
small and irregular contorted and twisted root; it is of the thickness of a
small goose-quill, and is brought here in pieces of one, two, three, or more
inches in length; but these never straight, but variously turned, and wreathed
in several directions. It is of a rough surface, and that in a very particular
manner, being raised into a sort of annular ridges, at small distances from
each other, running quite round the root, and rising considerable about the
rest of its surface. It is of a dense and firm texture, considerable hard,
though not tough, but breaking on attempting to bend it: it is moderately
heavy, and does not cut easily through with a knife; it is of a dusky greyish
color, on the surface, and when broken, appears of a clearer and paler gray,
and discovers a tough and firm nerve, occupying its center, and always running
its whole length; this nerve or fiber is very small and slender, of a somewhat
paler color than the rest, and is with much more difficulty reduced to powder;
it is less resinous, and of less virtue than the cortical part: the whole root
is of a very peculiar smell, somewhat pungent, but not disagreeable in taste:
it is acrid, and somewhat bitterish, and upon the whole very disagreeable.

The brown or Brasilian ipecacuanha, is a root much resembling the former in
all its characters, but it is, if any thing, more twisted and convoluted: its
annual ridges are higher raised than in that, and it is a smaller as well as
shorter root; very few pieces of it much exceeding a crow-quill in thickness,
or an inch and an half in length; it is of a deep dusky brown, or blackish, on
the outside, and white, when broken: it is less acrid, and has more of the
bitter to the taste than the gray kind, and has less smell.

Ipecacuanha, though one of the most valuable drugs the materia medica affords
us, was not only unknown to the ancients, but even to the modern world, till
the middle of last century. Piso and Mar^grave were the first who brought it
from South America to Europe; it was celebrated at that time as a cure for
disenteries, and got into use for a few years, but again sunk into oblivion,
and it was many years before it got into the reputation it now possesses.

The French were the first people in Europe who attempted to introduce it, and
they succeeded very ill with it at first, which was owing to their giving it in
too large doses. Helvetius, was the man who first gave it successfully among
them, and the French king soon after purchased the secret of him at a large
price, and communicated it to the world.

The plant which produces them is of the number of the herboe bacciferae or
berry bearing plants of Mr. Ray Plukenet and Morrison have called it a
perclymenum, and Linnaeus has named it ouragoga. It rises to six, eight, or ten
inches high, sometimes to more than a foot; the stalks are tender and weak, and
have no leaves except near the top, where there stand three or four, seldom
more than five; and above these grow a few monapetalous flowers, divided into
five segments at the edges, which are succeeded by as many roundish umbilicated
berries, each containing three hard seeds. The root naturally extends to a
great length, creeping horizontally under the surface of the ground; the stalk
seldom stands erect, and the leaves are oblong, swelling in the middle, and
small at both ends; they are about two inches long, and an inch and an half
nearly in breadth, sometimes larger; they are rough to the touch, and somewhat
paler on the under side than on the upper.

The method of propagating it, is from the seed, which must be sown in a light
rich earth, and when two years old, transplanted into rows at six inches apart,
and four feet between the rows, to admit of the hoe plow to keep them clean
from weeds.

The time for planting of them is in the fall of the year. And the second fall
after they are planted, as well as every succeeeding fall, they are to be dug
between with a sharp spade cutting off the horizontal roots, which are to be
gathered up, cleaned and dried, which will be the true ipecacuanha sold in the
shops.

OPIUM.
Opium, in pharmacy is an inspissated juice, partly of the resinous, and partly
of the gummy kind. It is brought to us in cakes or masses, usually of a
roundish figure, flatted and covered with poppy leaves. These are of uncertain
sizes usually about an inch thick, and their weight from eight ounces to a
pound.

Opium is very heavy, of a dense texture, not perfectly dry, but more or less
soft, and, commonly, easily receiving an impression from the finger; it is
tough and hard to break, its color a brownish yellow, so very dark and dusky
that in the mass at first sight it appears black, and of a faint, dead,
unpleasant smell, bitter to the taste, and very acrid. It is inflammable, yet
in great part soluble in water: it comes from Natolia, from Egypt, and from the
East Indies.

The plant which affords opium is one of the polyandria monogynia of Linnaeus,
and one of the herbae flore tetrapetalo anomalo of Ray; and is described by all
the botanical writers under the name of the white garden poppy, the papaver
hortense semine albo, papaver sativum dioscoridis, and papaver album plinii.

The fields of Asia Minor are in many places sown with the white poppy as ours
are with corn. When the heads grow toward maturity, but are yet soft, green,
and full of juice, they make incissions in them with an instrument, which is a
kind of a knife with five edges; this being struck into the head, makes five
long cuts in it, from which the opium flows, and is the next day scraped off
with an edgeless knife, and is put up in a vessel, fastened to the girdle for
that purpose; at the time the opium is collected, the opposite side of the
poppy head is wounded by the same instrument used at first, and the opium is
collected next day in the same manner.

They distinguish the produce of the first wounds from those of the second, and
with great reason, the first being greatly superior to the second. They call
the first flowing of the heads gobaar; it has much more virtue than the rest,
and is sold at a much greater price: Its color is at first white, but
afterward yellowish; and when long kept, of a dusky brown. The opium produced
from the second wounds is darker colored, and approaches to blackness; it has
a weaker smell and taste than the former; after this they make a third, by
bruising their heads and expressing their juice; but this last is reckoned but
of little value.

After they have collected the opium, they moisten it with a small quantity of
water, or of honey, and work it a long time upon a flat, hard smooth board,
with a thick and strong instrument of the same wood, till it becomes of the
consistence of pitch: Finally, they work it up with their hands, and form it
into cakes, or rolls, for sale.

Opium being now so generally used in medicine, must cause a great demand for
it: Of course it must fetch a good price, therefore it will be an object worthy
the agriculturist's attention.

The poppy is propagated from the seed; one hundred heads will produce seed
enough to sow an acre; the cultivation of it is excedingly easy, as it will
grow in almost any soil or climate; and I am of opinion if the heads were
collected together when they are full of juice, (just before they come into
flower) and the juice pressed out and managed as before described, that the
opium would be as good as that collected from the incisions, as it would
contain the same virtues.

This method will save a great deal of trouble and expense.

Prepared opium or laudanum, is a tincture of opium made by dissolving the
opium in spirits of wine, some other spirits, or water having different
ingedients added to it, according to the use it is intended for.

FINIS.
INDEX.
A.
Accounts, regular, the advantages of 15 Agriculture, on 11 improvements, who
made by 12 pleasures of 14
Air, effects of, on vegetation 70 Putrid and noxious, first discovered by Dr.
Hunter 69 Found in every portion of earth 71 Dr. Priestly's experiments on 72
Alkaline, or new manure 51 Almond-Tree, account of 328 how to cultivate 329
Almonds, how cured 330 Ant-hills, how to make into a manure 46 Animalculaes
discovered 121 Anise, when to be sown 209 Artichokes, how to make the beds 216
Their cultivation 217
Analysis of soils and manures 21 Ashes a good top dressing 41 Asparagus, how
to make the beds 212 its cultivation 213 dressing the beds 215

B.
Barley, its cultivation 137 experiments on 140 comparative view of do. 144
number of grains in a bushel 139 seed to steep, an excellent method 142
Balm, when sown 209 Beans, for a field, when sown 103 number of in a bushel
139 when most liable to blight 101 a good fallow crop 102 for a garden, their
sorts 210 when sown 218
Beasts, of 264 Blights, accounted for 102 best preservative against 102
Brick and lime rubbish 45 Brocoli, how to prepare the land for its reception
209 its cultivation 209
Brew House, how to build 247 Brewing of beer and ale 248 proper utensils 248
Buck-wheat its cultivation 148 plowed in, a good top dressing 109
Burnet, its culture and advantages 173 Budding 234 Butter, to make from St.
Foine-grass. 307
C.
Calculations of produce, how made 15 Calves, to suckle 270 to wean 272 that
scour, to stop 271
Cabbages, their several sorts 211 their cultivation 209
Carrots, their cultivation 209 Celery, its cultivation 209 Composts, now best
made 37 of quick lime and mud 38
Chemistry explained 28 Chewing balls for horses 296 Cherries, to inoculate 235
Chalk a good dressing 45 Changing of crops, the advantages of 94 of seed do. 134
Cheese to make 306 Clay soil, a description of 28 analized 22 adds tenacity to
sandy soils 29
Clay soil burned, a good dressing 38 Clouds explained 64 Clover to sow 154 its
advantages 153 how saved for seed 157
Clover hay, best method of making 157 Clearing of land from trees, etc. 77
Cleft grafting 226 Comparison of different ways of farming 177 Cow dung, of 36
Cows, what they will pay a year 264 to choose those that give the most milk 264
to feed and dry 265 to prevent hoving 156 their diseases and cure 297
Colliflowers how to cultivate 209 Colewort do. do. 210 Crown Grafting 228
Crocus, how to cultivate 345 Cucumbers, their sorts 211 Cultivation in this
country imperfect 123 Cider, to make, that it will keep 252 stronger than
common 255

D.
Dairy, a description of 309 Dew, its cause and effects 62 Dead Animals 48
Ditches, how made 261 Dill, when sown 209 Draining of land 74 Dungs 35
Dressing, of, for different lands 29 Drilling, advantages resulting therefrom
93 distance most advantageous 143
Drill Machine described 256 directions for using 258

E.
Endive, its cultivation 209 Explanation of provincial words 9 Experiments on
drilling of peace 103 on do. of beans 103 on do. of barley 95 on do. of wheat 97
on clover. 158 on saintfoin 111 on lucern 112 on barley unsteeped 141 on barley
steeped 142 on potatoes 106 on fattening of hogs 269

F.
Fallowing of land 93 Fallows unnecessary 100 Fallow crops 100 Farmers, their
general ambition 18 Absurd prejudices against improvements 125 should be
masters of their farms 18
Farm yard, a plan laid down of 37 Fertilizing steeps 120 Fennel, when sown 209
Fly on turnips, best preventative 185 Foine St. its nature and cultivation 161
method of sowing 163 its produce 165
Fig Tree, how propagated 323 Figgs, how cured 328 Frost, effects of 60 French
wheat, its nature and cultivation 148 makes a good dressing for wheat 149
Fruit trees, to plant in the field 241
G.
Garden, kitchen and flower 203 Grain, great increase of 138 number in a bushel
139
Green crops, plowed in for manure 149 Growth of peace and beans investigated
101 Grasses, artificial 152 Gravelly soils 109 Green and boorcole, to cultivate
210 Grafting and innoculating of trees 219 general observations on do. 223 to
collect and preserve the grafts 220 what stocks are proper 220 time of
performing the work 219 time and method of sowing the kernel 220
Grafting by approach 230
H.
Harrowing 118 Hail, effects of 61 Heat, effects of, on vegetation 58 Hedging
261 Hoes, description of 259 Horse beans, their cultivation 102 number in a
bushel 139
Horse dung 35 Horses, to manage and treat 273 the best method of breeding 275
what stallions to choose 273 to know their age 281 breaking of them 276
fattening of them 278 to cure their several diseases 284
Horse balls, to prepare 295 Hogs dung 35 Hogs, to fatten 269 Hogs, to keep
them from having the meazles 270 Hop, its culture and method of curing 197
Hurdles, how made 189 to place them 190
Hysop, when sown 209
I.
Jerusalem artichokes, their culture 217 Imperfections of the old mode of
husbandry 139 Improvement of wet lands 75 Indian corn, its cultivation 149
experiments on it 150
Innoculating 234 Ipecacuanha, a description of 352 the plant which produces it
355 its cultivation 356

K.
Kelp, made from sea weeds 44 Kidney beans, their several sorts 211
L.
Lands, wet, how best improved 74 rendered fertile by prudent culture 75
Lambs, to fatten 269 Lavender, when sown 209 Laudanum, how made 359 Lime,
quick, when injurious 34 deprives alkalies of fixed air 34
Lightning, effects of 62 Lettuces, their sorts 211 Loamy soil 30 Loss
sustained by improper management 19 Liquorice root, how cultivated 331 manner
of preparing the juice 332
Lucerne, its culture and advantages 167 its most fatal diseases 169

M.
Madder, given to hogs 270 a description of 333 its cultivation 334 experiments
on it 336 drying the roots for use 337
Machine for drilling of grain 256 Malt dust 51 Melioration of different soils
89 Mechanics explained 26 Mangel Worzel, or root of scarcity 191 Marjoram, when
sown 209 Marigolds do. 209 Marle 45 analized 23
Meazles in hogs, to prevent and cure 270 Meadows, upland 175 low and watered
176
Mud from rivers, etc. 38 Mud and lime 38
N.
Natural philosophy explained 56 Nurseries, how managed 240 recommended to
farmers, 241 to raise their own trees 241

O.
Oats, their culture and management 146 weight and number in a bushel 140
Oil, the best steep for turnip seed 185 Onions, their different sorts 211 time
of sowing 209
Opium, how made 357 collected from the poppy head 358

P.
Peace, field, experiments on 105 second best fallow crop 103
Peace, number in a bushel 139 their several sorts and culture 104 garden, when
sown 218 their several sorts 210
Pears, to graft or inoculate 221 season for sowing the kernels 221
Pennyroyal, when sown 209 Philosophy, Natural, explained 56 Philosophical
account of steeping grain 142 Parsnips, when sown 209 Planting fruit trees in
the field 241 new observations on do. 244
Ploughs, description of several sorts 80 Plowing frequent, the advantages of
to stiff soils 89 of fallows 90 Mr. (...) observations on 113 Sir Hugh Platt's
do. 116 Mr. Delu's do. 11
Plumbs, to graft or inoculate 222 time of sowing the stones 222
Potatoes, the third best fallow crop 106 experiments on 107 method of planting
218
Powder, black, observed on grain 121 Poppies, how cultivated 359
R.
Rain, effects of 64 Radishes, when sown 209, 219 their several sorts 211, 212
Raisins, how dried 322 Rhubarb, a description of 338 its cultivation 340
manner of drying the root 341
Rotation of crops, its advantages 94 Roots, investigated 136, 162 Rubbish of
brick and lime 45 Rye, its cultivation 136 Rye-grass, its cultivation 171 its
nature and properties 172

S.
Saintfoin, its nature and advantages 161 its cultivation 163 to make the hay
166 to save the seed 166
Salt, common 142 Salt petre, given to hogs 270 Sandy soils 28 Saw dust 46
Savoys, to cultivate 209 Saffron, made from the flower of the crocus 344 how
cultivated 345
Saffron, quantity of roots planted on an acre 348 the kiln for drying it how
made 349
Sea sand 43 weeds 43
Seed, a less quantity required on rich than poor soils 127 Shells of sea fish
44 Sheep's dung 190 Sheep, their nature and treatment 266, 267 to prevent
rotting 301, 303 to cure those that are not too far gone 302 to cure their
other diseases 303 to fatten on turnips 186 to know their age 267
Shallots, their culture 209 Soils, observations on 28 Soap suds, etc. 50 Soot,
a good top dressing 42 Spinach, when sown 209 Spanish juice, how made 332
Steep, the alkaline, how to prepare 120 Sun, effects of 57 Sulphur, given to
hogs 270 Swamps and bogs 31 Snow, effects of 61
T.
Tares, their cultivation 151 Tanners bark 46 Timothy-grass, its cultivation
173 Transplanting 241 Trees, fruit to propagate 220, 221 to graft 224 to
inoculate 233 to alter their fruit 234 to make prolifick 49 a composition for
curing their defects 244
Trefoil, its nature and cultivation 159 Turnips their cultivation 184
recommended for fattening sheep 186 oil the best steep to prevent the fly 185
Turmeric, a description of 341 its cultivation 343 its use 344

U.
Upland meadows 175 Urine, a most excellent manure 48
V.
Vineyard, the best situation for 315 Vine, how to propagate 315 time of
planting and management 316

W.
Weeds, keeping the land clean from 133 Wheat, the several sorts 126
experiments on 130 spring, directions for cutting 127 number of seed in a
bushel 139
Whip grafting 224 Wine, how made 320 Wearing out of land, how occasioned 19
Woollen rags 48 Wood ashes 41 Worms, experiments on 121

