A TREATISE ON THE DIEASES OF CHILDREN, WITH GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR THE
MANAGEMENT OF INFANTS FROM THE BIRTH.

By MICHAEL UNDERWOOD, M. D. Licentiate in Midwifery of the Royal College of
Physicians, in London, And Physician to the British Lying-in Hospital.

TWO VOLUMES IN ONE. A NEW EDITION, REVISED AND ENLARGED.

Ornari Res ipsa negat, contenta doceri. MANILL. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY T.
DOBSON, NO. 41, SOUTH SECOND-STREET. MDCCXCIII.

PREFACE.
THE quick sale of the first impression of his Treatise on the Diseases of
Children, has encouraged the author to take some pains in correcting and
enlarging this second edition. He has at the same time endeavored to avoid all
unnecessary details, and useless distinctions, as well as extending it to
subjects foreign from the immediate design. Should the reader apprehend any
little exceptions in this respect, he (...) readily perceive the inducement;
and although the accuracy of system should really be violated, it is presumed,
it has only given way to motives of humanity and usefulness.

Perfectly sensible, however, of numerous defects, the writer relies again upon
the indulgence of the Public, though he hopes this edition will be found
somewhat more complete, and more worthy of a continuance of that favorable
reception wherewith the former was so generally honored. Particular
acknowledgements, indeed, are due for the approbation of the faculty; and the
like candor, it is hoped, will now excuse any alterations that have been
intended to render this edition more easy and familiar to common readers. For
the sake of public utility, the writer has carefully avoided all technical
terms, or has so explained them, and so enlarged on the nature of diseases, and
the doses of medicines, that parents, and others not versed in the practice of
physic, may find all common directions sufficiently explicit: whenever they
appear otherwise, readers of that description should conclude, that the case is
too difficult for their management, and that probably the best guide might
mislead them.

The prolixity of other parts may be equally disagreeable to professional men.
-- For the style in general, indeed, the author pretends to have but little to
offer. Had he more leisure, possibly the faults might have been fewer; and
perhaps, the necessity of clearly and intelligibly expressing what is to be
said, may, in this instance, be pleaded with those who expect conciseness and
accuracy; which every writer should aim at. It may therefore be observed, that
some consentaneous diseases have been longer dwelt upon, and their remedies
oftener hinted, than might be necessary for many readers. To such, however, as
are themselves obliged to superintend the health of their children, and to
those who derive a happiness from contributing to that of their offspring,
there will not be much apology necessary, either for entering so fully into the
LITTLE matters that compose the SECOND part of the work, (...) for enlarging
elsewhere on many circumstances that may appear trifling when separately
considered. It was, indeed, very much with a view to their use and profit, that
the work was originally undertaken; and to their notice and protection it is
again submitted, in its improved state, with all Deference and Respect.

CONTENTS.
THE diseases of Infants are too much neglected 3 Causes of this neglect 5
Arguments against such neglect 6 Their diseases easily understood 7 Causes of
Infants Diseases 9 Symptoms, or marks, of their diseases 11 Meconium, what? 12
Retention of it, an occasion of disease 12 Of no use after birth 13 Ought to be
carried off early ib Proper remedies to expel it 15 Instance of its retention
for many days 21 Icteritia, or Infantile Jaundice 22 Treatment 23 Sometimes
occasioned by Jaundiced-milk 24 Inward fits, what? 26 Treatment 27 Costiveness
and Wind 31 Treatment 32 Watching, or want of sleep 38 Often improperly treated
39 Imperfect Closure of the Foramen Ovale, and Canalis Arteriosus 40 Symptoms
42 Erysipelas Infantilis 44 Erysipelas Infantilis, Parts affected 45 Treatment
46 Aphthae, or Thrush 48 Appearance of it 49 Causes 52 Remedies 53 Red-Gum 58
Eruption, on the skin 60 Anomalous Rash 61 Crusta lactea, or milk-blotches 62
Sore Ears 69 Vomiting 71 Not a common Disease of Infants 71 Milk returned
curdled 72 Treatment 73 Gripes 76 Purging 77 Cause ib Kind of Stools 84 Watery
gripes 85 Treatment 8^ Purging, Dr. Armstrong's objections considered 80
Incontinence of Stools 91 Worms 92 Not usually dangerous ib. Kinds 93 Symptoms
94 Cause 95 Treatment 96 Convulsions 99 Of two kinds ib. Children oftener said
to die of them than they really do 100 Causes 101 A remarkable Case ib.
Treatment 102 Skin-bound 110 Not absolutely unnoticed 111 Symptoms 114 Cause
115 Treatment 116 Account of this disease on the Continent 118 Appearances
after Death 120 Tetanus 122 Cause 123 Treatment 124 Epileptic-fits ib. Cause
125 Treatment ib. Chorea Sancti Viti, or St. Vitus's Dance 127 Cause ib.
Appearances ib. Treatment ib. Teething 128 An important period in the Infant
state ib. Process of Dentition 130 Symptoms 131 Remedies 132 Great advantage of
lancing the gums 136 Fevers 142 Infants not very subject to common fevers 142
Causes of ib. Treatment 143 Slow fevers with appearance of boils 150
Mesenteric-fever 151 Symptoms ib. Causes 153 Treatment 154 Hectic-Fever and
Marasmus 159 Sometimes curable 160 Treatment 163 Scarlet-fever 165 Symptoms 166
Treatment 167 Cardialgia, or Inflammation of the Stomach 169 Symptoms ib.
Treatment 170 General observations on the Smallpox and Measles 171 Age and
circumstances suitable for Inoculation 173 Chicken-pox 176 How distinguished
from the Smallpox 177 Ague 179 Symptoms ib. (ague-cake) 180 Treatment 181
Hooping-Cough 184 Symptoms ib. Treatment 187 Spasmodic-Cough 194 Group 195
Causes 196 Prophylaxis, or Means of Prevention ib. Symptoms 197 Treatment 198
Morbid Appearances 199 Rickets 200 Cause 201 Symptoms ib. Treatment 202
Scrofula 204 Cause ib. Treatment 205 Hydrocephalus, or Watery-head 208 External
ib. Hydrocephalus, Internal 210 Cause and Symptoms 211 Treatment 213
Incontinence of Urine 214 Remedies ib. The Seven-days-disease 215
PART I.
TINEA, or Scall'd-head 222 In general only a topical complaint 223 of
different kinds 224 Treatment ib. Herpes miliaris, or Shingles, (Ring-worm) 225
Appearances 226 Remedies ib. Herpes exedens, or Serpigo 227 Treatment ib.
Scabies, or Itch 228 Ophthalmia, or Inflammation of the Eyes 229 Variously
distinguished ib. The common inflamed Eye 229 The watery Eye 231 The purulent
Ophthalmy ib. Treatment 232 Leucoma, or Spe^k of the Eye 236 Cataract, or Gutta
Serena 236 Stithe, or Stye 239 Deafness 240 Causes ib. Remedies 240 Canker of
the Mouth 241 Remedies 243 Gangrenous Erosion of the Che^ks 244 Appearances ib.
Treatment 245 Psoas, or Lumbar-abscess 246 Symptoms ib. Treatment ib. Morbus
Coxaris 247 White Swelling of the Joints 248 Palsy of the Lower Extremities,
with Curvature of the Spine 249 Cause 250 Symptoms ib. Treatment 251 Debility
of the Lower Extremities 254 Cause 255 First Symptoms ib. Treatment ib.
Curvature of the Bones from Weakness 257 Remedy 257 Paronychia, or Whitlow 259
Furunculus, or Boil 260 Chilblains ib. Cause 261 Treatment ib. Burns and Scalds
264 Remedies 265 Luxations and Fractures 267 Luxation of the Lower Jaw 270
Treatment ib. Cutting of the Tongue ib. Suffocation from swallowing the Point
of the Tongue 272 Symptoms ib. Remedy 273 Hemorrhage from the sublingual Veins
ib. Hiccough 274 Sneezing ib. Bleeding of the Nose 275 Hemorrhage from the
Navel 277 Herniae, or Ruptures 278 Rupture at the Navel 279 In the Groin 280
Hydrocele, or Watery-rupture ib. Appearance 281 Treatment 282 Retention of the
Testes 283 Tumefaction of the Prepuce 284 Prolapsus Any, or falling Down of the
Gut 285 Treatment 286 Discharges from the Vagina 287 Of various kinds ib.
Treatment ib. Of the Venom of Insects, and of certain Animals 290 Complaints
mentioned by ancient writers 294 Ranula 295 Cause ib. Treatment 296 Crinones,
or Grubbs ib. Morbum Pilare 298 Phthiriasis ib. Macies 299 ON Congenite
Disorders 300 Encephalocele, or Hernia of the Brain ib. Occasion 301 Treatment
ib. Tumors of the Scalp 302 Treatment 303 Lymphatic Tumors of the Head and
Spine 305 Treatment ib. Spina-byfida, and Parenchymatous Tumors 306 Treatment
ib. ON other external Disorders, and certain Blemishes, supposed to be Marks of
the Mother 307 Causes commonly assigned ib. Experience proves them to be
groundless 308 Blemishes that may be remedied ib. Hare lip 309 Properest time
for the Operation 315 On superfluous Parts 317 Vagina Imperforate ib.
Imperforate Anus 318 Operation 319 Imperforate Penis 320 The Ears Imperforate
321 Squinting 322 Vari and Valgi 323
PART II. GENERAL DIRECTIONS for the MANAGEMENT of INFANTS from the BIRTH.
Dry-nursing, unnatural 328 Arguments in favor of it usually futile 330 The
Duty of great attention to Infants 332 Hints taken from the irrational Species
336 Means of Recovering Infants apparently still-born (Note) 337 Great Heat and
Cold, and strong Light to be avoided 338 On washing of Infants 340 On the
Cold-bath (Note) 343 On the Intertrigo, Chasings or Excoriations 348 On forcing
out the milk from the breasts 349 Errors in regard to the first-clothing of
Infants 352 OBSERVATIONS on the NON-NATURALS On AIR 354 Changes of Clothes 356
On MEAT and DRINK 357 Children require no food immediately after Birth ib.
Milk, the most proper of all food 358 Infants will pine for a long time after
the Breast, when prematurely taken from it 362 Milk, or Bubby-pot, its
excellent contrivance 366 Resemblance to the Nipple 367 Objections answered 368
Proper times of feeding 370 Change of food as Children grow older 372 Proper
diet when ill 377 On the acescent quality of the food of Infants, their
disposition to Wind, and their Remedies 379 On the choice of Wet-nurses, and
their Diet 381 On weaning of Children 384 On SLEEP and WATCHING 385
Observations on the Cradle 387 Caution against the use of Opiates 388 On MOTION
and Rest 389 Exercise how important to Health 390 Caution in regard to Females
391 Proper time of putting Children on their feet 394 On Rest 397 On RETENTION
and EXCRETION 398 Retention and Incontinence of Urine 399 Infants bowels should
be always open ib. On the PASSIONS of the MIND 400 Laughter and Crying ib. On
the Tempers of Wet-nurses 402
A TREATISE, etc.
THE following pages being conceived to contain a pretty full account of the
diseases incident to childhood, and some of them scarcely known to preceding
writers, may possibly throw some additional light on this important subject.
They are, in this hope, respectfully offered to the notice of such
practitioners in physic, as may not have made the complaints of children their
particular study. The motives which have induced the writer to extend his plan
to another class of readers, it is presumed, may justify such an attempt. He
has, indeed, long lamented the very improper method in which the disorders of
infants are treated by those who design them the greatest kindness, but whose
mistaken opinions too often counteract their benevolent intentions. The
laudable affection of the fondest mother frequently becomes a source of
manifold injury to her tender offspring: And this is not only the case among
the lower class of people, or in situations where medical assistance is
procured with difficulty, but even in the metropolis itself, and in the higher
ranks of the community, where many prejudices very hurtful to the ease and
health of children still prevail.

It is intelligent Parents therefore, as well as the medical world, to whose
notice this work is addressed; and it is hoped, in the estimation of both, no
formal apology can be necessary for taking up a subject, that has long called
for a thorough investigation. -- For the manner in which it has been executed,
the author, indeed, again solicits the candor of the public. The most
respectable authorities, however, have been consulted, a proper attention been
paid to facts, and his best endeavors exerted to obviate the effects of that
peculiar veil There is nothing to which this peculiar obscurity may be
referred, but the incapacity of infants to describe their own feelings. --
There are, nevertheless, other sources of information, less fallacious
sometimes than the more literal descriptions of adults, which in nervous
complaints particularly, would tend to perplex the ablest physician if he
should always be led by them; and the like discrimination will serve him
equally well in the treatment of infants.
which is said to obscure infantile disorders. A practical arrangement of them
has been studied, and regard had to their respective causes and symptoms,
tending to elucidate their nature, and render their treatment more obvious than
has been generally imagined.

To their immediate Diseases, is added an attention to some of the principal
Accidents and little Injuries to which infancy and childhood are peculiarly
liable; which though not necessary, indeed, for some readers, it is presumed
will have their use, and may, possibly, prove no small satisfaction to others.
And here it may not be improper to observe, that whatever merit former
publications may possess, it may, nevertheless, with great propriety be
remarked, that they either make a part of some large systematic work, the bulk
of which must be foreign from the intentions of a tract of this kind, or else
they are far too concise, and have omitted many complaints of too much
importance to be overlooked.

It has been generally lamented by writers on these diseases, that this branch
of medicine has remained too much uncultivated. And, indeed, till of later
years, little more has been attempted than getting rid of the wild prejudices
and anile prescriptions of the old writers, which had too often served only to
obscure the true nature of children's diseases. Another, and a very principal
cause of so strange a neglect, has arisen from an idea some people have
entertained, that, as medical people can have but a very imperfect knowledge of
the complaints of infants, from the inability of children to give any account
of them, it is safer to entrust the management of them to old women and nurses;
who, at least, are not likely to do mischief by violent remedies, though they
may sometimes make use of improper and inadequate ones.

How fatal such a mistake must be, is surely sufficiently obvious; since the
destruction of infants is eventually the destruction of adults, of population,
wealth, and every thing that can prove useful to society, or add to the
strength and grandeur of a kingdom. It may, moreover, be observed, that where
mismanagement at this period does not actually destroy the life, it often very
essentially impairs the health; the foundation of a future good or bad
constition being frequently laid in a state of infancy.

It is true, indeed, some laudable attempts have been made of late years to
rescue this important trust from being indiscriminately committed to such
dangerous hands; but it is still to be lamented, that even in this liberal age,
such attempts have not been attended with all the success they have deserved.
It cannot therefore be improper, that something farther should be advanced on
the subject, in the hope of silencing the weak objections hitherto made against
procuring the best advice as early as possible. And this is the more necessary,
because those who have the greatest interest in the subject, the most authority
on the occasion, and the sincerest affection for their offspring, have
frequently the greatest objections to medical assistance, till it is,
sometimes, too late to employ it with effect. -- I may, indeed, be very
inadequate to the task of obviating such prejudices, but I shall state an
argument or two that has always appeared to me of great weight.

A principal objection, taken from the consideration of the incapacity of
infants to describe their complaints, has been slightly noticed already, and
has been more fully discussed in a treatise written about twenty years since,
by Dr. Armstrong. This edition did not contain more than a dozen diseases;
being confined to the hooping-cough, scrofula, teething, and the disorders of
the first-passages. In the year 1783, Dr. Armstrong published a second edition
considerably enlarged. It so happened, that I had not seen it when the first
edition of the present work appeared, or I should certaily have taken due
notice of it, in regard to several disorders, mentioned in the Doctor's latter
edition; to which therefore I shall now attend, as occasion shall offer.
It is aptly remarked by this writer, that the same difficulty occurs in a
variety of the most dangerous complaints of adults at every period of life,
which confessedly require the greatest assistance; such are attacks of phrenzy,
delirium, and some kinds of convulsions: to which may be added, all the
disorders of idiots and lunatics. But these have been successfully treated in
every age, not excepting even lunacy itself, and the melancholy subject happily
restored to society, his family, and himself.

It has likewise been observed, if infants for the reasons abovementioned are
to be excluded the benefit of a physician's advice, it is difficult to say at
what age children may safely be entrusted to his care; since at the age of five
or six years, they would frequently mislead the enquirer, who should trust to
their own account of their complaints. Their ideas of things are too indistinct
to afford us sufficient information, and they accordingly often call sickness
at the stomach, pain, and pain, sickness; they will frequently make no reply to
general questions, and when they are asked more particularly whether they have
any pain in one or another part of the body, they almost certainly answer in
the affirmative; though it afterward frequently turns out they were mistaken.

To this idea I will venture to add, that although infants can give no account
of their complaints in the manner we receive information from adults, their
diseases are all plainly and sufficiently marked by the countenance, the age,
the manifest symptoms, and the faithful account given by the parent, or an
intelligent nurse. This I am so confident of, that I never feel more at my
ease, in prescribing for any disorders than those of infants, and never succeed
with more uniformity, or more agreeable to the opinion I may have adopted of
the seat and nature of the disease. Every distemper may be said, in some sense,
to have a language of its own, and it is the business of the physician to be
acquainted with it; nor do those of children speak less intelligibly. In
neither of these sentiments do I stand alone; Harris, of whose work Sydenham is
thought to have spoken so highly, has said the same things -- "Incertae vero
diagnose^s (quae multum obtinuit) querela non tam a symptomatum defect^, quam a
praepostera ac inepta medendi ratione ortum suum duxisse videtur." (page 8.)
And at page 3. -- "Etenim asserere non verebor morbos illius aetatis genere
paucissimos esse, et gradu tantummod^ differe; imo curationem puerorum multo
tutiorem ac faciliorem, quam virorum ac mulierum." De Morb. Infant.
-- Limited as is human knowledge in every department, there are yet certain
principles and great outlines, as well in physic as in other sciences, with
which men of experience are acquainted, that will generally lead them safely
between the dangerous extremes of doing too little, or too much; and will carry
them successfully, where persons who want those advantages cannot venture to
follow them. -- Let me ask then; is it Education, is it Observation and long
Experience, that can qualify a person for the superintendance of infants, or
the treatment of their complaints? Surely all these fall eminently to the share
of regular practitioners, to the utter exclusion of nurses and empirics. Neque
pote^t scire quomodo morbos curare conveni^t, qui unde hi sint ignoret --
Pertinet ad rem omnium proprietates nosse. -- CELSUS.


Having briefly stated this matter, as I hope, with impartiality, and given it
the attention its importance demands, I shall next observe, that, as the
complaints of infants are more obvious than it has been generally supposed, so
their number is comparatively small, their cause uniform, It may perhaps be
objected to this idea, that their various diseases cannot all originate from
one and the same cause; nor is it my intention to assert it, though it is,
indeed, true, in regard to a great number of them. It is to be remarked
likewise, that it is the complaints of early infancy that are here particularly
spoken of; though it is nevertheless very evident, that there is a greater
uniformity also in the causes of several disorders even of older children, than
there is in those of adults, which have very often various, and dissimular
remote causes, at different times, and in different habits: E. G. obstructed
catamenia, ascites, etc.
and the treatment of most of them, simple and certain. Facillime inquam in
morbos dilabuntur infantes, et nisi aut serius aut imperitius tractentur,
facillime in sanitatem restituntur. -- HARRIS de Morbis acutis Infantum.


For the proof of this, as well as in order to establish a rational practice, I
shall first consider the Causes and Diagnostics, or specific nature of their
complaints, before I attempt to enter upon their Cure.

And here I shall not attend to the various remote causes, but shall confine
myself to a practical consideration of the subject, and briefly point out their
obvious occasions and symptoms. And on this account, I shall not take notice of
the various changes which nature herself induces during the growth of the
infant, as it passes from one stage of life to another; which is, doubtless, a
remote cause of some of their complaints.

A principal CAUSE, mentioned by ancient and modern writers, is the great
moisture and laxity of infants; which is necessary, however, in order to the
extension of parts, and the rapid growth of young children. This laxity arises
from the vast glandular secretion, their glands in general being much larger in
proportion, than those of adults. I might instance in the thymus gland, and
particularly in the pancreas and liver. But besides these, there are
innumerable glands situate within the mouth, in the gullet, stomach and bowels,
which are continually pouring out their contents into the first-passages. This
is, doubtless, a wise provision of nature, and I cannot, therefore, think with
Dr. Armstrong, that the gastric, or stomach juice, renders the chyle less fit
for absorption; but, as we do not strictly follow her dictates in the
management of children, as to their food, manner of clothing, sleeping, etc.
this abundance of slimy matter may often overload the stomach and bowels, the
constant seat of the first complaints in the infant state. Non quod aetas per
se sit causa illius morbi, est enim res naturalis et temporis determinatio, sed
quia disponit ad morbos quosdam facilius suscipiendos, si causae little
accesserint. -- PRIMEROS: de Morb. Infant.
The quality of the milk, or other food with which infants are nourished, may
be reckoned a second cause. A third arises from the delicacy of their muscular
fibers, and the great irritability of the nervous system. In addition to these
general causes may be reckoned the want of exercise, which at a more advanced
age, happily for us, we are obliged to make use of, and which art, in general,
does not duly supply in regard to children. Exercise is the grand mean of
health. -- The irrational species are capable of affording it to themselves
almost as soon as born; and though infant children are not, they are passive,
and can be exercised. Nature and instinct point out the expediency of it, and
the fond mother who follows only her own inclination, naturally, and insensibly
adopts it, and is continually stroking and playing with the little idol of her
heart, whenever it is awake; and as it grows older, she is led on to give it
more exercise, as it can bear it, and according to the satisfaction the infant
never fails to manifest on the occasion.


Hence arise acidities in the first-passages, a constant attendant upon all
their early complaints. SYLVIUS DE LE BOE. HARRIS.
The first of which, is the retention of the meconium, and the last (which may
be properly termed a disease at all peculiar to infants), is the cutting of the
teeth, in which likewise the state of the bowels is very much concerned.

Upon each of the above heads, it may be necessary to make farther observations
as occasion may offer, in order to take notice of some accidental causes
arising from mismanagement, or errors in the non-naturals, Such are food, air,
exercise, and the like.
as they have been called; especially in regard to the quantity of nourishment
administered to infants, and an inattention to the state of their bowels.

The symptoms of these first diseases of infants, (by which we also judge of
their nature), are chiefly retention and excretion; ^our belchings; sickness;
vomitings; purgings; the nature of the matter thrown off; watching; inquietude;
contraction, and sharpness of the features; blueness about the month; thirst;
heat; the manner of breathing and of crying; retraction of the lower
extremities; and pustules, or eruptions, external, or internal. The pulse and
urine are less certain marks than they are in older children, and adults. To
these may be added, the openness, or firmness of the fontanelles, or moles, and
of the sutures; and the relaxation or contraction of the skin in general, and
of the scrotum in particular.

Having thus briefly adverted to the general Causes and Symptoms, I shall now
proceed to the consideration of the Disorders themselves; and shall begin with
the

RETENTION OF THE MECONIUM.
THE Meconium is that black, viscid, or tenacious matter, which, it is well
known, every infant parts with by stool, for the two or three first days after
it is born, or retains it to its manifest injury.

The ordinary source of infantile complaints has already been said to originate
from something amiss in the first passages, according to the most ancient
opinions HIPPOC. CELSUS, AEGINETA.
, and I have long suspected, that a foundation is sometimes laid for them, from
not duly attending to an early expulsion of the meconium; which will sometimes
firmly adhere to the coats of the bowels, and remain for many days, unaffected
even by powerful medicines, as I shall have occasion to remark as I go on. -- I
shall only observe in this place, that though it should not be all retained,
yet a part will often remain much longer than has been usually imagined, and
will come away, perhaps unnoticed, at a late period, where no retention of it
has been suspected. Of this I can have no doubt, having been called to visit
infants after the month has been expired, who have been unwell through all that
period, for want of having been properly purged, and from whom meconium has
still been coming away. A tea-spoonful of castor-oil, given once or more, has
soon carried off a great quantity; upon which all their complaints have
disappeared.

The meconium appears to be no longer of use after the child is come into the
world, unless it be to keep the bowels from collapsing, till they be
replenished with the aliment the child is soon afterward to receive. Whereas,
if it be not soon carried off, it will not only change the quality of the milk,
or other food, as it descends into the bowels, but itself also becomes highly
acrid, (as it consists chiefly of gall) and cannot fail to produce indigestion,
flatulency, pain, purging or costiveness, and other similar evils: And the
meconium is farther disposed to this acrid state, on another account, viz. from
admixture of atmospheric air. Whilst the infant remains enclosed in the womb,
it is secured from all contact of air, and therefore the alimentary contents
remain harmless and bland though increasing for so many months; but it is well
known, ^ow soon every secretion or extravasation will become acrid, upon the
admission of air into any cavity where it may be lodged. And it is, doubtless,
on these accounts, that provident nature has imparted an opening quality to the
first milk of all animals; a certain indication to the rational species, to
assist the expulsion of this matter, now no longer required. For though a child
should even be suckled by its own mother, (in which case, there is, doubtless,
less occasion for other assistance) yet we know that nature does not, in every
instance, always fully accomplish her own designs: and it is from some striking
instances of the truth of these observations, that I have said so much on this
subject, which I have also been the more inclined to, because so many writers
have passed it over almost in silence.

I am aware that all those who esteem medical people to be officious disturbers
of nature, have objected to their assistance in this instance, and conclude,
that she would do the business much better if left to herself. The Editors of
the Critical Review offered a remark of this kind, upon this part of the work,
in its former edition; and is the only critique I remember to have seen. I have
therefore no cause of complaint against any writers of that description, and
should not have noticed the present censure, if I were not well satisfied there
is no room for such an objection. And indeed, it is now well known, that the
formidable disease, so fatal to newborn children in the West Indies, called
the locked jaw, or jaw-fallen, See Tetanus.
is almost always owing either to unwholesome, and confined air, or to a want
of purging off the meconium.
And there are even some physicians of this opinion, amongst whom I find Dr.
Buchan, whose abilities and reputation claim particular attention though he,
perhaps, may not be so much engaged amongst very young infants, as those whose
peculiar province it is to attend them from the birth. But there can be no
general rule without without exceptions, Vix ulla perpetua praecepta
medicinalis are recipit. CELSUS. Praef. Lib. i. p. 17.
and as, doubtless, many children would do very well without any such
assistance, so am I certain, many would not: and I believe, none can be
essentially injured by constantly assisting in this work, provided the means
first made use of be lenient, as they ought always to be. -- It is the province
of art to superintend nature, and not only to guard against her excesses, but
so to watch over her, as to ensure the accomplishment of her intentions,
whenever we perfectly comprehend, and can effect them without the risk of doing
harm. A Tree will produce fruit in its wild state; but by human culture the
tree is often preserved, and its fruit improved, far beyond its natural state.


For this purpose, amongst others, a new remedy has of late years been
recommended as preferable to any purging medicines whatever. Dr. ARMSTRONG on
the Diseases most fatal to infants. 1767.
Mankind has ever delighted in extremes -- no sooner has any thing, formerly
judged to be hurtful, or even poisonous, been found in certain cases, to be
very useful, than it is supposed to be capable of doing every thing, and
supersedes all that the wisdom of former ages has proved to be salutary. Hence,
some advantages experienced from the use of wine of antimony, in a variety of
children's complaints, as far as they arise from one common cause, has induced
some people to extol it as an universal remedy. But wherefore give an emetic,
calculated to empty the stomach, in order to expel the meconium from the lower
bowels? On examining the first-passages of still-born infants, (newly dead) it
appears, that the large intestines contain the true meconium; the smaller
bowels, only a thin bilious fluid mixed with a little gastric juice. The
stomach contains still less, as no bile can enter it but by regurgitation from
the duodenum, and the gastric juice is in small quantity, not enough to be
brought up by an emetic without violent straining; which I should imagine it
can answer no good end to excite by a vomit, the first hour a child comes into
the world.
It is universally allowed, and by this writer also, that emetics are not to be
administered when the bowels are full, which, in this instance, is precisely
the case. It is true, the wine of antimony does not always vomit children, nor
will a little matter oftentimes do this, (as I shall have occasion to take
notice very soon); it is sometimes, indeed, found to act as a purgative: but if
this be the intention, why not adhere to the old, and more certain method, and
direct at once such things whose proper operation may be depended upon? Not the
stomach, but the bowels, are the natural and safe outlet for most complaints of
children, and a want of due attention to this circumstance has been productive
of some evils, which many practitioners, I think, are not sufficiently aware of.

It is very evident, that some gentle purgative is indicated on this occasion,
and that it should be of a kind that will create as little disturbance as
possible, and especially should not be of an offensive, or indigestible nature;
though such have been very commonly advised. In general, indeed, a very little
matter will suffice; perhaps a little syrup of roses, diluted with some thin
gruel, and given occasionally by tea-spoonfuls, will mostly answer the end;
will also serve to keep the child quiet, and so prevent the nurse from giving
it improper food. But if this should fail to procure stools, a watery infusion
of rhubarb, (or a tea-spoonful of the wine, diluted as above) will be found
preferable to the indigestible oily mixtures in common use. See HARRIS.
In the country, where the above medicines may not be at hand, a little fresh
whey and honey will be an excellent substitute. As I have professed writing for
the benefit of the intelligent parent, as well as to assist regular
practitioners, I shall take this early opportunity of dropping a hint in regard
to the doses of medicines, as a kind of general guide, where the exact dose may
not be pointed out. Indeed, it were impossible, in many instances, so to
prescribe, as to afford no latitude to the discretion of those who are watching
the infant, and are eyewitnesses to all its complaints; and I might rather
lead the less intelligent into errors, by attempting to lay down very
particular and precise directions.

The rules I shall here offer will chiefly refer to vomits, purges, anodynes,
(or composing medicines) and the testaceous powders, or absorbents.

Every one knows, that the doses of medicines should be adapted to different
ages; but these are not in mere arithmetrical or geometrical proportions, and
their due relation is only to be ascertained by experience, and in a reference
to all the varieties of constitution, and habits.

From the result of daily observation, one may say, for example, to a child of
seven years old, nearly the half of the dose suitable for adults; to one of
three years, the fourth part; of one year, the sixth part; and the eighth or
tenth part to an infant in the month.

An adult person may take from fifteen to thirty grains of the testaceous
powders, and double that quantity of magnesia, at a dose, to be repeated
several times a day. -- From fifteen to thirty grains of ipecacuanha, and from
one to two, of emetic tartar, as a vomit. From one to two ounces of salts, or
of manna, and from ten to thirty grains of jalap, and from four to ten of
colomel as a purge. From ten to thirty drops of laudanum, and from half an
ounce to two ounces of syrup of white poppies, as an anodyne.

From this twofold direction, parents may, perhaps, attain to a more accurate
estimation of the dose proper for their children, by means of the experience
they may have had of the particular quantity of any of the above medicines
usually found sufficient for themselves, whereinsoever that happens to vary
from the dose here supposed to be proper for adults.




The objection now made to oily medicines is very much increased, from nurses
scarcely ever giving the quantity that is directed, in the course of the first
twenty-four hours, as it is always designed; and administering the rest long
after the child has begun to suck, or to feed. At this period, mixing with the
nourishment, it has a direct tendency to produce indigestion, wind, and the
very complaints, which the oils, administered in proper time, were designed to
prevent. Not to add, that some kind of oily medicine being the usual purgative
on this occasion, is an inducement to parents and nurses to procure a
repetition of it, and to administer it whenever an infant happens to be costive
during ^he month; and from whence, the above evils may be frequently induced.

But it has been observed, the meconium is not always disposed to come away,
even by the assistance of common purgative medicines. Having, therefore, begun
with such as the above, if the child has no stool for twelve or fourteen hours
after birth, and especially if it should seem to be in pain, a clister ought to
be thrown up; which may be repeated, if necessary, a few hours afterward. And
here I would observe, that in the cases where more powerful means are required,
scarcely any evacuation will be procured by these gentle means; for, as I have
seen, wherever I could procure one copious stool by a clyster, or gentle
laxative, the rest of the meconium has come away with little, or no farther
assistance. But as it sometimes happens, that neither clysters nor purgatives
have any sufficient effect for several days, very powerful means must then be
made use of; there being reason to suspect a suspension of nervous influence. I
shall close this subject therefore, with a recent instance of this kind, (of
which, I have seen many) as a proof of what powerful remedies may sometimes be
required, and how necessary it is to pay some attention to this first complaint
of infants.

The child was born of very healthy parents, (not at all of constipated habits)
after a quick and comprehensively easy labor, on the 22d. of February. -- To
avoid prolixity, I shall not state the case in the form of journal; but shall
only observe, that the child took a little rhubarb an hour or two after it was
born; but having had no stool when I saw it the next day, I ordered a clyster
to be thrown up. In the evening, the child became drowsy and insensible, and
when rouzed, it moaned, but seemed unable to cry. It continued pretty much in
this state, (and at times, seemingly, in great pain, and evidently convulsed)
for six days; and was nourished chiefly by a tea-spoon with a little
breast-milk, seldom reviving sufficiently to to suck.

It had no stools, but such as made only a few spots on the cloths about the
size of a shilling, till the twenty-seventh, and those were very small, hard,
and lumpy. On the twenty-eighth it had more of this kind, and it had not till
the twenty-ninth any thing like a proper stool, which was also mixed with hard
lumps; but on the third of March, they were thinner, and on the fifth came very
freely. -- In the course of six and thirty hours, I prescribed two ounces of
the common infusion of senna, two drams of rochelle salts, four grains of
jalap, and a grain of calomel; besides purging clysters, and the use of the
warm bath. The next day the child took four grains of ipecacuanha at two doses,
and forty drops of the new wine of antimony, at four times (in the course of an
hour) without any effect; and at another period, six drams of castor-oil,
besides several doses of manna. From such instances as these, as well as the
remark already offered on the Locked jaw of the West Indies, the expediency of
having recourse to some safe and effectual means of purging off the meconium
seems to be evidently pointed out; more especially when we consider the
dangerous complaints, which are said to arise in some of the hospitals in Paris
from an undue retention of this viscid matter.
Three days after the child got rid of the meconium, the thrush made its
appearance; which was slight, but continued above three weeks.

ICTERITIA, or INFANTILE JAUNDICE.
THE Jaundice of infants seems always to have been improperly conceived of.
Those who have written only on children's diseases, have usually passed it over
in silence, whilst others have considered it as rather a serious complaint, and
have prescribed as for the jaundice of adults. On the other hand, parents and
nurses have usually accounted the common yellowness that appears about the
third day after birth (termed by some yellow-gum) as the true jaundice. Neither
of these opinions seem to me to be just; for the latter of these appearances
requires no attention at all, and though infants are not subject to the
troublesome jaundice of adults, (unless infected by the breast-milk) they
nevertheless are liable to some affections of that kind which claim some
attention. These are easily distinguished from the common yellowness, mentioned
above, by the tunica albuginea, or white of the eyes being always very yellow;
but the nails are not tinged, as in the jaundice of adults, though it is
probable they usually would be, if the complaint were long neglected, and the
child suffered to be costive. I have waited some days to see if the yellowness
would go off of itself, as the usual tinge does; but it has always increased
rather than diminished. It arises from viscid matter obstructing the
gall-ducts, which open into the duodenum, and therefore requires a little
emetic. Wine of antimony is a very proper one on this occasion, as it may
likewise procure two or three stools; but as children in this complaint are not
easily made to vomit, should the wine fail, I would advise three or four grains
of the the powder of ipecacuanha, which is more certain in its operation; and
the next day give four or five grains of rhubarb. Should the symptoms continue,
the emetic ought to be repeated after two or three days, and rhubarb be given
about every other day, till the yellowness disappears; which, under this
treatment, never continues more than ten or twelve days, unless the stools are
of a very pale color; in which ^ase a little more time, as well as the use of
the warm-bath, will be required.

Women long afflicted with jaundice, during any part of their pregnancy, though
actually brought to bed in that state, do not infect their children, unless
they also suckle them; I have myself never met with such an instance; but Mr.
Baumes, who has been very attentive to the disease, once saw an infant so
infected from the womb: but in this case, the child died very soon in a very
diseased state, the internal part of the liver being in a state of suppuration.
but, from some striking instances, I have found that suckling in that state is
capable of communicating the true jaundice to a great degree, and that it will
not be cured, but by the recovery of the mother or nurse, or by the infant
being weaned, as well as properly treated.

The true jaundice, distinguished by the skin being every where discolored, as
well as the whites of the eyes, seems to be much more common among newborn
infants in France, than in this country; as appears by a memoir written by Mr.
Baumes, and to which a prize-medal of the Faculty of Medicine in Paris has been
adjudged.

In this work the various causes and nature of the disease are distinguished;
and a correspondent treatment pointed out with great accuracy and judgment.
Throughout the tract there seems also to be much ingenious and plausible
theory; though I cannot agree with that able physician in supposing the
jaundice to be occasioned by the retention of the meconium, otherwise than from
this viscid matter sometimes obstructing the orifice of the biliary ducts; for
in the several instances I have met with of the most obstinate retention of
that secretion, there has not been the least disposition to jaundice; nor can I
conceive, that any part of the meconium is usually absorbed in icteric cases,
as Mr. Baumes has imagined; neither does such an incident appear to be
necessary in order to account for the frequency of the disease in that kingdom,
or elsewhere.

As to the treatment, under the different circumstances there described, I meet
with nothing that militates against the more general account I have given of
this disease, or the treatment adapted to it, under the form wherein it appears
in this country.

INWARD-FITS.
ANY derangement of the first-passages is capable of giving rise to various
complaints, among which, that of inward-fits, has lately been taken notice of
by some medical people, but I think scarcely deserves the name of a disease. It
demands attention, however, because so much has been said about it as to expose
the fond parent to continual apprehensions, left this subtle disease should be
insensibly at work, and making way for more severe and outward convulsions.

A constant symptom in this kind of fit, as it is called, is the infant's
little mouth being drawn into a smile; which whoever has noticed must have
beheld it with pleasure. And if the complaint extends no farther than this
smiling, which is generally in its sleep, it arises merely from a little wind,
and is certainly harmless, because the wind in this case is not really
confined; and therefore an immediate recourse to pukes or purges, is more
likely to do harm, by straining the stomach, or by relaxing the bowels, than to
do any good. Every body is acquainted with the effects of different degrees of
irritation of the nerves, from the sensation produced by tickling with a
feather, to that of a hard gripe, or a violent stroke. The first may be said to
be pleasing; and such, I doubt not, is the stimulus in question on the nervous
coat of the stomach of little infants, and therefore produces so agreeable a
smile, that I could never consider it as an indication of pain. Indeed, I know
of no complaint that ought to be termed inward fits; and I mention this,
because nurses are continually talking to us about them, when children are
perfectly well, and often give the fond parent needless distress, as well as
many an unpleasant medicine to the child. It were certainly a good rule, to
administer no medicine to infants for such symptoms as do not indicate some
real complaint, unless where experience proves that such symptoms neglected are
apt to forerun some well known disease.
They are at the same time treating the true convulsion, whilst slight, in the
same way, being led into the error by the ideas of inward fits; a term they are
ever using but have no precise ideas of, nor do any two of them mean the same
thing by it. It were therefore better, perhaps, the term were altogether
abolished; as the child is either evidently convulsed, or has no kind of fit,
at least none for which any remedy can be offered. Infants, as well as adults,
do sometimes, indeed, die suddenly without any manifest convulsion. But this
more frequently happens after over-feeding, and arises from a spasm of the
stomach; or sometimes of the heart or lungs; and infants may then be said to
die of inward-fits, there being no external convulsion; but this is, by no
means, the kind of affection usually understood by that term.
-- If the child should sleep too long, and this smile should often return, the
infant may be taken up, gently tapped on the back, and its stomach and belly be
well rubbed by the fire; which is all that can be necessary. This gentle
exercise will bring a little wind from its stomach, and the child will go to
sleep again quietly.

This complaint, however, is largely treated of by some writers, and Dr.
Armstrong wishes to give a few drops of the wine of antimony; but it is very
apparent, that when he considers it as worthy of more attention than I have
just now advised, it is either a true convulsion, in which the eyes are
distorted, and the mouth is discomposed, instead of putting on a smile, or else
he is prescribing for another disease under the name of inward-fits, which
former writers have treated under the head of disorders arising from
costiveness and wind. But if this little turn of the features should arise from
constant over-feeding it, were endless to administer emetics; the cause of the
complaint is obvious, and upon the removal of it the remedy must rest.

Such has ever been my opinion of this much-talked-of complaint; and indeed I
have not to this day, after a good deal of attention to infants, seen any thing
myself to induce me alter it; or I would in this edition, have cheerfully
retracted the preceding observations. As I wish, however, to afford all the
information I can on every complaint, I have to observe, that it is conceived
by some gentlemen of great respectability and experience, that though the term,
inward-fits, has been often misapplied, there is really such a complaint, and
that it generally proves fatal. Besides a little blueness of the lips, and
slight turning up of the eyes, often noticed by nurses, this complaint is
described to me as attended with a peculiar sound of the voice (somewhat like
the croup) and a very quick breathing, at intervals; and is supposed to arise
from a spasm of the stomach, lungs, or other vital organ; a complaint I have
indeed too frequently seen, See Note, pages, 27, 28.
but certainly very different from that usually known by inward-fits.

These symptoms are said frequently to attack the child in the sleep; and in
their commencement will go off upon taking it up from its cradle. They are
likewise observed to be induced by sucking or feeding, and to be increased upon
any little exertion of body, or transient surprise, and in this manner to recur
for a length of time, before they become alarming. The remedies proposed for
the cure of this complaint are an emetic, on the first attack, and afterward
volatiles and fetids; but, as it has been observed, not often to good effect.

In regard to costiveness and wind, which have been said to be the parent of
what nurses commonly term inward-fits, as they do not always arise from one and
the same cause, and are productive of other complaints than those above
mentioned, I shall consider them by themselves; which, it is presumed, will be
pursuing a more rational plan, than adhering to a term obscure in itself, and
indicative of a disease not well defined, and which therefore may tend to
mislead the generality of readers.

DISORDERS arising from COSTIVENESS and WIND.
IT has been usual with ancient writers, when conciseness and accuracy were not
so much considered as in the present day, to treat of costiveness and wind as
distinct heads of complaint; and for the reasons aforementioned, as well as
from this little tract being calculated for general usefulness, and not merely
for medical readers, it may not be altogether improper to comply with this
custom.

Wind is but a mere symptom of some preceding or attending complaint; nor are
its troublesome effects either occasioned or increased by air taken in with the
food, as many people have imagined; atmospheric air being essentially different
from that produced by indigestion, whether owing to the weakness of the
stomach, as it is called, or the improper quality or quantity of the food taken
into it. It may, however, prove a source of many complaints, and create
watchfulness, startings, hiccoughs, vomitings, and even convulsions, if not
timely attended to, especially if the infant is costive.

Costiveness is either constitutional, or accidental, which ought always to be
distinguished, the former being oftentimes harmless; and, indeed, children of
such a habit of body are frequently the most thriving. If the mother should be
very constipated, her children generally are so; and such a disposition,
(whilst they continue in health) ought not, I believe, to be counteracted,
though it will be prudent carefully to watch it. And this will be especially
necessary, in the case of children who are subject to fits; fine lusty infants
being often seized with violent convulsions, without any other apparent cause
than a natural costive state of the bowels, and as uniformly recovered from the
fits, merely by procuring stools, and breaking off the wind. And this
disposition to fits has taken place long before the ordinary period of
teething, and has continued till children have been a twelvemonth old; at
which time the solids, and especially the nervous system, has appeared to get
stronger. In such habits, a quarter of an ounce of manna, or the like quantity
of the syrup of roses, may be put into any liquid, and as much of it given by
tea-spoonsful, as shall open the belly: or a tea-spoonful of castor-oil, Oil of
castor may be rendered very acceptable to children, if rubbed down with gum
arabic, and a little manna, and afterward made into a draught or mixture with
some dill-water, and the addition of a drop or two of the compound spirit of
ammonia, where that may be proper.
or from five to ten drops of the compound tincture of aloes, may be taken two
or three times a-week. And here it may not be useless to observe, that rhubarb
will not be a fit purgative, though it be joined with magnesia, which will not
sufficiently counteract its restringency. Another reason for objecting to this
compound, is that of its being the almost constant prescription of nurses on
every occasion, whose indiscriminate use of it is generally needless, and
sometimes prejudicial; rhubarb alone, in ordinary cases, answering all the
purpose intended, whilst the magnesia makes an unnecessary addition to the bulk
of the medicine, which should always be avoided for children. A few grains of
magnesia in a spoonful of water, and sweetened with a little manna, forms a
much neater medicine, and in costive habits, which usually abound with acidity,
answers very well in early infancy.

But if the child be otherwise in health, it has been said, it is, in general,
inadviseable to do much to counteract the natural habit of body. I have
formerly, even during the month, directed manna, even to half an ounce at a
time, to very little purpose, unless it were almost daily repeated, and have at
other times given from three to five grains of jalap; till I learned there are
some constitutions, even in infants, where the bowels cannot be kept open
without a daily exhibition of some purgative medicine, and that many such
children are as well left to themselves, and require only to be watched. If a
stool should be wanted, however, a suppository made of a little slip of paper,
twisted up, and well moistened with oil, may be very easily introduced, and
will generally answer the purpose: or should this fail, a bit of Castile soap
may be introduced in like manner.

Should such a costive (...) of the bowels produce griping pains, which may be
known by the drawing up of the legs, or of the scrotum, and a certain manner of
crying; or should the costiveness be accidental, it must speedily be remedied;
and if the occasion of it be an improper food, which is very often the case,
the food must immediately be changed. If the child be not usually costive,
rhubarb Some writers have in this case recommended oil, and particularly the
French, who administer oil of almonds to infants much too frequently. Mr Le
Feubre de Villebrune therefore, in the translation with which he has honored
this work, gives the preference to oils; but I must beg leave, in turn, to
differ from him, being persuaded, there are few cases beside disorders of the
chest, in which any kind of oil, but that of castor, will not be injurious to
young infants, and particularly in affections of the first-passages.
is often the best purgative, as it strengthens the bowels afterward, infants
being much more subject to an over-purging than to almost any other complaint,
especially if brought up by hand. It sometimes happens, however, that much more
powerful medicines than rhubarb may be required, whether the child be naturally
costive, or not; and in such cases, much caution is necessary on the part of
parents and nurses: For, where a proper dose of senna-tea has proved
ineffectual, it is surprising what large doses even of rough purges have been
given in vain, or sometimes to the injury of the child. On such occasions, I
would rather advise a recourse to clysters, and especially those made of
succotorine aloes. From five to twenty grains, according to the age of the
infant, dissolved in boiled milk, will rarely, if ever fail of procuring two or
three stools, especially if preceded by the exhibition of a purge. But even
drastic clysters should be administered with caution, and ought not to be very
often repeated, especially to very young children; though less hazardous, in
every view, tha^ ^he frequent repetition of purges of a similar ^ind.

It may be necessary here to observe, that purgatives for infants ought
generally to be made potentially warm, by the addition of a little ginger,
po^nded cardamom-seed, carraway-tea, or dill-water; which is of more
consequence than is usually apprehended. I have known a careful attention to
this circumstance alone, happily suppress complaints in the bowels, which had
long continued obstinate, though, in other respects, properly treated.

As there is usually too much acidity in the first-passages in costive and
windy habits, a little magnesia may be given for a few days after the
costiveness has been removed; and if the child be suckled, the nurse's diet
must be attended to. If any flatulency should still remain, (which will not
often be the case if it has arisen merely from constipation) a little
dill-water is the most harmless carminative. But should it be an attendant upon
a lax state of the bowels and indigestion, its remedy will consist in the
removal of those complaints, which will be noticed in their place.

I have hitherto spoken chiefly of Costiveness; wind being, however, likewise
sometimes a real complaint, though it should not happen to be so confined as to
become an occasion of fits. The only instances of this kind, indeed, that I
remember having seen, have been in newborn and very lusty infants, whose
mothers have also been peculiarly distressed by affections of that kind. This
is, indeed, a somewhat anile way of speaking, but it states the precise fact;
and one instance of an infant suffering in this way was so remarkable, that it
may be worth noticing in this place.

In this case, the meconium began to pass off soon after birth, but not without
repeated clysters, purgatives, and the warm-bath, and was peculiarly viscid, as
well as in vast quantity. Nevertheless, the infant appeared, for several days,
likely to be strangled, and was black in the face, merely through the abundance
of wind in the first-passages; though it was continually breaking off both by
the mouth and the bowels, and by that peculiar, and very loud noise, when it
came upwards, frequently observed in the hysterical spasm of adults, and
continuing for several hours together, so that the infant was often thought to
be dying. The whole face, except the nose, became exceedingly swelled, so that
the infant could scarcely open its eyes, though without any discolouration of
the skin; being probably owing to wind diffused through the cellular membrane;
the tumor subsiding immediately upon getting rid of the wind from the stomach
and bowels.

These symptoms, however, yielded to carminative juleps, and purging medicines;
and the infant after the meconium was all come away, was freed from every
complaint, without any farther semblance of fits, though frequently apprehended.

WATCHING, or WANT of SLEEP.
THIS is frequently a symptom of the foregoing complaints, and is to be removed
by opening the belly, and afterward administering some pleasant and
carminative pearl-julep; This remedy has been so called from having been
formerly composed of prepared pearls, and the name is here retained because
familiar to some readers; but the pearls having no virtue peculiar to them, are
very seldom made use of. The julep is now prepared from the shell-powders, or
testacea. -- As this term (or testaceous powders) occurs very frequently in
this work, it may not be amiss to observe, that testacea consist of prepared
oyster-shells, crabs claws, crabs eyes, pearls, and red-coral; which differ but
little from each other. They are likewise denominated absorbents, in which
latter class, are also ranked prepared chalk, and magnesia; the former is more
powerful and binding than any of the testacea, and the latter is, on the other
hand, moderately opening. -- Either of them may may be given to infants, from
three to ten grains at a dose, three or four times a day.
which will then frequently act like an opiate See HARRIS De Morbis acutis
Infantum.
by restoring rest. Sometimes, indeed, this has succeeded so well, when given
in large doses, that I have been suspected of having really given some sleeping
medicine; which would in these cases prove exceedingly hurtful, as the
watchfulness is generally a mere symptom, and not a disease; though when very
obstinate, it is sometimes the harbinger of epilepsy, and then requires
purgative medicines. I cannot, therefore, avoid taking notice in this place, of
the destructive custom amongst nurses, of giving opiates, in one form or other;
which, however useful on proper occasions, are sure to act as a poison, and
sometimes not a very slow one, when injudiciously administered, and never can
be more so, than in a costive state of the bowels.

Watchings may arise from worms, purging, gripings from acrid breast-milk, or
other food, and from indigestion, as well as from every thing capable of
producing pain; each of which will be considered in their proper place. The
seat of this complaint is, indeed, usually in the first passages, and in very
young infants is frequently owing to costiveness. I shall only observe farther,
if watchfulness be confined only to the night, it is probable, the child sleeps
too long in the day time, which may be remedied by keeping it moving, and
playing with it throughout the day; of which farther notice will be taken,
under the head of Management of Children.

The preceding complaints would naturally lead me to consider the Thrush, and
other disorders connected with the state of the first-passages; but it is
necessary first to mention one or two of a very different kind, which either
exist at the birth, or appearing very soon afterward, would otherwise be much
out of place.

IMPERFECT CLOSURE of the FORAMEN OVALE, and CANALIS ARTERIOSUS; with other
PRETERNATURAL CONFORMATIONS of the HEART.
THESE morbid deviations appearing in different parts, See Morgagni, Epis. 17.
Art. 12. Land. Med. Journal page 4. and Med. Observe. and Inq. vol. vi.
have in all the same tendency, viz. in a greater or less degree, to obstruct
the passage of the blood through the lungs, which in some instances has
continued nearly the same as in the unborn-fetus. The peculiarity, is sometimes
in the pulmonary artery, which is constricted, or closed, as it rises from the
right ventricle; at others, in the septum cordis, which has an unnatural
opening, affording a free communication between the two ventricles; and
sometimes in the imperfect closure of the foramen ovale, or the ^^nalis
arteriosus.

These sources of disease are mentioned merely with the view of pointing out
the symptoms by which they may be known, and not of attempting a remedy; which
is out of our power. The recital, however, may serve to prevent fruitless
attempts, and perhaps the aggravation of the symptoms, and consequent distress
of the patient, where upon due knowledge of the disease, art has, evidently,
nothing to offer. The imperfections are owing merely to an original
malformation of parts, or in the two latter instances, to a deficiency in the
powers of the system soon after birth; the only time in which that diversion to
the circulation can take place, which nature has intended upon the change made
in consequence of respiration.

The precise time when this change should take place, is not attempted to be
settled, the passages being open in children of very different ages; nor do
both always close at the same time. It is conjectured, however, that this
process ought to begin from the birth, as it is found to do in the remains of
the vessels of the navel-string; It is probable, however, that they are not
very firmly closed for some time, as I have easily forced the vessels open, by
an injection, in children who died at the end of the month.
so that, although the fatal apertures in the heart should not be actually
impervious at the end of some months, it is imagined a constriction usually
takes place, and that, at least, some check is given to the blood's passing
from one side of the heart to the other, in the free manner it does in the
fetus, This, it is natural enough to conceive, and I apprehend, is owing to a
greater quantity of blood rushing into the lungs, in consequence of
respiration, (which lessens the difficulty of entering that organ); by which
means, a greater quantity flows into the left auricle from the pulmonary veins,
which filling the part, prohibits an entry from the right. Upon the like
principle, the aorta being more distended by a large quantity of blood from the
left ventricle, prevents the pulmonary artery from emptying itself into it by
the canalis arteriosus.

Sometimes one of these apertures is found open, and the other closed up,
especially the canalis arteriosus, which is of the greater consequence; the
foramen ovale having in several instances been found pervious in adults; and it
is imagined is always so, in those diverse, who can remain the better part of an
hour under water.

Whether the preternatural aperture be in the vessels, auricles, or ventricles,
or wheresoever any morbid stricture may be, whenever it may prove of any
consequence, the constant symptoms attending it are a discolouration of the
face and neck, with a sloe-blue, or leaden color of the lips, such as is met
with in some fits of asthma. These take place soon after birth, and the
discolouration is increased, and attended with difficulty of breathing, as
often as the child is any wise agitated; but are not relieved by procuring
stools, by the warm-bath, or any other mean made use of as a remedy for fits;
nor can be, but by the child being kept as tranquil as possible.

If the aperture be in the canalis arteriosus, children usually sink very soon
under the complaint, of which I have seen one instance only a few months since;
but if the aperture be in the inferior parts of the heart, infants may survive
for months, or even for years. A recent instance of which, with an accurate
account of the disease, is recorded in the third vol. of the Medical
Transactions of the College. In such instances, the system having been
accustomed to the effects of this derangement, is better able to withstand
them; the patient, however, can endure but little motion, the heart becoming
thereby surcharged with blood, and respiration rendered more difficult; hence
also the blood is detained in the extremities, and the face, neck, and hands
become particularly discolored. Some time, indeed, before the patient sinks
under the disease, the symptoms are aggravated, and almost the least motion
endangers suffocation.

ERYSIPELAS INFANTILIS.
IN the former edition it was observed, that this complaint did not appear to
have been distinctly noticed by any preceding writer. Hoffman, indeed, though
he makes no mention of any such complaint in his Morb^ Infantum, has the
following intimation in his chapter de Febre Erysipelacea, and it should
therefore seem, was acquainted with that species of the disease which appears
in the more simple form of erysipelas; but which he had noticed only in the
region of the belly. -- "Umbilialem regionum in infantibus frequentius
infestar, ac inde per abdomen ^^^rgitur, cum gravibus pathematibus, funesto ut
plurimum eventu."

De Febre Erysipelacea, sec. i. cap. xiii.

The French have likewise spoken lately of a somewhat similar affection,
combined with different endemic complaints infecting cro^ded hospitals: the
disease, however, does not appear to have been any where noticed in its simple
form.


This being now, confessedly, the case (at least in respect to the form in
which it now appears) it seems necessary to give a name to the disease, which,
it is apprehended, may with propriety be termed Erisipelas Infantilis.

It is a very dangerous species of the spurious, or erisipelatous inflammation,
which I have not met with, but in lying-in hospitals. The ordinary time of its
attack being a few days after birth, it was remarked in the former edition,
that it was thought never to appear later than the mo^^^; but I have since seen
it in a child of two months old: and the late Dr. Bromfield informed me, that
he had noticed it in a child much older. It seizes the most robust, as w^ll as
delicate children, and in an instaneous manner; the progress is rapid; the skin
turns of a purplish hue; and soon becomes exceedingly hard.

The milder species of it appears often on the fingers and hands, or the feet
and ankles, and sometimes upon, or near the joints, forming matter in a very
short time. The more violent kind is almost always seated about the pubis, and
extends upwards on the belly, and down the thighs and legs; though I have two
or three times seen it begin in the neck. The swelling is but moderate, but
after becoming hard, the parts turn purple, livid, and very often mortify;
especially in boys, when it falls on the scrotum; the penis swells, and the
prepuce puts on that kind of emphysematous, or windy appearance, which it has
in children when a stone is sticking in the passage; or in the dropsy of the
scrotum.

Upon examining several bodies after death, the contents of the belly have
frequently been found glued together, and their surface covered with
inflammatory exudation, exactly similar to that found in women who have died of
puerperal fever. In males, the tunicae vaginales have been sometimes filled
with matter, which has evidently made its way from the cavity of the abdomen,
and accounts for the appearances of the organs of generation just now
described: in females, the labia pudendi are affected in like manner, the pus
having forced a passage through the abdominal rings.

Various means were made use of at the British Lying-in Hospital without
success, though the progress of the inflammation seemed to be checked for a
while by saturnine fomentations and poultices, applied on the the very first
appearance of the inflammation; but it soon spread, and a mortification
presently came on; or where matter had been formed, the tender infant sunk
under the discharge. It is now some years since I proposed making trial of the
bark, to which sometimes a little confectio aromatica has been added; from
which time several have recovered. My colleague Dr. Garthshore, has for several
years past directed the application of linen compresses wrung out of
camphorated spirit, in the place of the compound water of acitated litharge
which has proved more successful in checking the inflammation in several
instances; nevertheless, the greater number of infants attacked with this
disorder, still sink under its violence, and many of them in a very few days.

Since the former edition of this tract, the same disease, as I apprehend, has
appeared once in a new form, in the British Lying-in Hospital. In this
instance, the infant was not only born with hard, and sublivid inflammatory
patches, and ichorous vesications, about the belly and thighs, but other spots
were already actually in a state of mortification. An eschar soon spread to
near three inches in length upon the spine of the tibia, and other smaller ones
appeared about the legs, and on several of the toes and fingers. The parents of
the child appeared to enjoy good health, and the mother had plenty of good
milk, which her infant was fortunately able to take in great quantity. The
child was hereby duly nourished; and taking likewise every day, from the time
the mortification began to spread, from four to six ounces of a strong
decoction of the bark, it was supported under an excessive discharge of matter,
through this tedious disease. The parts affected were at the same time
frequently fomented, and were sometimes wrapped up in warm cataplasms, and at
others, dressed with theriaca, as the sloughs became loose; and were covered
with compresses wrung out of camphorated spirit. The infant, however, lost two
joints of one of its fingers, and the first of another; all the other fingers,
and the toes, contrary to expectation, throwing off the mortified parts, were
recovered entirely, and the child was sent out of the hospital perfectly well;
and I had the satisfaction of seeing it in good health, several months
afterward.

APTHAE, or THRUSH.
HAVING considered the above early complaints, I return to those which owe
their immediate origin to some affection of the first passages, as they are
called.

It is amongst the vulgar errors, that the thrush is a very harmless complaint,
or is even desirable to a child in the month; for it is said, if it does not
then make its appearance, it certainly will at a more advanced age, and will
then prove fatal, or will, at least, attend the patient in his last illness.
The fact is, it is a disease of debility, and therefore attacks very young, and
very old subjects, especially if otherwise weakened. From the above mistake,
however, the disorder is often neglected in the beginning, whereby the acidity
in the first passages is suffered to increase, which always aggravates the
complaint. It is, indeed, a much milder disorder in this island than on most
parts of the Continent (through a priori we might perhaps, supose it would be
otherwise) particularly in France, where it reigns as a malignant epidemic,
especially in the Hotel Dieu, and Foundling Hospitals, known by the names of
Muguet and Millet. It has been already remarked, that several hospital diseases
in France are more complex than with us, possibly from their infirmaries
receiving a much greater number of patients than ours, and their apartments and
beds being consequently less clean, as well as the air more foul, and disposed
to multiply the contagion.

This is remarkably the case in regard to the diseases of infants, whose
temperament is a singular union of debility and spasm, which the French have
aptly termed Laxite vibratile.

The Muguet is a striking instance of the above mentioned tendency, it being
altogether an hospital disease; which though distinguished by this name,
appears to be a malignant thrush, and is frequently ly attended with a species
of the infantile erysipelas.

See Memoirs de la Societe Royal^ de Medicine anno 1779.
When so accompanied, it is said to be constantly fatal, unless the hard and
tumid parts terminate in benign abscesses, and suppurate kindly; which is
rarely the case, they being more commonly found to mortify.


The thrush, however, is as much a disease, as any other that appears in the
month, and is connected with most of the foregoing complaints; a proper
attention to which may very frequently prevent it.

This disorder is so well known, as scarcely to require any description, and
generally appears first in the angles of the lips, and then on the tongue and
cheeks, in the form of little white specks. These increasing in number and
size, run together more or less, according to the degree of malignity, and
compose a thin, white crust, which at length lines the whole inside of the
mouth, from the lips even to the gullet, and is said to extend into the
stomach, and through the length of the bowels; producing also a redness about
the anus. When the crust falls off, it is frequently succeeded by others, which
are usually of a darker color than the former. But this is true only in the
worst kind of thrush; for there is a milder sort, that is spread thinly over
the lips and tongue, which returns a great many times, and always lasts for
several weeks. I have seen this so very often the case, that when I observe a
child to have the complaint very very lightly, and that it does not increase
after two or three days, I venture to pronounce it will continue a long time,
but will be of no consequence. Care, however, ought to be taken that the child
be not exposed to cold.

The thrush is said to be generally attended with fever, but this is not
usually the case where the thrush is an original disease but when consequent to
severe bowel complaints, erysipelas, and other infantile disorders, it is,
indeed, often accompanied with fever, and when so, proves either favorably
critical, or the infant usually sinks very soon. In ordinary cases, however, I
am confident in nine out of ten, there is not the least fever, though the mouth
is often so much heated, as to excoriate the niples of the nurse, and becomes
so tender, that the child is often observed to suck with reluctance and
caution. -- It is an old observation amongst nurses, and there is some
foundation for it, that very long sleeping, in the course of the first week or
two, is often a forerunner of this complaint.

It has long been a received opinion, that the thrush must appear at the anus,
and nurses will seldom allow it to be cured if it does not; but the truth is,
that its appearance there is only a mark of the degree of the disease, and not
in the least of its cure, and is not, therefore, generally to be wished for.
The redness about this part is occasioned by the sharpness of the secretions in
the bowels, and consequently of the stools, which lightly inflame and sometimes
excoriate the parts about the anus, and in a bad thrush will do so long before
the complaint is going off; but in the lighter kind, no such effects are
produced, or are, at least, very slight. And, indeed, this redness has been so
often mentioned to me as an indication that infants must certainly have already
had a slight thrush, or be likely to suffer by it very soon, where children
have escaped it altogether; that I have ventured to imagine such infants may be
least of all liable to it, if otherwise in good health; at least, my experience
seems hitherto to support that idea. And I have even conceived, that the
acidity of the first passages being in some children more confined, may prove a
remote cause of such infants being troubled with the thrush; whilst others by
an open belly, and firmer viscera, may escape it, at the expense only of this
soreness of the external parts, which often continues for several days.

The remote cause of this disease, seems to be indigestion, whether occasioned
by bad milk, or other unwholesome food, or by the weakness of the stomach. --
Perhaps thick victuals, particularly if taken hot, and made very sweet; also
covering the face of the child when it sleeps, or its breathing the confined
air of the mother's bed, may be amongst these causes, and ought therefore to be
avoided. -- The proximate cause, If such a term, after all that Gaubius and
later professors have advanced, may be used in any sense distinguishable from
the disease itself, it is presumed, that the circumstances enumerated may be
distinguished from those termed remote causes. Should this not be allowed of,
the term proximate cause, seems to be perfectly useless, and one to which we
can never affix any precise ideas; the cause and the effect being confounded.
-- But I do not mean to enter far into such a controversy, and have touched
upon it rather by way of apology for the use I have made of the term, in this
and other parts, and to mark an obscurity which I leave those to settle whose
province it may be to take the lead in such matters. It were well, however, if
some able pathologist could affix some idea that might be universally adopted,
so that when we meet with the term in different authors, no reader might be at
a loss for the meaning.
is the thickness, or acrimony of the juices secreted from the mouth, fauces,
stomach, etc. producing heat and soreness in these parts. -- A tea spoonful of
cold water given every morning has been a good prophylactic, or preventive.

Much has been said in favor of emetics, especially wine of antimony, as being
almost a specific for this disease, but I cannot say it has proved so with me;
nor can I see any sufficient cause for departing from the more ancient
practice, in the treatment of this very common complaint.

There can be no objection, after having properly opened the bowels, to
administering an emetic, and where the thrush is of a dark color, and the
whole inside of the cheeks are lined with it, I believe it will be useful, by
emptying the stomach of the crude juices oozing into it from the glands of this
part. But, I think it would be almost as endless, as it would generally be
prejudicial, to persevere in the use of emetics, for days, and even weeks
together, and is both a severe, and an unnatural method of treating a tender
infant, in which the bowels are always the most natural outlet for its
complaints; on which, therefore, nature uniformly throws the offending matter
on almost every occasion, as appears plainly in teething, in which the first
passages cannot be primarily affected.

I believe, therefore, where there is no fever, nor any uncommon symptom,
testaceous powders are the best and safest remedy; which may be joined with a
little magnesia, if the body be costive; or if in the other extreme, and the
child is very weakly, two or three grains of the compound powder of contrayerva
in its stead. Some such preparation should be administered for three or four
days successively, and afterward something more purgative, to carry down the
scales as they fall off from the parts. For this purpose, rhubarb is generally
the best; but when the thrush is very violent, is of a dark color, has come on
very rapidly, and the child is lusty and strong, a grain or two of the powder
of scammony with calomel, A very good method of administering this powder, and
other metalline preparations, is that mentioned by Dr. Armstrong, by directing
it in the form of a pill which may be broken into small pieces, and given mixed
up with the child's food; by which means, it will not precipitate, and be left
at the bottom of the spoon, as is sometimes the case when such remedies are
administered in powder.
may be joined with it, agreeably to the idea of HEISTER; but this must be
given with caution. After the purgative, the testaceous powders should be
repeated for two or three days as before, till the disorder begins to give way.
Afterward a tea-spoonful of camomile-tea, or a few drops of the compound
tincture of gentian, well diluted, may be given two or three times a day with
advantage.

The choice of the testaceous powders, on which some writers have said so much,
is, I believe, of very little importance; the purest and softest are
preferable. The design of these medicines, being to absorb and correct the
predominant acidity, The French physicians are of opinion, that the thrush is
owing to what they call a putrid alcaline humor, or something analogous
thereto, rather than to an acid. But this cannot be the case in the ordinary
thrush, as is manifest both from the appearance, and the sour smell of the
stools, as well as from the more certain remedies for the complaint, which are
alcalis and absorbents.
their effect will be discovered from the kind of stools that succeed, and the
dose may therefore be increased or diminished, or they may be altogether
discontinued, as circumstances direct. In the mean time, if the child is
suckled, the nurse's diet should be attended to, and in general, her usual
quantity of porter or ale, (which is almost always more than sufficient) should
be diminished.

In regard to applications to the part, it is necessary to observe, that as
they have little to do in curing the complaint, it will be improper to have
recourse to them very early. I know, indeed, it is very common to begin with
them, but they serve only to increase the soreness of the parts, (especially in
the manner they are generally used) and to give a deceitful appearance of
amendment. If the inside of the cheeks and tongue are thickly covered with
sloughs, it may sometimes be convenient to clean the mouth once a day; but it
will in general be useless, till the complaint is past the height, the sloughs
disposed to fall off, and the parts underneath inclined to heal. Proper
applications will then have their use, both by keeping the mouth clean, and
constricting and healing the raw, and open mouths of the excretory vessels.

For this purpose, an hundred different lotions and gargles have been invented,
which from the earliest times have all been of an astringent nature. -- Honey
of roses and spirit of vitriol, or of sea salt, as recommended by Etmuller and
Dr. Shaw, form a very good one; but nothing is preferable to borax, which some
advise to be mixed up with sugar, in the proportion of one part of the former
to seven of the latter: a pinch of this put upon the child's tongue will be
licked to all parts of the mouth. But I prefer a mixture of borax and common
honey, (about two scruples or a dram of the former to an ounce of the latter)
which hangs about the fauces better than in the form of powder. Either of these
may be made use of as often in the day as shall be necessary to keep the parts
clean, which they will effectually do, without putting the infant to pain, by
being forcibly rubbed on. I must own, I have frequently been distressed, at
seeing nurses rub the mouth of a little infant, with a rag-mop, as they term
it, till they have made it bleed; and this operation they will often repeat
half a dozen times in a day.

It only remains to take notice of the black thrush, as it is called, which is
confessedly a very uncommon complaint in the infant state. Dr. Armstrong says
he has never met with it. I have seen only two instances of it, which were in
strong and healthy children; but the parts were not perfectly black, and if
that be intended by the name, these cases might not be precisely that
complaint: they, however, both proved fatal. After the stomach and bowels have
been cleansed, I believe, a decoction of the bark, with a little aromatic
confection, is the most likely medicine to be of service, and is sometimes
necessary in the worst kind of common thrush, when the succeeding sloughs are
very opake, thick, and of a dark color; which is, however, always a dangerous
symptom.

The RED-GUM, or BENIGN-FRUPTION.
THE red-gum is an efflorescence on the skin, appearing usually in small spots,
often confined to the face and neck; but at others, it extends to the hands and
legs, and even the whole body, appearing in very large patches, and sometimes
raised above the surface. It will likewise appear in the form of small
pustules, filled with a limpid, or sometimes a purulent or yellow liquor; at
least, I have never known what name to give this kind of eruption, but that of
a rank red-gum, as it happens only in the month, or soon afterward, and never
gives any trouble. There is another species as small as pins heads, or even
their points; firmer than the former; often of a pearl color, and opake, which
has generally been accounted a kind of red-gum; but it has of late been
suggested, might for distinction sake, be termed white-gum. It is to this
complaint, that Vogelius seems to give the name of achores; but the old writers
differ in this respect -- of that complaint, however, more will be said in
another place, when speaking of disorders described under obsolete terms.
Every species of this eruption is produced by the same cause as the thrush,
but can scarcely be termed a complaint, being a kindly effort of nature to
throw off some acrimony; consequently an evidence of the strength of the
constitution, as the thrush is, usually, of its weakness. In the former, nature
throws off the offending matter on the surface more completely than in the
latter, and therefore, when the eruption is slight, requires no assistance.

On this account it is, I apprehend, that writers have not usually taken notice
of it, though it should seem requisite, if only for the satisfaction of
parents, who are sometimes distressed on account of it, especially if it be of
the more extensive and rank species. It is necessary only to give a little
testaceous powder, or magnesia, according to the state of the bowels, and to
keep the child moderately warm, otherwise the rash striking in, the acrimony
will fall on the first-passages, and be succeeded by sickness, or purging,
(till the eruption appears again on the skin) or not unfrequently by the
thrush, or a slight return of it, if the child has lately recovered from it.

ERUPTIONS on the SKIN.
IT is, by no means, my intention to enter largely into this extensive subject,
but imperfectly understood, perhaps, even to this day. In another part of the
work I shall treat of the scall'd-head, and two or three other troublesome
affections of the skin, but shall at present confine myself to such eruptions
as are peculiar to the state of infancy.

Infants are liable to various anomalous kinds of rash, both in the mouth, and
till the period of teething is over. The early ones may be regarded as a sort
of red-gum, and children who are most subject to them, generally have their
bowels in a better state; the rash carrying off, as has been said, the acidity
See Harris, Pages 22, 23.
with which they so much abound.

It may be remarked, however, that when infants at the breast are inclined to
frequent returns of some eruption on the skin, if the child be always
indisposed at such seasons, the rash will often be found owing to some ill
quality in the breast of milk, which ought therefore to be examined, and
particularly in regard to its taste. On such occasions I have found, that milk
which has been above a twelvemonth old, has contracted a very unpleasant
flavor, and that upon changing the wet nurse, a very ill looking rash has soon
afterward entirely disappeared, together with the other complaints.

One species of these early rashes often takes place about the time of
teething, and not unfrequently at the decline of fevers or severe bowel
complaints; insomuch that, upon a sudden appearance of it during a serious
illness, I have often ventured to prognosticate the recovery. This rash very
much resembles the itch, both in regard to the little watery heads and foul
blotches; and is confined to no particular part of the body, though it appears
more frequently about the face and neck. Indeed, I have seen the whole body so
covered with it (and mixed with an eruption about the face, of a different
appearance, and evidently red-gum) that in a consultation, it has been by some
taken to be the true itch. This eruption is certainly salutary, and even
critical, requires nothing but to avoid taking cold, and is mentioned only
because it is not an uncommon appearance, and parents who are unacquainted with
it, are apt to be alarmed at it.

But there is a very common rash that calls for more attention, and to which
medical writers have given the name of Crusta lacte^ (Lactumen, or milk
blotches), which has a very unpleasant appearance, but is notwithstanding
equally innocent with the former, and even prevents other complaints. I think I
never saw an infant much loaded with it, but it has always been healthy, and
cut its teeth remarkably well. Indeed, it falls to the lot of the finest
children, and such as are well nourished; whence some have imagined it owing
only to the richness of the milk. See Astruc
And it is remarkable in this eruption, that however thick and long-continued
the scabs may be, the crusta lactea never excoriates, nor leaves any scar on
the parts.

It appears first on the forehead, and sometimes on the scalp, often extends
halfway over the face, in the form of large loose scabs, and appears not very
unlike the small pox after they are turned. Very little, I believe, is
necessary to be done; but in bad cases a perpetual blister may sometimes be of
service. It usually disappears of itself when the child has cut three or four
teeth, though it may sometimes continue for several months, and in a very few
instances even for years: in such cases, the Harrowgate, or any other
sulphurous water will have a good effect; but the medicines commonly
prescribed do nothing. I have known testaceous powders and various alteratives
administered to no purpose, as people of rank are very anxious to have it
removed if it be possible. I was lately consulted for a child who had taken a
grain of calomel, at short intervals, for several months without any benefit,
and fortunately without any injury; which is rarely the case when powerful
medicines are administered unnecessarily. This rash will now and then make make
its appearance very early, and has then been mistaken by those who are not much
accustomed to very young children, for the effects the venereal disease. I not
long ago saw such a case, and advised only to keep the body open with a little
magnesia; the complaint got no worse, and upon cutting some teeth, disappeared
as usual. I have known it, however, disappear suddenly, previously to any teeth
being cut, and after some weeks become more violent than ever; the infant
remaining all the while in perfect health.

It were almost endless to enumerate the various kinds of rash to which infants
are liable, but I mean chiefly to confine my remarks to the more important, or
rare ones, and such as may not have been described by preceding writers. Among
such is the following, whose unusual appearance are apt to alarm parents and
others, not accustomed to see them.

The first I shall notice appears chiefly in teething children, very much
resembles the measles, and has been sometimes mistaken for it. It is preceded
by sickness at the stomach, but is it attended with very little fever, though
the rash continues very florid for three days, like the measles, but does not
dry off in the manner of that disease. It requires nothing more than the
shell-powders, or sometimes the addition of a little nitre and compound powder
of contrayerva, with a dose or two of rhubarb, or other gentle laxative, on the
going off of the rash.

An eruption still less frequently met with appears sometimes after children
have cut all their first teeth. I know not what name ought to be given to this
kind of eruption, which breaks out in the form of round lumps as large as
midling-sized peace, very hard, with a very red base, and white at the top, as
if they contained a little lymph.

They come out suddenly without previous sickness at the stomach, are not sore,
disposed to itch, nor ever give any trouble, and are seldom seen but on parts
that are usually uncovered, and are sometimes there in great numbers,
resembling the distinct smallpox; but are harder, more inflamed, and less
purulent.

Alarming, as well as unusual, as is this appearance, I believe the eruption is
always perfectly harmless, if not repelled by cold, or improper treatment; and
will dry away in three or four days: nothing more being necessary than the
little remedies, directed for the former, and to keep the child within doors,
if the weather be cold.

An eruption of an appearance equally uncommon and analogous to the above, I
have met with only in children of at least three or four years of age, and such
as have also been affected with slight symptoms of scrofula; though I have not
seen it frequently enough to ascertain its being, in any degree, owing to that
specific virus. It breaks out suddenly, covering at once the greater part of
the body, but occasioning neither pain nor itching, nor are children sick at
the stomach nor otherwise ill with it, though it lasts for two or three weeks.

This eruption, therefore, like some others, (...) taken notice of chiefly for
its singular appearance, which, though somewhat like the nettle-rash, is of a
different figure, but may be pretty exactly conceived of by the little red
lumps sometimes left by smallpox, after they are turned, and also rubbed, or
picked off; especially after the chrystalline or warty species, and where the
pustules have been pretty numerous.

If the first-passages are at all disturbed, my attention is principally
directed to them, otherwise to the state of the skin; and in this case, I have
usually directed small doses of Dr James's powder, to be taken for a few nights
at going to bed, and the polychrest salt and rhubarb, occasionally, in the
course of the day, with or without the addition of a little of the acitated
water of ammonia.

In the course of a few days the eruption puts on a darker color, is less
prominent, and begins to scale off in a branny scurf, somewhat like the
measles: but should no such change take place, the vinum antimonii should be
taken two or three times a day; to which, if no amendment should soon be
perceived, a few drops of the tinctura cantharidis may be added; a remedy often
very efficacious in disorders of the skin; but should be administered with
caution.

Another rash, or rather eruption, takes place both in bowel complaints and in
teething, and always appears to be beneficial. It consists of vesications or
blisters of different sizes, resembling little scalds or burns, and continues
for several days. They come out in different parts, but chiefly on the belly,
ribs, and thighs; and contain a sharp lymph, which it may be prudent to let out
by a puncture with a needle, especially from the larger ones. No medicine is
necessary but such as the particular state of the bowels may call for, which
usualy abound with acidity whenever there is much eruption on the skin.

An eruption, vulgarly termed scorbutic, infesting the face and neck, and
discharging a sharp ichor that excoriates wherever it runs, and difficult of
cure by chemical alteratives, will often yield in a very short time to the
expressed juice of the sium aquaticum. From one, to four or five table
spoonfuls may be given, mixed with one or more lpoonful of new milk, three
times a day, according to the child's age, and the state of its stomach; taking
care at the same time, to keep the bowels open by senna-tea or other common
laxative.

I shall close this account with a description of an eruption that is singular
enough, resembling very much the herpes or broadring worm, or the
adust-coloured spots left on the face after an attack of St. Anthony's fire. I
have seen it in various parts, but I think only on such as are more or less
liable to be fretted by some part of the infant's dress, especially on the
nates and contiguous parts covered by the cloths, where the blotches are always
the broadest and most ^ank. Were it to appear no where else, it would seem to
be occasioned by some sharpness of the urine and stools, as the skin has a very
heated appearance, though the eruption, I believe, is not at all painful. It
frequently breaks out before the period of teething, but the bowels are
generally somewhat disordered, and the stools voided very green, or else become
so very soon afterward. This I take to be one of those eruptions occasioned by
some bad quality of the breast-milk as I have never met with it but in young
infants whose nurse's milk has been old, and has also contracted a very
disagreeable taste. If that should not be the case, the rash will probably
require nothing but the light absorbent medicines before mentioned, and to
guard against constipation. But if these means should not succeed in a short
time, the nurse ought to be changed.

In all the eruptive complaints of infants, taking cold ought to be carefully
avoided, and great caution be used in regard to all external applications, as
well as keeping the belly open. If the child is sick at the stomach, a little
magnesia, testaceous powders, or the compound powder of contrayerva joined with
them, may be given now and then; or should the rash be hastily struck in, and
the child be ill, it should be immediately put into a warm-bath and afterward
take five or six grains of the aromatic confection, with, or without a few
drops of the wine of antimony, in simple mint water.

Should any scabs become very dry and hard, which the crusta lactea will
sometimes be, especially when they extend to the crown of the head, and seem to
give pain, they may be touched with a little cream, or with oil of almonds
mixed with a few drops of the water of kali; but not a large surface at a time.
Or should they be very moist, and cause pain by sticking to the cap, they may
be dusted with a little common powder, or with flowers of sulphur, and covered
with a singed rag, but I should be very cautious of doing much more; as the
suppression of any considerable eruption on the skin may occasion the worst
effects espcially during the time of teething.

SORE EARS.
SLIGHT blisters and ulcerations behind the ears of infants are so very common,
that almost every parent is well-acquainted with them, and in general require
only to be washed with cold water, or covered with a singed rag, to keep the
cap from sticking to them, and thereby giving the child pain. They are,
moreover, often very useful, especially during bowel complaints, or the
eruption of the teeth. But there is in some children of a gross habit of body,
and especially about the time of teething, a species of ulcer that often
requires attention, on account of its extending low down in the neck,
occasioning great pain, and spreading into large and deep sores, insomuch that
a mortification has sometimes come on, and even the processus mastoideus has
become carious. Here fomentations will be necessary, especially those of bark,
and its powder should be administered internally. Such cases, however, do not
often occur; but whenever the sores are large the cure should be begun by a
blister on the back, in order to draw off the heated serum that flows to the
parts. I have usually given an opening powder of testecea and rhubarb, with a
little nutmeg, and sometimes nitre, to which is added either calomel, cinnabar
of antimony, or hydrargyrus cum sulphur; the latter of which, I think I have
found more serviceable in some eruptive complaints in young children, than seem
to be generally imagined. But above all, some mercurial should be made use of
to the sores, which, though they are often apparently inflamed, never offends
them. A very clean and elegant preparation of this kind is the following, R.
Calomelan. j. ad ij. Ung. Sambuci j m. ft. inimentum.


A little of this liniment spread on each side of a piece of doubled linen
cloth, and applied twice a day, will do more than all the fomentations, or
healing ointments, that I have ever seen used; and indeed has always succeeded
with me, though I have been told the sores had spread deeper from day to day
under various other applications. From such treatment I have never found the
least ill effects, but children have preserved their health as well as if the
sores had kept open, which, when benign, are certainly designed by nature as a
preservative from some other complaints, especially those of the stomach and
bowels, of which I now proceed to take notice.

VOMITING.
VOMITING is certainly not a common complaint of infants, I mean when
considered as a disease, unless it be attendant upon some other, of which it is
then rather a symptom, or the consequence of such disease improperly treated.
Neither are infants in health disposed to vomit frequently, unless the stomach
is overloaded, the milk is then usually ejected as soon as it is taken, and
comes up unchanged. Nor is this to be considered as a disease, or as calling
for the discipline recommended by some writers. Wherefore should the residue of
the aliment be forced off the stomach by an emetic, when it has already parted
with all the oppressive abundance? This kind of puking is not attended with any
violence to the stomach: the milk, or other food seems to come up without an
sensible action of the stomach, or the child being sick. Nay, it is at once so
common to some of the finest children, that it is a saying with some old
nurses, (though I am not very partial to many of their proverbs) that a puking
child is a thriving child; and when such ejection comes only soon after sucking
or feeding, and the aliment is cast up, scarcely changed, matter of fact
verifies the observation. See PRIMEROS: De Morbis Infant.
But if the food remains some time on the stomach, it will then be thrown up in
a curdled state, which is an indication to attend to it, if it happens
frequently. Not that the milk ought not to curdle on the stomach, which it
always must do, in order to a due separation of its component parts, and is the
chief, if not the only digestion, it undergoes in the stomach. The whey and the
rich oil are there separated from the curd and earthy particles, the former
being taken up by the lacteal, or milky-vessels in the bowels, It is not
intended in this place to speak with physiological accuracy, but merely to
afford common readers some idea of the nature of the first digestion; in the
second, indeed, it is probable, that some portion of every constituent part of
our food may be farther prepared to become nutritious; the thinner serving to
renew the finer parts of our system, and the grosser, such as the earthy
particles, etc. more adapted to the renovation of the muscles, tendons, bones,
etc. may be deposited in these parts.
is converted into blood; whilst the bulk of the latter is carried down and
expelled with the other excrementious parts of the food, and gastric juices,
for which nature has no use. This curdling of the milk, therefore, is the
natural course of digestion, though many writers have not been sufficiently
attentive to it, and Harris has asserted it is owing to a predominant acid. But
when the milk comes up in a curdled state, it proves that the stomach having
digested what it had received, has not power to push it forward into the
bowels, and therefore throws up a part of it. I have known a child throw up a
piece of curd full as large as the thumb of a grown person, and as firm as a
piece of dough; and be perfectly well the next minute. -- When infants, not
over-fed, throw up the milk uncurdled, after it has been sometime in the
stomach, it is always a worse sign.
If this be the case, the stomach may perhaps require to be emptied of its
whole contents, which may be easily done by giving a little warm water, or
camomile tea. The cause of the indigestion was an accidental repletion; that
removed, together with the consequent foulness, or bad juices of the stomach,
the effect also will generally cease, and unless the vomiting returns, from any
farther injury the repletion may have occasioned, it requires nothing more. To
distress the child, on every such occasion, with a sickening emetic, or drench
it with rhubarb and magnesia, is as needless as it would be to awake a patient
out of a sound sleep to give him an opiate. Only let the child fast a little
after having emptied the stomach of its load, and the nurse be careful not to
overfill it for the future, and it will rarely want any other assistance.

If the vomiting, on the other hand, has arisen from acrid diet, a little
farther discipline may be requisite, because some half-digested food has got
into the bowels, perhaps for several days together. In this case, a gentle
laxative, and change of food for one of a milder kind, is all that is generally
necessary; or if there be a prevailing acidity in the stomach, either the
testaceous powders, or magnesia, (according to the state of the bowels) may be
mixed with the food, or be otherwise administered for two or three days, as the
occasion may require. Or a drop or two of the water of kali, or a little
castile, or almond soap, are excellent remedies, especially when the stools are
unusually green, or clayey; not only as they will tend to promote a secretion
of the gall, but correct acidity. It is well known, how small a quantity of
soap put into a churn will prevent a due separation of the component parts of
the milk, so as to allow very little, or no butter to be made; whereas, a
little vinegar effects the separation almost instantaneously, and saves a vast
deal of trouble.
For which purpose also, myrrh, though an obsolete, seems to be an excellent
remedy, when infants are a few months old. Should the vomiting be a symptom
attending some other disease, its remedy will turn on the proper treatment of
its cause. If such cause be the sudden disappearance of some eruption on the
skin, the child may be put into a tepid bath, the limbs be well rubbed as soon
as it is taken out of the water, and the infant be then put to bed: and if the
vomiting continues, an emetic should be given, and afterward a blister applied
to the pit of the stomach.

Having mentioned emetics, I shall take this occasion to observe, that the
choice of them will be always best determined by the nature of the complaints
for which they are administered. In those of the first-passages, ipecacuanha is
generally the best, but if a fever should attend, or it be wished to promote a
gentle perspiration, those of antimony are preferable; or lastly, in disorders
of the breast, the oxymel, conserve, or tincture of squills.

But a more troublesome vomiting will sometimes arise in unhealthy children,
from too great a sensibility, or too great an irritability of the nerves of the
stomach. Such medicines are then indicated as will brace, or strengthen that
organ, and abate its sensibility. For the former, a cold infusion of the bark,
or of camomile flowers, with orange peel, and sometimes a little rhubarb. For
the latter, a saline mixture with a drop or two of laudanum. And the benefit of
these may be increased by aromatic and spirituous fomentations to the pit of
the stomach, or by the labdanum plaster, with a little theriaca added to it.

GRIPES.
THE Gripes is a very common term amongst nurses, and some writers on
children's diseases have treated of it under a distinct head; but this serves
to perplex matters, instead of explaining them. If a child be not hungry, or
hurt by some parts of its dress, there are always symptoms attending, that will
account for its crying, and other expressions of pain. The cause is, indeed,
very commonly in its bowels, and may be increased by costiveness, which has
already been treated of, but more commonly manifests itself by a purging, which
comes next in order to be considered.

PURGING.
UNDER the article of vomiting it was observed, that frequent puking is
oftentimes an attendant upon some other complaint, and then demands a peculiar
attention, and is to be treated agreeably to the nature of such complaints; and
there is, perhaps, none which it more frequently accompanies than a Diarrhoea,
or Purging.

Vomiting and Purging very often arise from unwholesome milk or other food,
from a moist cold air, or from the sudden disappearance of some eruption on the
skin. The purging is not then hastily to be stopped, nor even absorbent powders
to be given, till the offensive matter be first carried off; and if a vomiting
attend, the cure should begin by administering an emetic. But though the
purging ought not to be checked without previous evacuations, nor to be stopped
hastily, yet it is not to be treated with a daily exhibition of rhubarb, which
though a common practice with many, serves to keep up a purging after the cause
has been removed, by creating a continual irritation in the bowels. The
diarrhoea, indeed, is a complaint often as difficult to treat as any in the
infant state, and is therefore worthy of particular attention. In a general way
it may be said, that a sufficient dose or two of rhubarb should be administered
in the beginning, and afterward absorbents. If the purging should still
continue, an emetic will be necessary, as purges do not always lie long enough
in the stomach to carry off the offensive matter it contains. After this, it is
often necessary, the child should be purged again, for it should be always
remembered, that many complaints of infants, whether seated only in the
first-passages, or attended with fever, will frequently seem to be giving way
upon procuring stools freely, but will soon return if the same means be not
repeated, till the whole irritating matter be carried down. Should such
repetition fail of success, though the diet has been carefully attended to, the
use of them at present should be laid aside, and recourse should again be had
to absorbents, and if there be no fever, to light cordials, and even to
opiates, without the latter of which, many bowel complaints will not admit of a
lasting cure, owing to the great irritability of infants. Such medicines are
not indeed very often required till children are some months old: but when they
are found necessary, not only may syrup of white poppies, but even laudanum be
given with the most perfect safety; From the half of a drop, to two, or three
drops, in the course of the day, will be a proper quantity for infants from a
week old, to the age of six months.
though from the time of Galen, (who cautions against giving theriaca to
children) till of later years, many physicians have been fearful of directing
them, (arguing from their abuse against their use) and especially Harris, who
in other respects, has written so well on their diseases. I remember being
called to see an infant of only two days old, who, through a mistake, had taken
some hours before, four drops of laudanum. The parents were greatly alarmed at
the child's lying in a stupid, drowsy state, without being able to take the
breast or open its eyes, I encouraged them, however, to believe the laudanum
would do no kind of harm, if they would frequently get a little breast-milk
down with a tea-spoon. Accordingly, though the child lay sleeping above six and
thirty hours, it afterward awoke perfectly well. -- This is mentioned,
however, only by way of encouragement to such as may be fearful of
administering opiates even where they are necessary. They are, nevertheless,
very powerful medicines, and should be prescribed with due caution for patients
of every age, and especially for infants. A like caution may be necessary in
regard to cordials, which are, nevertheless, in many cases equally proper,
notwithstanding a modern prejudice against them. There is a certain coldness
and langour in infants when they are ill, especially under some bowel
complaints; and whenever they may be in that state, that class of medicines
will have a very happy effect.

Purging in children, it is to be observed, is not always a disease. The bowels
are the great natural, and critical outlet in infants, as the pores of the
skin, and the kidneys are in adults. Not the mere discharge, therefore, but the
cause of it is, in the first instance, to be removed, and the ill effects are
to be guarded against by keeping the purging within bounds. For this purpose,
the chalk julep, as it is an astringent only by absorbing the acrid, or
changing the acid, and irritating matter, is as safe as it is useful, becomes
an excellent anodyne, or composing medicine, and after the bowels have been
well cleased, will usually accomplish the cure.

Dr. Armstrong takes occasion to speak against the use of absorbent powders,
and prefers wine of antimony, because modern writers appear to depend so much
on the former, from their known property of correcting acidity, previous to the
exhibition of purges; and says, that in cases of extreme danger, a physician
who is called in late, would, according to this practice, often find no
opportunity for purging at all. But surely this is scarcely an argument to
prove the superiority of his method, since no writer that I know of, ever
designed it as a rule without exception; and Harris, who has said as much as
any man in commendation of the absorbent powders, does not deny the expediency
of sometimes beginning with purgative medicines. But had it been otherwise, the
argument goes no farther than to prove, that in cases of great danger, the wine
of antimony, being both an emetic and a purge, ought to precede the use of the
testaceous powders. Instead of this, Dr Armstrong slides into a general
conclusion from premises evidently limited; though he has advanced nothing
against an established, and successful method of treatment. And I may add, that
whilst he is fearful, that the absorbent powders, (which nobody prescribes
without some purging medicines) should check the looseness, and thereby
increase the fever; he ventures, after a repetition of the antimony, to
administer what he calls a gentle paregoric, or opiate, to appease the pain,
consisting of a dram of syrup of white poppies, repeated every three or four
hours, till that end be obtained. So that if the pain should continue for nine
hours, a child will take half an ounce of the syrup; and this Dr. Armstrong
observes is the only medicine he gives, except wine of antimony, which
(notwithstanding the opiate) he supposes to be the efficient remedy.

It is an improper exhibition of absorbents, I apprehend, rather than their
dose, that has made some practitioners so averse to them; for they certainly
ought, in many cases, to be given in large quantities; but if administered too
early, and long continued, the stools may become like plaster of Paris, and be
with difficulty excreted. Such an instance is mentioned by Boerhaave, who had,
nevertheless, a very favorable opinion of them, as will be noticed hereafter.
There is, however, some fallacy in regard to the color of the stools, as this
kind is frequently observed in children who have never taken any of the
testacea, if the secretion of the bile be obstructed; as in jaundiced adults.

In his second edition, Dr. Armstrong mentions another method he has fallen
upon for curing this disorder, which, however, appears to be recurring to the
ancient method of treating bowel complaints, and seems, indeed, to overturn the
idea he had entertained of the superiority of wine of antimony over every other
medicine. This method, he tells us, is by cleansing the bowels, by means of
proper purgatives, joined with anodynes, or opiates, intermixed in such a
manner as to correct the griping quality of the medicines, and lessen the
stimulus occasioned by the acrimony of the stools. -- A plan worthy of
imitation, it is apprehended, and though not likely to be proper in all cases,
must, as an occasional practice, be safe and beneficial.

To return, it is of some consequence to learn what part of the bowels is
particularly affected, and the degree of pain children may endure; and some
indication may be had from undressing the child, and carefully examining the
belly, and gently pressing in different parts, as well as from the different
expressions of pain the infant may manifest, either by a forcible contraction
of one or both legs, or of the arms, according as the irritating matter may be
higher or lower, or on one, or both sides of the belly; also from the coldness
of the feet. Regard is also to be paid to the kind of stools that come away,
which in a diarrhoea are seldom good, and are usually distinguished into the
sour and curdled, slimy, green, clayey, watery, and bloody, some of which are
at times also fetid; and in this case, some powerful purgative, such as
senna-tea, is oftentimes necessary, if the child is not very young. True bloody
stools, however, are less common in infants than adult^, and seldom occur but
in the last stage of the disease; but a few streaks of blood may sometimes be
mixed with the feces, which arising only from the hemorrhoidal veins, is of no
consequence. Should purgings return frequently, it will be very useful,
(especially in the time of teething, or upon the striking in of some cutaneou
eruption), to procure a little discharge behind the ears, o^ ^o apply a
burgundy-pitch plaster to the back. For the former purpose, some finely
pounded Spanish slies may be rubbed on the (...), till a slight excoriation, or
rawness, is produced; (...) perhaps a better, though not a common method, is to
draw a piece of course doubled worsted, or a bit of narrow tape, through a
piece of common blistering-plaister, and lay it close behind the ears where
they rise from the head, and repeating it occasionally, which will produce a
discharge exactly from the spot where it is wont naturally to arise.

When the stools appear sour or curdled, or the child is much disposed to
hiccough, the magnesia, and other absorbent powders are calculated to afford
peculiar assistance, and may be warmed by the addition of a little grated
nutmeg. When the stools are green, or white and clayey, a drop or two of water
of kali may be occasionally put into the other medicines, or a little soap be
dissolved in the clysters, which are essentially necessary when much griping
attends this complaint: the child's belly may likewise be rubbed with a little
warm brandy. The following preparation is highly extolled by Boerhaave, Epist.
^ma. -- ad. J. B. BASSAND: a physician at Vienna.
as an almost universal medicine in the diseases of infants; and is certainly a
good remedy, especially in their bowel complaints:

Take of Venice soap two drams; prepared pearls, one dram; prepared crabs
claws, one dram and an half; syrup of marshmallows, half an ounce; mint-water
and fennel-water, of each three ounces; mix them. -- A desert spoonful is
directed to be taken once in eight hours.

When purgings have continued a long time without any amendment, a peculiar
tightness of the skin will sometimes take place in the last stage of the
disease, affording always an unfavourable prognostic; and of which farther
notice will be taken under the article of Skin-bound.

The true Watery-gripes, so called, is esteemed the most dangerous of all
purgings, and is usually thought fatal, though perhaps without reason; since if
properly treated, children recover from it as well as from excessive purgings
of any other kind, unless it happen after some other illness, or to very small
and tender infants during the month. It is not the having a few very thin
stools, however, that is an evidence of the true watery-gripes, for in almost
every purging of a few days continuance, the stools are very thin as well as
numerous. But in this case, they are thin very early in the disease; the child
looks wretchedly, and every thing it takes runs almost immediately through it,
with very little change, as in the lientery of adults.

The cure should be begun by administering one or more pukes, especially when
the stools are of a dark color and fetid, as they frequently are in the
earlier periods of the complaint. And to this end, a pretty strong one should
be prepared, which should be given in divided doses, at about a quarter of an
hour's distance, till a proper effect is produced; and some hours afterward a
warm purge with rhubarb should be administered, if the disease be not very far
advanced. After the first passages have been cleared, the eighth part of a
grain, or less, of ipecacuanha, or a drop or two of wine of antimony, given
every three or four hours, with a few grains of the testaceous powders, or the
aromatic confection, appear to me amongst the best remedies in the earlier
periods of the complaint. Indeed, very small doses of ipecacuanha, especially
if duly guarded by some gentle aromatic, is both so useful and safe a remedy,
that it should not be hastily laid aside, and when persevered in the use of for
some time, will effect wonders, not only in long purgings, but in other
chronical complaints.

In the more advanced stages of the watery-gripes, and where the child is not
very young, the following old medicine is a very good one -- Of Locatelli's
balsam, one ounce, and conserve of red roses, two ounces: from the quantity of
an horse-bean to that of nutmeg, may be given three or four times a day,
according to the age of the child. -- The laudanum plaster likewise, as
directed for vomitings, or the following, may be applied to the parts above the
navel: Take of Venice treacle, one ounce; expressed oil of mace, two drams; and
oil of nutmegs, three drops; mix them into a plaster, to be spread on a piece
of soft leather.

Should these means fail, I have known the repetition of a vomit give an
immediate check to the complaint, especially where the stools continue to be
remarkably sour. So long as this is the case, it would be both vain and
hazardous to exhibit opiates, or powerful restringents: the acidity must be
first carried off by warm purges, and be corrected by absorbents; the latter of
which must be given in large, and repeated doses, and frequently their powers
be augmented by the addition of water of kali, or tincture of myrrh. And an
excellent remedy sometimes, as an antiacid, is the spir. salis ammon. succinat.
of Bate's dispensatory. The acidity once removed, a starch clyster may be
thrown up, two or three times a day, with or without a few drops of laudanum,
according to the number of the stools, and weakness of the infant. A drop or
two of laudanum may now likewise be given, once or more in the day, (according
to the age of the child) either joined with some purgative, or in any of the
aforementioned medicines, or in the chalk-julep, made warm with tincture of
cinnamon, or of cardamoms; and in cases of extremity, in the decoction of
log-wood, which agrees very well with young children.

If infants ill of watery-gripes, are brought up by hand, the strictest
attention must be paid to their food, which must be changed from one kind to
another, and especially trial be made of broths, (and to older children white
meats) as long as the food shall be disposed to turn very acid on the stomach.
In one case, I think I saved a child, by Bates's julepum vitae, lowered with
water, when nothing else would stay on the stomach. This served both for food
and medicine; for the former of which, it was still farther diluted. When the
watery-gripes, or indeed any violent purging, attacks young children at the
breast, no other food ought to be given, but the wet nurse be changed, if the
acidity and purging continue many days, and medicine does not seem to take a
proper effect; which it cannot, if any offensive matter be continually thrown
into the stomach.

It has already been hinted, that when there is no fever, purging medicines for
children ought to be made potentially warm, and in no case is it more
necessary, than in long continued complaints of the bowels, which are so apt to
give rise to spasmodic affections. I am not very fond of giving prescriptions,
but it may not here be altogether amiss for some readers, since the following,
considered as a general medicine, has been found so frequently useful, and will
keep for a great length of time.

Take of rhubarb from fifteen to twenty grains; two scruples of magnesia alba;
sweet fennel, and dill-waters, of each one ounce; half an ounce, or six drams
of syrup of roses, and fifteen or twenty drops of the compound spirit of
ammonia. Of this, one, two, or three tea-spoonsful may be given two or three
times a day, and being very pleasant, infants are never averse to it.

Bowel complaints, it was said, are frequently owing to improper food, which on
this account, should at all times be peculiarly attended to; and when a purging
has taken place, ought to be suited to the nature of the stools. In the second
part of this work, some farther notice will be taken of the article of
children's food; at present, I shall only observe, that cow's milk is often
found to disagree with them, when their bowels are disposed to be too open, at
which times, a little lean mutton broth, or beef-tea is abundantly preferable.
On the same account, rusks, These are preferable to tops and bottoms, as they
are called, which have a good deal of butter in them.
and biscuit-powder are more suitable than bread; but at other times, I
believe, either the common, or the French roll, which is already half digested
by a previous fermentation, is more easily dissolved in the stomach, if there
be not a predominant acid in the first-passages. But where there is an habitual
disposition to a purging, I know of no diet so proper for infants who do not
suck, or who cannot have enough of the breast, as flour baked a long time in
the oven, till it breaks into a soft, greyish-coloured powder, To this end, the
flour should be put into a small jar, properly covered, and be taken out of the
oven several times, and stirred up from the bottom and sides of the jar, that
it may not form into hard lumps, but the whole be equally baked.
and afterward mixed with boiled cow's milk, the scum being first taken off;
the flour and milk should then be boiled a little time together, till the whole
appears like a thin custard. This is a very light and soft food, and
sufficiently restringent; and I have often known more good from it, than from
all the absorbent medicines ever devised, and have received more thanks for the
prescription, as it proves a permanent remedy. When children who are weaned,
are attacked with repeated purgings, and even broth is found to run through
them, I have observed no food so generally useful as a bit of the white of
chicken, not over-boiled, and afterward lightly bruised in a mortar with the
chicken liquor, and a very little bread, into a kind of light jelly. But this
should not be given oftener than twice, or at most, three times a day.

In all bowel complaints, it has been already remarked, that infants are
disposed to eruptions on the skin; by which they are so frequently benefited,
that if any kind of rash appears during long or severe purgings, a recovery may
almost with certainly be prognosticated.

That I may not multiply distinct heads of complaint where little need to be
said, I shall briefly notice in this place, that many children who are
accustomed at all times to have a very open belly, do not seem to have the
faculty of properly retaining their stools, and need a servant continually to
attend them, even at two or three years of age; so that some have been
suspected of being culpable in the matter. I know of no particular remedy,
indeed, on this occasion, but, perhaps, the aqua calcis, and other absorbents
may have been of some use; I have, however, observed, that the complaint wears
off as such children grow up, though oftentimes not entirely for several years.

WORMS.
THIS being a bowel complaint, I have noticed it in this place, especially as
worms have sometims been voided by infants of only a few weeks old. It is even
reported, Philosoph. Transact.
that Lille Van Deoverin has discovered them in the still-born fetus. Worms,
however, are much oftener suspected to be the cause of children's complaints
than positively ascertained; a mere foulness of the bowels often producing all
the evils attributed to worms: nor are all children equally affected by them
where they are actually met with. Some infants continue very healthy, though
they are seldom free from them, whilst others are very ill who have apparently
very few.

Worms become hurtful chiefly from their numbers; first, when they obstruct the
bowels, or compress the adjacent parts by their bulk. Secondly, by sucking up
the chyle designed for the nourishment of the child. Thirdly, by irritation.
Fourthly, by actually destroying the parts; though this is certainly a very
rare occurrence, and a far less frequent source of injury than those
beforementioned. Worms have, however, been said to eat their way through the
intestines; and Lister relates, Philosoph. Trans. See also Heister.
that some resembling the Teretes, but of a whiter color, have been seen
coming from an abscess on the ankle. They are likewise said to have occasioned
sudden suffocation, by rising up into the throat and lodging there. Mr. Le
Febure de Villebrune.


They are chiefly of four kinds, the large round worm; the very small maw-worm,
or ascarides, resembling bits of thread; the short, flat white worm, or
cucurbitina, and the jointed, called the tape-worm, or tinaea, which is often
many yards long. This is the most hurtful of all, and most difficult of cure,
because it will remain long in the bowels even after it is dead, and is then
seldom brought away but in pieces, and that by very powerful medicines. But as
this kind of worm is certainly not common in children, though it may sometimes
have been met with, and as it generally occasions a variety of symptoms
resembling other complaints, for which many different medicines may be
required, the bare mention of it here may suffice. This is so generally
solitary, that it has even acquired the name; yet it is said, there are
sometimes several of them, but, perhaps, attention enough may not have been
given in the examination of them, it being well known, that this worm will live
a long time after it has been broken into several parts.


The Symptoms of worms are various, and many of them are very equivocal: I
shall name only the more constant, and less uncertain ones. Such are fetid
breath, especially in the morning; bad gums; itching of the nose, and of the
anus, especially from the ascarides; a very irregular appetite, always in
extremes, whether of hunger or of loathing; a large, hard belly; pains at the
stomach; sometimes vomiting, oftener costiveness or purging, with slimy stools;
irregular colicks; thirst; dullness; peculiar unhealthy and bloated countenance,
with a dark, hollow circle round the eyes; startings in the sleep, and grinding
of the teeth. To these symptoms are often added, slow fever, with a small and
irregular pulse, pale, or whitish urine, a short and dry cough, (which is an
almost constant symptom where the complaint is of long standing, and has
injured the health;) sometimes even convulsions, epilepsies, and partial
palsies of the lower extremities. Children, whose digestion is weak, are most
liable to be troubled with these vermin, which are sometimes very easily
removed, and at other times very difficult of cure, and subject to return.

The Cause of this troublesome complaint is not perhaps certainly known* but
the great moisture of young persons is thought to be an occasion of their being
more infested with them than older people. Since the doctrine of equivocal
generation has been justly exploded, it has been generally imagined, that worms
are engendered from the eggs of insects, which float in the air, or are
swallowed with some part of our food, such as summer fruits, vegetables,
cheese, and some kinds of flesh meats. But perhaps this is not altogether so
certain as it may appear at first sight, unless we are to imagine that these
supposed eggs produce very different insects, from being taken into the stomach
and bowels, than they would otherwise do; since we do not meet with insects of
this kind, especially the tape-worm, any where else. Linnaeus and others have
though the Teretes, or Lubrici, to be the same with the common earthworm; but
Tyson has, by dissections, demonstrated the contrary. Philosoph. Transactions.
It is, however, more than probable, that they were destined by nature to be
generated, and to live in the bodies of other animals, as observed by Dr.
Black. Treatise on the Generation of intestinal Worms, and on the Means of
destroying them.

See also, Dissert. of J. Mathien Gesner, Mem. Gotting, an. 1751.


The like, however, are said to be met with in running waters, as well as the
bodies of different animals. But as the fact is not generally known, it were
desirable to have it established on the authority of several writers: I happen
to remember none, indeed, but that of Roseen, whose veracity, however, I do
not, in the least disp^te.

But whatever be the cause, the general intention of Cure is obvious enough,
which is to bring them away in the most easy, and expeditious manner, whether
alive or dead; the difficulty chiefly consisting in dislodging them from their
firm attachment to the sides of the bowels. To this end, a variety of
medicines, pretty much of the same kind, has been devised, and has served the
cause of empiricism in every age. Most of them consist either of the bitter
purges, or mercurials, to which are sometimes joined steel, and tin.

Worms existing in the bowels can, indeed, only be carried away by purging; and
very active purges are indicated when the time of life and constitution do not
forbid: on this principle, turn almost all the empyrical medicines prescribed
for worms. But when the age and constitution are tender, gentle purges given
duly for some time, by the constancy of their operation produce, without harm,
an effect equally, or perhaps more beneficial and lasting, that the active
purges: hence have arisen the family receipts, as worm-seed, tansey, and such
like, (given in treacle or honey) rhubarb, senna, etc.

If the child therefore be of a delicate habit, or the complaint not of long
standing, a little senna-tea taken every other morning, may be a proper
medicine to begin with; but should this, in any instance, prove insufficient, a
few grains of the powder of scammony with calomel may be given the overnight,
once or twice a week, according to the age and strength of the child. If
purging much should, on any account, be found improper, the following is very
safe, and often effectual.

R. Limatur: Stanni ij. Hydrargyr: iij. Misce, finant amalgama.
About eight or ten grains of this powder, with three or four grains of
rhubarb, and as much unwashed calx of antimony, may be taken every morning, in
a little honey, for a week together; after which, a clyster of succotorine
aloes, dissolved in warm milk, should be thrown up over night, and a proper
dose of rhubarb, or senna-tea be taken the next morning: which course may be
repeated, as the obstinacy of the complaint, or the strength of the child shall
direct. -- Volatile alkalies also, in some debilitated habits, will prove
serviceable.

Amongst other means, especially for such as may be at a distance from medical
assistance, is a mixture of pewter filings and treacle, of which children of
four or five years old, may take several tea-spoonfuls in a day, almost at
pleasure; which they will also readily do, for the sake of the treacle. At the
same time, from five to ten grains of jalap, with as much of the hydrargyrus
cum sulphur should be given twice every week, to carry the worms down, as they
die. To answer the last purpose, equal parts of bullock's gall, and powdered
aloes; may be mixed up with butter, and the parts below the navel be anointed
with it, two or three times a week; or succotorine aloes and powder of dried
rue, made into a plaster with Venice treacle, and applied round the navel,
first covering that part with a little cotton. -- I mention these things with a
view to the country poor, whom the benevolence of their neighbors may incline
them to assist, and who may, by these easy means, do it at so little expense to
themselves. Amongst such likewise, the decoction of quicksilver, in the
proportion of about two ounces to a pint of water, may be made trial of, and
and taken as a common drink, of which some people have entertained a very high
opinion. When this shall be drank, the like quantity of water may be added, as
often as it may be wanted.

If the complaint, however, has been of long standing, and the child not very
young, mercurial purges are a more expeditious, and a safe remedy; though the
hydrargyrus cum sulphur taken for a length of time, and occasionally purging
with senna, has sometimes succeeded, even where there have been the severest
convulsions. For which likewise, or obstinate contractions of the limbs, the
warm-bath is often essentially necessary.

Throughout the cure, and indeed afterward, the diet should be strictly
attended to, and all fat and greasy aliments abstained from. The child should
live upon milk, broths, and meats of easy digestion, with toasted bread and
honey, instead of butter, which is exceedingly pernicious. -- To prevent a
return of the complaint in older children, or grown people, chalybeate-waters
and bitters may be made use of.

CONVULSIONS.
CONVULSIONS are of two kinds; the symptomatic, depending upon another disease,
and the idiopathic, said to be an original complaint, and arising from a morbid
affection of the brain, though the distinction be not, perhaps, perfectly
philosophical, or accurate. It is for want of some such discrimination,
however, that writers have had occasion to observe, that children are much
oftener supposed to die of convulsions than they really do; for though a
convulsion frequently closes the scene, it has generally arisen from the great
irritabiity of their nerves, and violence of the disease under which they have
labored.

Such original Cause may be a rash improperly repelled; but is much oftener
seated in the gums, in the time of teething; or in the first-passages, where
some undigested matter, or sometimes pent-up wind, irritates the coats of the
intestines, and produces irregular motions throughout the whole nervous system.
Such a load, whether from too great a quantity, or bad quality of the food, by
occasioning a faulty secretion, must act like a poison; and that the
convulsions are owing to this cause may often be known by the complaints that
have preceded them, such as loathings, costiveness, purging, pale countenance,
large belly, and disturbed sleep. If the child is two or three years old, any
load at the stomach may be more readily discovered; the tongue will be foul,
the skin hot, and the pulse quick and weak. But should it be granted, that the
convulsions of children are generally symptomatic, they may nevertheless be
said to die of them more frequently than some authors have allowed; for where a
disease is disposed to produce violent convulsions, the convulsion, though a
mere symptom, may carry off the patient: but as it may sometimes be prevented
or removed, by its peculiar remedies, (the disease which occasioned it being at
the same time properly treated) infants may often be recovered, who would
otherwise expire in a convulsion fit.

Any little matter capable of irritating the nervous system, will induce the
symptomatic convulsions in some infants, whilst others will withstand a great
deal. For such habits as the former, the cold bath will be found the best
preservative. Every young infant is, however, more or less, predisposed to this
complaint; and the disposition continues throughout childhood, in a proportion
to the age and delicacy of the habit. The younger and more irritable,
therefore, an infant may be, it will be so much the more liable to the
symptomatic convulsion, especially from any considerable disturbance in the
first passages, as was mentioned before, particularly the bad quality, or over
thickness of the breast-milk, or other food; and from frights of the wet nurse.
Of this I remember a remarkable instance in a patient of my own, in whose house
a visiter dropped down suddenly dead. The mother of the child, which was six
months old, was exceedingly alarmed, but her attention being for a moment
called off by its crying, she incautiously put it to her breast. It was not an
hour afterward that the infant was seized with a sit, and lay either convulsed
or drowsy, without so much as taking the breast, for the space of six and
thirty hours; though it was at length happily recovered.

The cure of every convulsion will consist, principally, in removing the
exciting causes, which must, therefore, be inquired into. If from improper food
and indigestion, a gentle emetic should be given. If the irritation be in the
bowels, whatever will carry down their acrid contents will cure the
convulsions, if administered in time; and we ought generally to begin with a
clyster. If the stools appear very foul after common purges, (in which case
there will frequently be a difficulty of breathing) a few grains of the powder
of scammony with calomel may be given with great propriety. But if the
disposition to convulsions continues, after the bowels have been properly
cleansed, and no new irritation of them may be apprehended, antispasmodics
should be administered, I speak from my own experience of the efficacy of such
remedies, and it may not be amiss to observe that Harris, who is extremely
cautions of giving heating medicines to infants, speaks favorably of some of
these. -- "Usus horum (says he) hand prorsus improbandus est, vel in tenellis:
nempe quia acidum absorbendi facultate excellunt. Verum summa cantione" etc. --
Great caution is certainly necessary in regard to every medicine prescribed for
infants, and especially, it has been granted, for those of heating quality:
nevertheless, it may be repeated, that in proportion as the disorders of
infants shall become more attended to, I doubt not, it will appear that, in
this country at least, cordial and volatile medicines, are frequently both more
expedient and useful, than many people have imagined.
such as tincture of soot or of castor, spirit of hartshorn, or drop or two of
laudanum, or, what I have found remarkably successful, oil of rue; which though
an obsolete medicine, I think I have never administered, when there was any
chance of recovery, where it has not been serviceable. Rubbing the back bone,
palms of the hands, and soles of feet with oil of amber, or water of ammonia,
has likewise had a good effect. A very common cause, however, of recurring
convulsions is worms, and where no other probable one may appear, ought to be
suspected; the cure will then depend on the proper treatment of that complaint.

Should the convulsions arise from the disappearance of a rash; or of a
discharge behind the ears, the warm-bath, blisters, Blisters may be dressed
with the common while cerate, rubbed down till it becomes smooth, and spread
upon a double linen cloth, instead of the hard drawing plasters commonly made
use of, which are very harsh to the tender excoriated surface.
gentle purges, or a few drops of the compound spirit of ammonia joined with
the salt of amber, bid the fairest for administering relief. But when the cause
is unknown, as the approach of small pox, measles, or other eruptive complaint,
bathing the feet in warm water, and throwing up a clyster, are the safest
means. If from teething, after gentle evacuations, and other means directed
under that head, blisters, oil of rue, laudanum, or the compound spirit of
vitriolic ether, and especially lancing the gums, are the grand remedies.

When repeated convulsions connected with some disorder in the first passages,
and recurring for several months have withstood all the above means of cure and
been suspected to arise from some fault in the brain, they will sometimes
disappear of themselves as the infant gets older. At other times, the
appearance of some other complaint has put an end to the convulsions, and not
unfrequently, changing the wet-nurse; and sometimes even weaning children, when
six or eight months old, has seemed to remove the complaint. I lately saw a
remarkable instance of the concurrence of two of these circumstances; the child
being seized with the smallpox, and weaned, at, or near the same time. The
infant previous to this, for several months together as constantly fell into
violent convulsions as it chanced to chew a crust of bread, eat a bit of plain
pudding, or even take bread and milk, and though when debarred from these, and
nourished only at the breast of a healthy nurse, the fits recurred every two or
three weeks: but after going through the smallpox in a favorable manner, and
being taken wholly from the breast, the fits soon disappeared, and the child
was able to take all the light food usually given to infants.

If convulsions come on without any of the preceding symptoms, they have
generally been concluded to be a primary disease, and to proceed immediately
from the brain. Some derivation is therefore to be made, by bleeding, if the
child seems able to bear it, or by leeches behind the ears; by blisters;
purging; bathing the feet in warm water; frictions of the legs, and rubbing the
soles of the feet with the water of ammonia. If children of two or three years
old are subject to slight and frequent fits, issues or setons should be made
between the shoulders, or in the neck, and be kept open for a length of time:
chalybeate waters may likewise be useful. But when the idiopathic convulsion
attacks very young children, it generally terminates very soon, sometimes in
ten minutes, and is, indeed, often fatal before any means can be made use of.
Though, indeed I have often imagined, that we are frequently mistaken in regard
to such hasty deaths, and that when convulsions prove so suddenly fatal, they
are commonly symptomatic, and are occasioned much oftener than is suspected by
over-feeding. -- I have known some of the largest ^^d finest children I have
ever seen, die presently after the nurse had boasted of their having eaten
three boats-full of victuals.

From this view of the disease, a few words more may not be wholly unnecessary,
especially as they will hold out much comfort in regard to this alarming
complaint; by which, I am however, assured, many infants have perished merely
from its not being properly distinguished. For though, indeed, every convulsion
fit is to appearance exceedingly shocking, yet under proper treatment they are
much seldomer fatal than is commonly imagined, however often they may recur:
neither is the frequency of their returns during infancy, nor the long
continuance of such a disposition an indication of future evils, if the fits
themselves be of the kind here supposed. The above observation is, I believe,
strictly true in regard to such kind of fits; and though in some others, the
intellects have appeared afterward to be impaired, yet are the instances so
very few, that there is usually little room for parents to be alarmed in the
apprehension of such consequences.
But though experience warrants my speaking with confidence on this head, and I
should account myself exceedingly happy in preventing any unnecessary distress
that parents may endure, yet would I, by no means, put them off their guard;
since the recovery depends so entirely upon an expeditious use of the remedy,
that even the time lost in calling in assistance from abroad may be fatal to
the infant.

Fits of this kind are, indeed, pretty generally known to arise from irritating
matter confined in the first passages, as has been already explained, but I
believe it is not so generally understood, how often such matters are lodged in
the stomach, (perhaps the pylorus itself); or very low down in the rectum.
Instances of the latter are not wanting, wherein the hardened feces have lain
so low as to dilate the sphincter any, (or lower opening of the bowels)
sufficiently to expose them to view, and yet the infant been dead before a
clyster could be procured from a neighboring apothecary's; whereas such fits
cease immediately after a plentiful evacuation from the bowels, artificially
induced: and I have seen an infant in the month, lying torpid for an hour
together, in a kind of fit, and apparently in the very article of death,
brought out of it entirely after a large and spontaneous discharge of thick
feces. In like manner sudden death has taken place when the load has been in
the stomach; whilst other children have been saved by spontaneously throwing it
up.

After what has has been said it would be scarcely necessary to point out the
remedies in a formal way, but for the sake of directing the most expeditious
manner of applying them. In the first instance, doubtless, the obvious means
are a soap clyster with two or more tea-spoonsful of salt (such articles being
always at hand) and afterward administering one or other of the purges
formerly directed; which it may often be necessary to repeat for some days,
perhaps with an interval between. But when an infant falls suddenly into a
convulsion very soon after sucking, or feeding, whether on any thing actually
improper, or not, and the bowels have been for some days in an orderly state,
it may reasonably be presumed, that the irritation is in the stomach,
especially if there be an unusual paleness of the countenance, indicating
sickness; or on the contrary, any considerable blackness, with symptoms of
suffocation; which I think do not come on so soon when the obstruction is in
the bowels. And it should here be remarked, that it is not necessary, that the
load in the stomach should be considerable in quantity in order to induce such
sudden and alarming convulsions; it is sufficient that the stomach be really
oppressed by it to a certain degree; nor does i^ always appear to arise so much
from an oppressive abundance, as from a small piece of undigested food,
irritating, and perhaps sticking in the pylorus, or inferior aperture of the
stomach.

In the case here described it would be improper to think of a formal emetic,
at least without making trial of some more expeditious means, such as
irritating the Pharynx, or upper part of the guller, with the finger, or a
feather, or forcing in the smoke of tobacco, if that be at hand, which often
instantly produce vomiting, and put an end to the fit. To this end, the child
should be supported by a hand placed under its stomach and belly, whilst the
feather or other means are made use of; in which posture the infant will be
made to vomit more readily, and with less straining, than in any other
position. -- It is hoped that the importance of the subject, as well as the
very frequent success attending the plans last recommended, under the most
alarming appearances, may be thought an apology for the length of this chapter,
as well as the sort of repetitions made use of.

It is farther to be noted, that symptomatic convulsions are sometimes the
effect of a salutary effort of nature, to produce a crisis in some disease the
child labors under; in which case, great caution should be used not to be over
officious: bathing the feet in warm water, however, as mentioned before, will
be perfectly safe, and perhaps useful. -- Having spoken of opiates, I shall
just observe, that though they are often very serviceable, when judiciously
prescribed, they become very hurtful if improperly administered. They will,
however, always be safe, where convulsions continue after the first exciting
cause has been removed; or where they are so violent as to become an obstacle
to administering proper remedies; or when the originial complaint is of a
spasmodic nature.

When convulsions occur many times in a day, it is of importance to attend to
the distance of the paroxysms, or returns; from which a much better indication
may be had of their immediate danger, than from the forcible contraction of the
muscles during the fit. For where the intervals are short, though the fit
itself be not long, nor violent, the disease is more dangerous, than where
violent fits are attended with long intervals.

SKIN-BOUND.
IN the preceding edition, this disorder was considered only in a transient
way, under the article of Purging; both from its being conceived to appear
chiefly in the form of a morbid symptom attending certain bowel complaints, and
because I had then neither seen, nor heard enough of the disease to enable me
to offer to the public any very distinct account of it. I could indeed wish
that this disorder were yet better understood, and that I were able to lay down
a more successful method of treatment than has yet been made known: it is
however in every view worthy of the most distinct consideration, as well from
the observations made in this country, as from the late researches by several
physicians in Paris, as I shall have occasion to notice very soon.

Having met with no account of this disorder either amongst the ancients, nor
very modern writers when I mentioned it in a former edition, I presumed I was
announcing a disease, at that time scarcely known, or at least was giving the
first public account of it: and this I believe is no uncommon mistake of
authors. Perhaps, it may be the wise intention of Providence, that in
succeeding ages, many things relating to arts and sciences should be forgotten
or overlooked, in order to emulate posterity in the pursuit of knowledge; which
men would, probably, be less inquisitive after, if things once known were very
rarely lost sight of. However this may be, I continued to consult the oldest
writers, after having published my former edition, and was once more led to
conclude, that no account of this disorder had ever before been given to the
public. At length, however, I met with a solitary case, which had occurred in
the hospital at Stockholm, Anno 1718, accurately described by Uzenbesius, and
recorded in^ Scuringii Embrologia (de faetu frigido et^rigido), The midwife is
reported to have said, that this infant though born alive, felt as intensely
cold and rigid when it came into the world as a piece of ice. -- How this might
be, I leave to the Academy of the Curious to determine.
but without adverting at all to its treatment. The case, as I since find, is
transcribed into the Ephemerid. Academ. Naturae Curiosor. Cent. ix.

The above is related in a manner importing it to be an uncommon occurrence,
and the disease at that time little, if at all known: and though recorded in
two distinct works (the latter of which is rather consulted than regularly
perused) the case seems to have been universally overlooked, and consequently
the true nature of the disease has remained nearly in its original obscurity.
It was, indeed, not till a twelvemonth after my short account of it appeared,
that this disorder began to engage the attention of the French physicians, in
consequence of Monsieur Andry being called upon to take the charge of the
Hospice des Enf^ns trouves* at Paris. The disease indeed had been for many
years noticed both in that hospital and the hotel Dieu, but having always
proved fatal, little attention had been for a long time paid to it, till Dr.
Andry was elected physician to the first mentioned charity; since which time,
no pains seem to have been spared in the investigation of it.

That the present account of the disease may therefore be clearly stated, I
shall first consider it as it has appeared in this country, and in the manner I
had long ago intended, and had actually drawn up before I was favored with
some farther description of it, by Dr. Andry, of Paris.

It has, indeed, been much less common in this kingdom than on the continent,
but is equally an hospital disease, and is seldom met with but accompanied with
some bowel complaint, and still more rarely appearing at the birth. It was
first spoken of in public, I believe, by my friend Dr. Denman (when physician
to the Middlesex hospital, and a teacher in midwifery); as I remarked in the
former edition; and it is to him I was indebted for some account of it before I
had at all noticed the disorder myself.

The British Lying-in hospital has been very little infested with it, and,
possibly, by being solely appropriated to the reception of pregnant women,
which the Middlesex hospital was not. I shall therefore first of all lay down
the symptoms exactly as they were noticed in that infirmary, by Dr. Denman,
whose unwearied attention to it, though not with all the desired effect, does
him more honor, than could have been derived from the most successful
treatment of a disease less fatal than this has proved wherever it as appeared.

The following symptoms may be considered as pathognomonic, or characteristic
of the disease.

1st. The skin is always of a yellowish white color, giving the idea of soft
wax.

2d. The feel of the skin and flesh is hard and resisting, but not edematose.

3d. The cellular membrane is fixed in such a manner, that the skin will not
slide over the subjacent muscles; not even on the back of the hands, where it
is usually very loose and pliable.

4th. This stricture often extends over the whole body; but the skin is
peculiarly rigid in the parts about the face, and on the extremities.

5th. The child is always cold.

6th. The infant makes a peculiar kind of moaning noise, which is often very
feeble; and never cries like other chirdren.

7th. Whatever number of days such children may survive, they always have the
appearance of being dying.

This disease appears at no regular periods; but whenever it takes place it
attacks several infants within a short time; and chiefly those, as I have just
noticed, who may be in the last stage of obstinate bowel complaints, in which
the stools are of a waxey or clayey consistence. It has been also remarked,
that it sometimes makes its appearance as an original disease, and even at the
birth; in which case, the infant has never survived many days.

I have seen the rigidity extending beyond the cellular membrane, so as to
affect the muscles, but only those of the lower jaw, which became perfectly
rigid: but this spasm or tetanus is, by no means, a frequent symptom, and does
not seize the extremities as it is found to do in France; nor has the disease,
in any instance that I have heard of, been attended with the erysipelatous
affections constantly noticed in that country.

The Cause of this dreadful complaint, when congenite, or evidently
supervenient to disorders of the first-passages, seems to me to be a spasm
depending very much upon a certain morbid state of those parts, and with which
the skin is well known to have a peculiar sympathy. But when, though an
original disease, it does not take place till some days after birth, which, I
believe, is rarely, if ever the case except in large hospitals, and other
crowded apartments; wherever the irritating cause, in such instances, may be
seated, the disease seems to be an endemic of certain seasons, arising from
that unwholesome air to which such places are peculiarly liable.

The means of Cure in this country have been very different from those that
have lately been found successful in France; but instances of recovery have
been very few in either. As Dr. Denman did me the kindness of giving me the
first intimation of such a disease, I very naturally adopted his plan of
treatment, which consisted in a strict attention to the state of the bowels;
and rendering the several medicines very warm by means of the compound spirit
of ammonia, which was administered every four or six hours; and was the only
plan that he ever ^ound attended with any success. Together with this, I after
some time directed the frequent use of a warm-bath, and chafing the whole body
afterward with soft flannel; and I think myself happy in having fallen upon
one part of the plan that has since appeared to have been attended with the
first instances of success in France, as will be noticed below.

As the disease raging so much in France seems to differ in many respects from
ours, it is very doubtful how far the plan of cure lately adopted there may be
applicable in this country, and my own experience has hitherto not gone beyond
the means I last mentioned: but I would venture to suggest, that in many cases,
trial might be safely and properly made, not only of carminative clysters, but
also of a grain of calomel previous to the infant being put into the warm-bath:
To the warm water should be added a good quantity of salt, and some Castile
soap.
and after a sufficient number of stools shall have been procured by these
means, exhibiting other volatile and cordial remedies beside the spirit of
ammonia; as well as anti-spasmodics of different kinds.

It was after I had made up my mind about this complaint, in the manner that
has been just noticed, that an advertisement appeared from the Royal Society of
Medicine in Paris, proposing this disease as the subject for their next
prize-medal. About this time also, Mr. TENON published his Memoires sur les
Hopitaux de Paris, in which is a brief account of this disease; and very soon
after this, Dr. Andry did me the honor of sending me his Tract, entitled,
Recherches sur L'endurcissement du Tissu cellulaire des Enfans noveaux-nes.

Though these works contain very accurate accounts of this disease, and to
which Dr. Andry especially has paid an attention that must do him great honor,
they at first served only to perplex my own views of it. This obscurity arose
from the disorder being combined, or as I then rather conceived, entirely
confounded with another complaint first publicly noticed, I believe, in a
former edition of this work, under the term anomalous inflammation; and from
which Dr. Andry had, on this occasion, made two or three quotations. I
therefore took the liberty of writing to that eminent physician, and was soon
favored with a satisfactory answer, by which I hope the public as well as
myself may be obliged; as it must prevent any mistakes arising from the
accounts which the above mentioned works afford of this melancholy disease.

After the description given of this disorder as it appears in London, little
more will be necessary, I apprehend, than to select the circumstances in which
that in France is found to differ, as related by Dr. Andry in his printed work,
as well as the letters with which he was pleased to honor me.

It has already been said, that it is more frequently attended with tetanus,
and never occurs without those appearances mentioned under the article, termed
in this edition, Infantile Erysipelas, especially the redness and hardness
about the pubes, accompanied farther with tumor and redness of the soles of
the feet. But these parts, it seems, though of a purple red, are intensely cold,
very rarely suppurate, but sometimes mortify. This is said to be the case in
four or five children out of twenty, all of whom certainly die in a few hours
after the gangrene has taken place; and become so putrid, that by the next day,
the skin separates from every part of the body, so as to adhere to the hands of
those who have occasion to touch them.
In one very late instance, however, the infant was not cold, but on the
contrary, exceedingly hot. The legs, thighs, and soles of the feet were red and
hard; but no mention being made of a general tightness of the skin, it is
probable this child was affected only with that infantile erysipelas which
appears amongst us.

Besides the above variations, the infants are said to swallow with extreme
pain; the extremities, especially the legs, are much enlarged, and attended
with a serous effusion in the cellular membrane, which we have not hitherto
noticed: and the disorder is likewise said to rage most in the hotter months.
-- The infants are observed to die about the third or fourth day, or at
farthest, on the seventh from the birth. It is probable, there is another and
very material variation, in respect to the degree of stricture and immobility
of the skin, which are not clearly expressed to be either so considerable or
extensive, as in the disease I have been describing; but are more confined to
those parts which become red and tumid. But in the instance recorded by
Scuringius it was clearly otherwise, the infant being said to feel, from head
to foot, like a piece of flesh dried in the smoke. The child survived a
complete day, during which time it took no sort of nourishment; but never
cried, nor made any kind of noise.

Upon examining a great number of dead bodies at the Enfans Trouves, the serous
extravasation is constantly met with; is of a deep yellow color and fluid, but
coagulates with heat; the fat is peculiarly solid; the glands and lymphatics,
especially those of the mesentery, are found stuffed, and the liver uncommonly
large, with a great quantity of deep colored bile in the gallbladder; and the
lungs are said to be loaded with blood, as well as to contain an unusual
quantity of air.

The supposed Cause of this disease amongst them, seems to me but ill accounted
for; being attributed to the improper diet of the mother or her infant, or to
cold it has taken at the birth: whereas, the coldness and rigidity of the skin
seem to be but mere symptoms, and not the disease; especially as their
children, like ours, are but rarely attacked from the birth. It should rather
seem to be a true endemic, arising from foul air, especially as it is found
only to attack the poor, and particularly to infest the two large hospitals
that are crowded above all others, and receive the lowest and most wretched
part of them; of whose newborn children, it is supposed, one out of twenty is
visited with this disease.

It has been hinted, that for a long while, little attention was paid to this
complaint, on account of its constant fatality, six hundred infants sinking
under it every year, in a single hospital; four hundred of which are born in
the Hotel-Dieu.

But since Dr. Andry's election, various means have been attempted both by
himself and his colleague, Mr. Auvety; and amongst other means, the warm-bath,
which appears to have saved the first child that was known to recover. Monsieur
Souville, surgeon to the Military Hospital at Calais, has also given some
account of this disease, in the Jo^rnal de Medicine, under the name of
AEdematie Concrete, and observes, that it is a very common disorder in the
provinces, as well as in Paris. Under his direction, likewise, a warm, or
rather vapor-bath, succeeded in the only instance wherein he had made trial of
it.
Trial has since been made of blisters to the extremities, which succeeded also
in the very first instance, as well as since in several others; so that, in the
last year, they are reported to have saved five infants out of an hundred, more
than in the preceding one.

As this disease, more especially in the form it puts on in Paris, is now, by
the encouragement of the Royal Society of Medicine, likely to be fully
investigated, it may be hoped some farther light will be thrown on it: in the
mean time, as it is evidently a complicated disease, the bark and cordials,
with proper attention to the state of the bowels, might possibly be useful.

TETANUS.
THE Tetanus, or Locked-Jaw This is the species which Nosologists have termed
Trismus maxil^ae inferioris Rigiditas spastic^. Species In^. Trismus Nascentium
Infantes intra duas primas a nativitate septiman^s corripiens. Vide Cullen. G.
lxix.
of infants, is an equally fatal complaint, and as little known in this
country, as the foregoing. In some instances, it has been confined to the jaw
only, as in Jamaica; in others, it has been attended with contraction and
rigidity of other muscles of the face, and a peculiar fixedness of its
features. Sometimes, the rigidity has extended to the neck; and in one child I
observed it to be spread so completely over the whole body, that the limbs
could not be bent so as to place it conveniently in the vessel appropriated to
a warm-bath. It has already been observed that it is sometimes joined with the
foregoing complaint, but rarely in this country; and even then, the jaw
partakes only of that kind of rigidity common to other parts.

In such instances of Tetanus as I have met with, the attack has not been
earlier than the sixth, nor later than the ninth day from the birth; and as far
as I could learn, the infants had not been costive (as mentioned by Dr. Evans),
nor apparently unhealthy: one, I remember, was a remarkably strong and lusty
child. It seems somewhat to differ, therefore, from the disease termed
Jaw-fallen, in the West Indies; and in one instance appeared to have some
resemblance to the catalepsy. The rigidity has stolen on in a more gradual way
in some instances than in others, but has always been very great as far as it
extended, from the moment it has been discovered; so that in instances where
the mouth has continued sufficiently open to admit my finger, I could not
thereby depress the jaw. In some, the eyes have been bloated, and the whole
countenance much swollen.

The cause of this complaint, which does not seem to arise from constipation,
or neglect of purging off the meconium, may, probably, be a certain state of
the air, as has also been suspected in the West Indies; and the more so, as
the disease has appeared only once in the British Lying-in Hospital during a
great number of years and then attacked several infants in a short time.

The remedies made use of at the hospital were, the warm-bath; fomentations to
the rigid parts, frictions with oil and camphire, and BATES's anodyne balsam;
blisters behind the ears, and to the nape of the neck; and opium, calomel, the
bark, and aromatic confection have been given internally.

One infant, in whom the complaint was confined to the jaw, and who had less
rigidity than any of the others; never looked ill, and had no convulsions in
its limbs, died rather sooner than the rest. Only one survived the third day:
this child was not seized till the ninth from its birth, and lived to go out of
the hospital with its mother, at the end of the third week, and we hoped was
then recovering; but it had never been able to take the breast after the
attack, and died three weeks after it left the hospital, though, possibly, not
altogether from this complaint.

EPILEPTIC-FITS.
THIS and the following complaint, as well as the two immediately preceding,
which relate, some to the more early, and others to the later periods of
childhood, are noticed together in this place, on account of their falling
under the general class of convulsions, and it is presumed less improperly, on
the whole, than ranking them according to the different periods of time in
which they might take place.

Very few words, however, on the Epilepsy, or falling sickness, may suffice, as
it is either pretty easily cured, or usually continues through life; and is too
well known by this popular name to require a particular description: an account
of the various precurrent symptoms would be equally useless in this work. -- It
may just be noticed, that the patient falls suddenly to the ground, and
sometimes without any perceptible warning, or at all sufficient to secure him
from injury; and is usually much convulsed, but frequently retains his senses
during the fit.

I believe it sometimes takes its rise merely from foul bowels, and certainly
more commonly attacks children of a costive habit of body: it should then be
treated agreeably to the directions already given in such cases, and especially
with active and mercurial purges: after which, the bark, chalybeates, and
sea-bathing may be serviceable. In other instances, especially in more advanced
life, and toward the time of puberty, the epilepsy seems to be owing rather to
a more sensible nervous irritation. In such cases, blisters to the back of the
head may be useful; and I have experienced much benefit from large doses of the
powder of valerian, and opium; and in one instance, by an infusion of savine,
fennel seeds, and juniper berries; but I never could entirely conquer the
complaint by these means; but the olium succini has, in several instances,
perfected a cure in young subjects.

In the worst cases I ever met with, in which the fits were very long and
violent, and to the number of twenty or thirty in a day, electricity has very
soon rendered them weaker, reduced their number to three or four in a day, and
gradually to one in a month; but did not entirely remove them. In such
obstinate cases it is generally supposed, that the brain is affected by some
local and permanent cause, and a perfect cure is consequently despaired of.

When this disease has attacked children of five or six years of age, and where
no treatment has been serviceable, the complaint has very frequently
disappeared suddenly about the time of puberty, and sometimes a year or two
sooner. Where it does not, it will probably continue through life, and now and
then prove suddenly fatal.

Upon examining the brain after death, I have found a small point of bone
standing out from the internal part of the os frontis, as sharp as a needle (of
which Boerhaave has recorded several instances) and was, doubtless, the true
cause of the disease.

CHOREA SANCTI VITI, or SAINT VITUS's DANCE.
I SHALL be equally brief on this untoward disorder, which, though not often
fatal, is like the former, I believe, rarely cured but in young subjects.

Worms and other foulness of the bowels in children, are likewise frequent
causes of this strange convulsion; in which different parts, and especially the
extremities are put into continual motion, giving the patient a very awkward
appearance, particularly in his walk.

If the first-passages are the seat of irritation, the complaint must be
treated in the manner noticed under the preceding article; and, indeed, in most
cases, the cure should be begun by administering aloetic, o^ mercurial purges.
But should the disorder appear to be owing rather to relaxation, as it
sometimes is, the bark, chalybeates, and other tonics, especially the vitri^lum
album, and sea-bathing, are indicated, and are very frequently successful; as I
have seen in a late instance, in a child of eleven years of age.

TEETHING.
THE complaints arising during dentition may next be considered, many of the
foregoing being blended with it, the first-passages and the nervous system
being always more or less affected. The state of dentition is likewise not
unfrequently an occasion of many complaints afterward to be mentioned, such as
cough, fever, the rickets, and even consumption; under each of which heads
therefore, occasional references will be made to it.

The time of teething is a most important period of the infant state, and
subjects into manifold complaints and dangers. Some writers, indeed, and
particularly Dr. Cadogan See his Essay on Nursing, etc.
, and Dr. Armstrong, seem to think otherwise; and that teething is scarcely to
be ranked amongst the diseases of infants. They have imagined that children, if
otherwise healthy, would cut their teeth with no more danger than adults, who
often out their wise-teeth, so called, at an advanced age, without any
difficulty, and always without hazard. They likewise observe, that many
children get their teeth easily. But this argument must suppose the healthiest,
and best nurtured children, to be, in all respects, in the same circumstances
with adults, which is, by no means the case; as they are liable to fever,
dangerous purgings, and even convulsions, from causes that would in no wise,
affect the latter: nor can they stand under some of those complaints so long as
adults, nor endure the necessary remedies. For the same reason, the measles and
smallpox carry off such numbers of infants, when attacked by them a little
more severely than common, whilst young and healthy people often struggle
through the most dangerous and complicated kinds, when properly treated from
the beginning. Not to mention, that very few infants, who are unhappily
affected with lues venerea, recover under any treatment, whilst adults are
cured in the most advanced stages of the complaint, notwithstanding some parts
may be actually mortified. I have, therefore, no doubt, that the time of
teething ought to be ranked amongst the most dangerous to infants, and that the
greatest attention ought to be paid to it; though it is probable that Dr.
Arburthnot greatly over-rates its fatality, when he says that one child in ten
may be supposed to sink under it.

Some late writers, and particularly Mr. Le Febure De Villebrune, have
conceived this to be a mere dispute about words; but the difference, indeed,
extends much farther. For though I would, indeed, by no means assert dentition
itself to be a disease, and have made use of any such like expression merely in
a popular way, yet am I confident it induces disease in very many infants of
every habit of body, and more especially, however strange it may seem, in the
apparently healthy and robust. Indeed, weak and even rickety children, more
commonly cut their teeth easily, though often very late; or if they should be
harrasted by a purging, and other complaints, they, nevertheless, escape with
their lives oftener than lusty strong children, who are frequently carried off
suddenly at this period, unless the teeth happen to find a very easy passage
through the gums. The system, during dentition, being disposed to inflammation,
such children must oftener fall into fever than the tender and delicate; like
athletic adults, who are more disposed to inflammatory complaints, than those
who are of a colder, but less healthy temperament: and it is by acute fever, or
convulsions, that infants are carried off, who are well known to survive a
thousand lingering and vexatious complaints, if their viscera be sound.

This period usually commences between the fifth and tenth months, and the
process of the first teething continues to the eighteenth at the least, and
sometimes much longer, The two front teeth in the lower jaw are usually cut the
first, and it is commonly a few weeks longer, before the corresponding ones in
the upper jaw make their appearance. After which, it is frequently a
considerable time before the next underteeth come out; but sometimes, though
not often, six or eight are cut in a hasty succession. Children sometimes cut
their teeth irregularly, or cross, as it is called, both by the teeth appearing
first in the upper jaw, and also at a distance, instead of being contiguous to
each other: this is accounted, and with some reason, indication of difficult,
or painful dentition.

Teething is usually preceded and accompanied with various symptoms: the child
drivels, or slavers much; the gums swell, spread, and become hot; there is
often a circumscribed redness in the cheeks, and eruptions on the skin,
especially on the face and scalp; a looseness, gripings, green stools,
watchings, startings in the sleep, and spasms of particular parts; a
diminution, or increased secretion of the urine, and discharge of matter, with
pain in making water, (imitating exactly a virulent gonorrhoea) which often
mitigates the fever. A less common symptom, appearing only in certain habits,
is a swelling of the tops of the feet and hands: it seems, however, of no
importance, and goes away upon the appearance of the teeth. I never met with it
but in infants who cut them painfully; and being seldom accompanied with a
purging, it is likely may prevent that fever which is otherwise so apt to
attend. In all cases, the child shrieks often, and thrusts its fingers into its
mouth: and these symptoms are sometimes followed by a cough, difficult
breathing, fits, fever, scrofula and marasmus, or universal decay.

Strong and healthy children cut their teeth both earlier and more easily than
the weak and tender. I have known a weak, and rickety child, without a tooth at
twenty-two months old, Primerose speaks of it being as late as the third, or
even fourth year.
though it lived to grow up; but at the age of five years became scrofulous.
Therefore air, exercise, wholesome food, an open belly, and every thing that
has a tendency to promote general health, will greatly contribute to the safety
of dentition.

Difficult teething is to be treated nearly as other acute diseases with local
inflammation. If the body is at all bound, some opening medicine should be
administered, and it is to be observed, that even a considerable degree of
looseness is useful; few children cutting teeth so well as those whose bellies
are at this time much more than commonly open. Diluting drinks are also very
necessary, especially if the child does not suck; with a light food, in small
quantities, and frequently taken. If much fever attends, the loss of a little
blood, in some way, will be necessary; though children do not endure bleeding
so well as they do other evacuations. If the propriety of bleeding with the
lancet be doubted, a leech or two, as Harris advises, may be applied behind the
ears, and is generally serviceable. Clysters are also very useful, especially
if there be retention of urine, which will likewise call for the use of the
warm-bath. Gentle diaphoretics are also serviceable, particularly of wine of
antimony, or the antimonium tartarisatum, which besides opening the belly,
often operate in this way: a blister should likewise be applied between the
shoulders, especially if there is any disposition to fits. And, indeed, if
stools do not afford some considerable relief, there should generally be some
discharge from the skin; since a purging, and eruptions on the skin, when
spontaneous, are the grand means of easy dentition. A little discharge should
therefore, be kept up behind the ears, by rubbing the parts with Spanish flies,
applying a thread as before directed, or putting on a small blister; which may
be kept open. A burgundy-pitch plaster laid on the back will sometimes
suffice, which should be renewed every ten days, till the symptoms disappear,
or the teeth come into sight. Even before this period, light scarifications of
the gums are very useful, by taking off the tension; or if the teeth are at all
to be felt, lancing them, as it is called; the proper method of doing which
will be noticed below.

I shall close what I have to offer on the general plan of treatment, by
observing, that the indications certainly are to assist the eruption of the
teeth, and to moderate the inflammatory and other symptoms: which must be
treated according to their kind: all parts of the body readily consenting with
the gums at the time of teething, but the nerves, the bowels, and the lungs,
more particularly and importantly than the rest. It has been observed, that a
purging is beneficial, and it is, indeed, surprising how considerable a
diarrhoea children will stand on this occasion, and how very bad the stools
will often be for many weeks together, and a child happily struggle through;
though at another time, an equal degree of purging, with such bad stools, and
constant fever, would prove infallibly fatal. The diarrhoea is therefore not
only to be cautiously treated according to the directions already given under
the article of purging, but is oftentimes rather to be encouraged than
suppressed. Very pale stools are at this time not uncommon, and are sometimes
in vast quantity: I have known an infant have fifty in one night, at le^^^ by
the account of a careful and discreet nursery maid; and from the quantity of
feces that I saw the next morning, I had no reason to dispute her calculation.

For the fever of dentition, besides bleeding the absorbent powders are
eminently useful, and are in various respects calculated to afford relief. To
these, sometimes a grain or two of Dr. James powder may be added at bedtime,
which, if there should be any thing amiss in the stomach or bowels will either
vomit or purge, but otherwise (it has been said) will promote a kindly sweat,
which is always beneficial. Nitre is very often useful, joined with the
testaceous powders, or a little of the compound powder of contrayerva --
Sydenham directs three or four drops of the compound spirit of ammonia (...)
spoonful of water every four hours, for four or five times, and I have thought
it very serviceable after proper evacuations; but this dose may be considerably
increased, according to the age of the child. Nor is a drop or two of laudanum
to be feared, if the bowels have been previously opened, the pain be very
great, and the breathing not difficult.

A principal indication, it has been said, is to assist the eruption of the
teeth. This is attempted, by cooling, sedative, and demulcent applications made
to the gums; by rubbing them with some hard, polished body, such as the coral;
or by dividing them with the lancet: which last is the only mean to be depended
upon. When it is found necessary to lance the gums, (which is ever, at least, a
safe operation) it should always be done effectually, with a proper gum-lancet,
and not with a needle, a thin sixpence, or such like instrument, which will
not sufficiently divide the gum, or the strong membrane that covers the teeth.
The lancet should always be carried quite down to them, and even be drawn
across the double teeth. It is certain, that this little operation gives
scarcely any pain, and the relief is at the same time often so considerable
that the child appears exceedingly pleased with it, and will immediately
squeeze the jaws and grind them together forcibly, which proves the gums are
not very sensible.

The most painful part of dentition, and that in which children are most
exposed to convulsions, is usually from the teeth cutting through the
periosteum (or nervous membrane mentioned above) that covers the jaw
immediately under the gums. This, I apprehend, in difficult dentition, is often
not cut through, but is forced up before the teeth, when they are even in sight
under the thin gum; hence it is, that cutting through the gum is so very often
useful, and takes off fever and convulsions, which severe symptoms could not
arise merely from piercing the gum, which, it has been said, is not a very
sensible part. At other times; the pain and fever seem to arise from almost the
very first shooting of the teeth within the jaw, and then they will very often
not appear for some weeks after the gums have been properly lanced; and parents
are therefore apt to conclude, the lancing has been unnecessarily done. I am,
however, convinced from experience, that this little operation, though not in
the general esteem it ought to be (and by the French physicians even dreaded at
this period) See Lieutaud.
is often inexpressibly useful, and appears to have saved many lives, after the
most dangerous symptoms had taken place, and every other mean of cure had been
made use of. And I cannot here for bear expressing my surprise, at the fears
some people entertain of lancing the gums, and their delaying it so long, if
not altogether rejecting it, though no evil can possibly arise from the
operation. On the other hand, its advantages are so great, that whenever
convulsions take place about the usual period of dentition, recourse ought
always to be had to it, after an unsuccessful use of other means; though by an
examination of the gums there may be no certain evidence of the convulsions
being owing to such cause; the irritation from teething, it has been remarked,
often taking place in a very early stage of the business. At any rate, it has
been said, the operation can do no harm, even at any period, and should the
shooting of teeth be only an aggravation to the true cause of the disease,
lancing the gums must be attended with advantage. But should teething be the
proper and sole cause, it is evident how fruitless any other mean of relief
must frequently be: for should convulsions, for instance, take place from a
thorn run into the finger, or toe, the proper indication of cure, by an
immediate extraction of the thorn, and the probable futility of other means,
would be equally obvious.

The operation may also be safely repeated, the scars doing no kind of harm.
And indeed it will be frequently necessary to lance the gums several times, on
account of the extraordinary difficulty with which some infants cut their
teeth, especially the double ones, which are furnished with two or more knobs
or points. Fever, purging, and even convulsions will sometimes arise from only
one point of a large tooth offending the periosteum that covers it, and being
nearer the surface than the other points, the lancet sometimes does not
completely divide the membrane that lies over the rest; and this part not being
injured by the tooth, the symptoms subside on having divided that portion of
membrane that was inflamed. But in a little time, another point of the same
tooth is found to irritate the periosteum, and calls for the like assistance of
the lancet, which again removes all the complaints. This, at least, I have
conceived to be the process, when I have found lancing a large tooth
immediately remove every terrible symptom, though the fever and other
complaints have returned, and the tooth not appeared till the operation has
been three or four times repeated. I have seen the like good effect from it,
when children have been cutting a number of teeth in succession, and have bred
them all with convulsions. Nothing having relieved or prevented these terrible
symptoms but lancing the gums, which has removed them every time it has been
done, one or more teeth appearing a day or two after each operation. -- In such
cases, it will often be proper to draw a lancet along a great part of one, or
even both the jaws, at the same operation.

Some writers, however, and Dr. (...) particularly, have advised, not to cut
quite down to the teeth, but only to scarify the gums, unless the teeth are
very near. He suspects that the instrument often injures them, and produces
caries, which he thinks will be communicated to the succeeding set of teeth.
But this is a needless scruple, and I apprehend arises for want of duly
attending to the state of the teeth, which are perfect bone, and covered with a
strong enamel, long before they get through the gums. The manner of the second
teething of children likewise forbids such a fear; for though the first set,
which are designed by nature to be only of short duration) should actually be
injured by the lancet, the succeeding ones are not at all likely to be affected
by the carious state of the former. For the first teeth of infants constantly
become carious at the roots, and are loosened and expelled by that means, when
left to nature alone; and though the upper parts of the new teeth are in
contact with the carious bottoms of the first set, they never suffer from this
circumstance. I have dwelt the longer on this head, because writers are not
agreed on the subject, and it is a matter oftentimes of no small importance. I
have, however, written from experience, and am perfectly satisfied of the
propriety and safety of what I have ventured to recommend. See Mr. Hunter's
copious and accurate account of the teeth, and their diseases.


It has been hinted to be a common practice to touch the gums with oils and
mucilages, and to rub them with some hard and polished body. To answer the
first intention, perhaps a little honey, or syrup of white poppys is as proper
as any thing, or the honey may be lightly acidulated with spirit of vitriol.
Besides the coral, a crust of bread, or a piece of liquorice root, may be often
carried to the mouth, and may sometimes be preferable, as they will yield a
little to the pressure of the gums.

It should be a pretty general rule during the time of teething, to abate a
little of the usual quantity of food, and the increase the quantity of drink;
unless the child is very weakly, or every thing is going on perfectly well: or
if the child be at the breast, a similar regard ought to be paid to the diet of
the nurse.

Children will sometimes have ulcerated gums in teething, and more frequently
where they have not been lanced, which are easily cured by keeping the body
open, and touching them with astringent applications. As much white vitriol, or
roch alum as will give a moderate roughness to a little honey, is usually
sufficient for this purpose. But should this fail in any case, it must be
treated as directed under the head of Canker.

FEVER.
THOUGH some writers have supposed infants to be as liable to fevers as adults,
and from the same causes, I have, by no means, found it so, and I wish parents
to take comfort from the consideration; having observed for many years, as ^ell
in the hospital, as in private practice, that infants do not readily take
common fevers, though exposed for a long time to that contagion which has
appeared to affect adults around them. Their fevers are also of a short
duration if properly treated, unless the few that arise from some more
permanent irritating cause.

Young children, however, are disposed to some febrile complaints peculiar to
themselves; which, as I have enlarged this edition considerably, with the
design of taking in all their complaints, I shall bestow some pains in
specifying, as well as pointing out the treatment most adapted to each.

The more frequent causes of fever, are teething, foul bowels, worms, glandular
diseases, some eruptive and very contagious complaint, or taking cold, and are
often attended with symptoms peculiar to children. If from the last mentioned
cause, and the cold be severe, it will always be attended with a cough,
hoarseness, and some difficulty of breathing, and often with running at the
nose or eyes, which will distinguish the fever from all others, except it be
the measles; which will be attended likewise with violent sneezing, and a
peculiar appearance of the eyes not often met with in a common cold.

If a fever from cold be considerable, the cough violent, and the difficulty of
breathing very great, a blister will always be safe and expedient, and may be
applied at the pit of the stomach instead of the back, as being both less
painful under any motion of the body, and more readily got at to be dressed, or
for the application of fresh cloths, where the discharge happens to be
considerable. But if the fever and difficulty of breathing should not be very
much abated by the blister, children though within the twelvemonth, will bear
and even be greatly benefited by the loss of a little blood, In mittendo
sanguine, non tam annos medicus numerare, quam vires aegrotantis aestimare
debet. Celsus. Lib. ii. cap. 10. p. 78.

Galen indeed forbad bleeding till after fourteen years of age, but since the
time of Celsus, that absurd idea has been exploded. Rhazes permitted cupping
after three or four months; Avicenna at a year old. -- Some allowed of bleeding
in the feet or legs, though not in the upper parts; but this useful operation
is now justly unconfined; and extended, occasionally, to every period.


at least by the application of two or three leeches, as I have frequently
seen; and I mention this again, because it has been thought so highly improper
for infants. But I can venture to say, they will be much less reduced by it,
than by the continuance of the fever, which the loss of a little blood will, in
many cases, shorten by two or three days; and which is sometimes absolutely
necessary, and in peripneumonic cases, may even be repeated with safety and
advantage Mul^a in praecipi^i periculo recte (...), al^as amittenda. Id. Lib.
iii. cap. 18. p. 150.
. Oily medicines, likewise, made into a neat emulsion, are often useful,
especially if the child be not at the breast; but they should be preceded by an
emetic of wine of antimony, as there is usually much phlegm on stomach;
children never coughing it up. In many cases it is also necessary to repeat the
emetic, as often as the phlegm in the throat is collected in such a quantity as
seems to impede respiration. But if the cough be dry or convulsive, Bates's
spirit. sal. ammoniac. succinat. may be safely and usefully administered, if
there be not much fever. The body at the same time should be kept perfectly
open, and this purpose is usually well answered by smaller doses of wine of
antimony, or of Dr. James's powder; but if they should fail to procure stools,
as they sometimes will, where there is much fever, they rather do harm than
good, unless a little manna, or rhubarb be joined with them.

It is very necessary ^ere to observe, that though preparations of antimony may
perhaps be safely administered under the eye of very attentive parents, they
are very powerful medicines, and not (...) be prescribed by nurses and ignorant
people, or without great caution. And I hope this may be admitted as an apology
for the liberty I have taken in saying so much against some practices highly
extolled by other writers, and espeially the indiscriminate use of antimonial
wine, It may be proper once for all to remark, that, it is presumed truth calls
for an undisguised account of every writer's sentiments, from whomsoever he may
differ; who, the more respectable their names and opinions may be, and the
oftener their authority ^ay be quoted, by so much the more prejudicial any
erroneous sentiments or practice must become. It is to method and measures, not
men, that writers have (...) object: when compelled so to do, I wish always to
express myself in a manner equally respectful and intelligible; after which an
impartial public will judge on which side the fairest reasoning, or safer line
of practice may lie.
which has induced some people to make free with medicines of this class, who
are in no wise competent judges. A nurse very lately proposed giving half a
grain of tartar emetic to an infant of a few days old.
But where such medicines are found to agree, and keep the belly open, children
frequently stand in need of no other; though where the fever has been very
considerable, I have given nitre to advantage to infants of only a few months
old. In the little fevers arising from taking cold, to which some children are
very liable, I often join it with a little of Dr. James's powder, (proportioned
to the age) and a few grains of the compound powder of contrayerva, lowered
with testacea; which I find to be a medicine exceedingly useful, when given in
time. If the head is much affected, putting the feet into warm water, or
applying a milt to them just taken from the animal, are admirable remedies; and
I think have sometimes saved a life after all hope had (...) given up. Or a
little fresh leaven, or dough, as advised by Mr. Le Febure de Villebrune, may
be spread thinly over the soles of the feet. If the fever be accompanied with
much cough, and attended with difficulty of breathing, which comes on by fits,
both may be greatly relieved by ten or fifteen drops of the spirit of vitriolic
ether, given three or four times a day. But in the absence of fever, the
breast-milk is often as good a balsamic as can be had; or if the child be
dry-nursed, a little syrup of balsam is both pleasant and useful.

If the fever be not owing to taking cold, to worms, teething, or some eruptive
complaint, it will generally be found to arise from some foulness in the
first-passages, in which case, opening the belly, and afterward giving a puke
and the testaceous powders, usually remove it. But if otherwise, opening
medicines must be continued a while longer, especially castor-oil; but if the
stools are very fetid, the basilic powder, or small doses of calomel are the
fittest purge; though they require to be administered with caution. I have
known not only convulsions, but paralytic affections, attended with great pain
and continual fever, induced merely, as I apprehend, by a foul state of the
bowels; where, after the complaint has been unsuccessfully treated as a fever
of another kind, all the symptoms have been removed at once by an active purge.
Even infants of only three or four months old will often have very considerable
fever, and fits, with so costive a state of the bowels as to require strong
purgative medicines to be repeated for several successive days, with clysters
and the warm-bath, before the obstruction can be removed, or the fever will at
all abate. And I doubt not, it may be matter of surprise to those who may not
frequently have met with such cases, to find what a quantity of purging
medicines have been taken by a tender infant before one proper stool could be
procured, and how certainly a relapse will take place, if the opening plan be
not persevered in, in the manner recommended. In less urgent cases, and
especially in very young subjects, much gentler means will usually succeed; and
after the belly has been once or more well opened, many common fevers will
nearly subside; after which it will frequently be proper to return to some of
the absorbent powders, in one form or other, and that recommended by Boerhaave
See the prescription under the article of Purging, page 85.
may be as proper as any; though the union of different testacea is of very
little importance. Any of them will form an admirable medicine for very young
children, as well under little fevers, as for almost all their complaints not
attended with much costiveness. This, the judicious Harris was so sensible of,
that he thinks them alone sufficient to effect almost every thing during the
infant state, and has done unspeakable service by abolishing that
indiscriminate recourse to cordials, and other heating and rough medicines,
such as mercury, aurum fulminans, theriaca, etc. together with various anile
and superstitious remedies, which the ancient writers frequently recommended on
occasions peculiarly improper. And though absorbents will not do every thing he
has imagined, yet are there very few medicines of such general use. But should
the fever withstand these common remedies, or be found to increase, it will be
necessary to give some of those before recommended, or, what is sometimes very
useful, little draughts with lemon juice and salt of hartshorn, in which the
latter is left a little predominant; or three or four drops of the compound
spirit of ammonia, in a little water, four or five times a day. I have, indeed,
lately experienced very good effects from persevering in the use of small doses
of wine of antimony, given in a saline draught, in the little obscure fevers of
infants, where the cause has not been so obvious as it commonly is.

On the decline of some fevers, especially those arising from fowl bowels, it
is not uncommon to see an eruption on the skin, resembling that called the
red-gum, in the month, and sometimes even the thrush will make its appearance,
though the infant may have had that complaint already; which are marks of the
great disturbance the first passages have suffered, and of the consent they
have with the skin; the former, it has been said, is always a favorable
indication; but the observation does not hold good in regard to the thrush.

Fevers in children of three or four years old, are sometimes tedious of cure
by any of the above means, and like those of adults, require the bark; which
should be administered in a light decoction three or four times a day, in such
doses as the symptoms may require.

I have sometimes met with a fever, more remarkable for its being attended with
inflamed and painful tumors, than for any other symptom peculiar to it. These
are seated chiefly on the legs, and particularly along the spine of the tibiae;
and rise in a day or two to the size of a nutmeg. They are marked with all the
appearances of abscesses, feeling as if they contained matter, and on this
account, they put on a formidable aspect to such as may not often have seen the
disease; but what is remarkable, they never, I believe, come to suppuration,
but disappear again in a few days, though the fever sometimes continues. The
like appearances have been met with in adults, and especially females, but
perhaps more commonly in children from three to ten years of age; and are not
peculiar to scrofulous habits. As far as my experience has gone, (for I believe
it is not a very common complaint) they are conjoined more frequently with that
fever which attends a foul state of the bowels, than with any other; which
therefore requires repeated purging, especially with calomel; and on this
account, the pulvis e scammon. cum calomel. becomes a convenient preparation.
Saline draughts with the spir. aetheris vitriolici may be given on the
intermediate days, and in the end the bark is commonly useful.

MESENTERIC-FEVER.
ANOTHER cause of fever has been hinted at, which is obstructed glands,
especially the mesenteric; and is often a forerunner of the true hectic fever,
or fatal marasmus.

It, indeed, frequently arises from scrofula, which then discovers itself by
other marks; and will require its peculiar treatment. But there is an early
stage of glandular obstruction in the mesentery, and of the fever here alluded
to, that is often falsely attributed to worms; but will not yield to mere
purgative medicines. It attacks children from the age of three or four years,
the fever remitting, and sometimes intermitting irregularly; is attended with
loss of appetite, swelled belly, and pain in the bowels; the latter more
commonly taking place, more or less, every day, or is generally more violent if
the child be a day or two free from it. After opening the bowels, half a grain,
or a grain of calomel may be given to advantage, two or three times a week, and
on the intermediate days small doses of the natron ppt. either alone, or
neutralized with the juice of lemons, or in some instances partially so. If the
belly be very costive, as it often is, an infusion of the burnt sponge and
senna is more effectual than any thing; and when strained through filtering
paper, make a neat preparation, and an excellent remedy for many little fevers,
in older children, when the primae viae, or first passages are concerned. When
the glandular fever, just now mentioned, has abated, some light bitter, as of
camomile flowers, is useful to brace the stomach and bowels; and to prevent a
relapse, it will often be found necessary to administer some chalybeate, of
which the tinct. flor. martialium is usually the most proper for children.

But as this fever, from its great fatality and frequency, has lately very much
engaged the attention of writers, it may be proper to consider it a little more
distinctly in some of its principal stages; in each of which its nature and
treatment sometimes materially differ. For before the mesenteric glands become
much enlarged, or the fever continual; whilst the appetite continues, and the
first digestion is but little impaired, and no purging has taken place; the
opening mixture of sponge and senna, with a few doses of calomel, and
afterward bitters and chalybeates, are the only remedies very likely to be
called for. In this state, the disorder may still be considered as in its first
stage, and of which an unusual costiveness, the hardness and recurring pains in
the belly, and an intermitting fever, are the principal symptoms. The limits of
this work, however, will not allow of a particular detail of the many others
that attend this fever through its various stages; and it is presumed, they are
so well known to medical people as to render it unnecessary. But in general, it
may be said, that indigestion, costiveness or purging; irregular appetite;
flushed cheeks, or a total loss of color; impaired strength and spirits;
remitting fever; and a hard and tumid belly, with emaciated limbs, are amongst
the more constant symptoms attending, at one period or other of the disease.

Children are liable to it from their infancy to six or eight years of age, it
being often a consequence of the long continuance of almost any of the
preceding complaints, especially those of the first passages and dentition, as
well as the measles, and a few others; of which that from teething will be
separately considered. Among the poor, it is too frequently owing to a coarse
and unwholesome diet; indigestion at the stomach, and a consequent vitiated
chyle, with infarction, or obstructions in some of the internal glands or
lymphatics, being among the primary remote causes of the disease.

As prophylactics, or preventives therefore, good air, exercise, gentle
frictions, an easy dress, frequent washings of the body of young children with
soap and warm water, This idea is as ancient as the time of Hippocrates, who
strongly advises it.

De Salubri Diaeta. IX.


the cold-bath, in older children, and especially a light and nutritious diet,
with such mild aromatics as may assist digestion, are some of the principal and
most efficacious means.

But when this fever is actually formed, it calls for the most powerful
remedies; and such have happily succeeded in several instances, wherein
formerly little hope had been usually entertained.

As I am constrained to pass over many less important symptoms occurring in the
different stages of this long disease, especially such as arise from some
peculiarity of habit; so will it be necessary to confine these observations to
the more general plan of treatment, without particularly noticing a variety of
occasional remedies, which such symptoms might at different periods require.

In a general way, the principal indications are to remove the obstructions in
the lymphatic system, and effect a resolution of the indurated glands of the
mesentery; to carry off this viscid matter; and lastly, to strengthen the
system, and establish a good digestion, as well by means of proper diet as by
medicine. To accomplish these intentions, attenuants and deobstruents, purges
and emetics, and ^^nic, or bracing remedies, must be had recourse to, in their
turns.

Amongst the first, and as general deobstruents, are mercurial and antimonial
remedies, neutral salts, soap, steel, and, according to some, the cicuta.

In regard to the efficacy of mercury and steel in this disease, a vast cr^ud
of testimonies appears among writers, White, Hartmann, Worlhof, Theden,
Burchard, Baume, Baumes, Roseen, Fouquet, etc.
in almost every part of Europe. And a very rational idea has been suggested on
this head, by Mr. Royer, that of administering mercury clyster-wise; inasmuch
as the resolution of local and partial obstructions, does not so much require
an exertion of the collected force of the system, as deriving all the influence
of proper remedies to the seat of the disease: an idea of late years pretty
generally received, and in some instances, successfully adapted to the cure of
scrofula, as well as some other chronical disorders.

Calomel is, perhaps, one of the fittest remedies of this class, and may be
combined with some purgative medicine, and given for several weeks, till there
shall (...) some favorable change in the feel and size of the belly.

The lightest preparations of steel are usually preferable, such as its
tinctures, or the salt, or merely some chalybeate water; which will act both as
aperitives and tonics; and amongst antimonials, the kermes mineral is found by
experience to be more generally useful than any other preparation.

The Evacuants mentioned as proper in this disease, were emetics and purges; to
which may be added diaphoretics. The two former are more essentially necessary;
but must be adapted and carefully dosed, agreeably to the state of the bowels
of the patient. As a purge, rhubarb and salt of tartar are generally the safest
and most effectual, and may be persevered in for the greatest length of time;
or the composition which, in regard to many cases, has been deservedly extolled
by Sir William Fordyce, rhubarb and polychrest salt; which, whenever mercury
may not be preferred, should be exhibited daily for several weeks, and will
sometimes restore the patient without recourse to any other means, when the
disorder is not of long standing; being at once both a purge and an efficacious
deobst^^ent.

As a Diaphoretic, sarsaparilla, or a more compound decoction of the woods;
which may be taken together with any of the above mentioned remedies.

The last means recommended were tonic, or bracing medicines, which can very
rarely be dispensed with; since although the obstructions should actually be
removed, the emaciated state to which the patient is generally reduced,
peculiarly calls for bracing remedies, especially with a view to strengthening
the stomach and alimentary canal, and promoting a good digestion; the only
means of obtaining a bland and nutritious chyle, by which the body may be
conserved in good health. To this end, the bark, steel, the cold-bath, light
bitters and aromatics, are the principal remedies; to one or more of which,
recourse may be had, as the degree of remaining fever, and the state of the
bowels may point out. To these may be joined daily frictions, especially of the
belly and limbs; or the common soap-plaister, or one composed of ointment of
marshmallows, gum ammoniac, and oil of chamomile, applied over the whole
belly: or the body may be covered all over (as directed by Mr. Baumes) with
sea salt, reduced to a very fine powder.

It has been already hinted, that the diet ought to be of the lightest and most
nutritious kind, and carefully adapted to the age and other circumstances of
the child; who, if at a due age, ought in many instances, to partake of light
white meats, as well as vegetables, and plain jellies; but always avoiding fat
and greasy aliments, pastry, and whatever may not be duly, as well as quickly
digested, or will not form a bland and nutritious chyle, however readily they
may get out of the stomach.

Though in some instances, merely purging with calomel or rhubarb, for a length
of time has been said to succeed, and in others, some one of the above remedies
may be more adapted to the patient than the rest; yet in general, each of them
will be useful, at one period or other of the complaint, and sometimes the
union of several: but above all, purging is always the most essential to the
cure of this dangerous disease. And though it is oftentimes attended with
costiveness and a voracious appetite, it is, at others, accompanied with a
loathing of all food, and frequent stools, which do not reduce the belly, but
too often deter practitioners from the use of active, or repeated purges;
without which, however, experience proves there can be no prospect of success,
after the belly has once become enlarged. -- I shall close these observations
with offering the following form, which in a general way, may be as suitable as
any. It should be continued for a length of time, taking care that the bowels
be kept properly open by it, or by other remedies occasionally administered.

R. Calomelan. gr. j. ad. ij. Pulv. I pecac. grss. ad. gr. j. Zingiber. gr. vj.
Misce, st. Pilulae is, cum quantitat. sufficient. vel. Conf. aromaticae, vel
Conf. opiatae, ut alvi status postulet.

HECTIC FEVER, and MARASMUS.
NOT a few, both of the preceding and following complaints, are sometimes found
to induce a confirmed hectic fever, and marasmus, or a wasting of the whole
body, called by some writers Atrophia Lactantium; though it often comes on too
late properly to admit of the name. I have nothing new, indeed, to offer on
this disease when it seems to be far advanced, unless it be by way of
encouragement to hope for a better issue in the hectic fever, under certain
circumstances than we are wont to expect.

This fever, as it is apt to arise from other complaints, is very often owing
to their having been imprudently treated, or imperfectly cured, especially by
suppressing some eruption or discharge from the skin, or incautiously stopping
a purging during the time of teething. In such cases, and indeed whenever the
hectic fever is of some standing, the mesenteric glands become indurated,
greatly increased in size, and often suppurate, the belly getting large, though
the limbs and other parts become emaciated; which state has been treated in the
former chapter, and has been shown to be curable, or otherwise, according to
the degree of induration, and the length of the time it has existed. But there
is sometimes a threatening appearance of hectic fever, where nevertheless
nature effects a salutary and wonderful change, and will restore the emaciated
infant as from the very jaws of death. And this, indeed, is often the work only
of nature, art doing no more than superintending it, and preventing her being
counteracted by the use of improper medicines, or diet.

Nature alone will, indeed, oftentimes effect wonders for infants, and far
beyond any thing to be expected in adults, if she be not officiously
counteracted. And the reason is obvious, it being well observed by a great man,
and a good physician, Dr. Gregory -- Comparative view of the State and
Faculties of Man with those of the animal World. 1785.
lately deceased, that "there is, in truth, a greater luxuriancy of life and
health in infancy, than in any other period in life. Infants, it is
acknowledged, are more delicately sensible to injury, than those advanced in
life; but, to compensate this, their fibers and vessels are more capable of
distension, their whole system is more flexible, their fluids are less acrid,
and less disposed to put^^scence; they bear all evacuations more easily, except
that of blood, and, which is an important circumstance in their favor, they
never suffer from the terrors of a distracted imagination. Their spirits are
lively and equal; they quickly forget their past sufferings, and never
anticipate the future. In consequence of these advantages, children recover
from diseases, under such unfavorble symptoms as are never survived by adults.
If they waste more quickly under sickness, their recovery from it is quick in
proportion, and generally more complete than in older people, as diseases
seldom leave those baneful effects on their constitutions, so frequent in
adults. In short, a physician ought scarce ever to despair of a child's life,
while it continues to breathe." -- In farther support of this sentiment it may
be observed, that their complaints are not often attended with acute fever,
like those of adults, which is disposed rather to break up the system, than to
rectify the machine.

The above mentioned salutary turns in the true hectic fever, as far as I have
observed, are chiefly in that species of it arising from worms or teething; and
in which I have known recoveries after hope had long been given up, and all
attempts been laid aside. There is, indeed, an atrophy, or universal decay in
infants, for want of the breast, or from the unsuitableness of it, or of
whatever else may be the child's ordinary food, (as I shall instance in another
place:) but this is not usually attended with fever, and is to be cured merely
by making that change, which the nature of the different occasions points out.
Harris recounts some remarkable recoveries in what he calls the Atrophia
verminosa, (or Worm-hectic) and attributes the cures to the free use of the
hydrargyrus cum sulphur, carefully prepared; but I have seen none so
mavelous as in the Atrophia Dententium, or Tooth-atrophy. In this, I have
known children after being reduced by purging, and other complaints, lying for
three months together in the cradle, scarcely fit to be moved, with continual
fever, flushed cheeks, emaciated countenance and limbs, a large belly,
incessant cough, and almost without taking any nourishment, recover, as it were
in a few days, upon unexpectedly cutting half a dozen teeth.

After what I have said on this fever, it will not be expected I should offer
much on the head of medicines; I shall therefore only observe, that after
making trial of the mixture recommended by Boerhaave, Page 85.
when acidity may prevail in the bowels, or prescribing opening medicines, as
directed under the heads of costiveness and purging, are the chief indications
in this advanced stage of the complaint. With this view, Sydenham's
rhubarb-beer, Take of choice rhubarb sliced, two drams; let it be put into a
glass bottle, well stopped, with a quart of small-beer, or any other liquor the
child may make use of. This medicated beer is to be his ordinary drink. When
this quantity is drank, a second, and a third quart of beer may be poured on,
as before; after which the rhubarb will commonly have lost its virtue. Should
the beer first poured on be too much impregnated with rhubarb, and purge too
much, another pint may be added presently after the first is drank up.
and purging with mercury, if that has not already been done, should even now
be attempted, since children in this state will often bear stronger doses of
purging medicines, and more frequently repeated, than under any other
circumstances. -- Some attention, however, should be paid to the diet, which
ought chiefly to be of milk, rice, semolina, and such like, with light
puddings; but above all, plenty of fresh air, and as much exercise as the weak
state of the child will bear.

In Dr. Armstrong's second edition, is a pretty long chapter on the hectic
fever of teething children, wherein several medicines are prescribed, which the
doctor apprehends may be very serviceable early in the disease. He speaks of it
as a very common complaint, beginning like other fevers, and gradually becoming
remitting; then a slow continual fever, and terminating in a fatal hectic.

It is very probable, that a fever of this description, may be common among
paupers, relieved at dispensaries, and may deserve such a name, but, I believe,
it will be rarely met with in higher ranks of life; and if so, perhaps, that
ought to have been intimated in a popular work. It seems to me, (and Dr.
Armstrong, indeed, says as much) to arise from improper food and nursing,
joined with a costive state of the bowels, and is therefore, very much the
offspring of neglect. When advice is sought for in proper time, it,
accordingly, appears to be nothing more than the common fever I have described,
arising from a foul state of the bowels, and is easily cured by such medicines
as are best calculated to clear the first passages. Should this, however, be
neglected, it may degenerate into a continual fever; but it is not even then
peculiar to the age Dr. Armstrong has specified, nor, by any means, the common
hectic fever of dentition.

FEBRIS SCARLATINA -- SCARLET-FEVER, WITH or WITHOUT ULCERATION of the THROAT.
WHENEVER the Scarlet-^^ver becomes epidemic among adults, children rarely fail
being attacked by it, in great numbers, and frequently sink under it. This
disease has, indeed, engaged the pen of the most able physicians, and has
lately been accurately arranged by Dr. Perkins. It is therefore well understood
in this day, at least in the metropolis, and needs only on this occasion, to be
adverted to as one incident to ch^dren, and its most approved method of
treatment to be briefly pointed out.

The scarlet-fever with ulcerated throat, has, perhaps, been distinguished in
too refined a manner, by some writers, into the scarlet-fever with malignant
ulcerated throat, and the malignant fore throat with efflorescence, or redness,
on the skin. But such distinction, it is apprehended, is needless, since the
experienced practitioner will always be guided by the degree of tendency in the
system either to an inflammatory or putrid diathesis; and the less experienced
will only be perplexed by multiplied by distinctions.

The mildest species of scarla^ina anginosa should, however, be carefully
distinguished from the true inflammatory affection of the tonsils, which the
angina maligna will sometimes resemble in its first stages: but the genuine
marks of the two diseases, and the cast of the epidemics reigning at the time,
will direct the attentive practitioner; who will in less certain cases, take a
middle course in his method of treatment, till the characteristic symptoms of
either shall become more evident.

There is, however, a scarlet-fever that is not atended with any affection of
the throat, and was long ago described by Sydenham, See also Withering and
Cullen.
though not much insisted upon by later writers, which is attended with a
harder pulse, and other symptoms of an inflammatory disposition, but
nevertheless, in every instance that I have met with, calls for the same
general treatment, only more cautiously adapting the necessary cordials and
tonics to the degree of fever, especially in the commencement of the complaint.

The f^bris scarlatina of every species begins with the common symptoms of
fever, often with languor and disposition to fainting, sickness, a quick pulse,
and pain in the head. The eyes are often inflamed, and where the throat is
affected, there is frequently a stiffness of the muscles of the neck very early
in the disease, which is soon followed by some difficulty in swallowing. The
fever generally increases in the evening, and is often attended with transient
fits of delirium; but some remission takes place toward morning, with
sweating; and on the second, or third day the efflorescence appears on the
skin, and generally first on the face, neck, and breast.

The limits of this work allow me only to observe, that the method of cure
being didirected to the two indications of the general diathesis, and the
affection of the throat, the nature and extent of these must ever be kept in
view, and the system be duly supported. The throat should be often gargled, or
rather syringed, with mucilaginous infusions or decoctions, rendered more or
less stimulant; such as the compound decoction of barley with honey of roses,
warmed with the compound spirit of ammonia, tincture of myrrh, or a decoction
of snakeroot; or other such like preparations.

This fever, especially when epidemic, being almost constantly of a low type,
the physician must not trust to saline draughts, or other medicines of that
class, without the addition of the aromatic confection, snake-root, or the
bark, in one form or other; and beside these, should direct a moderate quantity
of wine to be given with the food, according to the age and other circumstances
of the patient.

Should the affection of the throat therefore to be evidently inflammatory, or
should a case occur where the fever may seem to be of that kind, (which may be
better ascertained by the hardness of the pulse than any other symptom) it will
rarely, if ever, bear bleeding, even in the beginning of the disease, as
symptoms of debility generally attend in some period of the scarlet-fever, and
will allow only of that middle course of treatment, hinted above.

In a general way, a cordial plan is required throughout the disease, and where
the throat is much affected, either with sloughs, or total blackness, the bark
is indispensably necessary, howesover thick and florid the rash, or however hot
and dry the skin may be; the bark, as it were, extinguishing the fever above
every other remedy. Young children take it very well, especially the soft
extract, dissolved in a strong decoction. Should it be disposed to purge the
child, a little of the spirit of cinnamon, or a drop or two of the tincture of
opium should be added to it; or if the child, on the other hand, should be two
or three days without a stool, a laxative clyster should be injected. -- If
there is much external swelling about the neck, blisters to the part are
frequently very useful -- Even after the efflorescence has dried off kindly, a
gangrene has sometimes seized the whole palatum molle.

CARDIALGIA, or INFLAMMATION of the STOMACH.
THIS is a disease very seldom met with, I believe in this country, but is
common in France, as it appears by a paper read lately before the Royal Society
of Medicine, in Paris, by Mr. Saillant; and is said to attack children of four
or five years of age.

The pathognomonic, or characteristic symptoms of this disease are, violent
pains in the region of the stomach, sometimes recurring every quarter of an
hour; violent contortions of the child; and the application of a hand to the
seat of the disease. Mr. Saillant in the first instance, suspected that these
symptoms might be owing to worms, and prescribed accordingly; but that child
dying in a few days, the body was afterward opened, and the presence of
genuine inflammation of the stomach, and of a part of the intestinal canal was
clearly demonstrated.

The treatment of this dreadful disease is, however, represented as very
simple, consisting only in cooling and laxative remedies, which when
administered in good time, are said to be usually successful. For this purpose,
Mr. Saillant has generally administered the juice of the lettuce, by spoonsful,
every hour; an idea he took up from Baglivi, who directed the juice of the
sowthistle in the hemitritus, under symptoms analogous to those of the
cardialgia. The juice of the lettuce was generally was found to relieve the
pains in a short time, and some infants who had been judged to be in a hopeless
state, and even at the point of death, were perfectly recovered.

Mr. Andry has done me the kindness of acquainting me, that he has sometimes
met with this complaint, in the hospice des enfans trouves, especially during
the summer, and at such times as infants have been obliged to continue there
without the breast, for the want of wet nurses; who are usually otherwise
engaged in the harvest and vintage seasons, as well as during a hard frost. In
the instances Mr. Andry has seen, the infants were found to vomit up every
thing that was given them, which it is probable, must generally be the case
where the stomach is actually inflamed. In such instances, perhaps,
fomentations to the stomach, and the use of a warm-bath ought to be made trial
of.

SMALLPOX, (INOCULATION) and MEASLES.
IT were very foreign to the present intention to treat distinctly of these
diseases and their several varieties, being in no respect peculiar to
childhood, and are noticed only to point out a few principal indications, and
to introduce some observations in regard to the properest time for inoculation.

Though the SMALLPOX is a complaint so incident to the early part of life,
that comparatively few children living to the age of eight or ten years, are
found to escape it, yet it is not so readily communicated, in the state of
infancy, as has been generally imagined, unless by immediate infection. Some
evidence of the propriety of this assertion may be gathered from the
consideration of there always existing a far greater number of infants within
the month, than of children of any other age; and for the like reason, a
greater number of those under a year old, than of such as are two or three
years of age. For, every infant that dies at the earlier periods, reduces the
number to which those of the more advanced ages might otherwise have amounted;
whereas, all the children who arrive to two or three years of age, having been
first infants in the month, and of one year old, the number of the latter
periods is not diminished by the death of those of a more advanced age. Now,
every one knows how very few infants he has heard of who have received the
smallpox, naturally, in the mouth, or even within the year; though fewer of
these are inoculated than of children above a year old. And this exemption from
the natural smallpox does not seem to arise from their not being exposed to
the ordinary means of contagion, especially among the middling and lower ranks
of people who form the bulk of mankind; since the medical men who usually
attend such lying in rooms, are very much in the habit both of visiting the
smallpox, and of inoculating, all the year round: and even in the higher ranks
of life, if gentlemen in the general practice of physic happen to be consulted,
the chance of their visiting at the same time infected patients, is not so
small as may be imagined; not to speak of the probability there is, that some
one of the numerous visitors, during the month, may by accident or otherwise,
have been in some infected house in the course of the day in which their visits
may be made.


The poor furnish frequent instances of the truth of this observation. I have
attended where children born in an air, saturated as it were, with the miasma
of this disease, (as well as of the measles) and even lying continually in a
cradle in which another child has died a few days before, have nevertheless
escaped the disease, and sometimes when they have slept together in the same
bed with one loaded with it. Hence it appears that highly tainted air, and even
personal contact, are often insufficient to communicate the virus. Yet we know
that infants are very easily infected, receiving the smallpox by inoculation
as readily as adults; though neither are at all times equally susceptible of
it. Perhaps this latter circumstance may not always be sufficiently attended
to; the mode of inoculation being often blamed, when its failure may be owing
to the indisposed habit of the child. Possibly, on this account, it may not be
perfectly safe to urge it, at such a time; at least, instances are not wanting,
where twice introducing the virus having failed, an infant has had the disease
very severely, and even fatally, upon its being repeated a third time.

But in whatever way the smallpox or measles may take place, they are to be
treated as in adults, with but little other difference than what every
practitioner is well acquainted with, that of greater caution and tenderness;
as infants cannot bear the powerful antiphlogistic regimen and evacuations,
often proper for the other. Ex toto, non sic pu^ri, ^t viri, curari deb^^t.
Celsus. Lib. iii. cap. 7. p. 134.


In the treatment of the MEASLES, not only ought children's bellies to be kept
open throughout the disease, but unless they are very young, they will bear and
even require one or more bleedings, at any period of it when the symptoms
indicate its propriety. And, indeed, the cure of the secondary fever, however
long it may continue, will turn upon repeated bleedings, laxatives, and a total
abstinence from wine, and all animal food.

I have now only to drop a word or two on the subject of Inoculation, because
parents are very apt to fall into great mistakes respecting the age, and
circumstances most proper for this operation.

It is too common an opinion that a very young infant, sucking at the breast,
is the fittest subject for inoculation, and medical people have some difficulty
in persuading parents to the contrary. Children are then said to be clear from
humors, their blood mild and balsamic, their food innocent, and they are free
from all violent passions of the mind. But all these advantages may be
counter-balanced by the delicacy of their frame, their disposition to spasm,
and their inability to struggle with a severe attack of the disease, if it
should chance to fall to their share. And such, indeed, are the facts; infants
usually have the smallpox very lightly, whether taken naturally, or from
inoculation; though in both there are instances of their expiring in a fit at
the time of the eruption; and they seldom get through the disease, if they are
full, or it proves of the confluent, or malignant kind. And this furnishes a
peculiar objection to inoculating infants at the breast, which arises from
their necessarily lying so much on the arm of the mother, or the wet-nurse,
especially in the night; the heat exposing them to a much more copious
eruption, than children who are weaned. This I have seen clearly exemplified in
the instance of a child whose mother could suckle only with the right breast;
the consequence was, that the left side of the child was perfectly loaded with
the eruption, (though the pock was of the distinct kind) whilst the other had
only a very moderate sprinkling. The child, however, sunk under the secondary
fever at the end of five or six weeks, though turned of two years old; the only
child I have known to die of inoculation at so advanced an age.

I am aware that many children are inoculated very young, and even in the
month, and generally with very good success; but the frequency of this
practice, among eminent surgeons, its owing to the urgent solicitation of
parents, and their fear of contagion. I cannot therefore avoid saying, that
however few may die under inoculation, under any circumstances, the fact is,
that the far greater proportion that I happen to have had an account of, is
amongst infants under six months old.

From this view of the matter, it is pretty evident, I think, that this
operation ought, usually, to be postponed to a later period, which is pointed
out by the child having cut all its first teeth. To which may be added the
observation just made, that infants are not much disposed to take the smallpox
naturally, and that fifty children die under the age of two years, of other
complaints, to one that dies of the natural smallpox. Should it, however, be
in the same house, or prevail in the neighborhood, and the parents find it
difficult to remove the child out of the way, it may run a less risk in being
immediately inoculated, as that operation is now so well understood, and
successfully conducted, than by taking the chance of escaping the infection, or
of recovering from the disease, if it should happen to take place.

CHICKEN-POX.
FOR the reason given in the former chapter, I shall be very brief on this
head. The complaint, nevertheless, merits a few words, not only because more
incident, perhaps, to children than to adults, but also that parents are often
at a loss to distinguish it from the mild smallpox; which it sometimes exceeds
in violence, and is now and then even attended with danger. This is, indeed,
not often the case, and the disease has therefore been very seldom noticed by
medical writers; and even Dr. Heberden, who was among the first that obliged
the public with a distinct account of it, says he never saw any person with so
many as three hundred pustules over the whole body. Physicians, indeed, as he
observes, are not often called to visit patients under a complaint usually so
trifling, or a gentleman of his long and extensive practice, would have met
with instances in which it must have appeared of more consequence, as will
presently be noticed.

It is from this disparity, I apprehend, that this disorder is sometimes
denominated the swine-pox, which is only a ranker species of the disease, in
which the symptoms may run higher, as well as the pustules become much larger.
In this case, I have known the head and face as much swollen as I have ever
seen them in any distinct smallpox, however full, and the pustules containing
a yellow, and seemingly purulent matter, with highly inflamed bases, and
exceedingly sore; and these have formed a complete mask on the face, after the
turn, as is often seen in the smallpox. One such patient whom I was called to
visit, was about sixteen years of age, of a plethoric habit, but very healthy;
and what makes it very certain, that this complaint could not be the smallpox,
is, that the young gentleman died of that disorder a twelvemonth afterward,
and possibly owing to its being neglected in the beginning, from an idea that
the former illness had really been the smallpox. The latter mistake arose from
an improper answer having been then made to my enquiry after the day on which
the eruption had first appeared (as I was not called in to visit him till the
disorder was at the height); a mistake the young gentleman's mother had a
perfect recollection of after I was gone, and of which I reminded her upon
being called to visit him in the smallpox, only the day before his death.

This case strongly verifies the remark of Dr. Heberden, that this complaint
can, in some instances, be distinguished from the smallpox only by its quicker
progress toward maturation, and the shorter duration of the pustules; a watery
vesicle always appearing on the second or third day from the eruption; and the
turn, at the farthest, taking place on the fifth.

The treatment of it differs nothing from that of the mild, distinct smallpox;
but it more rarely calls for much attention, and only when a patient may have
it very full.

AGUE.
THIS is a complaint so well known, that it seems unnecessary here to enter
minutely into a description of it. It is sufficient to say, that it consists of
repeated cold and hot fits regularly succeeding each other, with one or more
well-days between them; in which interval the sick passes a high-colored
urine, that deposits a red sediment.

It, perhaps, partakes more of a nervous affection than other fevers may do,
and is known to be endemic in some flat marshy situations, but is most frequent
in the spring and fall of the year; in the former of which it is generally
easily cured, and is even sometimes salutary. Autumnal agues, on the other
hand, especially in the country, and amongst the very poor people who feed
coarsely, will frequently continue a long time, and return again the next
autumn; whereby the constitution becomes considerably impaired. In such
instances the legs are apt to swell, and more specially the belly, which
becomes h^^d, particularly on the left side, and has been termed the ague-cake.
This tumefaction, however, instead of being a bad sign, as might be suspected a
priori, is a very favorable one, and indicates the recovery of the patient.
This circumstance is noticed by Sydenham, and like other observations of that
attentive practitioner, is a very just one, and was doubtless, the result of
his experience. The hardness is probably owing to an infarction of the spleen,
and usually subsides in the course of a few months, especially upon the use of
moderate exercise, and a generous diet. It may be prudent, however, to
administer small doses of calomel, and afterward light bitters, adding
likewise chalybeates, if the habit of the patient seems to require them, and
there are no symptoms of morbid affection of the viscera.

It were needless to enter more largely into the subject, and it is equally
foreign from the present intention, to be more particular in regard to the cure
of this oftentimes very troublesome complaint, as it would lead me farther than
would be compatible with the design of this work. Some notice of it, however,
is taken because, though no more peculiar to children than the last mentioned
diseases, yet it may be said, that there are comparatively very few children
who have not suffered by it during the years usually passed at school.

The ague, indeed, attacks every age, so that infants even under a year old are
very liable to it, whenever it rages among adults. It is with a peculiar view
to patients of the former class that the following directions are given, the
bark being usually a specific for older children and grown people; to whom,
however, it is generally proper first to administer a vomit, and one or more
doses of physic.

In a state of infancy, the ague is often owing to, or connected with a foul
state of the bowels and obstruction of the gall-ducts, and is frequently
accompanied with worms, or such a state of the alimentary canal as affords a
proper nidus for them.

The tertian, or more common ague, at this age generally yields to purges of
the basilic powder, or calomel and rhubarb, given on the days between the fits,
and small doses of Dr. James's powder on the return of the fever. Should this
fail, a vomit should be administered an hour or two before the next cold fit is
expected, if the powder should not already have had that effect. In older
children, the common saline draught, taken once in six or eight hours, will
frequently succeed, as will warm bitters, and medicines that promote and keep
up perspiration. A linen waistcoat with fine powder of bark quilted within it,
may be worn by infants next their skin.

Amongst popular remedies, It is hoped, that a desire of enabling leaders to
assist their country poor, will be admitted as an apology for this and other
similar passages met with in this work.
is a tea-spoonful of white resin in fine powder, mixed with the like quantity
of pounded loaf-sugar, taken a little before the cold-fit, and repeated
afterward night and morning. Poor people, (...) such as live in the country at
a distance from medical help, may make trial of it with safety, and with as
good prospect of success as any other remedy I know of, having found it
successful even where large doses of the bark have failed. Such kind of
remedies for this disease are numberless; I shall, however, mention another,
which, though as anile as any, seems to have been very often successful; and is
nothing more than the spider's web, rolled loosely up to the size of a child's
marble, and washed down with a little warm wine and water, or camomile tea,
before the cold fit is expected: the child should then be put into a warm bed,
and perspiration be encouraged.

Crude salt ammoniac, in the dose of ten or twelve grains, for children of five
or six years of age, has sometimes cured this troublesome complaint; but may
not be proper for delicate constitutions. Myrrh is a better remedy for such,
given from four to eight grains, before, or during the cold-fit, and as much
cream of tartar, every two or three hours, during the fever. Pepper, and
likewise alum, are frequently given with success at this age, the former from
five to ten grains; the latter from three to five, joined with the like
quantity of nutmeg, three or four times a day in the absence of the fev^r.
Another good remedy is flowers of brimstone, given in the quantity of a table
spoonful in a glass of brandy, before or during the cold-fit; this is a proper
dose for adults, but I have never administered this medicine to children. I
shall close this list of remedies with the following from Dr. Kirkpatrick,
which is a very good one for patients no otherwise averse from the bark, than
that the stomach will not bear it in large doses.

Take of the fresh sassafras bark, of Virginia snake-root, of roch-allum, of
nutmeg, of calcined antimony, and salt of wormwood, of each one dram: to these,
well rubbed together into a fine powder, add the weight of the whole of the
best Peruvian bark, then add three or four drops of the chemical oil of mint;
and with syrup of saffron make all into the consistence of an electuary. This
is to be divided into twenty-four doses, one of which may be taken by children
of eight or ten years of age, every four or six hours, while the patient is
awake. -- To make this or any other preparation of the bark sit better on the
stomach, the patient should first eat a bit of bread, or other light food, that
the bark may not be received into an empty stomach.

HOOPING-COUGH.
THE Hooping-cough is a disease unknown, probably, to the old writers; the
Greek and Arabian physicians make no mention of it, and indeed it has not been
well understood in any part of Europe, till of very late years. Even Willis
supposed its seat to be in the breast, but Harvey makes it a disease of the
stomach, and Astruc an inflammation of the larynx and pharynx, produced by an
original affection of the former, from indigestion. He seems to have been one
of the first that discarded the use of oily and pectoral medicines, (which
indeed some practitioners have been weak enough to revive); though he advised
bleeding too indiscriminately. See his Diseases of Infants.


This disorder furnishes another proof of the observation made on the
impropriety of submitting the complaints of children to improper hands -- the
care of old women, and frequent change of air, being all that this disorder is
thought to require: but perhaps the maxim was never worse applied. There is,
indeed, a milder sort of hooping-cough, as there is of every disease, that
calls for very little medical assistance; and it is always in such cases, that
matrons and nurse, acquire their credit. But there is no complaint of children
with which I am at all acquainted, in which medicine is at times more evidently
serviceable, than a bad hooping-cough.

This disease is certainly highly infectious, and one of those that never
appears a second time. It often begins as a common cough, and is attended with
the usual symptoms of having taken cold, but in its progress soon becomes more
(...): the longer it may be before it plainly discovers itself, by the hoop,
the more favorable it is likely to be. The fits of coughing are attended with a
peculiar noise, not ill-expressed by the term hoop, and is sufficiently known
to every parent who has ever had a (...) severely attacked by it, and to whose
feelings, it proves one of the most distressing complaints their children are
liable to. A flux of rheum frequently comes from the mouth, nose and eyes, and
the food is thrown up, together with a viscid phlegm, (often in great
quantities) in the coughing fits; between which the child generally appears to
be perfectly well, and eats its food very heartily. These are the more common
symptoms, but when the disease is violent, and has continued for some time,
they become greatly aggravated, especially in the night, and the child will
seem almost strangled in each fit, and the face and neck becoming perfectly
livid, till by a violent effort, attended by a hoop, it recovers its breath;
the blood will likewise sometimes rush from the nose and mouth. When taken in
time, and properly treated, it is, however, rarely fatal, and scarcely ever but
to young infants.

Dr. Armstrong has strongly recommended wine of antimony as the proper and only
remedy In his second edition, many other means are recommended.
for this, as well as for almost every other complaint of infants, which,
however opposite, in this case, the remedy may be, in a general way, is saying
no more than that emetics and gentle laxatives are useful, which all modern
practitioners are agreed in; and in which view, Dr. James had long before
recommended his powder. But the fact is, that many other means are equally
useful, and not unfrequently indispensably necessary, unless we should suffer
the patient to be strangled in a fit of coughing, or fall into a decline, from
the injury which the lungs must endure by a frequent repetition of such
violence.

This must be exceedingly apparent from the above history of the disease, the
various symptoms of which, certainly demand a considerable diversity in the
treatment. The more important ones are, the state of inflammation, sometimes
inducing peripneumony; the quantity and viscidity of the phlegm; and the
spasmodic affection, and danger of suffocation; together with the exhausted
state into which the patient may be reduced by the long continuance of the
disease. If the breathing therefore be difficult, a blister is indicated, which
if the child is not very young, may be kept open for two or three weeks. If the
face should be very livid and swollen, during the fits of coughing, if any
vessel give way, or the patient be plethoric, and more than two or three years
old, or should be hot between the paroxysms, a little blood ought to be taken
away, (which is sometimes inexpressibly useful) and a saline draught be
administered, every six or eight hours, till the fever shall disappear.
Otherwise, if none of these symptoms attend, bleeding does not seem, in
general, to be indicated, but may rather have a tendency to protract the
disease, by increasing the spasmodic disposition, and by weakening the patient.

If there be an inclination to vomit, it ought to be encouraged, unless the
phlegm be brought up with great ease in almost every fit of coughing, in which
case, nature seems able to accomplish the business herself and it will then
oftentimes be sufficient to keep the body open by the mildest laxative
medicines. But it very rarely happens, unless in infants at the breast, that
some kind of emetic is not necessary in the first stage of the complaint. The
disease, indeed, very frequently requires no other medicine, for such usually
keep the body open at the same time, which it ought always to be, but not to
such a degree as to weaken the patient. For this purpose, perhaps, wine of
antimony may be as proper as any thing, when it answers the end, but it is less
certain than tartarisated antimony, and is not always, I think, of the same
strength. The latter is also rather tasteless, and will therefore have an
advantage over every other medicine, when we are prescribing for children. Two
grains of this in two ounces of water, with the addition of a little sugar, is
a medicine to which children will never make any objection. From one to two
tea-spoonfuls, given to a child of a year old, (varying the dose according to
the age) will in general, act sufficiently; and may be given upon an empty
stomach, every day, or every other morning, according to the strength of the
child, and violence of the disease. If the cough should happen to be more
violent at any particular time, the emetic should be given a little before the
paroxysm is expected. Or perhaps a still better method, at least in some cases,
and particularly in very young children, is, to give the tartarisated antimony
in smaller doses, together with a few grains of magnesia, or prepared
oyster-shell powder, (according to the state of the bowels) three or four times
a day, so as to keep the stomach in an irritable state, as shall secure a
gentle puking every time the fits of coughing come on. But in whatever way this
medicine be directed, it will prove of no service if it does not vomit, and
must therefore be given in a dose suitable to the strength of the stomach,
which is exceedingly various, not only at different ages, but in children of
the same age, and of the same apparent habit of body. If the tartarisated
antimony has any advantage of the wine, it has much more over every other
emetic I have made use of, the ipecacuanha, and oxymel of squills, being
exceedingly unpleasant, and the latter likewise uncertain.

Such a plan is all that will be necessary in the common hooping-cough; but it
has been said, there are many cases which will require other means, and demand
all the skill of the experienced physican. The cough, for instance, will
sometimes increase not only for days, but for weeks together, and the
strangulation be exceedingly alarming. In this case, the milk of gum
ammoniacum, but especially asa foetida, frequently proves a sovereign remedy,
and though exceedingly nauseous, many children will take it tolerably well for
the short time it appears to be absolutely required; and when they will not, it
may be administered by way of clyster, dissolved in two or three spoonsful of
pennyroyal, or common water. These medicines, however, will be improper in the
very advanced stage of the disease, when attended with hectic heat, hemorrhage,
or other phthysical symptoms; a caution equally necessary in regard to the
bark, which in the absence of these symptoms, and after the stomach and bowels
have been well cleansed, is frequently very useful at the latter stage of the
disease, when the patient has been exhausted by its long continuance. Upon the
same plan with the afa ^oetida, camphor and castor are frequently beneficial,
and have the advantage of being less nauseous, but I think are proportionably
less powerful. I take no notice of tincture of cantharides, though strongly
recommended by some writers, because I have had no experience of it myself, and
indeed have never sound any necessity for trying it.

It will sometimes be of no small service, to rub the hands, and the soles of
the feet, with the compound spirit of ammonia, several times in the day; or the
spine of the back, and the pit of the stomach, with oil of mace, (so called) or
oil of amber; but as the smell of the latter is very unpleasant, it may be
dispensed with where the spasms are not exceedingly urgent. But when they are
so, this oil is sometimes very useful, particularly when administered
internally, and children of three or four years will often take a few drops of
it very well, mixed in a spoon with a little brown sugar; from which I have
seen as evident advantages, as from any medicine whatever. In a little child of
my own, it immediately gave a turn to the complaint in the most violent hooping
cough I ever met with, and after almost every other medicine had been tried to
no purpose; so that from the hour she took it, the complaint was no longer
alarming, nor tedious of cure. But frequently, no antispasmodic is equal to
opium, in this, as well as in other diseases. With this view, two or three
drops of la^danum, and, to younger children a small tea-spoonful of syrup of
white poppies, or to grown people from five to ten grains of the pilula e
styrace, taken at bedtime, will not only quiet the cough, and remove the
strangulation during its operation, and procure the patient some rest, by which
the strength will be recruited, but in many cases, seems to have a kindly
operation on the disease itself. It is in this way, I doubt not, that the
cicuta once seemed to gain some reputation, but I believe, it is no otherwise a
remedy for it than an anodyne. From a mistake, however, in this respect, the
strong manner in which this medicine has been recommended by Dr. Butter, has
certainly done harm; as I have known many people depend solely upon it in very
bad cases, to the exclusion of other remedies evidently indicated, which would,
at least, have shortened the disease.

If obstructions in the lungs be suspected, blisters should be applied, and
recourse had to gently deobstruent medicines; but at this period, the cure is
chiefly to be accomplished by a vegetable and milk diet, (especially asses
milk) pure air, and gentle exercise.

The cough after having disappeared for a week or more, is sometimes found to
return with great violence, especially upon taking cold; but a gentle purge or
two, a vomit, and abstaining from heavy food, general remove it in a very short
time. If these cautions should be neglected, the cough will often prove extreme
tedious.

The only thing that remains to be spoken of, is the proper diet, which for
children even of five or six years of age, ought to be little more than milk
and broths. These are easily digested, and will afford them much more good
nourishment than any kind of meats, and will sit much lighter on the stomach
than puddings, or pastry, the latter of which is exceedingly injurious. The
objection made by old nurses against milk, that it breeds phlegm, is utterly
founded in a gross mistake that cannot be too frequently controverted. It has,
indeed, been sometimes mentioned by a certain class of medical people, but the
objection is so unphilosophical and unlike objections of thinking men, that it
scarcely deserves a reply. Should the milk, however, be found to curdle
remarkably soon on the stomach, a little common salt, Castile soap, or
testaceous powder, may be added to it occasionally; or where it can be
afforded, asses milk may be substituted for cow's. These light nourishments
soon pass out of the stomach, or if brought up by coughing fifty times in the
day, (as I have known them to be) a child of four, or five years old, will
immediately take more of them with avidity, and will be better supplied in this
way, I mean by taking a tea-cupful at a time, than by making set meals, or
taking a large quantity at once. If the child should be thirsty, a little
apple-water, toast and water, and other thin drinks, will be pleasant and
useful. Patients treated in this way, will get through the complaint, if not
severe, in a very short time; and where it proves violent, a child will
struggle through this long disease without any considerable loss of strength,
or will be very soon recruited by a decoction, or cold infusion of the bark,
together with gentle exercise, and a little country air, the best restoratives
after every kind of disease. Such at least has been my own experience in this
tiresome complaint, by which I know parents are usually as much alarmed as by
any incident to childhood. But unless it has been long neglected, or taken
place in the month, I have never experienced it to be fatal, and then only in
one instance, though I have known eight or nine children in a family laboring
under it at a time; and I wish to mention this as an occasion of consolation to
those who may have been led to think more formidably of it.

SPASMODIC-COUGH.
VERY much akin to the former complaint, is a trouble some cough, properly
enough denominated spasmodic, or convulsive. In a certain state of the air it
is sometimes epidemic, and young children, and even infants in the month, are
then attacked by it, as well as adults. The irritation seems to be about the
larynx, (or superior parts of the throat) or only a very little lower down, and
is very distressing, at the time of coughing; but the patient, though an
infant, seems immediately afterward to be quiet and comfortable. This cough is
not usually attended with fever, nor other ordinary symptoms a common cold, nor
is it to be relieved by the like means; the cough remaining dry and hoarse
under the use of pectoral remedies.

Children of four or five years old may be cured by the cicuta, and gentle
laxative remedies; but the former being less adapted to infants in the month,
such may take a few drops (...) syrup of white poppies, three or four times a
day, and their bowels be carefully kept open; which means seldom fail of
removing the complaint in three or four days. -- Should the syrup constipate
the bowels, or otherwise disagree, Bates's Sp. Sal^ ammmon. succinat. may be
tried in its stead; which is a good medicine in other dry convulsive coughs,
where there is no fever.

THE CROUP.
THE Croup, or acute asthma, is a complaint somewhat similar to the two former,
to which, perhaps, children only are liable, called therefore asthma infantum
spasmodicum; also suffocatio stridula. Esquinan cie membraneuse.
It rarely atttacks those who have arrived to the age of ten or twelve years,
and chiefly seizes infants newly weaned; at which period it is the most severe.
Dr. Millar is, perhaps, the first person in this country who has written
particularly on this complaint; but it has been mentioned by some German
writers, and well described by them long before it was noticed in Britain.

Remote causes of this disease may possibly be the lax fiber of children, the
abundance of moist humors natural to them, and the vast secretion from the
bronchial, or air vessels; and perhaps the change of food from milk, which is
easily assimulated, to one requiring more digestion.

The prophylaxis, or mean of prevention, is the same as in most other diseases
peculiar to children. If this complaint arise from the laxity of their solids,
the quality of their food, and the natural weakness of their organs of
digestion, the general means of prevention, as well as of cure, will be readily
indicated. -- Their food should be such as may be easily digested, and may
prove nourishing. A due proportion of milk and broth, A diet of milk only, even
in adults, when long persisted in, though otherwise proper, will create
flatulencies. Berry on Digestion.
taken separately, whilst children are very young, or light meats when they
become older; good air and exercise, and a careful attention to the state of
their bowels.

The proximate cause of this complaint is a morbid secretion of a viscid mucus
in the trachea, adhering so firmly to its sides as to impede respiration. The
quantity and viscid^^y increasing, gradually lessens the diameter of the
windpipe, and if it effect this to a considerable degree, the disease must
necessarily prove fatal.

The Symptoms of this complaint are spasmodic, being such as would be produced
by any other matter constantly irritating the trachea, and diminishing its
diameter. They will therefore very much resemble those of the nervous asthma,
but the complaint differs materially from the common spasmodic asthma of
adults, in the peculiar croaking noise made in respiration, (from whence it has
its name) and in the violence of the paroxysms; which, however, leave no
apparent indisposition, save a certain dullness, and a sense of fear, in
children capable of expressing it. The fits frequently terminate by sneezing,
coughing, or vomiting, and return without any regularity. It is attended with a
quick pulse, laborious breathing, a sharp, and shrill voice, and a flushed
countenance, which grows livid during the paroxysms, or fits.

The disorder is probably inflammatory in the beginning; and though this period
seems to be very short, yet should the physician be consulted as soon as the
disorder might be ascertained, both emetics and bleeding might be useful; but
after the croup, as well as difficult respiration have thoroughly taken place,
it would be improper to have recourse to any debilitating means.

It does not always seem to be an original disease; being sometimes a
consequence of bad fevers, and of some chronical disorders that have reduced
the patient's strength. It frequently appears to arise from the same causes as
the malignant sore throat, only having its seat lower down, and is therefore
more dangerous. And it has, in several instances, accompanied the malignant
sorethroat, as may be known in the early stages of that complaint, by the
croaking noise peculiar to the croup; and, I believe, is in such instances
generally fatal.

It is divided into two principal stages; in the latter of which no method of
treatment has appeared to be effectual, but medicine is never more efficacious
than in the first, if the disorder be not combined with some other, and it be
taken in time, though the crouping may be very considerable. This I saw
remarkably exemplified in a little boy of my own, who was nearly cured in two
days.

The sovereign remedy seems to be asafoetida, which ought to be administered
both by the mouth and in clysters, according to the exigency of the complaint;
and in the first instance, before any marked inflammation has taken place, may
be given very freely. Antecedently to this, however, it may often be prudent to
apply a leech or two to the throat, especially if there be any perceptible
fullness of that part, and a blister to the nape of the neck. At the close of
the complaint, and to prevent a relapse, the bark proves highly serviceable,
and will also restore the strength of the patient; returning, however, to the
asafoetida, if there should be any threatening symptom of the asthmatic
affection, which is not uncommon. Should a patient suffer two or more relapses,
to which a moist air will peculiarly expose him, some discharge, by a blister,
or issue, ought to be procured, and continued at least for some months.

The French writers depend much upon emetics, and afterward lenient purges;
and to prevent a return, advise aperitives, stomachics and tonics, particularly
preparations of steel, and natural chalybeate waters.

I have examined the trachea after death in only one patient, in which I found
the precise appearances described by Dr. Millar; the windpipe being lined by a
tough viscid coat, so as mechanically to close up the passage.

RICKETS.
THIS is a late disorder in Europe: Astruc observes that England is said to be
the part in which it first made its appearance, and that it was then described
by Glisson and Mayow; but he thinks it probable, that it appeared at the same
season over all Europe, through the coldness of the weather. It was named
rachites, from the Greek, implying that the spina dorsi is particularly
affected by it; From this circumstance, it has been supposed to have been known
in the time of Hippocrates; but his remark ( Aphor. 3. 26.) is certainly too
concise to establish the sentiment (...) as it is simply observed, that among
other complaints, infants after the period of dentition, are liable to (...).
-- In M^ns. L^ Feb^re de Villebrune's Greek edition of the (...), there are,
however, some observations tending to evince, that this disease is of an older
^ate, by some centuries, than it has been generally imagined.
though it rarely attacks the spine till the disorder is far advanced.

It was first noticed in the western parts of England, See Glisson.
about the year 1628, Primerose.
and is said to have taken place upon the increase of manufactures, when people
left the villages and husbandry, to settle in large manufacturing towns; where
they wanted that exercise, and pure air, which they had enjoyed in their former
situation, and employments.

It may therefore frequently arise from unhealthy parents, especially from
mothers who pass too sedentary a life in a bad air, and feed upon a weak and
watery diet: from children's food being weak, watery, or too viscid to be
properly digested; but above all, perhaps, from bad nursing, and the child's
being left wet, dirty, or exposed to a cold moist air, It is remarkable, that
this complaint is scarcely known in very hot climates.
without sufficient covering; from want of proper exercise, and from close and
crowded apartments. Or lastly, from the habit of body being reduced by the long
continuance of almost any of the complaints hitherto considered.

The usual symptoms of rickets are soft flesh; bloated, or very florid
countenance; weakness; dislike to motion; with enlargement of the belly, head,
and joints. The wrists and ankles enlarge first, afterward the back, and
breast-bones; and indeed all the bones swell and become soft, especially the
more spongy ones. The pulse is quick, and feeble, and the appetite and
digestion usually bad. Teething is commonly late, though not frequently
difficult, but the teeth often rot early, and fall out. Great acuteness of mind
has been observed, in this, and some other chronical complaints. It seldom
attacks children before they are six months old, or above two years.

As it appears to arise from a general weakness and relaxation, the indications
of Cure are to brace and strengthen the solids, and to promote digestion, and
the formation of good chyle. These ends will be promoted by wholesome food,
suited to the age; good bread, or biscuit; dry food; and roasted meats, rather
than boiled; with a little red Port wine. Should the child be too young to eat
flesh meats, its diet ought to be chiefly of rice, millet, pearl-barley, salep,
and semolina, with spices, if it be not inclined to be feverish. It must also
have good nursing, and especially exercise and air, without being kept too hot
or too cold: without a very strict attention to these, medicine can be of but
little service. If the child is of a gross habit, the eighth part, or a
quarter, of a grain, of ipecacuanha powder, taken once or twice a day; gentle
pukes, and very brisk purges, especially of the powder of scammony with calomel
prove of use. In such habits, all foundation of a cure must be laid in reducing
the belly to its proper size, and ^n strengthening the stomach. If rather
delicate, the cold-bath is often of more service than any thing else: but this
should not be entered upon in winter, nor without previous purging. Frictions
afterward with flannel and aromatic powders, or the fumes of frankincense,
mastic or amber, especially on the back and belly, will farther tend to
strengthen the habit. Besides these, may be given the cold infusion of bark,
and other bitters, or small doses of the martial flowers, or the vinum ferri;
but a good diet, air, and exercise, especially riding on horseback, are of the
utmost consequence, and if duly persevered in, will often effect wonders. This
is one of those chronical or lingering complaints which seem to be gotten the
better of by time, and like the following one, wears itself out, as it were,
(if the vital parts do not happen to be affected) and to which the
abovementioned means will greatly contribute -- Saepe Pertinacia Juvantis,
Malum Corporis vi^^it. CELSUS.

SCROFULA, or KING's EVIL.
THIS is primarily a glandular disease, though in its progress it attacks the
adipose membrane, the eyes, the muscles, tendons, and even the bones
themselves, especially the joints. It seldom makes its appearance before two
years of age, nor later than ten or twelve, (except it be in regard to
affections of the eyes) though there are a few exceptions in regard to the
latter period, and it then often proves fatal, by falling on the lungs, or
other noble part. It is frequently observed to follow other disorders,
particularly the smallpox, whether taken naturally or from inoculation, but
more especially the former; also the hooping-cough, measles, teething, rickets;
and many other disorders already mentioned. Hence, the nature of this disease
is better understood, as it so often falls upon weak and tender habits, either
originally of a lax fiber, or worn out by previous diseases; or is gradually
brought on by a heavy, indigestible, and bad diet, or a low, wet, and unhealthy
situation. It is, however, sometimes found to be hereditary, but will very
frequently lie dormant for two or three generations, and afterward appear with
redoubled violence. It is often attended, or rather preceded, with a peculiar
look about the eyes, which are generally large, and a thickness of the upper
lip; and sometimes proves a source of ill-health through life, but is not
usually fatal in the first instance. Long before the external glands become
affected, especially in young subjects, the belly is observed to be hard and
enlarged, and after death, the mesenteric glands, and even the pancreas have
been found diseased.

Though this is a very unpleasant complaint, and one that does not often admit
of much relief, yet it frequently disappears at the time of puberty (and
sometimes sooner) especially in females; but whether this be owing to the
increased strength of the solids, or to other changes in the habit, naturally
happening at that period, is not an inquiry proper for this place.

Although I thought it necessary to mention this disease amongst others to
which the state of childhood is liable, I am sensible how difficult it would be
to point out any thing like an adequate remedy. At its first appearance,
however, bitter, or mercurial purges, are sometimes of use, as are also
antimonial vomits, and sometimes saponaceous medicines. But when the disease is
confirmed, limewater, and decoctions of the woods, together with crude
antimony, bark, and steel, with wine, and a generous diet, are, I believe, most
to be depended upon as internal remedies; from some of which, I have seen no
inconsiderable cures effected. But in this, as in other chronical complaints,
good air and exercise are of the greatest importance. Indeed, the advantage of
exercise in this disease is so great, that I wish to lay a very great stress on
it. But then it must be daily had recourse to, and, by degrees, be so
considerable, as to render the patient every night sensibly fatigued. Thus, I
have known riding behind a carriage, (as I have noticed in another work),
almost without the aid of any medicine, entirely remove the complaint.

When there are external tumors, I am satisfied that the opinion I have already
given to the public, in a larger tract on this complaint, is both rational and
safe; and that whenever they are at all disposed to come forward, they ought to
be brought to as speedy a suppuration as is possible, and be treated as I have
there recommended. The scrofulous virus when thrown on the surface, so far
resembles the cancerous, according to the description of the ingenious Mr.
Hunter, that it is inclined to spread to a considerable extent; but as tumors
of the former class will bear rougher treatment than the latter, I am confident
that much benefit may arise from the use of external stimulants, by stopping
the progress of the disorder in the neighboring parts, as well as by
invigorating them, and thereby disposing the ulcers to heal. Also light
frictions with mercury, so as to make it pass freely through the lymphatics of
the distempered parts, without affecting the system, have in a course of time
been beneficial, and deserve to be brought into a more general practice than
they have hitherto been.

I have lately had farther reason to be confirmed in the above opinion
respecting stimuli, from observations communicated to me by Mr. Partington, who
since the hints I threw out in the aforementioned work, has made use of
electricity with very good effects, in these, as well as other cold tumors and
ulcers I had mentioned; which have all healed very kindly, in consequence of
this stimulus to the parts. When scrofulous ulcers have been healed, and only
some small tumors remain, I have experienced very good effects from the
external use of as strong a solution of camphor in oil of almonds as can be
made, which has dispersed them very soon; and I have found it the best remedy,
and a very successful one, in the cure of the incipient bronchocele, though
enlarged to the size of a turkey's egg; and requires only to be very well
rubbed into the parts, three times a day. The patient should at the same time
take a dram or two of the tartarisated natron every morning. -- I shall only
add, on the head of scrofula, what is very well known, that sea-bathing, alone,
sometimes effects a perfect cure. Should the child therefore have several
scrofulous tumors, or the habit be conceived to be much affected, trial should
be made of the sea, in whatever manner it may be determined the tumors shall be
treated, if not dispersed by sea-bathing.

HYDROCEPHALUS, or WATERY-HEAD.
THIS complaint is distinguished into the the external, and internal; in the
former, the water lies upon the surface of the brain, over the pia matter, but
in the latter it is seated much deeper, within the ventricles. The external
makes its appearance at, or it is said, in some instances, soon after birth.
But children with hydrocephalus externus are more commonly still-born, though I
have known one arrive to ten years of age, See Medical Communications, vol. I,
in which there is mention of one attaining the age of 29, and another, 45
years, who were then both living; the former did not appear to have any
enlargement of the head for three weeks after birth.
who was then unable to walk, or even to sit upright in a chair. From a very
recent instance, however, I have learned, that when no symptoms of
hydrocephalus appear at the birth, the water is sometimes, at least, contained
within the ventricles of the brain: and from the circumstance of no children
living long with an internal hydrocephalus, but such whose heads enlarge within
a few months after birth, I should suspect the disorder has, in such instances,
taken place in the womb. The foetus, at this time, enjoying only a kind of
vegetative life, may arrive to maturity under such a disease; various instances
being met with, in which full grown foetuses have had neither head, nor heart,
nor lungs. Accustomed to the abovementioned disease, we may presume such
infants more likely to live for a certain time with water in the ventricles,
than those in whom the disease takes place suddenly, after birth.

In the instance alluded to, the child's head began to be sensibly enlarged
when the infant was about four months old, and the child lived to the fifth
year, unable to walk, or even to support its head. Upon a careful examination
of the parts after death, the water, to the quantity of three pints, as I am
informed by the surgeon, was evidently contained within the ventricles: which
were so stretched as to compress the brain in such a manner, that it appeared
only like a smooth thick membrane within the dura matter; and of all the solid
contents of the skull, scarce any thing but the cerebellum remained.

The external hydrocephalus, at whatever period it may commence, has always
been esteemed a fatal, as well as most distressing complaint; but I have been
informed, that where the disorder has not been very manifest at the birth,
blisters on the head have sensibly diminished its size. These should be
applied, successively, to different parts, especially along the top of the
head, in the course of the longitudinal sinus, so as to keep up a constant
discharge; which from the good effects in two or three cases, when had recourse
to in good time, may possibly, in some instances, effect a perfect cure: at
least, the advantages already observed are sufficient to justify the attempt,
in a disorder hitherto esteemed incurable.

Of the internal watery-head it may be proper to treat more largely, though I
have nothing really new to offer in regard to the cure. It usually takes place
between the age of two and ten years; is a like melancholy complaint with the
former, and the method of treatment not yet well established; and as it can
hardly be ascertained whether any have recovered from it, (the certainty of its
existence scarcely being known but by examination after death,) it is not
likely that a very determined, and successful treatment will shortly be
settled. It may probably arise from falls and blows on the head, or from an
original laxity of the brain; from chirrhous tumors and excrescences within the
skull; a watery state of the blood, or a lingering illness. It appears,
likewise, to be a family complaint in some instances; for I have known six
children, born of the same parents, die successively of it at the age of two
years, five of whom were afterward opened.

The attack is sometimes very sudden; but the complaint more commonly begins
with the appearances of slow fever, especially in older children, with debility
of the arms, and pains in the limbs, especially the upper part of the neck.
After a while, the child is suddenly seized with pain in the fore part of the
head, and retches: It becomes heavy and dull; can bear no posture but that of
lying horizontally; the pulse becomes irregular, but usually very slow; in the
progress of the disease the faculties and senses are impaired, and the eyes are
offended by the light; the patient sees objects double, and becomes delirious.
As the disease advances, the pulse grows frequent, the cheeks become flushed,
the pupils of the eyes are dilated, the stools and urine come away
involuntarily, and the patient lies sleeping, or is convulsed.

In the youngest subjects, I have known it begin with a cough, quick pulse, and
difficulty of breathing, attended with circumscribed flushed cheeks as in
teething, occurring on every little exertion, with continual fever and
costiveness; and sometimes a discharge from the nose and eyes.

Symptoms indicative of the disease at this age, are, a hand often put to the
head, or lifted upwards, and waving about; vomitings; costiveness; expression
of anxiety, and dislike to be moved: at other times, an unmeaning look, and
marks of insensibility; the fingers often clinched, and hands tumid;
drowsiness; the eyes in some cases impatient of light, in others, vision is so
imperfect, that the child does not regard any object however close to them. The
pupils are often not dilated till near the close of the disease, and patients
often hear and comprehend, and take food to the last, and die suddenly upon the
decline of the febrile symptoms, when they have been thought to be recovering.
These and other symptoms, however, laid down as indications of water in the
brain, are, in some degree, common to other diseases of children, especialy the
dilatation of the pupil, and sleepiness, in fevers arising from fowl bowels.

For these reasons, it is difficult to say if medicines are so often successful
as has sometimes been imagined; for when a patient recovers, it may be
suspected he has not had the true disease. Practitioners seem chiefly to have
depended upon repeated bleedings; purges with jalap, or calomel; blisters to
the neck or head, and diuretic medicines. A large bleeding early in the disease
I have thought very beneficial, especially in children of a robust habit. The
use of sternutatories, as powder of asarum, or white hellebore, and
electricity, have likewise ben recommended by some experienced practitioners;
to all which I would add the application of a narrow caustic, the whole length
of the head, in the course of the longitudinal sinus, instead of trusting to a
small blister on the crown.

Though I have made mention of calomel, I cannot say I have seen any good
effects from the use of mercury, either as a purge or an alterative; and on
that account shall not enlarge on the different manner of exhibiting it with
either of these views It has, however, been strongly recommended by Drs.
Dobson, John Hunter, Haygarth, Mosely, and Dr. Armstrong; but I am informed by
other physicians of eminence, that they have not been so successful in the use
of it; and some good arguments have lately been advanced against an
indiscriminate recourse to it, by Dr. John Warren; who advises trial to be made
of emetics.

INCONTINENCE of URINE.
THIS is not a very common complaint, I believe, in children, unless combined
with the stone in the bladder, and then is not so constant, nor to the degree
that is intended here. It is an involuntary flow of the urine, sometimes by day
as well as during the night; arising, I apprehend, from a relaxation or other
affection of the Sphincter of the bladder, as in old people, but is not
attended with manifest fever, nor symptoms of decay. An affection of this kind,
in which the urine runs away in the sleep only, is perhaps, more common; and I
have known it continue to the age of fifteen or sixteen years when not properly
treated, and afterward yield to sea-bathing. The total incontinence generally
comes on gradually, and is sometimes attended with excessive gonorrhae, even in
very young children.

Tincture of catechu, or of gum kino; the bark; balsam-copaibae, and white
vitriol may be made trial of; but nothing is usually so effectual as repeated
blisters applied over the os sacrum, or lower part of the back; and proper
doses of the tinctura cantharidis. This may be given in doses of ten or fifteen
drops to children from five to ten years of age, and increased to two scruples
and a dram; which has general removed the complaint if there has been no morbid
affection of the spine, as is sometimes the case. If these means should fail,
recourse should be had to sea-bathing.

THE SEVEN-DAYS-DISEASE, etc.
I SHALL close this part of the work with a brief account of two very
extraordinary disorders, which should have been noticed among the earlier
complaints of infants, if they had been diseases of this country, or even much
known in other parts of Europe. As the seven-days-disorder has, however, made
its appearance in this quarter of the globe, and may, therefore, at some future
period, become more common, it may be proper it should be mentioned in a work
of this kind. The following account is translated from the French of Mr. Le
Febure de Villebrune, who refers to the Spanish work of D. Ulloa, (Disc. XI. 19
and 20) and Barrere's Voyage to Guinea.

19. The disease of seven days of newborn infants is common in both quarters of
America, and equally dangerous in the high, as in the low parts. A great number
of infants die of it, without any thing preceding that could occasion it to be
suspected. They are, on the contrary, apparently healthy and robust, when the
disorder makes its attack in the form of epilepsy; and few of those who are
visited with it are found to recover. Though this complaint is not altogether
unknown in Europe, it is neither so common, nor so dangerous. It is conceived,
that the best preventative were to guard infants from being exposed to the
wind, till the first seven days are over.

20. But infants at Guaneavelica are still liable to another very extraordinary
complaint. Having escaped the seven-days-disease, they thrive well until the
third or fourth month; they are then seized with cough and pulmonic affections,
which they call pecheguera. The complaint goes on increasing without any
sensible relief from the medicines made use of; and a swelling taking place,
they presently die. The disorder attacks only the white people, or children of
the Spaniards; the Indians and the mongrels are not subject to it. The way to
escape it, is to remove the infants from the spot, before they are two months
old, and to carry them to more favorable climates, into one of the Zuebrades,
(or the low grounds between the mountains) that are at a little distance. It is
imagined, that the cold and intemperature of the climate is the occasion of
infants being so soon seized with this complaint. This may be the case in some
degree: but the vitiated habit of body of their parents, and the sulphurous
vapors continually issuing from the furnaces for the extraction of mercury,
may likewise contribute to it. In fact, these vapors are so abundant, that
when reunited by means of the cold, they form such a thick cloud in the
atmosphere, during the season there called summer, as to cover all the colony.
Notic. American. Disc. II. p. 205. L.

THE END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
A TREATISE ON THE DISEASES OF CHILDREN. VOLUME THE SECOND. IN TWO PARTS.

A TREATISE, etc. PART I.
HAVING already considered all the more important Diseases for which the
Physician will usually be consulted, there remain now only some lesser matters
in that line. But beside these, there are many complaints which relate rather
to the province of Surgery, and others that may be said to be of a mixed kind,
but have each a reference to the department of Midwifery. Of these last, more
especially, not a few may very well fall under the care of another class of
readers; their nature and treatment, it has been already noticed, being in this
edition rendered more obvious and intelligible. To the Diseases will follow
suitable Directions to Parents and others, for the general Management of
Infants in every article of importance to their Health; to which particulars
the second part of this volume is wholly devoted. -- The first Complaints I
shall mention relate to contagious Eruptions.

TINEA, or SCALD-HEAD.
THE Scald-head is a very troublesome complaint, and is said to be often a
scrofulous symptom; but I rather think it is usually communicated by contact,
and when lighting on a scrofulous habit may be more difficult of cure. I have
never met with it in infants, but it being no uncommon complaint in the later
periods of childhood, it may be proper to notice it, as it sometimes proves a
very tedious disease. I hope, however, to point out a successful method of
cure, the unpleasantness of which has, improperly I think, prevented its being
more generally adopted.

From some considerable experience, I may venture ^o say, that being usually a
mere complaint of the skin, it may be most successfully ^reated by outward
applications. This disease is seated in the little glands at the roots of the
hair, is sometimes dry, but at others moi^^, and then produces little ulcers,
which being thoroughly cleansed, and made to digest, may be safely healed up,
as I have found in many other affections of the skin.

It is not uncommon, I know, to admininister a variety of internal remedies,
and perhaps they may sometimes be required, though I think I have seldom given
any thing more than limewater, or a decoction of the woods; and a few purges
at the decline of the disease.

If the complaint be taken early, before it has spread far over the head, and
whilst the scabby patches are small and distinct, (...) may be frequently cured
by the sulphur ointment, with a small addition of the calx hydrargyri alba. And
such a preparation may very safely be made use of, if the patient be kept
within doors, and his body be properly open; as it will be necessary to rub in
only a small portion, one or twice a day, on the parts immediately affected.
But if the disease should spread, or has already extended itself over a great
part of the head, the hair must be shaved off, and the head washed twice a day
with a strong decoction of tobacco; repeating this process till the scabs
disappear, and the hair grows up from the parts they had occupied. Or, instead
of the decoction of tobacco, the head may be well washed with the lotio
saponacea, with the addition of a small quantity of the aqua kali puri, and the
scabs anointed with the unguent* hydrargyri nitrati in the place of the sulphur
ointment and calx of mercury; the former being a very powerful, as well as a
safe application, and may be used in any quantity that may be necessary.

But the complaint is sometimes of long standing before medical assistance is
asked, and is not only extended over all the head, but the scabs are thick, and
rise high above the surface, returning as often as they may fall off. I have,
however, never failed to cure the common tinea by a method perhaps well known,
but too seldom complied with in time, on account of its apparent severity. It
consists only in well washing the head with a piece of flannel, and a strong
lather of soap-suds, after it has been close shaved, and then rubbing in very
forcibly the common unguentum picae and a good quantity of the pulvis ellebor.
alb. or other safe depilatory, for near an hour at a time, always using it very
warm; and covering the head with a bladder to preserve the ointment on the
part, as well as to keep it from sticking to the cap, or other covering made
use of. When this has been done three or four times, not only the scabs, but
the hairs will also loosen, which must be pulled out, however unpleasant the
operation may be; as it will, indeed, prove a kindness in the end: but must be
repeated till all the hairs be taken out, after which new hair will rise free
from scabs, which is a sufficient indication that the disorder is effectually
removed.

There is, however, a spurious kind of scald-head, that is sometimes more
difficult of cure; but it requires nothing but patience in the use of one or
more of the above remedies, or at most, an alterative plan of the flour of
sulphur, or of some mild mercurial preparation, with the common decoction of
the woods, or the Lisbon diet-drink. Or, should the difficulty consist in
getting out the hair entirely, or destroying the diseased glands at its roots,
the calx viva may be had recourse to, in one form or other; and is exceedingly
preferable to an adhesive pitch-plaister. In a few instances, the topical use
of the unguent. hydrargyri mitius has a wonderful efficacy. -- In the spurious
tinea particularly, it may be proper to open an issue, or fix a seton in the
nape of the neck.

HERPES MILIARIS, or SHINGLES; (RINGWORM.)
THE Herpes miliaris, and the Shingles are distinguished by some writers, but I
can see no good reason for it; and M. Aurelius Severinus and others, have
esteemed them to be the same disorder.

The Herpes, like the foregoing complaint, is a disease of the skin, infesting
some children almost annually, and appearing in dry scurfy blotches, on
different parts of the body, and usually of a circular form. It becomes
troublesome chiefly from the violent itching that constantly attends it, and
would probably get well of itself: it even sometimes has the appearance of
being critical, or is, perhaps, rather an indication of some favorable change
in valetudinarians, especially in adults, who are sometimes found getting the
better of chronical complaints at the time the shingles makes its appearance.
It is, however, often a blemish; as it frequently attacks the hands and face,
and especially the forehead. It is amongst the vulgar errors, I believe, that
when it appears on the breast or loins, if it should extend round the whole
body, it would prove fatal -- This form of the disease is termed Zona herpetica.

The Herpes miliaris is also by many distinguished from the ring-worm, (but
perhaps needlessly); the former being always supposed to arise from an
affection of the system, and to be preceded by shivering, or sickness at the
stomach. They are certainly both very easily cured, and probably would alike
disappear of themselves. The Herpes yields very readily to stimulating and
astringent remedies. Ink, therefore, as (as it contains an infusion of galls)
has been a common, though inelegant application, and may serve very well where
better forms are not at hand: it is sometimes made into a paste with the flower
of mustard. Spirit of wine; saturnine lotions, with the addition of vinegar, or
white vitriol; and ointments containing lead, answer very well; or an ointment
of calcined zinc and lard: but the ung. hydrarg. nitrati is preferable to most
others: The use of a flesh-brush is a good prophylactic, or preventive, in
habits accustomed to the complaint.

Should the shingles spread and become sore, it should be treated as directed
below.

HERPES EXEDENS, or SERPIGO.
THIS is a malignant species of the above complaint, but is generally local. It
is mentioned only as having relation to the former, being rather a sore than an
eruption, and not very common in children.

Suppurative applications may be made use of in the early stage of the
complaint, such as ointments of minium, soap, and Venice turpentine, or a
suppurative poultice, in order to liberate the diseased glands on the surface,
and absorb the acrid discharge. After this, the parts should be washed with
saponaceous lotions, and lastly, with strong solutions of vitriol. Should these
fail, the ung. hydrarg. nitrati will be proper, and as the last remedy, caustic
applications; of which, butter of antimony is the best, with which the little
ulcers may be touched lightly from time to time. The patient may take at the
same time of a decoction of burdock-roots, or sarsaparilla.

SCABIES or ITCH.
THIS disorder so commonly known and easy of treatment, is mentioned only to
introduce a caution to some readers, against popular washes and girdles; which
are generally either useless or hazardous. Such are often had recourse to in
order to avoid the unpleasant smell of the brimstone ointment; which, however,
rarely fails to cure the genuine itch. There is, indeed, a spurious kind, as of
the scald-head, which is far less, or often not at all contagious, but is more
difficult of cure than the genuine. Should the brimstone ointment therefore
fail, sulphur should be administered inwardly, and sometimes mercurials; which
may likewise be added to the ointment, and in a few weeks, at most, will not
fail of removing the complaint. It is common to administer at the same time
some alterative diet-drink.

OPHTHALMIA, or INFLAMMATION of the EYES.
THE Eyes of newborn infants are very apt to be inflamed during the first
three or four days after birth, especially in the winter season. If it be owing
to taking cold, it is probable it has been either immediately after the child
was born, before it has been given away to the nurse, or very soon afterward;
and on this account, a flannel cap becomes a very necessary part of its
covering before it can be formally dressed.

This kind of inflammation, however, is usually of very little consequence, and
generally disappears of itself, upon merely keeping the head warm, or by
washing the eyes with a little rose water, to two ounces of which, in some
cases, two or three drops of the water of acetated litharge, and a grain or two
of white vitriol, may be added. But there is an inflammation to which infants
are liable, that sometimes continues a long while, and therefore calls for
attention. I do not allude to that redness on the eye, known by the name of
sugillation, or bloodshot, which will often remain a long time, return, and
disappear again, without the least injury to the child; nor to the watery-eye,
which will sometimes continue for many months, and even for years. But that
which I here intend, is accompanied with the true appearances of op^thalmia, or
inflammation of the white of the eye, attended with a discharge as in the
ophthalmia of adults: it will sometimes get a little better by common means,
but seldom remains so for many days together, and generally increases at the
end of the month. -- It often seems connected with the state of the bowels, and
the coming on of a purging will frequently cur^ it.

I have nothing out of the common way to recommend for it; For a more full
account of the treatment of Ophthalmia^, See Surgical Tracts, 2nd Edition.
nor does it need much to be done, unless it be unusually tedious: in which
case, the parts behind the ears should be made sore, in the way I have before
described, and be kept so for some time. Previous to this, it is often
necessary to apply a blister to the back, and a leech to one or both temples;
to keep the body open, and to make use of the cooling eye-water before
recommended. If the child be inclined to a frequent return of it for years, as
I have known in very healthy children, it will sometimes degenerate into what
is termed the watery-eye; an excellent remedy for which is a grain of white
vitriol, mixed with as much fresh butter as will form it into a liniment, which
should be put into the inner angle of the eye every night, at going to bed. In
some of these cases, however, the ointment of nitrated quicksilver has proved
a more speedy remedy, and is a less painful application.

But there is a far more formidable inflammation, which has of late years been
called the purulent ophthalmy, distinguished from every other, by the vast
quantity of thick matter discharged, and great swelling of the lids.

This is so dangerous an inflammation as to require the best advice on its very
first appearance. It frequently seizes an infant a few days after birth,
without any previous complaint; and sometimes not only destroys the sight, but
dissolves the eye itself, in less than a week's time. I have likewise seen it
exceedingly violent in children of four or five years old, but rarely without
some blow, or other accident.

In this disease, every thing that may remove inflammation, and unload the
vessels of the part, should be immediately had recourse to. The body should,
therefore, always, be kept open, and if the child be two or three years of age,
leeches should be applied to the temples: scarifications also of the tunica
conjunctiva, (which generally falls out upon the opening of the lids); blisters
to the back, nape of the neck, and behind the ears, are sometimes essentially
necessary. The edges of the eyelids should be kept constantly greased
throughout the day, especially in infants, that the thick matter may find an
easy escape. At night, a little of Go^lard's cerate may be spread on soft
linen, and applied to the eye, and over it a very soft (...), made with the
compound water of acetated litharge, laid on as lightly as possible; that by
its constant moisture, the eyelids may always be kept supple. But if the
discharge should seem to be confined, or the eye affected, by the weight of the
poultice, this application should be changed for soft linen rage, which should
be frequently wetted with cold brandy and water, or some yet more astringent
lotion.

It should ever be remembered, that in the beginning of the complaint the
taking away of blood is often not to be dispensed with, (unless the child be
very young, or otherwise weak) nor to be sparingly done. The application of one
leech, therefore, to the temple or neck, will have no good effect, though often
repeated. Two, three, or even more, according to the age and strength of the
child, should be put on at a time, and a blister soon afterward; which will
often do more to conquer the inflammation, than most other means put together,
if had recourse to in time.

Throughout the complaint, astringent and stimulating applications are to be
made use of, being not only far preferable to other means, but so necessary,
that should emollient poultices, and merely cooling collyria be, at any time,
depended upon, the event were likely to be fatal. What may be the very best
remedy, it may not be very easy to determine, having for some years succeeded,
and in a reasonable time, by different means. But ever since I have seen Mr.
Ware's excellent publication on diseases of the eyes, I have had so frequent
recourse to to the aqua camphorata, as recommended by him, in this species of
ophthalmy, and have succeeded so well with it, that I am not yet certain to
which the decided preference should be given.

One dram of the aqua camphorata of Bate's dispensatory, to two ounces of
water, will be a sufficient strength to begin with. A few drops should be
instilled into the eyes, several times in the day, as well as the lids, be
frequently washed with it.

The topical remedies alluded to, in the place of the aqua camphorata, are
tinct. opii, and the unguentum hydrargyri nitrati, which should be applied
every night at going to rest; the former being dropped into the eye after the
lids have been touched with the ointment. It is sometimes proper to lower and
soften the ointment with a little fresh butter, and to add a little camphor.

It has been said, that where this inflammation has not been properly treated
from the beginning, the eye is sometimes exceedingly injured by it, so that
even the eye will burst. At other times, the cornea becomes much thickened, and
the pupil more or less opake by means of one or more specks which the
inflammation has occasioned. It should be remarked, however, that we sometimes
meet with an agreeable surprise, at the decline of this formidable complaint,
and find the eye much less injured than had been suspected at the time we were
first able to get a sight of it. And at others, even where the cornea has
burst, the aqueous humor has been restored, and being confined by the
cicatrice, the patient has recovered his sight. On the other hand, the cornea
has sometimes been so greatly injured, or the iris contracted, that though the
eye has not been sunk, the sight could not be restored by any means.

From what I have known of some permanent inflammations, I have sometimes been
much inclined to the opinion of the late Dr. Hunter and others, who after
having tried a variety of means, and assisted in consultation with different
physicians, have been induced to think, that many of the very stubborn
ophthalmias originate from a venereal taint, and could only be successfully
treated by its specific remedy, in one form or other. -- Every practitioner
will be very careful how he takes up such an opinion in particular instances;
The French physicians seem too much inclined to regard the purulent ophthalmy
in this view, being a very common symptom, amongst others truly venereal, in
many infants in the (...)-Dieu, l' Hospice de Salpetriere, Va^girard, and (...)
En^ans trouves; but when this species of ophthalmy appears alone, the case
should not be hastily concluded to be venereal, however violent the ophthalmy
may be.
however, it is right to observe, that if none of the means above recommended
should produce a favorable change in eight or ten weeks, I believe nothing but
that specific species of alteratives will have any lasting effect.

Though it is not my design to treat on this disease, it may not be amiss to
observe, that whenever a venereal taint actually exists, it is more safely
treated by unction than in any other way; and infants would probably be cured
much oftener than they are, if recourse were had to (...) in better time than
it commonly is. If internal remedies, however, are for any reason preferred, I
have found none so efficacious, convenient, and safe, as the late Mr. WARD's
white drop.

LEUCOMA, or SPECK of the EYE.
THIS is often a consequence of long continued ophthalmias, and is mentioned by
Dr. Armstrong amongst the diseases of children, in his second edition. He
directs a variety of things for the cure of it, which he says are often
efficacious if the specks have been recently formed, but when of long standing,
he has never seen any method successful. I shall only observe, that in a very
great number of cases, a drop or two of the aq. cupri ammon. instilled into the
eye, two or three times a day, has removed such specks, in the course of a few
months, and sometimes much sooner, without any other means. Should this fail,
however, trial may be made of a solution of the hydrargyr. muriatus, one grain
being put into four ounces of water; and the ointment of nitrated litharge be
applied in the manner before recommended.

CATARACT and GUTTA SERENA.
ALTHOUGH these disorders are not very common in young children, they do,
nevertheless, sometimes occur, and infants have been born with a cataract in
one or both eyes, or totally deprived of ^ight by the gutta serena. I shall
therefore speak of the two diseases together, and the rather because the same
remedies are here accommodated to both.

It would, indeed, ill become a man of the least character and experience to
affect to have much to offer in a way of remedy for these dreadful complaints;
the oldest and best practitioners never having pretended to be often, or by any
means uniformly successful in the treatment of them. From what I have known,
however, they are not to be despaired of, and I should think it unpardonable
not to hold out every occasion of good, or of comfort in my power, however
little it may be, in cases wherein art has so generally failed -- Valeat
quantum valere potest.

Where a disposition to cataract and gutta serena have been suspected, I have
known very considerable benefit obtained, and even the sight fully restored by
an alterative plan of calomel and cicuta, or by the long continued use of an
aromatic vapor with spirit. ammon. compos, Half an ounce of the spirit with two
ou^^s of water, should be kept boiling over a lamp, and be made use of two or
three times a day.
conveyed to the eyes by means of a tube properly adapted; or by brushing the
eyes and the adjacent parts, several times a day, with soft and smooth brushes,
which are properly constructed by Messrs. Ayliffe and Gee, in Wardour-street.
In the gutta serena, electricity also has certainly succeeded in several cases;
and in one instance, a lady whilst under such a course, suddenly recovered the
perfect use of her eyes, through a blow she accidentally received on the face,
which produced a copious hemorrhage from the nose. In imitation of this, the
like discharge has been lately artificially procured by wounding the internal
vessels of the nostrils; but without apparent good effect. To these brief
observations I have only to add, that I have very lately seen a gentleman of
near sixy years of age, for whom I had been consulted about three years before,
who some time after having been let blood in the above mentioned way, and made
trial of electricity without apparent advantage, has recovered from a gutta
serena of near two years standing, under the use only of a common collyrium,
which as I cannot conceive to have had any share in the cure, conspires with a
few similar instances to hold out ground of encouragement to other sufferers,
sufficient to prevent despair, under this melancholy disease.

I say nothing in relation to the cure of the cataract by a surgical operation,
either by extraction or depression, except it be, that neither of them is
advisable for infants unfortunately born with the disease, till they shall have
attained to five or six years of age.

The STITHE, or ST^E.
THE stithe is a small inflamed tumor on the edge of the eyelids, more
commonly on the side toward the nose; but there are sometimes two or more at
a-time. It rises suddenly, as if from a cold, or blast, and in the end
suppurates, or forms matter, of a thick, or cheesy consistence; often, indeed,
not for several weeks, or even months, but sometimes much sooner. It is
occasioned by an obstruction in the glands of the eyelids; and the matter
being enclosed in a hard cyst, or bag, the inflammation often returns in the
same spot, till the cyst being destroyed by repeated suppurations, the cavity
is afterward filled up, and the complaint disappears.

All that is necessary to prevent the returns of this temporary blemish, which
greatly weaken the eye, is to touch the little abscess, as soon as it breaks,
with the caustic called argentum nitratum, cut to a point, (carefully avoiding
doing injury to the eye) which by destroying the cyst, at once removes the
complaint.

When these stithes are small, or hang by a very narrow base, they may be
safely cut off, or be tied very tight with a bit of silk, and afterward
touched with the caustic as before mentioned.

DEAFNESS.
CHILDREN are frequently rendered deaf, in different degrees, in one or both
ears, by very slight colds, and at the expiration of a few days the hearing
returns, without recourse to any means. It is, however, sometimes otherwise,
and it becomes necessary to give a little purging physic; to keep the ears
warm; and to confine the child to the house: and where this does not succeed,
the complaint is not a little difficult of cure. Should it arise from indurated
wax, it will be proper to syringe the ears with warm water, to which should be
added a tea spoonful of lavender or honey-water; and a few drops of warmed oil
of almonds may be instilled into the ears at going to bed. If these little
means fail, warmer remedies should be made use of, such as the following, which
I have found very frequently successful:

. Olei amygd. ss Ol. Succini rectific. gtt. xx Sp^r. Camphorat. ss. Tinct.
Castor. j misce et instill. guttas iv vel vj calefact. aur. affect. nocte et
mane.

Deafness, however, is sometimes owing to the want of a due secretion of wax,
and is then much more difficult of cure. To promote this secretion a few drops
of the soap-liniment, oil of almonds and ether, and such like warm acoustics
should be tried, and continued for some time, if they should not occasion much
pain; and in all cases, blisters may be applied behind the ears. The juice of
onions, or a clove of garlic, raw, or roasted, put into the ears, has sometimes
restored the secretion, and removed the deafness; and in many cases it has been
effected by electricity. But it not unfrequently happens, that the cause of
deafness lies in the auditory nerve, and in that case, if the last-mentioned
remedy fails, very little is to be expected from art. Nature, however,
sometimes effects the cure, and children after having been deaf for several
years, suddenly recover their hearing perfectly, especially females. --
Medicated snuffs also that invoke gentle sneezing, and discharges from the
head, have sometimes been found surprisingly efficacious.

CANKER of the MOUTH.
THIS is chiefly a complaint of children, being rarely met with in adults, is
often talked of by nurses, and is usually as trifling as any. It has, indeed,
been said by some writers to prevail very much in England and Ireland, and to
be often a serious complaint. Such a disorder, if it be canker, may be treated
as under the next article; but the common canker is rarely troublesome to cure,
except it be amongst very poor people, where a great number of children are
crowded together.

It sometimes makes its appearance in the month, at others, about the time of
teething; and frequently at the age of six or seven years, when children are
shedding their first teeth, and the second are making their way through the
gums, which are covered with little foul sores, and will sometimes extend to
the inside of the lips and the cheeks. It seldom requires more attention than
was mentioned under the article of dentition, any mild astringent application,
and keeping the body open, usually effecting a cure; or if it does not, and the
complaint makes its appearance at the time of teething, it will generally go
away as soon as the teeth are come through.

The worst species of this complaint that I have happened to see, has been
during the second period of dentition, when a child has been shedding a number
of teeth together, and the rotten stumps have been neglected to be drawn out.
The whole gums will then sometimes be spongy, or dissolve into foul, spreading
sores, and small apertures will be formed, communicating from one part to
another, accompanied with an oozing of a fetid, and sometimes purulent
discharge.

If the stumps of the decayed teeth can, in this case, be easily got at, they
ought to be extracted; after which some such application as the following will
soon brace the loose gums, and heal up the ulcers.

R. Bol. Armen. Sang. Draconis, Gum. Myrrh. Cort. Peruv. pulv. subtle. Cremor.
Tartari a^a^ j Mel. Rosae q. s. misce, ft. Pasta. R. Aq. Calcis vij Tinct.
Myrrhae, Mel. Rosae a^a^ ss. ft. Mixtura.
The gums should be touched several times in the day, especially after meals,
and at going to bed, with the above paste, and the mouth be washed occasionally
with the mixture.

If no considerable change for the better should take place, in a week or ten
days, a dram of alum may be substituted in the place of one of the drying
powders, and instead of the above mixture, one acidulated with as much of the
muriatic acid as the parts will endure, occasionally made stronger, till some
amendment be perceived; the belly being, in the mean time, kept properly open.
If internal remedies be thought necessary; Peruvian bark, sarsaparilla, and
mineral acids are the properest; and the child may be kept on a diet of milk
and vegetables.

GANGRENOUS EROSION of the CHEEKS.
THIS complaint resembles the c^uker more than any other disorder, though it is
much more dangerous, and is not a more local disease. I have seen no clear
account of it in any late writer but Mr. Dease of Dublin, who seems to have met
with the disorder pretty frequently, and describes it very accurately in his
tract on the diseases of Lying-in Women, etc. to which I am very much indebted
on this occasion.

It appears to attack children from two, to six or eight years of age; usually
unhealthy children, and such as have been subject to worms. The whole body
often feels cold on the approach of the disease; after which a black spot
appears on one of the cheeks or lips, and spreads fast; but without any
appearance of inflammation. Oftentimes the whole side of the face is eaten
away, together with the lip, so that the bare jaw bone and inside of the mouth
appear. In the end, the entire lower-jaw falls down on the breast, and the
whole side of the face is dissolved into a putrid mass; a colliquative
diarrhoea taking place from the offensive matter that is continually swallowed,
especially by very young children.

In the cure, internal as well as external remedies are required, and only such
as correct putrescency, and support the strength, appear to be of any use. A
few drops of the muriatic acid, therefore, taken inwardly, in an infusion of
red rose leaves, or in the child's drinks; the saline draught in effervescence;
and in the end, the bark, in doses suited to the age, with good broths, jellies
and wine, are the proper remedies. The parts should be washed, and likewise
injected with the muriatic acid in cammomile, or sage tea, and afterward
dressed with the acid mixed with honey of roses, and over all a
carrot-poultice. The child should in the mean time be gently purged with
magnesia or rhubarb, to carry down the putrid matters it may have swallowed. By
this treatment Mr. Dease informs us he has recovered every patient except one,
since he had recourse to this plan, which the world is much indebted to him for
making public; though fortunately this dreadful complaint does not appear to
be, by any means, a common one.

PSOAS, or LUMBER-ABSCESS.
FREQUENTLY as this disorder takes place in adults, it is as often met with in
younger subjects, and even such as are only four or five years of age; and must
therefore be ranked among the diseases of childhood.

It is a true chronic, or slow inflammation, and is often occasioned by
bruises, strains, or lying on damp ground; and is not uncommonly connected with
a scrofulous taint of the habit. The inflammatory symptoms being rarely severe,
suppuration takes place slowly, and many months elapse before the matter can be
felt externally; which sometimes points up high about the loins, hip, or groin,
and at others, above the middle and on the inside of the thigh: In the most
benign, the abscess frequently bursts in the groin. It is, in any case, a very
dreadful disease, and is briefly noticed here, only for the sake of warning
parents of the danger of so insidious a complaint, and marking the outlines of
a practice which seems to have proved the oftenest successful.

The first indication is to procure a resolution, if possible, upon the
approach of the first symptoms, such as pain in the loins, difficulty of
standing upright, and a painful sense of contraction of the limb, and before
those of a hectical nature supervene; but unfortunately, the above symptoms are
too often over-looked, or mistaken in the beginning.

With a view to a resolution of the inflammation, recourse should be had to
bleeding by leeches, and cupping, and by blisters applied near the seat of the
pain; by purging; a supine posture, and low diet; and sometimes a caustic near
the lumbar vertebrae.

Should the^e means fail, or advice be sought for too ^ate to expect any thing
from them, of no less consequence is the treatment after the matter is formed;
which should be evacuated, by an artificial opening, as early as possible, and
by a very small aperture. Soon after this, the diet should be changed for one
more cordial, and nourishing; and the bark, steel or vitriol should be
administered, and the patient enjoy a pure air, and take such gentle exercise
as his situation may admit of without an increase of pain. -- The abscess
should be dressed superficially; and restringent, or other injections be made
use of, among which, perhaps, seawater is one of the best.

A very similar, and equally dangrous disease is the Morbus Coxaris, or abscess
of the Hip-joint: the symptoms and treatment of which so much resemble those
directed for the Lumbar-abscess, that it were needless, in a work of this kind,
to do more than barely mention the disease.

WHITE SWELLING of the JOINTS.
I SHALL be equally brief also on this article, my attention being only to
mention from experience a few remedies for this dangerous complaint, that have
been found successful, in young subjects, if had recourse to in good time, and
before any matter has been formed. Such are, the repeated application of eight
or more leeches, and afterward small blisters to the joint; gentle frictions
of the part; two or three vomits a week, with entire rest of the limb; and in
the end, sea-bathing, especially if the patient be of a scrofulous habit. In a
few instances, electricity has had an immediate, and wonderfully good effect,
even where the joint has been considerably enlarged, the pain very great, and
the child incapable of straightning the limb.

PALSY of the LOWER EXTREMTIES with CURVATURE of the SPINE.
THIS complaint has been of late years so thoroughly announced, that it should
seem unnecessary to enter into a minute detail of it after the accurate
description given by Mr. Pott, whose early account and judicious treatment of
this dreadful disease has added luster to the reputation acquired by his former
publications.

It will be proper, however, carefully to distinguish it from the simple
curvature of the spine, in which a greater number of vertebrae is concerned,
and the legs are not peculiarly affected; as well as from a complaint presently
to be noticed, under the name of debility of the lower extremities, in which
there is no manifest change of figure in the spine.

The palsy of the lower extremities is certainly confined to no age, and being
at first very frequently mistaken in young children for the trifling effect of
some fall or strain, is entitled to notice in this work. I have never met with
it, indeed, where it has not been preceded by some fall or violent exertion,
though as Mr. Pott has observed, such supposed accidents are seldom much
noticed previous to the debility taking place: but this is not universally the
case; though it is, indeed, probable, there may be some predisposing cause,
without which no common strain would induce so much mischief in a part
continually disposed to accidents.

The Curvature is generally in the neck or back, though sometimes in the upper
part of the loins, and varies in extent and degree according to the number of
the vertebrae that may be affected. The first symptom noticed by children of an
age capable of expressing their feelings, is an increased sensibility, and
irregular twitchings in the muscles of the the thighs. This is succeeded by a
dislike to motion, especially to moving briskly; the patient on such occasions
finding himself likely to fall, his legs getting entangled through their
weakness, and a disposition to cross each other, in his attempts to step
forward. Soon after this, perceives himself unable to stand upright long
together, and that the legs and thighs have lost much of their natural
sensibility. Matters seldom continue long in this state, and weakness
increasing, patients lose more and more the use of both the lower extremities,
till some are unable to move them at all even in bed; and these advances of the
disease are said to be more rapid in adults than in infants. In the latter, I
have particularly remarked that rigidity of the ankles noticed by Mr. Pott, by
which the toes are pointed downwards, so that the heels cannot be brought to
touch the ground.

As my intention is only briefly to point out the disease, and the properest
means of relief, it is not of importance to enter into a farther detail of the
progress of this disorder, and of other complaints which are induced by it
whenever the original disease has been long neglected.

The obvious remedy is that first happily suggested by Mr. Pott, and consists
only of a large issue or seton to be made on each side the curve, at such a
distance as may prevent their bursting into one. Where the curvature
comprehends three or more vertebrae, or joints, the seton may be preferable to
an issue, but if the latter be on any account elected, I should advise its
being made by the knife rather than a caustic; not only as being less painful,
but also for the very effect Mr. Pott has disapproved of, I mean, the
consequent inflammation before there has been time for suppuration to take
place. It may, indeed, be doubted, whether the benefit derived from the issue
may not arise rather from the inflammation and stimulus produced on the
surface, than from the discharge, to which, nevertheless, Mr. Pott solely
attributes the cure It has been a common idea, that the discharge furnished by
an ulcerated surface is the source of all the benefit that may be derived from
abscesses, unless blistered surfaces be an exception; in regard to which,
physicians have usually considered the stimulus produced by the cantharides as
the chief mean of benefit, especially in cases of great local pain and
inflammation. It is, indeed, matter of some surprise, that thinking men have
not more generally adopted the like idea in regard to other inflamed surfaces,
whether induced by natural or artificial means. It should surely seem, that
that state of the system, or of the parts, by which suppuration is induced, is
more likely to be the occasion of benefit, than the discharge of a large
portion of the richest animal juices, which is but the consequence of the
other. Thus, in most critical abscesses, the fever is found to abate as soon as
the external inflammation takes place, and the patient instead of being
afterward benefited by a copious discharge, is not unfrequently hurried by it
into a fatal marasmus, when the abscess has been large, or improperly seated.
There may be other instances, indeed, in which the suppuration, and even the
great quantity of the discharge, may be beneficial to the system; but it is
probable, that this is not in general the case, and much less in the present
instance, which is attended with symptoms of general debility.
. In a recent case, however, and a very unpromising one, in an infant about ten
months old, a very sensible relief was afforded as soon as the inflammation
took place, and before any suppuration appeared; and though the child had been
many months a cripple, with loss of health and appetite, unable to support its
head, and the sternum very much distorted, the relief was so great in one week
after the incisions were made, as left no room to doubt of a perfect recovery;
which accordingly took place very soon, without any deformity remaining. Had
Mr. Pott advanced any other reasons for the preference, given to the caustic,
or merely affected such preference, I should readily have submitted to the
great experience he has had in this dreadful complaint; but though I may very
possibly be mistaken in my reasoning, it appeared a duty just to state it, as
well as to notice this instance in point in a disease of so much importance:
hoping at the same time, that the desire Mr. Pott has expressed of serving the
public, and the satisfaction he has received from the benefit attending the
early publication of so valuable a remedy, will induce him to apologize for any
attempt to extend, or illustrate its utility.

The issues should be kept open till the patient perfectly recovers the use of
his legs, or even a while longer, at least one issue, which ought not to be
dried up till the patient can walk firmly alone, and shall have recovered all
the height which he may have lost in consequence of that stooping which the
disorder had induced.

In addition to the use of these means Mr. Pott has suggested those of
cold-bathing, frictions, and the bark, or such like; but I have myself never
seen any benefit from any thing where the issues have failed, which I have
found efficacious where no other remedy had been made use of. After the
recovery, however, if the patient be of a scrofulous habit, sea-bathing is
peculiarly indicated.

The moxa has been successfully made use of in one instance, by Mr. Gimes,
Jour. de Med. Fev. 1788.
after the (...), as directed by Mr. Pott, is said to have (...). But as the
burning was several times repeated, and the recovery appears to have been
unusually slow, it is not very certain, but a repetition of the caustic might
have proved equally beneficial.

DEBILITY of the LOWER EXTREMITIES.
THE disorder intended here is not noticed by any medical writer within the
compass of my reading, or is not so described as to ascertain the disease. It
is not a common disorder, I believe, and seems to occur seldomer in London than
in some other parts. Nor am I enough acquainted with it to be fully satisfied,
either in regard to the true cause, or seat of the disease, either from my own
observation, or that of others; and I have myself never had opportunity of
examining the body of any child who has died of this complaint. I shall
therefore only describe its symptoms, and mention the several means attempted
for its cure, in order to induce other practitioners to pay attention to it.

It seems to arise from debility, and usually attacks children previously
reduced by fever; seldom those under one, or more than four or five years old.
It is a chronical complaint, and not attended with any affection of the urinary
bladder, nor with pain, fever, nor any manifest disease; so that the first
thing observed is a debility of the lower extremities, which gradually become
more infirm, and after a few weeks are unable to support the (...). There are
no signs of worms, or other foulness of the bowels; therefore mercurial purges
have not been of any use, neither has the bark, nor hot, nor cold-bathing.
Blisters, or caustics on the os sacrum, and the great trochanter, and volatile
and stimulating applications to the legs and thighs, have been chiefly depended
upon; though there is no appearance of an enlargement of any of the vertebrae,
or joints of the back, nor of suppuration in the external parts, and therefore
no resemblance to the inflammation of the intervertebral cartilages, the psoas
abscess, or the morbus coxaris of De Haen.

When only one of the lower extremities has been affected, the above means, in
two instances out of five or six, entirely removed the complaint: but when both
have been paralytic, nothing has seemed to do any good but irons to the legs,
for the support of the limbs, and enabling the patient to walk. At the end of
four or five years, some have by this means got better, in proportion as they
have acquired general strength: but even some of these have been disposed to
fall afterward into pulmonary consumption, where the debility has not been
entirely removed. On this account it may be suspected, that the complaint is
sometimes owing to scrofula; and I have been very lately informed by a
gentleman of character, that he has seen one instance of a paralysis, or
debility of this kind, in which, upon opening the body after death, the
internal surface of the lower vertebrae lumborum was found carious, though
there was no abscess of the ps^as muscle, nor external tumor on the back, or
loins.

I have seen a similar debility seize grown people, especially women, after
some very long illness, and has continued a year, or more; during which time
they were utterly incapable of walking without the help of crutches. These
cases, however, have always been attended with great pain in the commencement
of the complaint, though without tumor of the limbs; and have seemed to be
benefited by the external use of the waters at Bath.

CURVATURE of the BONES from WEAKNESS.
CROOKEDNESS of the bones, particuticularly those of the lower extremities; has
been mentioned as a common consequence o^ ^icke^s, and may claim a transitory
notice (...) this work.

The principal inquiry in the treatment of deformities of this kind, respects
the use of irons for the support of the limbs, whenever the distortion happens
to be considerable. The propriety of this assistance has, indeed, been doubted
by some practitioners, as well as their unpleasant appearance been objected to
by parents; who have therefore been inclined rather to trust only to
cold-bathing. Friend, however, as I am to the latter, I may venture to say from
experience, that it is likely to be prejudicial at the time it is often had
recourse to; for by strengthening the system, it rather serves to confirm the
crookedness which the bones have already contracted. It is an advantage, on the
other hand, that the bones remain soft and yielding as long as the curvature is
considerable, if so be the pressure of the superior parts be at the same time
duly counteracted. To support the limbs, therefore, with irons, as long as the
softness of the bones disposes them to yield under the weight of the body, is
certainly a rational intention, and has been very beneficial in numberless
instances. This end obtained, the bones being still lengthening as the child
grows up, they naturally incline to become straight, and at this time the
cold-bath and other tonics are properly indicated, and will cooperate to the
cure of the complaint. The only care required, is, that the irons be made as
light as possible, and be properly adapted, and that they be lengthened as
often as may be necessary.

When a curvature takes place in the spine (without any disease of the
vertebrae or cartilages) the like method should be taken. Proper instruments to
support the head and upper parts of the body have been contrived by different
artists, but those made by Mr. Jones appear to be the best.

Should the bones of the arm be curved, either by accident or disease, in this
soft state, rollers and paste board splints properly applied, will be
sufficient to support, and restore them to their natural form.

But if the injury extend to the hip and contiguous bones, it will not be
manifest at the time, and can be benefited only by the cold-bath, and other
general remedies. If this distortion should be considerable, it may, indeed,
become a source of manifold evils in females, as will be noticed in another
place.

PARONYCHIA, or WHITLOW.
MANY young people are very subject to a mild species of this complaint, which
being perfectly superficial, is not improperly termed the cutaneous See
Principles of Surgery, by Mr. Pearson.
whitlow, and will attack the ends of the fingers, several times in a year,
without any previous injury of the part. The subject is therefore introduced
here only with the design of recommending a prophylactic, or mean of
prevention, which I have frequently seen successful. This consists only in
bathing the fingers, several times a day, in the following mixture, the moment
that a sense of any preternatural heat, or pain, may be felt.

Take of Camphorated spirit, four ounces, Water of acetated Litharge, two
drams, Tincture of opium, half an ounce. Mix them.
In the malignant, o^ deep seated whitlow, doubtless, the best method is to
make an early opening down to the bone, which will occasion the patient much
less pain than suffering the matter to make its own way to the surface; which
is likewise always attended with much mischief to the part.

FURUNCULUS or BOIL.
THE common Boil only is intended here, and is noticed from its frequency in
young people toward the time of puberty, who are sometimes vexed with a
succession of them. They are, however, justly accounted salutary, and do harm
only when repelled, or hastily dried up. If a poultice of bread and milk,
therefore, be applied from the first (if the boil be in a convenient part,
otherwise a gum-plaister) and a bit of yellow or black basilicon put every day
into the hollow, as soon as the boil breaks, it will be properly digested, and
the core, as it is called, be brought out. It is sometimes for the want of
this, that another boil forms in the neighboring parts, or the child is teazed
with sore eyes, or some humor, as it is termed, on the skin.

Two or three doses of purging physic should be taken as the boil is healed.

CHILBLAINS.
THIS is a complaint so well known, that it can need no description. It is
generally owing to the circulation of the blood in the minute vessels of the
extremities being checked, by a child having been long exposed to cold or wet,
and afterward running to the fire instead of recovering the natural heat by
exercise. If the injury be exceedingly great, as it sometimes is when a person
has lain for several hours in the snow, the circulation cannot always be
restored, and some parts actually mortify. To prevent this, if possible,
instead of bringing the person near a fire, he should be immediately stripped,
and well rubbed all over, especially the parts most affected, with snow, and
afterward with salt and water, and be then put into bed. But I speak chiefly
of slighter attacks; on the first appearance of which, known by the heat,
itching, redness, and swelling of the heels, toes or fingers, country people
apply warm wood-ashes between cloths, or rub the parts with mustard and brandy,
which if done in time will both prevent their breaking into sores, and entirely
remove the complaint. For the like purpose, rubbing the parts with a soft
brush, or soaking them in warm water in which a hot poker has been two or three
times quenched, and afterward rubbing them with soap, or salt and onions, are
good remedies; or embrocating them with the soap liniment, or with camphorated
spirit, to two ounces of which may be added a tea-spoonful of the water of
acetated litharge. But I have lately experienced the good effects of a far
simpler means than any of these, and which I have hitherto never found equalled
by any of the warmer remedies; and is nothing more than the ceratum album
spread on a large piece of thick, doubled lint to be applied as soon as the
extremeties begin to itch, or be painful.

Some children are disposed to have chilblains every winter; as a preservative
against which, if it be the hands that are liable to affected, warm leather
gloves should be worn, (avoiding woollen, which in these cases is unfriendly to
the skin) and above all, wearing for a few hours in the day or night, and
especially when abroad in the cold, oiled silk gloves, which is the best
preventative both of chilblains and of chopped hands, that has been hitherto
known. But if the feet are usually the affected parts, the heels only may be
covered by a piece of washing-leather, secured round the insteps, and worn day
and night during the cold months; and should be taken off only for the purpose
of rubbing the parts with the brush or liniments, as mentioned above.

When the swellings are broken, it is common to dress the sores only with a
little cerate, and to wait for the return of warm weather, when they usually
heal of themselves; but by this means, they often remain bad through all the
winter, and when large, are sometimes not well till the summer is very far
advanced; and I have even seen them remain very bad in grown people, at the end
of September.

After having attended great numbers in this complaint, I am satisfied that
this kind of sore requires applications somewhat more invigorating, being a
species of mortification; and though it will not always endure very warm
digestives like many other ulcers, yet when the chilblains are pretty large, a
portion of some digestive joined with the cerate, is very friendly to them. And
I have known some sores, though very small, remain long in a very obstinate and
tedious state after the breaking up of a hard frost, whilst they have been
dressed only with cerate, or other mild, or drying applications, as they are
called, and begin to heal immediately upon adding a small portion of some warm
digestive, and applying a flannel roller, without any other alteration in the
plan. But if they are spread to any considerable size, nothing contributes so
much to their healing, as touching the sores every day with bracing and
invigorating lotions, particularly diluted solutions of steel, or tincture of
myrrh; which in a very few days will produce kindly granulations in these, and
other cold sores, though of long standing.

When the parts are much swollen, and the sores been long foul, it will be
often necessary in severe weather, to make use of poultices, of which, those
made of rye-meal and the compound water of acetated litharge are more active,
and therefore preferable to mere bread and milk. If these are applied over the
above dressing of cerate and digestive, and changed twice a day, the sores will
heal in much less time than by any of the common applications I have seen used;
especially if the parts surrounding the sore be well rubbed with camphorated
spirit. If children are not very young, purging them with a little calomel
twice a week, will often expedite the healing of the sores: in the worst cases,
a decoction of the bark is required.

Since this work has been in hand, I have learned the good effects of
electricity in chilblains, both as a remedy and a prophylactic, or
preventative, especially in very old people, to whom they not unfrequently
happen.

BURNS and SCALDS.
BURNS are mentioned by some old writers, and though a misfortune by no means
confined to young people, they too often fall to the lot of infants, through
the carelessness of their attendants; and for want of being properly treated at
the instant, children often suffer exceedingly, when a sit application would
have rendered the injury trifling.

When such an accident happens, the nearest astringent at hand should be made
use of, such as brandy, or other spirit, ink, wine, or even cold water, till
something more proper can be procured; into which the injured part should be
plunged, or be covered with pieces of cloth dipped in such liquors, which will
prevent the blistering of the part; carefully avoiding the use of olive-oil,
too frequently had recourse to. As soon as it is possible to send to an
apothecary, the following should be procured, and used in like manner.

Limewater, a pint, brandy, two ounces, water of acetated litharge, half an
ounce.

If the injury has been too long received to admit of much relief by these
means, and deep sloughs are actually formed, a very proper dressing may be made
of equal parts of Turner's cerate, and green ointment of elder; diminishing the
proportion of the latter as the sloughs are thrown off, and the sores become
disposed to heal. But should the injured surface be large, or the pain,
occasioned by removing the dressings, be very great, it will be sufficient to
cover the parts with pieces of linen dipped in cold-drawn linseed-oil, which
should be moistened every day, and suffered to adhere till the sores are in a
state to admit of being dressed in a common way.

A strong solution of soap in water has long been in use with artificers,
employed in any business exposing workmen to very bad scalds; and is a very
excellent remedy -- About three quarters of an ounce of soft soap is a proper
quantity for a pint of water. But the soap takes some time in dissolving, and
as it requires a certain proportion of boiling water, the lotion cannot be made
cool enough for immediate use by the addition of the proper quantity of cold
water. A remedy, therefore, more convenient, and perhaps more efficacious,
which if not always in the house, may in every large town be speedily procured,
may be made of olive-oil, cold water and ley of kali. Six ounces Two table
spoonsful contain about an ounce.
of oil to ten of water, with two drams A tea-spoonful contains about a dram.
of the ley will make a pint. -- This quantity may be sufficient for a burn on
the hand or foot, which is to be immersed, and kept about half an hour in the
liquor, which will remove the injury if had recourse to immediately; but must
be repeated, as the pain may require, if the scald or burn be of some standing.
Should a person be scalded all over, and be immediately put up to the chin in a
cold bath of this kind, and the head at the same time, be frequently immerged,
or well washed with the liquor, very little injury would ensue. -- Whatever
sores may be formed, should be treated afterward according to the foregoing
directions.

LUXATIONS and FRACTURES.
INFANTS are not only liable to these misfortunes by a fall from the lap, but
the bones or joints may be sometimes unavoidably injured in the birth. There is
in this case, seldom any luxation, I believe, but of the shoulders, which is
not difficult to be reduced, and requires nothing afterward, but that the limb
be kept perfectly quiet. Fractures, indeed, are not quite so easily managed,
and perhaps happen more frequently. The bones are yet but little more than
gristle, and if strained beyond a certain degree, are easily bent, or even
broken. The former is very readily restored, but I shall be more particular on
the latter, as the subject is of some importance.

Fractures in the birth are usually of the collar-bone, the arm, or the leg,
the treatment of the two former of which, will include all that is necessary to
be observed of such as may happen in other parts.

The first, however, requires very little attention, as it will be necessary
only to draw the shoulders back, confining them in that posture, by two or
three pins in the clothes, and to apply a piece of adhesive, or of the
soap-plaister, spread on leather, upon the rising end of the bone, and a larger
piece over the first.

A fracture of the arm demands a little more attention, but will always end
perfectly well. The difficulty consists in keeping the fractured ends of the
bones opposed to each other, without rolling up the arm so tight as to occasion
pain, or much swelling of the hand, which in a newborn infant, a very small
pressure will effect. I have found no method so well adapted as the following,
which allowing of a little tumor about the fractured part, without the
necessity of loosening the roller, preserves the ends of the bones in due
contact, without drawing the roller so tight as to prevent the free return of
blood from the inferior parts of the limb.

To this end, three little splints, about half an inch in width, and an inch
and a half long, may be made of fine linen cloth, five or six times folded
together, to the thickness of common pasteboard; and being soaked in a mixture
of flour and white of egg, should be placed in the usual manner, along the
fractured ends of the bone. Being applied wet, they will accommodate themselves
exactly to the figure of the limb, and when become dry, will be sufficiently
strong to support the bones. They should be applied immediately on the skin,
without the intervention of a roller, by which means, when the parts swell,
which they should always do a little, there will be space enough between them
to allow of it, notwithstanding the pressure from the roller, which should be
applied over them. This ought to be of very fine flannel, and should not be
drawn near so tight as for adults, nor will there be occasion for it, as the
chief dependence ought to be on fastening the arm down close to the side, by
strong pins fixed into the little gown, in the manner the surgeon may best
contrive at the time. The gown, therefore, ought not to be changed, nor the arm
moved but in his presence; and if the hand is not inflamed, nor very much
swelled, and the child is easy, the part will no^ need to be opened under eight
or ten days. Till this time, the same gown should be worn, and be preserved
clean by such coverings as may easily be removed. The speedy union of the bones
will depend upon a strict attention to keeping the limb as still as possible;
and if it be so preserved, the accident will afford very little trouble after
the first ten or twelve days, and at the month's end, the child will move that
arm nearly as well as the other.

It is very common for nurses, especially during the month, to support the
lower-jaw of an infant whenever it happens to yawn, in the apprehension the jaw
might, otherwise, be dislocated. This practice is, at least, an evidence of the
nurses attention, and can do no harm, though I have, indeed, never known the
accident happen. Should it, however, take place, either at this age, or in
older children through some violence, it will occasion a very awkward
appearance, and prove very distressing to the child, who will be disabled from
taking any nourishment till the luxation be reduced. Nothing more, however, is
required to this end, than to place the thumb of each hand in the back part of
the mouth, and the fingers on the outside, under the jaw, so as to depress, and
at the same time bring it a little forward, to disengage the head of the
condyle, and then force the jaw suddenly back.

On CUTTING the TONGUE.
THE directions on this head, as well as the notice taken of many of the
following little disorders, proceed rather from a desire that nothing on the
subject of children's complaints should be omitted, than from their real
importance. Some of them, indeed, have been entirely overlooked by preceding
writers, and though they may seldom require much attention, it may sometimes be
of advantage to know what has been serviceable in similar cases. -- The
instance under consideration, however, is too trifling a matter to dwell upon.
-- It will be sufficient to observe that the little operation, performed in
order to lengthen the tongue, is very frequently called for where there is no
absolute occasion for it, the confinement being seldom so considerable as to
make it really necessary to divide the fraenum, or little bridle, that adheres
to the under part of the tongue. The child will suffer so very little, however,
in the operation, that when it is carefully done, it will be attended with no
inconvenience; and if it can afford the mother any satisfaction, it will be
very proper to comply with her request. It seems therefore only necessary to
add, that some little care and steadiness are required, or the sublingual veins
may be wounded, and in consequence an infant may lose its life. To avoid this
danger, the bridle may be divided by a small curved bistoury, instead of
scissars. The handle and blade, when open, need not exceed two inches in
length; and the point should be a little curved, and the back made broad,
whereby the point may be easily forced through the fraenum in the most
troublesome case, whilst the back of the instrument will sufficiently press
down the veins, so as to be entirely out of the way of being injured. These
cautions have been judged by some people to be very trifling; but besides that
infants have actually bled to death, the following equally fatal accident has
arisen from cutting too deep, which I shall therefore notice in this edition,
as well as describe an instrument contrived for suppressing the bleeding.

SUFFOCATION from SWALLOWING the POINT of the TONGUE.
THE occasion of this accident has been mentioned: it is therefore only
necessary here to notice the symptoms and remedy. The former are those usually
attending strangulation, and come on suddenly, and without any probable cause
but that of the tongue having been cut; but to which they are seldom attributed
by those, who are strangers to the complaint. The infant appears greatly
agitated; the face turns black; and unless these symptoms soon disapear, the
child goes off in a convulsion. But if they are presently removed, the infant
is as suddenly well; but they generally return again, and have in several
instances proved fatal.

Mr. Petit (...) de L' Academi^ de^ Sciences.
has perhaps the credit of discovering the true cause of the complaint. The
remedy consists in nothing more than bringing the tongue into its proper place,
and if the infant be suckled, putting it immediately to the the breast, which
will give the tongue a natural direction. Should the child be brought up by
hand, the tongue should be watched for some time, at least till the bleeding
shall be stopped; the complaint taking place only in consequence of that being
considerable, so as to become an inducement to the infant to continue sucking
at the part.

When the sublingual veins are actually wounded, the danger, it has been said,
is considerable; and it is to Mr. Petit that we are again indebted for the best
contrivance for suppressing this hemorrhage. The means consist only of a piece
of ivory, in the form of a short fork; the prongs of which should be so placed
as to press against the apertures in the veins, and the other end against the
inside of the lower jaw, and should therefore be broad and unequal in that part,
that it may keep its place.

HICCOUGH.
THIS has been ranked among children's diseases, but it is, by no means, a
complaint of consequence, as it sometimes is in adults. It occurs pretty
commonly, indeed, in infancy, but seldom requires much attention, as it
frequently comes on only after over-feeding, or in consequence of the
overthickness, or sweetness of the food, and is one of their most harmless
consequences. But when it depends on an acid state of the juices of the
stomach, or occurs in long bowel complaints, it indicates a necessity for
having recourse to the absorbent powders.

SNEEZING.
THIS has likewise been mentioned by some writers as a complaint of young
children, for which Rhazes prescribes refrigerants and anodynes, but it is
certainly not a common one, and indeed I have never met with it, in the form of
a disease. It may be occasioned by looking too long against a strong light, as
the fire, and especially the sun, or other very luminous body. It has already
been spoken of as a well known symptom of the measles, and of many common
colds, but in neither, I believe, requires any particular attention. It is
mentioned here, only because I would not pass over a complaint that has been
attended to by any writer of reputation, nor leave such readers at a loss, who
being unacquainted with the distinction between mere symptoms and diseases,
might at any time be needlessly alarmed by it. But knowing nothing farther of it
myself, and having no idea of its being a complaint of much consequence in this
country, I have not chosen under such circumstances, to be a mere copyer from
others. It may, however, in conjunction with other causes, give rise to the
following complaint in older children.

BLEEDING of the NOSE.
I MEET with this complaint also amongst old writers, and therefore bestow a
few words upon it, though it is not often of much consequence, I believe,
before the age of puberty.

If a child be feverish, or otherwise unwell, the hemorrhage is often a mere
symptom arising from the complaint under which it labors, and will disappear
upon that being properly treated. But a bleeding at the nose sometimes takes
place in the healthiest children, the vessels of this part being weaker than
those which are covered by the true skin, and often afford a salutary outlet,
in case of plethora, or fullness of blood, and therefore usually contract when
the intention of nature is answered; after which, a dose or two of cooling
physic should be given. But it may be sometimes necessary to draw a little cold
water up the nose, to which some vinegar may be added, and to apply some thing
cold to the upper part of the back. Should these little remedies fail, the head
may be bathed with cold vinegar and water, and the nostrils be stopped up with
dossils of lint, which on urgent occasions must be dipped in warmed oil of
turpentine, or other styptic liquor, and must extend to the posterior aperture.
The last means will almost always succeed; but if otherwise, some blood should
be taken from the arm, if the pulse does not forbid, the feet be bathed in warm
water, and the body be kept open by manna, and cream of tartar, and the patient
should live for a little time pretty much upon whey, vegetables and milk; at
least, he should not dine wholly upon animal food -- The bark will in some
instances be proper.

HEMORRHAGE from the NAVEL.
I HAVE two or three times seen a complaint at the navel of newborn infants,
which is scarcely worthy of mention, but from its being an uncommon one. This
is an oozing of blood from the part, after an unkindly separation of the chord,
and is owing to the shooting up of a soft fungus, which prevents the s^^in from
covering the divided vessels in the manner it otherwise does. This hemorrhage
has sometimes continued for several months, and in some instances, in such
quantity as to prove alarming to the friends of the child, lest it in the end
be injurious to its health. The little vessel from whence the blood issues,
lies always so deep that it cannot be secured by ligature, nor be conveniently
cauterized; the latter of which, indeed, would be very disagreeable. I have
conveyed the lunar caustic, however, to the part, but the bleeding has always
returned. Nothing farther is necessary, than to adapt a proper compress, and
secure it by a sticking plaster and bandage; which should be continued for two
or three weeks.

There is indeed another kind of hemorrhage of more importance, but this seems
to be sympathetic, and is attendant upon infants who are in a bad state of
health during the month, and is, perhaps, a bad sign. It takes place where the
chord has been apparently well healed; but the skin afterward gives way, and
the bleeding is much more considerable than in the former. It requires,
however, nothing more than the application of common styptics, with proper
compress and bandage. The bleeding not appearing, in the least, to be critical,
ought to be suppressed as soon as may be, and whatever complaint the infant may
labor under, be treated according to its kind.

HERNIAE, or RUPTURES.
RUPTURES may take place in different parts, but they usually appear at the
navel, or the groin. The former is sometimes complicated with the ventral
hernia near the part, and is occasioned by the separation of the recti muscles,
the linea alba being there deficient; but it seldom extends far above or below
the navel. The simple navel-hernia is a very common complaint, which if
immediately attended to, is easily cured, perhaps merely by the use of the
coldbath: but if neglected, may prove troublesome as the child grows up;
especially to females. It will be sooner cured, however, if treated like the
former complaint, by a^^apting a pyramidical compress, made of round pieces of
good sticking-plaister, spread upon thin leather, with pieces of card placed
between them; or what is more easily prepared, and is adapted to poor people,
is a piece of bees wax as broad as a shilling, and half an inch thick; the
upper part of it may be round, and the other slat, which should be placed on
the navel. But if the child be a twelvemonth old, these remedies will then
require a pretty tight bandage round the waste; and such a compression, I have
frequently observed nurses afraid of, who often loosen the bandage so much as
to render it of very little use. On this account I have for some time past
recommended Mr. Squire's elastic bandage, which if this rupture be complicated
with the ventral, or belly hernia, becomes the more necessary, and sitting
quite hollow on the sides, and making no kind of compression but on the part
affected, and the opposite point of the back, perfectly answers the end,
without the help of a surgeon. The child should be daily put into the
cold-bath, for some months, after leaving (...) the bandage or truss -- I have
often observed startings of the navel happen to infants, in whom the skin has
been found running a certain way upon the navel string; on which account,
nurses ought to be particularly careful in such instances, and keep the part
more than ordinarily confined.

Ruptures at the groin are of more consequence, yet may be safely left without
a bandage, especially as the cold-bath alone generally cures them when they
happen to children before they go alone. In early infancy, there is likewise
some difficulty in retaining the truss on the part, and it is continually
liable to be wetted. Should a rupture, however, be very large, and the infant
usually fretful and crying, recourse may be had to a steel truss; to which it
will be necessary to pay some attention, lest it slip out of its place, or the
rupture fall down, and be bruised by the pad. After two years of age indeed,
when children begin to take more exercise, the use of a truss seems to be
absolutely necessary, of which those made of steel as improved by Mr. Squire,
are incomparably the best.

HYDROCELE, or WATERY RUPTURE.
THIS is a distension of the scrotum of a nature similar to the hydrocele of
adults, and when it falls to the share of infants, I believe, it usually
appears at the birth. It is frequently mistaken by midwives and nurses for a
common rupture, who therefore advise a linen bandage to be applied in the usual
manner. It is, however, easily distinguished from a rupture, by the tumor
being transparent; without pain; and from not retiring upon pressure, or not
being increased by the crying of the infant.

Though I have said it commonly makes its appearance at the birth, and that the
tumor does not retire upon pressure, I think I have lately seen an instance to
the contrary. Mr. Le Febure de Villebrune met with it in a child of twenty-two
months old.
In this case, I had occasion to examine the parts very attentively at the
birth, on account of a little mal-conformation of another kind, and neither
then, nor the next morning saw any appearance of hydrocele; nor was it
discovered by the nurse or mother till six weeks afterward, though the parts,
for the reason above mentioned, were frequently examined. About this time I was
sent for in haste, on account of the appearance of a large hydrocele, which,
however, by the mother's report, was before I got there, greatly diminished.
There was, nevertheless, about three tea-spoonfuls (as I imagine) of water in
the scrotum which from this time was distended in different degrees, as the
water happened to retire, more or less, through the rings of the muscles, which
I apprehend must have been preternaturally open; though no portion of the caul,
or intestine, I believe, ever descended; and the complaint disappeared in a few
weeks, by only dashing the parts with cold water, three or four times a day. --
This infant was a twin; and it is remarkable, that the other had likewise an
hydr^^ele, which was not discovered for three weeks after the former; but was
much smaller and got well by only the like gentle treatment.

The hydrocele is a harmless complaint, and would probably always disappear of
itself in the course of a few months; but may much sooner be dispersed by some
astringent lotion. The water of acetated ammonia has succeeded with me
perfectly well, and I have sometimes made use of compresses wetted in vinegar
and water, with the addition of a little spirit, as the skin has been able to
bear it. Perhaps the addition of crude Sal ammoniacus, as lately advised by Mr.
Keate, in the treatment of adults, might assist the absorption of the water.
The smoke of burning gum benjamin received upon flannel, and applied to the
part, is likewise a good remedy. But the speediest method is to puncture the
bottom of the tumor with the point of a lancet; which, as it may be done with
perfect safety, and with little pain to the child, is often preferred by the
mother, as it instantly removes a blemish which cannot but be unpleasant to
her, whenever any other person may chance to be witness to it. In whatever way
the water be got rid of, I never knew it return, nor the child suffer any
consequent inconvenience; though the complaint (...) so common that I have seen
it in many score instances, and cured in different ways.

RETENTION of the TESTES.
THIS is a tumor in one, or both groins, and is another affection resembling
the hernia, and is noticed on that account. As the application of a steel
truss, or, indeed, any other bandage might here be attended with bad, if not
fatal consequences, it is of importance that parents should consult some
medical person, whenever they suspect a rupture.

This complaint being generally owing to a preternatural stricture of the rings
of the abdominal muscles, or to a want of due action in the cremaster or
gubernaculum, I have nothing to recommend, unless it be in a negative way, to
forbid any rude handling of the part, or attempts of the nurse to force the
testicles into the scrotum. Should any thing of this kind be necessary, it
should be done by another hand. In the course of a few weeks, or months,
however, the obstacle, of whatever kind, usually gives way; though sometimes
indeed the part remains confined through li^^, and its unnatural position is
certainly attended with some inconveniences, and a greater chance of injury to
the testes; of which I have seen more than one instance in adults. Should
inflammation take place, in consequence of any accident, during infancy, every
proper means of counteracting it should be immediately had recourse to, such as
gentle laxative medicines, and sedative embrocations and cooling poultices,
made of the compound water of acetated litharge.

TUMEFACTION of the PREPUCE.
THIS little complaint, like the hydrocele, arises from extravasated water, and
is a partial anasarsa, or dropsy of the skin, and if it be not attended with
inflammation, nor owing to a stone sticking in the passage, as it sometimes is,
it never proves of any consequence, and is mentioned only because it is always
alarming to parents.

It may be washed frequently with the compound water of acetated litharge, or
the part be wrapped up in a poultice of that kind, and the body be kept open,
which usually removes the complaint in two o^ three days; but if it should not,
the part may be lightly scarified, and afterward fomented. Should it arise
from inflammation, as in the erysipelas infantilis, the inflammatory cause must
be properly treated. If from a stone in the passage, the stone must be
extracted, if within reach, or if otherwise, it should be forced back into the
bladder.

PROLAPSUS, or PROCIDENTIA ANY.
THIS is a falling down of the internal coat of the lower bowel (this coat
being much longer than the others, and full of folds) and is either owing to
its laxity, or to irritation. It is no uncommon complaint, nor usually
difficult of cure, being generally a symptom of some other, such as worms, or
other foulness of the bowels, or has been induced by rough purges, diarrhoea,
long costiveness, a stone in the bladder, or other irritating cause, and is
usually preceded by tenesmus, or needing; to each of which the proper remedy
must be applied, or the cure of the prolapsus will be attempted in vain.

But if the complaint should remain, after the irritating cause shall have been
removed, it will then depend merely upon a relaxation of the part, arising from
the long habit of descending every time the child has gone to stool, and is, in
general, easily cured by an astringent lotion. To this end, a compress of
cotton, or soft tow, wrung out of the dregs of red wine, to which may be added
a few drops of the water of acetated litharge, should be often applied, and
secured by a linen bandage, so as to make a firm compression on the part; the
compress may also be sprinkled with fine powder of myrrh, frankincense, and
dragon's blood, or receive the smoke of turpentine cast on burning coals. Or,
suppositories may be made of powder of ^alaustines, red rose leaves, and oak
bark, in honey, and introduced into the bowel, after going to stool -- It may
be found expedient to have the part supported at such times, by a servant
placing a finger on each side the gut: but this caution will not be necessary
unless the complaint has been of long standing, or the descent be considerable.

When this is the case, astringent fomentations and injections will also become
necessary. These may be made of a decoction of oak-bark, which must sometimes
be rendered more powerful by the addition of a little a^^m; the quantity of
which should be increased as the part may be able to bear it. In children of
eight or ten years old, who take much exercise, recourse may be had to Mr.
Gooch's suspensory, instead of the linen bandage above recommended.

DISCHARGES from the VAGINA.
THESE are either sanguineous, mucous, or purulent. -- As I speak professedly
only of appearances before the age of puberty, I have merely to remark on the
first, that female infants have sometimes such a discharge from the vagina a
few days after birth, which appears to be of no consequence. Should it,
however, on any account, be thought necessary to prescribe something, a little
testaceous powder, or magnesia, according to the state of the bowels, will be
sufficiently astringent, as the discharge always disappears in a few days.

Children of five or six years old, are subject to a mucous discharge,
resembling the genuine fluor albus of adults, which will in some instances be
in an excessive quantity, so as to run through all their clothes; and is
sometimes, though rarely, tinged with blood. If it were suffered to continue,
it would probably injure the health, but, I believe, may always be cured, by
one or other of the means recommended for the the next, which may be called
purulent gonorrhea.

This is no uncommon complaint in children of three or four years old, and is
then, in general, easily removed by a little cooling physic, and keeping the
parts perfectly clean. I have sometimes made use of a lotion of the compound
water of acetated litharge, which I believe is preferable to most others, if
had recourse to in the commencement of the complaint; and if there be any
excoriations, they should be covered with the unguent. cerussae, spread upon
linen or lint.

When the purulent discharge makes its appearance later, which it will do at
eight, ten, and even twelve years of age, and is much discolored and fetid, it
gives rise to a suspicion which young practioners cannot be too guarded
against. There are, indeed, instances of little girls, not more than six years
old, being injured and it is of consequence to make a judicial discrimination;
but there are on the other hand, instances of a very suspicious appearance, as
late as the age of thirteen or fourteen, where no injury could be received
without the consent of the party, who is generally perfectly innocent, and
where, therefore, the least suspicion would be very distressing to her, and
might make a whole family miserable. Induced by motives of humanity, I hope I
may be permitted to add a word or two more on this subject, to professional
readers; whose prudence and information may not only prevent a vast deal of
unnecessary distress to many worthy families, but may even save the life and
character of another party suspected of criminality. For, besides many
instances wherein inattention or ignorance might give rise to injurious
suspicions, there are cases which call for much experience and attention in
order to form a just and decided opinion. I have, indeed, known the discharge
to be so ill-coloured and fetid, and attended not only with great pain and
inflammation, and excoriations in different parts, but such tumor and other
appearances of violence offered, about the fur^a, that had the patient herself
advanced any charge, I fear, I should not have hesitated to have joined in with
it; and yet from the event, as well as the whole history of the case, it has
been very evident, that no kind of injury had been received.


Discharges with the worst appearances, are frequently removed in eight or ten
days, merely by the treatment above recommended, but I have seen some cases in
the youngest subjects, of a bad habit of body, where mercury, as a deobstruent,
has proved useful, though I could not have the least suspicion of a venereal
taint. In such cases, I have found Ward's white drop a more convenient medicine
than any other preparation of mercury: it may be given in the dose of half a
drop, and may be degrees be increased to two and even three drops, once or
twice a day, for two or three weeks. But where this (...), I have only to add,
that I have been always able to succeed by giving a decoction of the bark, with
balsam. copaibae ovi vitel. solut. which is also an admirable medicine in the
fluor albus of adults.

OF the VENOM of INSECTS and of CERTAIN ANIMALS.
THOUGH the following accidents, like some others before mentioned, are not
confined to any age, they are, at least more formidable when they fall to the
lot of little children. It is hoped, therefore, it will not be thought
trifling, to recommend some suitable antidote against the bite, or sting of
venomous insects, particularly the wasp, gnat, and other flies; especially as
they happen frequently to children in the country, at a great distance from
medical help, and often alarm parents exceedingly. Indeed, for the most
venomous, such help can rarely be had before considerable inflammation has
taken place; after which it will take its course, and will continue, if
occasioned by a gnat, three days, and by some other insects, for six; though
the tormenting itching may be allayed much sooner by the means of proper
applications. If the bite should be on the eyelid, the inside of the lip, or
ear, very troublesome symptoms may follow, and the infant will be vexed by it
exceedingly.

In the absence of better remedies, the first application may be, of the
strongest spirit at hand, three parts, two of vinegar, and one of sweet-oil;
taking care it do not get into the eyes. But as soon as may be, the following
should be applied very frequently; which will check the progress of the venom,
and allay the pain and itching immediately, Of camphorated spirit, a
table-spoonful, Of distilled vinegar, and of laudanum, each a tea-spoonful;
to which, if the injury be not too near the mouth, may be added twenty drops
of the water of acetated litharge.

The bite of the common bug which infests crowded places, not only occasions a
tormenting itching in children of a very delicate skin, and in certain grown
people newly come from open villages, but will also sometimes raise blisters as
large as pigeons eggs, and will inflame the parts for several days. The best
application, I believe, is vinegar with a small quantity of olive-oil, and a
few drops of laudanum: oil alone, would rather increase the size of the
blisters. -- Whereas, for the highly venomous bite of the viper, the immediate
application of olive-oil is the well-known, and certain remedy.

Under the painful impressions of an awful accident that happened in my own
family, at the time I was engaged in this part of the work, (though I thank
God, the alarm terminated happily,) I cannot avoid dropping a few words on the
envenomed bite of morbidly enraged animals. It is not my intention, however, to
advert to the peculiar nature of this most malignant poison, nor to enumerate
the many deceitful remedies that have been at different times proposed with an
air of infallibility; since dwelling long on this unpleasant subject would ill
accord with a tract of this kind. Nor is it my design to propose any new
remedy, but rather to lament, that the best preventatives should be so ill
attended to, particularly amongst the inferior class of people, to whom this
dreadful accident happens oftener than to the rich. And on this account, as
well as the subject being rarely treated of, and seldom falling in the way of
any but medical people, (who are often consulted too late) it is hoped, the
intention will apologize for obtruding a friendly caution in this place. For,
after a good deal of experience, and much inquiry and reading on this subject,
I am confident, that nothing ought, in any instance, to be depended upon, but
taking out the injured parts, by the knife or caustic; which if duly and timely
effected, cannot fail to prevent every evil apprehended. But whenever the
situation of the wound may not admit of going deep enough to insure success, or
too much time may already have elapsed, the stronger mercurial ointment ought
to be rubbed in very freely, so as to raise a salivation; which has not only
been thought to have proved an effectual prophylactic, but to have also
succeeded even where evident symptoms of infection had taken place. See
Histoire et Memo^res de la Societe royale de Medecin. Ann^e 1783. 2de party
-- Tissot. Dr. Layard, etc.


I have only to add, (what it is, indeed, a great satisfaction to be able to
say,) that, dreadful as this accident is where the poison has taken effect, it
is evident, that only a very small proportion of those who are bitten by
animals actually enraged, receive any injury from it. Fortunately, the clothes
sometimes prove a defense, by wiping off the foam from the animal's teeth; at
others, it does not happen to be forced into the wound, or is not yet possessed
of a poisonous quality; or lastly, it is not absorbed, or the system may not be
in a state to be infected. These assertions are supported by numberless facts,
though much less frequent, perhaps, in London, than in some other parts,
especially on the continent, where such animals are very commonly met with, and
often wound great numbers of people.

It is, doubtless, the uncertainty of the effects attending such injuries, that
has supported the credit of many fallacious remedies on this melancholy
occasion. Encouraging, therefore, as the above circumstances certainly are, it
would indeed, be madness to confide in them, where the proper remedy may be
made use of in time; and though I should wish to conceal rather than spread
these acknowledged facts, could I think they would have such an effect, it is
on the other hand, no small satisfaction, that such encouragement may be justly
held out to those who may be under any alarm for themselves or their friends.

There are several other diseases attributed to young children, recorded by
Rhazes. Paulus, Oetius, Fabricius ab Aquapendente, Celsus, Primerose, and other
less ancient writers; of some of which I know nothing but from their own
account of them, or that they are needless distinctions of diseases already
mentioned, which the ancients were very fond of making, especially in
complaints of the skin, but can answer no practical end. Among the diseases
mentioned by these writers are, Lentes, Hispiditas, Achores, Favus.
Psorophthalmia, Impetigo, Ranulae or Batrachos, Seriasis, Paristhmia, Parulis,
Inflatio, Crinones, Malum Pilare, Phthiriasis, Hydroa, Macies.

The six first are affections of the skin, or the eyelids. Achores and Favus
The Tinea, or scald-head, so called when the scabs have resembled moth-holes in
cloth, and Favus when like an honeycomb, has been also termed Achores, when
the discharge has been unsually acrimonious.
are a a sort of Crusta-Lactea, or milk-blotches, so called by some, when of a
dark color, or ulcerated, and extending to the head, and Impetigo when it
attacks the chin; but by others the term Ach^res is applied only to adults.
Psorophthalmia is confined to the eyelids, and is so named by OEIIUS, and
others after him.

Ranula is an inflammatory tumor of the parts under the tongue, and according
to the ancients, particularly of the veins: it sometimes ulcerates, but often
presents a species of soft, and lax oedema. Celsus says the tumor is sometimes
included in a cyst, which must be taken out; the operation for which is fully
described by AQUAPENDENTE. Although such seemingly different accounts are given
of this complaint, the Ranula appears to be no more than an infarction of the
sublingual glands, and I believe, is not very common in infants, and indeed is
mostly an epedemic complaint. I have seen it however, in this country, in
adults, of the size of the largest walnut, and it then becomes very
troublesome, both in speaking and deglutition. When larger it is usually soft,
and contains a fluid, and sometimes calcareous concretions, owing to an
obstruction of the salivary ducts. In this case, it needs only to be opened,
and to be cleared of all the conretions; but if it be hard, the whole tumor
must be extirpated* Serias, from (...) quia quasi excavatu^ cernitur -- PAULUS
( Lib. i.) describes it a^ an inflammation about the cerebrum, in which the
brain is said often to mortify (...) three days; but if it should not, the
child may recover. Paristhmia is an inflammation of the tonsils, or throat, but
is certainly not common in this country; it is hinted by Hippocrates in his
book de Dentitione. Parulis, a complaint described by Paulus as a painful tumor
about the gums; Rhazes calls it a blister in the mouth. Inflatio is a
distention of the skin from wind or water after a child has been reduced by
long illness. Crinones, or Grubbs, is little known as a disease, I belive, in
Europe. It is probably a secretion from the sebaceous glands, and appears on
the arms, legs and back of sucking children; and is absurdly enough thought by
some to be produced by insects: Astruc. Lieutaud.
older children are often found to have some appearances of it, but it seldom
affords them farther trouble than a little itching, and they amuse themselves
by forcing out of the skin what they call worms. -- In the instance of infants
so affected, rubbing the parts with a coarse cloth, by the fireside, is all
that will usually be necessary in northern climates.

Though this kind of affection is generally of little consequence, whether in
infants, or young children, I have, nevertheless, known it prove a very
troublesome complaint in older subjects, especially in females about the time
of puperty. In such instances, the whole neck, back and breast will be covered
with little black spots, which gradually inflame till the parts become totaly
covered with heated pimples. These at first itch intolerably, so as frequently
to keep the patient from sleep through the greater part of the night; and in
consequence of being continually rubbed, turn to little inflamed and angry
boils. When some of these have discharged the sebaceous matter, and are healed
up, others will arise, in succession; and at the end of several months, the
superior parts of the body are covered with them.

After making trial of common purges and alteratives, to no lasting advantage,
I have cured the complaint by washing the parts morning and evening, for a few
days, with the lotio saponacea, and afterward rubbing in a little unguentum
hydrargyri nitrati; and when the soreness has gone off, making use of a proper
flesh-brush, for two or three months. The patient may at the same time take a
few drops of the aqua kali, two or three times a day, in a cup of
sassafras-tea, or milk and water.

A complaint sometimes confounded with the former, is that called Morbum
pilare, and is supposed to be spoken of by Hildanus, as sadly tormenting one of
his children. It is also mentioned by (...) but I have never met with it
myself. It is said to be owing to hairs not duly expelled, which stick in the
skin, especially the backs of young infants, whom it torments by an incessant
itching, and sometimes raises small tumors. The cure is said to consist in
fomenting the parts, and then pulling out the hairs with a pair of nippers.

Phthiriasis, or Morbus pediculosus, is a complaint I should not have
mentioned, were it not sometimes found very troublesome, and the heads even of
children who are kept the most cleanly, much pestered with these ugly vermin.
It is not therefore intended to treat of it as a disease in other parts, and
will be quite sufficient to say, that the cure is, in general, very simple, and
requires only the hair to be sprinkled for a few days with the powder of
staves-acre; a remedy that is kept a secret by some foreign perfumers, who sell
it at a great price.

Hydroa, or Sudamina, is a trifling eruption from the sudorific glands. Macies,
or according to some, atrophia lactantium, is applied to a decay, said to arise
either from worms, (and is then called atrophi^ verminosa See Harris.
) or to the unsuitableness of the breast-milk, which though it may be good in
its kind, will not prove alike nourishing to all children. The milk is then
properly directed to be changed, upon which it is remarked, the child will
often recover. This disorder is, however, a true ^trophy, or marasmus, from
whatever particular cause, and into which an infant may fall in consequence of
almost any of the complaints treated of in the forgoing pages, when they may
happen to prove of very long continuance.

I have now gone through all that have been usually ranked among the disorders
of infants, and have taken sufficient notice, as I apprehend, of every
complaint worth mentioning, that I have met with either in my reading or
practice; and may flatter myself this little tract will be found to possess the
advantage of compleatness above every work of the kind. Should the intelligent
reader recollect any disorders of consequence that are overlooked, or conceive
there are any material mistakes in the description or treatment of others, and
would be at the pains of making the author acquainted with them, his strictures
will be thankfully received, and duly noticed, should the author live to revise
another ^^ition.
That nothing may be overlooked, it remains to take notice of some congenite
diseases, and other external blemsh^shes; and first of those about the head.

ENCEPHALOCELE, or HERNIA of the BRAIN.
MANY infants come into the world with some parts imperfectly formed, and never
more commonly than in the upper part of the skull. If the deficiency be very
great, and accompanied with a like want of brain, such fetuses fall under the
class of Monsters, and being never born alive, are not subjects of this work.

The hernia of the brain, on the other hand, is met with in infants otherwise
completely formed, and is generally curable.

The public is indebted to Mons. Ferrand for an accurate description of this
complaint, given in the 5th. volume of the Memoirs de L'Academie royale de
chirurgie.

The Encephalocele is a soft circumscribed tumor, usually of a round form, and
correspondent in size with the extent of the deficiency of cranium; to which
the complaint is owing. It is without fluctuation, or discolouration of the
skin, but is attended with a perceptible pulsation of the brain, which
synchronizes with the pulse. The tumor retires and disappears upon pressure,
and is always situate either on one of the fontanelles, or in the course of one
of the sutures, and is never larger than a pullet's egg. Where the defect of
ossification is very considerable, a much larger portion of brain is
consequently protruded, which strictly speaking, it were less proper to call a
disease, than a fatal mal-formation, as it is pertinently remarked by Mons.
Ferrand; and no more resembles the true encephalocele, than an eventration
resembles the common intestinal hernia. It will be very necessary, however,
carefully to distinguish this incurable evil from other soft tumors of the
scalp, presently to be noted, which it very much resembles; the latter having
frequently the like precise feel of a bony margin around the tumor, as is
common, indeed, in cases of extravasation upon any solid surface. The tumor is
also colorless, and often as large as in the fatal mal-formation, but has a
considerable fluctuation, and is farther distinguishable by the tumor not
retiring upon pressure, nor being attended with any pulsation.

The Encephalocele is, indeed, easily distinguished from them both, by the
brief description above given of it; and fatal as it would be were it left to
itself, it requires only to be properly understood, in order to adapt a
rational and effectual remedy, which consists only in a careful and due
compression of the part. This may be effected by the application of a piece of
lead, somewhat larger than the tumor, and pierced with holes, that it may be
sewed to the child's cap. The compression should at first be very moderate, and
always such as may not give pain to the infant, nor disturb any or the natural
functions; and may gradually be increased as the tumor shall retire. This is
all that is required from art, the cure being the business of nature, which if
the child continue healthy, will proceed in the work of ossification, and in
due time will fill up the vacancy in the skull. The protrusion of the brain was
before an obstacle to this process, whilst the injury that tender organ must
sustain by the pressure from the sides of the bone, exposed it to all the evils
which compression never fails to produce; and which it were needless to
enumerate in this place.

TUMORS of the SCALP.
THERE are other tumors on the heads of newborn infants, which it were
improper entirely to pass over. One kind is occasioned by long compression in
the birth, is of different sizes, and the skin is always discolored, but
seldom requires much attention, as these tumors frequently disappear in a few
hours. If large, it is common to bathe, or foment them with red wine, brandy
and water, or vinegar, and in general they gradually subside, though sometimes
not perfectly for several days. Some of them, however, are of more consequence,
and concerning the treatment of which practitioners have differed; the absolute
impropriety of opening any tumors arising from compression having been
conceived of by many. On the other hand, I believe, it may in some cases, be
really necessary, in order to prevent a troublesome fungous sore, and even a
caries of the skull. The discrimination, however, is sufficiently obvious, such
assistance being required only where the above remedies and compression have
had no effect, and the tumor is found sensibly to increase day after day, which
in some instances has been the case to the end of the month. Such growth is
always owing to the extremities of the arteries ruptured by long compression,
being still open, and pouring out an ichorous fluid into the cellular membrane,
and thereby keeping up and increasing the original tumor.

Upon opening the integuments, a bloody fluid is led out, and the tumor nearly
subsides, which afterward requires nothing but moderately astringent
applications and pressure, which should be continued for a little time after
the aperture is closed.

Another kind of tumor has been hinted, which has a more unfavourable
appearance; and of which it may be proper in this place to take a little
farther notice. These tumors contain a kind of serum, and are often very large,
but without that discolouration of the scalp and bruised appearance, that there
constantly is in those last described, nor do they, indeed, seem to arise from
compression; I have, at least, seen them extending over a fourth part of the
head, and raised a full inch from the skull, after the shortest and most easy
labors. To the description before given of them it may be added, that this kind
of tumor, I believe, will always subside very kindly, though sometimes not
completely, for several weeks. It usually begins to lessen, however, in six or
eight days after birth; and as it subsides, more and more of the skull may be
felt, from day to day, in proportion as the absorption of the fluid takes
place. To assist nature, therefore, in this operation, embrocations of vinegar,
crude sal ammoniac and camphorated spirit should be made use of; with a gentle
compression of the part, as well as keeping the bowels properly open.

LVMPHATIC TUMORS on the HEAD and SPINE.
THERE is another kind of tumor appearing sometimes on the head, and at others,
on some part of the spine, which is not owing to accidents in the birth, but is
of a morbid nature. These tumors contain a lymph, and are attended with evident
fluctuation, as may be discerned by the touch; and unless they are exceedingly
small, ought in no case, I believe, to be punctured, or even removed by
ligature, though adhering only by a small pedicle. Those on the spine of the
neck, or back, or on the loins, if they do not arise from the dura matter
enclosing the medulla spinalis, seem to originate at least from the periosteum
of the spine; and the issue having some morbid source, will be kept up after
the tumors are opened, or even totally extirpated, and preventing the sore from
healing, the infant sinks under the discharge, or dies in convulsions.

But there are other tumors of a similar appearance, which being nevertheless
of a different kind, may be sometimes safely extirpated, and will be noticed
below under the head of Spina Byfida, to which likewise they bear a
considerable resemblance.

SPINA BYFIDA and PARENCHYMATOUS TUMORS.
THE Spina byfida is too well known to require much to be said upon it. It is a
fatal mal-formation, and seldom admits even of much temporary relief, though
some evils may be prevented by pointing out the most innocent applications.

It is of two kinds, open and occult. They both arise from deficiency of bone
in some part of the spine, usually about the loins, or os sacrum. The ulcerated
ones are of a deep red color, and in figure and size resemble the mouth when
the lips are drawn together, and the angles brought toward the center. When
the spina bysida, is occult, or the skin is yet entire, it is of a scarlet, or
sublivid hue, the tumor unequal, pretty firm in some parts, and in others
raised into little vesicles, and often resembles a cancer just about to break
into a sore. It is well known, that in this state, the skin ought not to be
opened, as it would certainly hasten the death of the infant. On the other
hand, every mean should be made use of to prevent the skin from giving way,
which should therefore be dressed with cooling, astringent and drying
applications, in the form of lotions and powders, and the part afterward
covered with a saturnine cerate; which are likewise the properest applications
afterward, as well as for that which is open from the birth, and will, at
least, afford some ease, as well as tend to prolong the life of the child. Such
treatment is also the more proper, from the hope that the tumor, whilst occult,
may possibly be of the more benign kind, now to be noticed.

These I have termed parenchymatous tumors; they appear on different parts of
the spine, but more commonly near the neck or os sacrum, are accounted marks,
and sometimes, it has been said, resemble the spin^ byfida, but are not always
of such a morbid nature as to prove certainly fatal, though it is probable,
they all might, if left to themselves. As I design, however, to treat only of
such as will admit of some remedy, I shall mention only two.

The first is a tumor on some of the vertebrae, usually of the neck, or the
first of the back; it is of a sublivid hue, unequal, internally spongy, and
very vascular. I saw one of this kind some years ago, in consultation with the
late Sir Caesar Hawkins, who advised to preserve the skin unbroken, as long as
it should be possible, which he feared was all that could be done for it; and
to this end, recommend the free use of the compound water of acetated litharge.
It was then about the size of a crown-piece, and not raised very much above the
level of the surrounding parts. The tumor, however, increased, and the skin not
long afterward gave way, and the child became ill; in consequence of which the
late Dr. Hunter was desired to give his opinion, who advised the tumor to be
taken out, as the only chance for preserving the child's life: but the father
disapproved of the operation. The part soon began to bleed a good deal at
times; in order to suppress which, as well as to lessen the tumor, which was
now considerably more prominent, I sprinkled it with the following powder, R.
Bol. Armen. pulv. Catechu a^ ij. Allumin. rup. j. Misce. Over this, compresses
wetted as above were applied frequently through the day. These would sometimes
adhere for several days owing to the blood and powder forming a sort of paste,
till a fresh oozing from the vessels loosened them; at which time the bleeding
returned, and the applications were repeated: by the continuance of which,
however, for seven or eight weeks, and compression with a piece of thin lead,
the vessels gradually shrunk, and the discharge being dried up, the part was
happily skinned over, and the child recovered its health.

I have lately seen another tumor of this kind, which was treated in a
different manner. It was seated on the last vertebrae of the back, and was
apprehended to be the true Spina byfida: but as no part of the bone could be
felt, nor the tumor by pressure, be made to recede, I hoped it might be
otherwise, and ventured to advise taking it off, as the only chance the infant
had for its life. This was accordingly done when the child was about eight days
old, and though a good deal of blood was lost in the operation, from a deep
seated artery, the sore at the end of the month was perfectly healed, and the
child soon afterward became as healthy as any other in the family*

On the HARE-LIP, and other EXTERNAL BLEMISHES, or COMPLAINTS, supposed to be
MARKS of the MOTHER.
THOUGH it be somewhat beside my purpose, to treat expressly on surgical
operations, I cannot close this part of my subject without taking notice of the
harelip, and other very common blemishes, if it were only for the sake of
adding my testimony to that of a sensible modern writer, Dr. Hugh Smith.
who has in an able manner, though not with equal success, combated the unhappy
prejudices of mothers in relation to marking their children; which they always
imagine to be owing to a violent impression from the sight of some disagreeable
object, or to a disappointment in something they may have longed for, during
their pregnancy. -- And I have chosen this place for such observations as I
have to offer on this head, because the hare-lip, and a few other of the
blemishes remaining to be noticed, bear that resemblance to objects around us,
which is wanting in those before mentioned.

The repeated experience of every attentive observer, has uniformly militated
against the tormenting suspicion alluded to, but still it prevails, though only
to the injury of those who ought, for their own sakes, to be persuaded to the
contrary. Every man long in business has known many instances of affectionate
^others, (for this needless distress falls only to the lot of such) who have
tormented themselves for six or seven months together, in the painful
apprehension of discovering some sad blemish in the child, (and on this account
have trembled to look on it when it has come into the world) which has
afterward proved to be as perfect as they could have wished, and as the more
more dispassionate amongst their friends have all along ventured to foretell. On
the other hand, where children have been born with some real blemish, it has
never been suspected by the mother, unless now and then in a most timid person,
(who has always bred in fear on account of some disagreeable object or other
she has seen), or else the blemish has turned out to be something perfectly
irrelative to it. Among several instances of such blemishes, in the British
Lying-in Hospital, we have had some remarkable ones of the entire ignorance of
any such supposed cause. In one, the infant was more marked than almost any one
I had ever seen; but I shall only notice, that the eyelids, part of the nose
and temple, and the greater part of one of the cheeks, were as black as ink,
and exactly resembled a dry gangrene of the parts. In a recent instance, the
extremeties were uncommonly ill-formed, and not a little resembled those of
different animals; but the mothers of these infants had go^^ on to their full
time, without their having received any fright they could recollect, or
suspecting any thing amiss in their children.

I should not, indeed, have ventured, even in a note, to have particularized
such deformities, but on account of their aptness, and in the hope of
preventing rather than creating fears and suspicions, in women of peculiar
sensibility. For these children were really so disfigured, that a lively
imagination, or a mind strongly impressed, might not only have conceived in
them a great resemblance to many objects, but it is more than probable, that
the parents must have actually noticed not a few such, during the period of
gestation -- Where any such deformity, therefore, may actually have taken
place, I only wish ladies to be persuaded, that such sights have not been the
true cause of it, nor can such objects, therefore, contribute to the production
of the like appearances another time. -- In this view, I cannot help observing,
that only a few days ago, a lady of rank acquainted me, that she had passed
almost the whole term of gestation in the apprehension of her infant being born
with a Hare-lip, on account of her having been daily met by a labourer working
in her own grounds, who had such a blemish. In this instance, the imagination
seemed to have done its utmost; as the lady conceived she met this man oftener
than any other, and that she could not avoid him walk which soever way she
might; and in consequence had his image continually before her, either in
reality or in recollection; and was kept under a continual alarm by it. It is
needless, possibly, to add; that the child was born free from the apprehended
blemish.


And here it ought to be noticed, that where a child has really been marked,
and the mother has insisted on her having seen, and been frighted by an object
which the blemish has resembled, it has, (to the best of my knowledge, at
least) appeared always to be an afterthought, by which the supposed occasion of
it has been discovered; and has not been taken notice of beforehand. It is,
however, the farthest from my thoughts to upbraid the sufferer on this painful
occasion, or to tax any wilful giving way to suspicions, into which, I am
persuaded, their feelings alone insidiously betray them. I wish only to obviate
the influence of a sentiment that I take to be without sufficient foundation,
and to which nothing but length of time, and prescription, could have given a
sanction.

That there are blemishes which bear a resemblance to various objects around
us, daily experience has proved; though the true occasion of them is not,
perhaps, understood. The like deviations from the ordinary course is observed,
not only in other animals, but also in the vegetable kingdom, fruits being
often joined together, and otherwise strangely misshaped, which must arise from
the common laws of nature being some-wise diverted from their usual course, by
some accidental cause equally unknown to us. But however this may be
occasioned, there is nothing that we know of in a fright or longing, that can
produce such a change in organized matter, nor can operate in the manner that
has been supposed, much less at such different periods; but there is, on the
other hand, every thing against such an hypothesis; which has accordingly
always given way in enlightened ages.

The instance so often adduced from the sacred historian, is by no means in
point: for without adverting to the very peculiar natural circumstances in that
transaction, which are wanting in ordinary instances, it is sufficient to
observe, that there was therein an evident divine interposition. Should any one
doubt of this, he has only to make a similar experiment, the result of which
will, probably, have more weight than ten thousand arguments. As matter of fact
therefore, as before observed, does not at all countenance, but directly
contradict the hypothesis, there is the strongest reason for married women
arguing themselves out of such fears, instead of reasoning themselves into
them, and suffering a painful conflict for weeks, and months together. It will
give me great pleasure if any thing I have advanced on the subject, should
answer so desirable an end; whilst reason, philosophy, experience, and every
thing on which we ought to depend, conspire to support such an attempt.

Amongst the various Marks resembling some of the objects around us, that
called the Hare-lip is the most common; a blemish too well known to require any
description. It is sufficient to observe, that it is of two kinds; the simple,
wherein the upper lip only is divided, either wholly or in part, with some loss
of substance; and the complex, in which the fissure of the lip is double; and
sometimes the palate of the mouth, and even the uvula is divided. It would be
beside my purpose, in this place, to treat of the manner in which this
deformity and defection is to be remedied; I shall confine myself to speaking
only of the time in which it ought to be attempted.

Various considerations contribute to make the distressed parents solicitous to
have this blemish removed soon after the infant is born, or at farthest before
the month shall be expired. On this account I am convinced, the operation has
sometimes been prematurely performed, contrary to the better judgment of the
operator, and not a few children have thereby fallen a sacrifice; whilst others
have received much less benefit than they would have done, had the operation
been postponed for a reasonable time. Where the blemish is very trifling,
indeed, and the operation simple, it may be done with reasonable safety in the
course of the month, or a little after; and if the child be able to suck, which
is not always the case, there are even some advantages in performing it sooner.
For as the child will not be able to take the breast for two days at least
after the operation, it will with difficulty be kept tolerably quiet by the
spoon after it has been once put to the breast; but as infants need but very
little nourishment for the first days after birth, and generally sleep a good
deal, if the operation be done twenty-four hours after the child is born, it
will be in a condition to suck by the time it requires much nourishment, and
the mother's breast is prepared to furnish it. But in the complex hare-lip the
case is exceedingly different, and the longer the operation is postponed, the
better it is likely to succeed, and should at least be deferred till the child
shall be four or five months old; the good effects of which I have lately seen
in a child born at the Lying-in hospital. By this time also, the infant will
have got over the period in which it is most liable to some painful and
dangerous complaints; will be thoroughly weaned from its hankering after the
breast, and have learned to feed contentedly with the spoon; by which children
with this kind of hare-lip are obliged to be supported, they being always
unable to suck. At this period likewise, the parts will have acquired a degree
of firmness necessary to retain the needles, as well as size that will admit of
handling them to greater advantage; for the want of which, though the operation
may appear to have been favorably performed, the needles will sometimes break
out, and the deformity be but little removed, or perhaps sometimes be increased.

I have once seen another blemish of the mouth in a child born at the hospital,
which required a similar operation. In this infant, the mouth was much wider on
one side than on the other, and appeared as if that side had been divided far
into the cheek, which gave it a very awkward appearance; but as it was capable
of being remedied in the same manner as the hare-lip, I shall only observe,
that when I withdrew the pins on the third day, the parts adhered very firmly,
and the child left the hospital at the usual time.

A different kind of blemish consists in some superfluous part. Such may
sometimes adhere only by a small base, like a thread, and may be removed by
only passing a tight ligature round them. But should any even adhere more
firmly, and be only a small joint, such as a finger or a toe, it were better to
have it cut off on the first days; as the vessels will then bleed but little,
and the gristle by which such joints are usually connected, are not yet become
bony. But should the part be more completely formed, it may benecessary to
delay the operation awhile longer, that by discovering which of the duplicates
may take the lead, the more promising one may be preserved; which is not always
to be known with certainty, at the birth.

Beside these, there are blemishes of far greater importance, some of which
demand an operation as the only chance for preserving the life of the infant.
Such are imperforations of the anus and urethra, or the vagina in females.

The Vagina is sometimes imperforate on the external, at others, only in the
more internal parts; and is in different degrees. The latter more commonly
relates only to the hymen, which requiring an operation to be performed about
the age of puberty, I shall do more than barely mention here, especially as it
requires only a simple, or crucial incision. Where the imperforation is in the
substance of the vagina itself, I have never found an operation to be of any
use, though I have known it attempted, in the adult, with great address and
resolution.

I have never met with the external parts totally imperforate, but have known
the aperture so very small as to require a little operation, which is mighty
easily done with the point of a lancet; there being always a raphe, or line,
directing the extent nature has seemed originally to intend, which being
through, requires only to be kept apart for a few days, by a bit of fine lint.

The imperforate ANUS is a melancholy case, as it seldom allows of an effectual
remedy, the gut often terminating in a cul de sac so high up as not to be
reached; it is not, however, always to be despaired of, though no fluctuation
of the intestinal contents should be felt for two or three days after the
infant is born.

I remember only one case of this kind in the Lying-in hospital, and in that I
happened to succeed, contrary, indeed, to all expectation, and after the child
had puked up a great quantity of meconium; and not only the belly, but also the
face was exceedingly tumid, and the eyes had not been opened for some time.

The manner of doing this operation must, in different cases, depend so much on
the discretion of the operator, that I shall do no more than describe that
which I made use of in the instance alluded to.

The operation was not determined upon till the third day. A longitudinal
incision was made, of about half an inch, above and below the part where the
anus ought to have been, which was marked by a little excrescence; a small
bistoury was then thrust up in the usual direction of the bowel, for more than
an inch. No meconium following this puncture, I examined carefully with my
finger, and feeling something like the fluctation meconium would make, I
introduced a trochar, and withdrawing my finger, I carried up the instrument in
such a direction as to avoid injuring the bladder, or forcing it against the os
coccygis, for near an inch farther, making allowance, however, for the yielding
of the parts, which might be somewhat forced up by the trochar. The instrument
having now passed forwards, without that resistance it had hitherto met with,
gave me the sensation of having entered a cavity, when withdrawing the trochar,
we had the satisfaction of finding the meconium run out at the canula. The
child was now put into a warm-bath, up to the waist, and in a few minutes
having voided a considerable quantity of meconium, it opened its eyes, looked
cheerfully about it, and fell into a pleasant sleep before it was taken out of
the bath.

A piece of bougie was occasionally introduced, and sometimes left in the part,
for a few hours, for the first fortnight; after which the child recovered fast,
and at the usual time was taken from the hospital in pretty good health, though
it had been much reduced by a bad thrush, which unfortunately made its
appearance soon after the operation; but it always voided its stools perfectly
well.

The imperforate Penis is not quite so common a case; but is not unfrequently
suspected, when the end of the passage is merely stopped up by a little mucus;
and should therefore be examined in good time. In this case, washing the part
with warm milk and water, or at most, a little assistance with a small probe,
or any such blunt pointed instrument, will be sufficient to open the passage.
But it is evident, if the urethra be wanting no operation at all can be
performed: it is, however, more commonly found open a certain way, and often as
far as the basis of the glans, and sometimes near to its extremity; in which
last instance, it is necessary only to make a small aperture with a lancet, or
a fine trochar, and to keep the part open by the occasional introduction of a
bougie. The more common complaint of this part however, is that of the urinary
passage terminating by a small aperture at a little distance below the glans,
and sometimes on one side of it. In these cases, the precise circumstances must
determine the propriety of any operation, which if not carefully managed, may
render the case worse than it was. I recollect two indeed, in which I was able
to do considerable service, one of which was in the presence of the late Sir
Caesar Hawkins, and the other of the late Dr. Hunter; in the latter, the urine
was discharged from one side of the penis, and pretty low down, which was very
happily remedied.

There are other mal-formations of this part, by which it is drawn downwards,
or to one side; the peculiar circumstances of which, must point out the nature
of the operation most likely to afford relief. This will generally consist in a
simple incision of the skin, where it may happen to be too tight or short, and
keeping the divided edges at a distance from each other, till the little sore
shall be healed.

I have likewise known the Ears to be imperforate, a case that allows of no
remedy; but the external appearance may sometimes be assisted, when the helix,
or outer circle, is turned forwards over the tragus, covering that part which
ought to lead to the internal ear; but in these cases, I have always found the
concha, and meatus auditorius, totally obliterated.

Another, and a very common blemish, is that called Squinting, which is
sometimes contracted by very young infants, and may then frequently be
remedied, especially if confined to one eye; but if a child be born with this
deformity, it is not so likely to be removed. The means I have to recommend
are, indeed, very simple, and consist only in applying a piece of
sticking-plaister spread on some bright colored silk, in such a position,
either on the temple, or the nose, agreeably to the side on which the eye is
distorted, as may draw it the contrary way. In order to keep up this
attraction, the color of the silk ought to be varied from time to time, as
well as its situation, placing it a little higher, or lower, both for the sake
of change, as well as to answer any other end, that a due observation on its
effects may point out. Besides this, the child ought always to be placed with
that side toward the light from which the eye is distorted; and for the like
reason, its parents, nurse, play-things, and every other object that can
attract its notice, should as constantly as is possible be on the same side,
that the child may have every inducement it, age and circumstances will allow,
to draw the eye the right way, and by early habit, counteract a muscular action
that is not yet become permanent.

Another method more proper for older children, is covering the eyes with
ogles, which are glasses fixed in a little case, such as many people wear when
they ride on horseback. They must be so placed, that the child can see no
object but by turning the eyes to the sides from which they are distorted. It
is scarcely necessary to add, that the glasses must be worn constantly, till
the bad habit is overcome.

Infants are liable, indeed, to many other blemishes; but as I mean to treat
only of such as call for medical attention, and admit of some remedy, I shall
mention only one or two more, which are very common, and with them close what I
have to say on their Complaints.

VARI and VALGI.
THESE are distortions of the feet, and differ only with respect to the side to
which the foot is turned; in the former, the soles of the feet being turned
inwards, and in the latter, outward: the curative intention is therefore alike
in both. The complaint is sometimes very trifling, and seems to have been owing
only to some cramped position of the feet in the womb, and in that case,
disappears before the end of the month. In other instances, there is evidently
a contraction, if not accurtation of the tendons, which calls for considerable
attention. The remedy, is obvious enough, and consists only in the proper
application of a roller and paste-board splints, so as gradually to bring the
foot toward its natural position, and in proportion as it inclines thereto,
increasing the force and tightning the roller, every two or three days.

There is also another very common distortion, to which no particular name, I
believe, has been given, in which the feet are turned upward toward the
instep: but the mode of treatment is alike in them all, and the cure will
usually be effected in a reasonable time. -- The like easy means, therefore,
will generally be sufficient to remedy a contraction of the joints of the
fingers, and various awkward positions of the toes, with which some infants
come into the world.

All these complaints may, nevertheless, be sometimes more considerable, and in
such case, especially if neglected for many months, or even years, as they
sometimes are, require the assistance of some steel instrument, or irons, (as
they are called,) which are properly contrived for these and other distortions,
as of the knees, etc. by Messrs. Addison, Sheldrake, and other truss-makers;
who seldom fail of bringing the parts into a more natural form, even in the
worst cases, whenever parents may think the complaint worthy of the time and
attention that may be required.

THE END OF THE FIRST PART.
DISEASES of CHILDREN, PART THE SECOND; CONTAINING FAMILIAR DIRECTIONS ADAPTED
TO THE NURSERY AND THE GENERAL MANAGEMENT OF INFANTS FROM THE BIRTH.

La Mere veut que son Enfans soit heareux, qu'il le soit de des apresent, en
cela elle a raison; quand elle se trompe sur les Moyens, il faut l'eclairer.
Rousseau. GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR THE PROPER MANAGEMENT OF INFANTS FROM THE
BIRTH.
WHATEVER splendour the actual treatment of diseases may reflect on the science
of medicine, it by no means comprehends the whole of its province: for
prevention being in every case preferable to remedies, the medical art would be
more imperfect than other sciences, were it devoted only to the latter. In the
management of infants more especially, such a variety of other articles occurs
subject to medical direction, that this little work would be peculiarly
incomplete if confined merely to the cure of disorders. In a view, therefore,
to such miscellaneous matters, and certain recurring affections too trifling to
be ranked as diseases, this second part is annexed; and it is hoped, may
contain every thing on which the most vigilant parent can wish for information,
without tiring her by enlarging upon trifles. In all matters of importance a
becoming firmness has been adopted, but I have not equally insisted upon
others, wherein the manners of a refined age cannot comply, nor have urged any
peculiar modes which the generality may not adopt. Should any opinion be more
obstinately maintained, it is, probably, in relation to the nourishment most
adapted to newborn children; and this it may be proper to discuss, previously
to entering upon their general management, by considering the case of infants
intended to be reared without the breast, or brought up, as it is called, by
hand.

But it would carry me altogether beyond the limits I have assigned to this
second part, were I to enter so far into the investigation of the subject, as
to set forth all the improprieties of (...) of training up infants from the
birth. And I am glad to find by some very recent examples among persons of
rank, that there is somewhat less occasion for it, than there appeared to be
some years ago. It would be unpardonable, however, in a work of this sort, not
to insist how inadequate every substitute for the breast has been universally
found; and therefore how proper it is, that every child should have it, and
even be suckled by its own mother, where her health can safely admit of it. --
Reason, instinct, experience, all conspire to support this opinion; and whoever
will determine to attend only to matter of fact, may soon be convinced of it.
Nature herself points it out: all the nobler part of the irrational creation is
qualified for it, and by instinct it obeys -- the human race alone, possessed
of nobler powers, and rational discernment, perverts those faculties to evade
its dictates, and to invent excuses for refusing its claims. But puerile,
indeed, are all the common arguments against it, in the greater number of
instances; and herein Dr. Armstrong seems to have egregiously erred, for
though, apparently, an advocate for suckling, he has labored for arguments to
apologize for the spoon and the boat, in too many instances. It were easy,
perhaps, to produce as sound arguments against eating more than once a day,
because so many people become diseased from excess. But not only is the
breast-milk the natural, In some very northern parts of the world, as those of
Greenland, and the neighboring country of the Esquimaux, the breast appears to
be, in the strictest propriety of speech, the only food that nature has
provided for infants; insomuch that, whenever a suckling-mother happens to die,
her infant is buried with her. Experience, one would hope, having demonstrated
the inefficacy of the hard and coarse diet which nature has there so sparingly
dealt out, it is esteeme^ an act of compassion to put an end to an infant's
sufferings by plunging it into the sea.
and most proper food for infants, but suckling also conduces to the easy
recovery of the mother; though she should not be able wholly to support her
child by the breast, or to continue suckling so long as the infant may require
it.

Although from much experience I venture to give this opinion, I do, by no
means intend to assert that every mother is able to suckle her child even for
the month, or would do well to attempt it; but I am, nevertheless, equally
satisfied, that many are very well able who do not, and several who have only
through fear been discouraged from doing it, in two or three lyings-in, having
afterward been prevailed on to make the attempt, have gone on with it for
several months, enjoyed better health when they suckled than at any other part
of their lives, and their children have thriven perfectly well.

Thus, besides the advantages derived to infants, there are evidently others
resulting to the mother herself, and some that deserve a particular notice.
For, by this means, where due care is taken, painful inflammations and
suppurations in the breast may often be prevented, as may be fairly concluded,
not only from the rarity of such complaints in the British Lying-in Hospital,
where almost every woman suckles her infant, but from the like authority of Dr.
Nelson, who reports, that out of 4,400 women who suckled their children, only
four had milk-sores, and that "these had either no nipples, or former sore
breasts." These advantages, if duly credited, one should hope, might tend to
induce ladies of rank to set the example, by performing this kindest and most
pleasant office, at least during the mouth. But it would be unjust not to add,
that whenever they may purpose to assume it for a much longer time, they should
determine to do it effectually, or they will but injure their children, as well
as forfeit many of the advantages and comforts, which in a due execution of it,
they would have a right to expect. It is possible, I may not be thanked for
urging some parts of the above advice; but I am certain, I am doing my duty in
giving it.

Hitherto, however, notwithstanding the the many encouragements often brought
to the ears, and urged upon parents, that tyrant, Fashion, has prevailed over
the good sense and natural feelings of many, whose maternal affection can be,
in no other instance, suspected. Against some, moreover, another complaint may
be brought, who not only refuse to give nourishment to their tender and
helpless offspring, but whilst they, unnecessarily, commit this charge to (...)
stranger, give up every other charge with it; and seldom visit the nursery, or
superintend those they set over it. It is from hence, that so many errors in
the point of diet, air, clothing, etc. etc. have insensibly (...) into the
houses even of some, whose rank in the world would otherwise have secured to
their children every advantage that a due attention to nature, or to art could
point out.

Another important, and affecting consideration might be brought forward on
this head, which I shall, indeed, only touch upon, as it calls rather for the
pen of the philosopher than of a physician, I mean, the sacrifice that poor
women make in going out to suckle other people's children, the sad consequences
of which are often severely felt by their own, through neglect or
mismanagement, and especially for want of the breast. Indeed no attention of
the nurse can duly compensate this loss; and only the most common substitutes
for it can, in their forlorn circumstances, be allowed them. This becomes a
source of evil, that, I fear, is not usually thought of, and proves eventually
the sacrifice of many infants every year: a matter of much importance, indeed,
to the public, as well as to the families immediately concerned. It is true,
indeed, ladies of rank frequently do all in their power to counteract this too
natural, and fatal consequence, by a careful attention to the forsaken infant;
not only insisting upon a breast being provided for it, but regarding it as a
kind of foster-child: so that, after generously preserving it through infancy
by their charity and attention, they frequently follow it with their protection
and kindness through life. Such charity, indeed, adds a (...) elevated rank;
though perhaps, much less than this, from some people, would be short of their
duty. But it is not every family that is in a situation to adopt this conduct;
though I am sorry to add, that too many who are not, nevertheless, greedily
adopt the fashions, and mimick the manners of the great, by more criminally and
needlessly refusing to suckle, and abandoning that tender charge with which
nature herself has entrusted them.

It gives me real concern to find occasion for such unpleasant reflections upon
any part of the sex I so much honor, and upon any of my fair and sensible
country women, in particular. Nevertheless, I cannot help suspecting, that
wherever such neglect does exist, whether in regard to suckling, or
superintending the management of their children, This seems to be the case at
present in both regards, amongst the lower class of people in France: and that
nation is therefore much indebted to the goodness of the Monarch, who is now
actually making solicitous inquiries through Europe to discover the bes^
substitute for the breast. Should the method hereafter^ recommended be, amongst
others, adopted, its claim will soon be determined; and I venture to hope, to
the advantage of the rising generation in that kingdom, and elsewhere.
and does not arise from want of health, or from some equally warrantable
objection, it can be charged only on the depravity of the age, which insensibly
perverts the taste, and corrupts the judgment of many who wish to do well. And
depravity of manners, when once become general, has ever been considered as the
leading symptom o^ a falling empire, and ought to be pointed out as far as it
extends, by every friend to the community, at whatever hazard of giving
offense, in every conspicuous instance of it. Tacitus, the Roman historian,
complains of the degeneracy of Rome in his days, (though by no means its most
degenerate era,) lamenting that in former times, grave matrons attended to
their children, as their first family concern, but now, says he, they are
entrusted to the care of some Grecian girl, or other inferior domestic. -- It
is no small satisfaction to me, however, to declare, that in this country there
is no ground for a general complaint on this head; there are examples of the
first magnitude of a nobler conduct, and ^he at the head of all, which were it
copied, without exception, in domestic life, would prove the glory of the
present day, and a blessing to the rising generation -- May the time hasten
when it shall be universally followed by her inferiors, whilst I attempt to
point out as far as my observation has extended, the most prudent means of
executing this important branch of the female duty.

It may not be amiss, at the opening of the ensueing observations to remark,
that the demand for the multifarious directions here offered, as well as all
those given by other writers on the management of children, arises from the
false reasoning of those to whose care the infant state is frequently
entrusted; who instead of being guided by the sober dictates of nature, have
adopted the rules of art, falsely so called, or have followed the wild fancies
of anile superstition.

On the other hand, the various tribes of the irrational species act in a
thousand instances more prudently than we do, and being uniformly guided by
instinct, are led implicitly and safely through all their operations. Many
quadrupeds, fish, and even reptiles seem to know what is proper for them as
soon as they come into existence, and have strength sufficient to reach after
it. In other instances they are guided by the parent, who seems to adjoin some
degree of knowledge acquired by experience, to the instinct with which it is
naturally endowed. Man, on the contrary, designed to be the pupil of
observation, has scarce any innate discernment; and consequently his infant
race pass through a long period utterly helpless, alike divested of ideas to
guide, and of strength to manage for themselves. But to the parent is imparted
both; whose province it is to judge for them, and actually to put into their
hands or mouths, whatsoever they may stand in need of. When the parent,
therefore, forsakes the paths of simplicity, and lays down arbitrary rules, the
result of false science, instead of patient experience, or mistakes the clamor
of fashion for the voice of nature, confusion and disease must be the
unavoidable consequence. -- Awakened by these, man is loudly called upon to
return to the simplicity of nature, and the result of dispassionate
observation. It is this will be ouraim in the work before us, wherever danger
and deviation are connected; assured, that the experience of the most judicious
and successful among parents and practitioners, will applaud the design, and
confirm the generality of our observations.

To this end, let us imagine an infant just born, No convenient place offering
in the former parts of this work, for a few hints relative to infants
apparently still-born, I wish here to suggest the result of an experience that
has been attended with more success than might have been expected.

I have, indeed, both at the hospital and elsewhere, met with many instances of
children born with very little, and others without even the smallest appearance
of life, some of whom have remained entirely destitute of any sign of it, for
more than a quarter of an hour, and yet have been happily restored. I pretend
to li^^^^ or no skill in this business not generally practiced, and can
scarcely guess (...) what to attribute this success, unless it may be an
unwearied assiduity and perseverance in (...) attempts, wherever there are no
certain signs of death, till I conceive nothing is possibly to be expected from
them. And this has so often succeeded, that I have been tempted to think its
importance may possibly, not have been sufficiently attended to by every
practitioner. I rest this presumption, not only upon some fortunate events
where I have had little or no previous ground for hope, but where others had,
in some instances, abandoned it. A certain steady perseverance in our attempts
to preserve life, is, indeed, not only a duty practitioners owe to the public,
so long as the least hope may remain, but one successful attempt is an abundant
recompense for many failures; especially, as I imagine we shall rarely fail
when there may be the least positive ground for hope of a favorable issue.

As to the means they consist only of warmth, clysters, stimulants, and
especially blowing forcibly into the trachaea, or windpipe.

The ordinary stimulants are the smoke of lighted brown paper, or tobacco;
juice of onions; Scotch snuff; frictions with hot cloths, and brandy; striking
the nates, and the soles of the feet: stimulating the nose, and upper parts of
the throat with a feather; with every other similar mean calculated to excite a
strong effort, especially that of crying; to which our attempts must
principally, and ultimately (...). On this account, I believe; no great benefit
is to be expected from stroking the blood along the chord, or immersing the
afterbirth in warm water; the fetal life being extinct, the recovery of the
child will depend on the blood passing freely through the lungs, which it
cannot do till the child is brought to breathe freely and forcibly; the
continuance of which also is never secure, till it begins to cry. To these
ends, I have depended above all upon blowing into the mouth, which I am
satisfied may be more effectually done by the mouth of the assistant being
placed immediately upon the child's, than by means of a blow-pipe; at the same
time, preventing a premature return of the air, by the fingers of one hand
placed at the corners of the mouth, and those of the other on each side of the
nose. But I have sometimes imagined, that I might attribute much of my success
not only to the continuance of this, but to the manner of doing it, by
attempting to imitate natural respiration, by forcing out the air I had thrown
in, by a strong pressure against the diaphragm and breast: thus blowing in, and
alternately pressing out the air, for a long time together, omitting it only
now and then, to make use of some of the abovementioned means: which latter,
however, can do very little till the child begins not only to gasp, and that
with shorter intervals, but also to breathe in a pretty uniform manner. At this
time, should the child not be disposed to cry, which is frequently the case,
the nates and soles of the feet should be stricken forcibly and repeatedly; and
this failing, as well as the application of ordinary stimulants to the nose,
and irritating the windpipe, I think nothing is so likely to succeed as a
tobacco, or other stimulating clyster, and putting a little Scotch snuff up to
the nose, which latter if it induce sneezing, will soon be followed by a strong
cry, and the child be with certainty restored.

Amongst other means, that of warmth was recommended; to which end, the infant
should be entirely covered with hot clothes, which should be renewed as fast as
they become cool; or the body may be immersed in a tepid bath, and be well
rubbed all over: the chord may likewise be suffered to bleed a little,
especially if the face or body do not soon acquire the natural color -- but
this ought seldom to be done, nor the chord be divided as long as any pulsation
is to be felt in it.

To these means may be added the cautious use of electricity, which appears, a
priori, as likely to be successful in these, as in any other cases to which it
has been applied: but I have never been in a situation to make trial of it, or
I certainly should, as I once knew a child happily recovered by it, after being
laid out for dead, for near two hours, in consequence of a fall from a two-pair
of stairs window.

But should these several means fail, as a last resource, a very different kind
of stimulant may be tried, and instead of laying the infant aside in a warm
flannel, it should be exposed to sudden and severe cold, which I remember once
to have succeeded after the life of the child had been despaired of.

It will be presumed, I dare say, that such a scrupulous attention is not
designed to be inculcated in every instance of apparently still-born, infants,
but principally where the death of the child may not only not be certainly
ascertained, but there has previously been reason to expect it would be brought
alive into the world. -- The great importance, however, of the subject, it is
hoped, will be a sufficient apology for the length of this note; and as the
attempt to restore infants to life has always been a most pleasing employment,
to myself, the desire of being an occasion of inducing others to a perseverance
in the use of the like means, emboldens me to risk the censure of any who may
deem it prolix or superfluous. -- I shall just add, that amongst other symptoms
of some irrecoverable injury a child may have sustained in the birth, is that
of a discolored and often fetid, or bloody water forcing out of the nose,
after the lungs have been two or three times artificially inflated. Under these
circumstances, I have very rarely seen an infant at all revived; but I have
twice lately so far succeeded as to animate a child sufficiently both to breath
and to cry; but they afterward lay in a moaning state for four or six hours,
and then expired.


who, doubtless, at this moment, calls for our best attention. And first, it
may be observed, that it ought not to be exposed to any thing that may
violently, or too suddenly affect the senses. On which account, Moschion and
Albinus have well advised, that it should not be exposed either to great heat
or cold, nor a strong light, nor odours of any kind, however grateful to
adults; the unpleasant effect of which are sufficiently manifested by the
infant itself.

The attention will next be called to washing and dressing it, together with
other little offices suited to the occasion. And this first washing is of more
importance than is usually imagined, being amongst the little things which are
often overlooked by writers and others, (and by some thought of no
consequence); Dr. Hamilton.
but it is not every little thing that may safely be neglected, or ill-done. In
regard to poor people, especially, and infants born in hospitals, and other
crowded apartments, the importance of proper washing is greatly increased, the
foulness left upon the skin being a remote cause of some dangerous endemic
complaints; See Mons. Baumes, on the Jaundice and Mesenteric-fever.
as a preventative whereof, the washing ought to be repeated for several days,
with light frictions of the skin. Some infants also are covered much more than
others with a thick, viscid matter, which cleaves so fast to the skin, that it
is not easily washed off, which there is, however, another reason for doing, as
it would obstruct perspiration, which can never be duly performed, where the
skin is left any wise foul. On this account, the nurse should be very attentive
to this first concern of her infant charge, and whatever wash she may make use
of, it should always have soap in it, and the child be well rubbed, especially
under the arms, in the hams, and groins, where this mucus is apt to adhere: and
to this end, it would be better she made use of no kind of grease, which tends
to stop up the pores, and so prevent perspiration; or that she be, at least,
very careful the grease be afterward well wiped off. In the same view, it were
well if the washing were repeated for two or three days, which it is not
improbable might tend to prevent the red-gum and other similar affections of
the skin, with such other complaints as may arise from the suppression of
insensible perspiration.

After a while, and sometimes the next day, most nurses wash the child with
cold water; a practice highly extolled by Dr. Armstrong, as well as many other
practioners. But though no one can be a greater advocate for every thing that
is bracing than I am, I cannot approve of this substitute for cold-bathing, as
it is called; at least, as an indiscriminate practice. The cold-bath acts on a
quite different principle, and I could wish almost every child, especially
those born in London, were bathed at three or four months old, (if the season
of the year and other circumstances should admit of it) To this end,
particularly, a child should not be costive, feverish, nor have any internal
obstructions. -- Mons. Le Febure de Villebrune in his translation of this work
into French, has added a chapter upon Baths; in which he strongly controverts
the idea of the probable good effects of cold-bathing, and even makes use of a
long chain of arguments against it, deduced, indeed, from an ingenious theory,
and supported by quotations from the ancients; who practiced, however, in a
different climate. -- The shortest, and, perhaps, the best reply to this
specious reasoning, might be given in the mode of Diogenes to Ze^^, whose
arguments against the possibility of Mo^^on, Diogenes laconically refuted, by
hastily getting up, and walking across the school. We have, in like manner,
only to point to the numbers of children and young men, who from very weakly
infants, have been rendered strong and healthy, merely from a prudent use of
the cold-bath; and may defy any man to produce the like instances of its
opposite effects when made use of with the cautions which every powerful remedy
requires. The Spartan women, likewise, afford us sufficient evidence of the
salutary effects of cold-bathing, notwithstanding the comments made upon the
women themselves, by Aristotle.
which I am certain would prevent, as well as remove many of their complaints.
From the surprising good effects that sometimes follow the use of cold-baths, I
do not wonder that Priests, in times of ignorance, have been known to account
them holy, and dedicate them to some Saint; to whose influence certain cures
were attributed.

The salutary operations of the cold-bath are, however, easily accounted for,
from its promoting insensible perspiration, and rendering that secretion less
readily affected by the impression of the external air.

It may be known to agree with children, when they come out of it warm, lively,
and their strength increases on the use of it. On the other hand, if they come
out cold, dispirited, and seem rather to lose strength, it may be as often
prejudicial.

But I must observe, that these unpleasant effects are frequently owing to an
improper use of bathing, and for want of making a very obvious discrimination
in the habits of body of different children. -- For the tender and delicate,
not only should a good quantity of salt be put into the bath, but the water
should also at first be a little warmed, and children be brought only by
degrees to endure it quite cold, which they will not by this means be the less
likely to do: or should the water never be perfectly so, the advantages of
cold-bathing will, nevertheless, be considerable; Hippocrates speaking of
bathing, cautions against the two extremes of heat and cold.

D. miquid. Usu.


though Dr. Hunter and others have thought differently. It is not, I apprehend,
merely from its coldness that the benefit of bathing arises, but is rather from
the subject being suddenly immersed into a very different medium, (if so be,
that medium be not actually warm) in which the contact of the external air is
taken off during the immersion, and is as suddenly restored on his being taken
out. By this means, the blood is alternately pushed forward into the extreme
vessels, and suddenly repelled to the heart (in proportion to the coldness of
the water) and suffers an advantageous attrition against the sides of the
vessels. The small passages are rendered previous, and the contractile power of
the heart is increased, as well as the muscular fibers proportionally
strengthened. The salt added to the water pretty certainly prevents taking
cold, whilst it adds to the stimulus on the skin, and has a more salutary
operation on the pores.

For the sake of some readers it is necessary to observe, that a child is to be
put only once under the water at each time of bathing, and to be taken out as
soon as it is possible. It should be received in a blanket, and be wiped dry
with a cloth in the most expeditious manner; and as soon as it can be dressed,
should partake of such exercise as may be best suited to its age: but by no
means put into bed. There will need no great attention to its being wiped
perfectly dry, as a child will be less liable to take cold from a few drops of
salt water being left upon it, than by being long uncovered in some parts of
its body, in an over-caution to wiping it dry.


But to see a little infant of a few days old, the offspring perhaps of a
delicate mother who has not even strength to suckle it, washed up the loins and
breast in cold water, exposed for several minutes, perhaps in the midst of
winter, (when children are more inclined to disease than those born in summer),
itself in one continued scream, and the fond mother covering her ears under the
bed-clothes that she may not be distressed by its cries; has ever struck me as
a piece of unnecessary severity, and favors as little of kindness, as plunging
an infant a second or third time, into a tub of water, with its mouth open, and
gasping for breath, in the old fashioned mode of cold-bathing: both of which
often induce cramps and pains in the bowels, and weakness of the lower
extremities, but rarely an increase of strength. It surely cannot be amiss, in
winter time at least, to take the cold off the water for the few first days,
which it has been observed, will be useful in other respects; and whenever cold
water is made use of, it will be quite sufficient to wash the child as far as a
regard to cleanliness may require, which will always be the parts exposed to
the worst kinds of galling and excoriation: on which account cold water is
certainly useful. With this view, beside the groins, and contiguous parts, the
armpits, folds of the neck, and parts behind the ears, being also disposed to
slight chaffings, may be occasionally washed in like manner, and if the
discharge be not checked by it, they should be dusted with a little
hair-powder, or powder of ceruse, or a little white vitriol may be added to the
water; which if the excoriations are not very considerable, will generally heal
them very soon: should these fail, they may be dressed with the red drying
ointment. This is an excellent remedy in a thousand instances, and has very
undeservedly fallen into disesteem.
In a very acid state of the stomach however during the month, particularly
where there is a purging with very green stools, the parts covered by the
cloths are often infested with a troublesome excoriation, (called intertrigo)
and whilst that state continues, will not be healed by any drying applications.
I have found nothing so pleasant, and useful in this case, as covering the
parts with a thin skin found upon the veal kidney, which softens, and cools
them, till the cause of the complaint may be removed by the use of proper
absorbents. There is a mixed affection of this kind, however, in which these
parts are not actually excoriated, but are very hard and swollen, as well as
painful and inflamed; and the affection seems to be kept up by the acrid nature
of the excretions, though not originally caused by it. In this case, instead of
washing the parts with wetted fuller's earth, gruel, or greasy mixtures, an
embrocation of elder-flower-water, with as much boiling milk as will render it
moderately warm, has been immediately efficacious. But one grand mean of
keeping children from chafing is to preserve them very dry and clean; To this
end, poor people need to be admonished, that all the cloths should be properly
boiled every time they are washed; a circumstance such people are apt to
neglect. -- Another error worthy of remark in this place, is, that of wearing a
pilch (as it is called); an old fashion still too much in use, and contributes
not a little to make children weak: it being originally designed to be worn
only for the few first weeks after birth, but is often continued for as many
months. It can answer no possible end but that of saving a little trouble,
since instead of keeping children dry and clean, it does directly the contrary;
for if it has received any wet through the usual cloth laid under it, it ought
itself to be changed as often as the other, or must certainly be damp and
uncleanly; whilst by heating the loins, and lower limbs, it has a manifest
tendency to relax, and dispose infants to become rickety.
articles of so much importance, that I should have insisted much longer upon
them, if I had not already far exceeded the bounds I had intended. Suffice it
therefore to say, that it is next to impossible a child should thrive or be
healthy, if these last articles are not strictly attended to, which, together
with those of proper food and exercise, are, perhaps, the principal ones in
which the children of poor people are at a great disadvantage, and which become
the constant source of rickets and distortions among them. Let not these ill
effects fall on the children of those whom misconduct alone can expose to them.

I shall just mention here another useless operation practiced by nurses, that
of forcing out the milk from the little breasts of newborn infants. Some
children a day or two after they are born, will have the breasts exceedingly
tumid, hard, and painful, containing something like milk; and nurses imagine it
to be a great kindness to milk it out as it is called. But I have often been
grieved, to see a nurse rudely rubbing, and even squeezing the breasts, already
in a state of inflammation, and continuing it even for some minutes, though the
child's cries might convince her she is putting it to pain. In the case of
inflammation, a bit of bread and milk poultice is the properest application,
but if the part be not inflamed, it can want nothing at all; though if it be
thought something ought to be done, a little oil with a drop or two of brandy
may be gently rubbed in, or small pieces of the litharge-plaister may be
applied, and lie on the parts till they fall off of themselves.

Having considered these necessary prepations, I proceed to offer a few remarks
on the prevailing errors in their dress.

Upon the first sight of a newborn infant, every one is struck with the idea
of its weakness and helplessness; and we often take very improper methods of
strengthening it. It is designed to be weak and tender in this infant-state, as
is every other object around us. Nons naissons foibles, nous avons besoin de
forces; nous naissons depourvous de tout, nous avons besoin d'assistance, nous
naissons stupides, nous avons besoin de jugement; tout ce que nous n'avons pas
a notre naissance, et don't nous avons besoin etant grauds, nous est done par
l'education.

ROUSSEAU.


-- Take a survey of nature, from the first opening leaves of the vernal
flower, or the tender foilage of the sensitive plant, to the young lion, or the
elephant; they are all in their several orders, proportionally weak, and cannot
exist without some exterior support. But they stand in need of nothing but what
nature has prepared for them. If seed be cast into a proper soil, it wants only
the surrounding elements to ensure vigor and maturity. So if the tender infant
be born of healthy parents, and at its full time, it is usually sufficiently
strong; proper food and nursing are the elements whose fostering influence it
requires: -- if it have these, it will need nothing more.

It is true, it is very weak, but is it therefore to be tight rolled, under the
idea of supporting it, and giving it strength? It is a bundle of tender
vessels, through which a fluid is to pass, undisturbed, to be equally
distributed through the body, and which are therefore surrounded by a soft
medium, capable of yielding to the impetus of their contents. Hence we cannot
but conceive, how injurious any great pressure must be to so delicate a frame,
which before birth swam in a soft fluid. But besides this, the infant requires
freedom and liberty on other accounts. The state of infancy and childhood (as
Dr. Gregory observes) is impatient of restraint in this respect, through "the
restless activity incident to youth, which makes it delight to be in perpetual
motion, and to see every thing in motion around it."

Let us again advert to the irrational species, whose more sagacious conduct so
often disgraces our own. There is no occasion on which they do not seem to
consult propriety; and having a right end in view, they as certainly accomplish
it, and always in proper time -- Does a little bird design to prepare a lodging
for her young; it is sure to make choice of the fittest situation, whether to
defend them from dangers, or obtain the most convenient supply of their wants;
if to this end it be necessary to construct the nest of rough and strong clay,
it is still lined with down: the young lie warm and secure, but they lie at
their ease.

I am not ignorant, indeed, that for many years past, the very ancient tight
mode of dressing infants has been discontinued, for which we are probably
greatly indebted to Dr. Cadogan. It is certain also, that for the last twenty
years, the fashion recommended by him has been improving; but there is yet room
to go forward, and were every tender parent in this country thoroughly sensible
of its advantages, it would soon become fashionable to see children as much at
their ease on a christening-day, as they are when laid at night in their beds.
And I may be permitted to add here, what every modern practitioner has adverted
to, that were strings, in almost every instance, sustituted for pins,
physicians would seldom be at a loss to account for the sudden cries and
complaints of infants, which are too often produced by this needless part of
their dress. A gentlewoman lately informed me, that one of her children, after
long and incessant crying, fell into strong convulsions, which her physician
was at a loss to account for, nor was the cause discovered till after death;
when on the cap being taken off (which had not been changed on account of its
illness) a small pin was discovered sticking up to the head, in the large
fontanelle, or mould.


Nature knows no other use of clothing but to defend from the cold, -- all that
is necessary therefore for this purpose, is to wrap the child up in a soft
loose covering, and not too great a weight of it; to which ornaments enough may
be added without doing mischief. And had this matter been always wholly left to
the judgment of parents, this is, probably all that would have been done, but
the business of dressing an infant is become a secret, which none but adepts
must pretend to understand. The child itself, however, discovers to us the
propriety of such clothing, by the happiness and delight it expresses every
time it is undressed, and rubbed with a soft hand. Whereas the art of dressing
has laid the foundation of many a bad shape, and what is worse, of very bad
health, through the greatest part of life. -- It is scarce necessary in this
day, to add any thing in this place in commendation of cleanliness, unless it
be to counteract a vulgar notion, familiar only to common people, that a
frequent change of linen has a tendency to weaken newborn children; an absurd
idea, that has not the smallest foundation in reason or fact.

The tender infant being dressed, and having undergone such other little
discipline as has been mentioned, is usually so far fatigued by it, as soon
afterward to fall into a sound sleep. We shall therefore leave it a while to
be refreshed, whilst I endeavor to conduct the fond mother through the various
other duties it calls for from day to day, till it happily arrives at an age
free from the peculiar dangers of infancy.

In the pursuit of such a plan, we meet with a variety of miscellaneous
articles, and though many of them are not of apparent magnitude in themselves,
are in their consequences highly worthy of notice; which that they may be
thrown into some kind of order, may all be very well classed under the several
heads of the Non-naturals, as they are called. Such are air, meat, and drink;
sleep and watching; motion and rest; retention and secretion, and the passions
of the mind; a due attention to which, may prevent many of the evils incident
to this tender age. -- The first of these was said to be Air.

The great importance of this has been set forth when speaking of the diseases
of infants; I shall here in a more particular way observe, that the age,
constitution, and other circumstances of the child, and the season of the year,
ought always to be taken into consideration, that being highly proper on one
occasion, which would be very detrimental at another. In general it may be
said, that warmth is friendly to very young infants, but they should,
nevertheless, be inured gradually to endure the cold air, which is absolutely
essential to their health. I cannot therefore agree with Dr. Armstrong, who
thinks the rich lose fewer children than the poor, because they are kept
warmer. On the other hand, it was well said by one, that "a warm nursery fills
a cold churchyard." Much caution, indeed, is necessary on this head, in this
unsettled climate, and evinces the necessity of parents superintending those to
whose care they in-trust infant-children, since nurses are often indiscreet in
keeping them too long in the air at a time, which is a frequent occasion of
their taking cold, and deters many parents from sending them abroad so often as
they should. Another, and a worse, as well as common fault, of nurses and
servants, is, that of standing still with children in their arms in a current
of air, or even sitting down with other servants, and suffering children who
can run about, to play at a little distance by themselves, sit down on the
grass, and such like; the consequences of which are often a long confinement to
a warm room, and either a prohibition against going out so much as they ought,
or a fresh cold owing to some of the like irregularities. And I may here
observe, the lightest symptom of cold (which is also often taken in the
lying-in room during the month,) is that called the snuffles, or stoppage of
the nose, and in general requires nothing more than a little pomatum, or pomade
divine, to be put to the nostrils when the child is laid in the cradle; or if
this fail, a little white vitriol may be dissolved in rose water, and the
bridge of the nose often wetted with it.

It will be advisable, in order to inure infants to the air, that they be
short-coated as early as the season of the year will permit; their dress should
be still loose and easy, and they may continue without stockings even for two
or three years, and boys till they are breeched. As to this change, I think, it
had always better be made in the beginning of the winter, than in summer, as
the dress upon the whole is warmer, especially about the chest, which from
having been open for three or four years, it seems rather strange to cover, all
at once, at the beginning of hot weather.

But though I have said children would be as well without stockings, for a
considerble time, I must remark, that circumstances are always to be taken into
consideration. Mutatis mutandis Conduct should be directed by Circumstances.
should not only be the motto of physicians, but of common life, and we should
be guided by it in regard to all general rules. For want of this caution in the
present instance, tender children suffer exceedingly in severe winters, and are
distressed with chilblains merely for want of proper covering to their tender
limbs. I have seen a child of four or five years old, the daughter of people of
fashion, (who I know will pardon my mentioning it) whose legs were covered with
chilblains quite up to the knee, and yet the lady could not be prevailed upon
in time, to suffer stockings to be put on, because strong and healthy children
are thought to be better without them.

The second article under the head of Non-naturals refer to meat and drink, and
is worthy of ample discussion, having as yet been considered only in relation
to the expediency of breast-milk, where that may anywise be procured.

In the first place it may be remarked, that although an infant be suckled by
its own mother, it can certainly have no real need of any other food, till the
time nature will bring milk into her breast, supposing the child be laid to it
in proper time; which, doubtless, ought to be as soon as she may, by sleep or
otherwise, be sufficiently refreshed to undergo the little fatigue that an
attempt to suckle may occasion. This method, however unusual with some, is the
most agreeable to nature, and to observations on the irrational species, who in
many things are the very best guides we can follow. This subject is largely and
elegantly treated by Dr. Gregory, in his Comparative View, before quoted.
By means of putting the child early to the breast, especially the first time
of suckling, the nipple will be formed, and the milk be gradually brought on.
Hence much pain, and its consequences will be prevented, as well as the
frequency of sore nipples, which in the first lying-in, have been wont to
occasion no inconsiderable trouble. But should this, or even an abscess take
place, they are far less distressing under proper management than has been
usually imagined See a Treatise upon ulcers beforementioned; in which the
milk-abscess, and sore nipples are fully considered, and a successful, and easy
method of treatment pointed out.
. However, should the mother be unable to suckle, and a wet-nurse be engaged,
there can be no harm in putting the child to the breast, after it has taken a
dose or two of the opening medicine; or should it be brought up by the hand,
and not easily kept quiet, a spoonful or two of water gruel, with a little
Lisbon sugar, may be given for this purpose, which will usually set it asleep;
after which it will be ready for whatever culinary food shall be found proper
for it.

And on this article, a vast crowd of absurdities open upon us at once; and
many of them with the sanction of custom and authority. I shall first advert to
thickness of the food: and it has, indeed, been matter of wonder, how the
custom of stuffing newborn infants with bread could become so universal, or the
idea first enter the mind of a parent, that such heavy food could be fit for
its nourishment. It were well if the fond mother, and all well inclined nurses
had more just ideas of the manner in which we (...) nourished; and especially,
that it is not from the great quantity, nor from the quality of the food,
simply considered. They may surely be led to conceive, that our nourishment
arises from the use the stomach makes of the food the body receives, which is
to pass through such a change, called digestion, as renders it balsamic, and
fit to renew the mass of blood, which is daily wasting and consumed. An
improper kind, or too great a quantity taken at a time, or too hastily, before
the stomach has duly disposed of its former contents, prevents this work of
digestion, and by making bad juices, weakens instead of strengthens the habit;
and in the end produces Worms, Convulsions, Rickets, King's evil, slow Fevers,
and Marasmus, or general Consumption.

Nature, it should be considered, has provided only milk, for every animal
adapted to draw it from the breast, and that of women is certainly the thinnest
of them all; but at the same time, far more nutritive than bread. It is true,
bread, as it requires more digestion, will lie longer on the stomach both of
infants and adults, and hence, probably, because it satisfies the present
cravings, it has been conceived to afford a greater proportion of nourishment;
though mixed up only with water, as it too frequently is, it is far less
nutritive than milk. Children ought to be frequently hungry, and as often
supplied with light food, of which milk is really the most nutritive that we
are acquainted with. This could never be doubted of, but from its passing so
quickly out of the stomach; on which account, indeed, though not the properest
food for adults, employed at hard labor, and many hours from home, it is the
fittest of all for the more sedentary life of a tender infant, who cannot get
that nourishment from bread or other solid food, of which the stomachs of
adults are capable. It must have been for want of attending to this
consideration, that Dr. Armstrong has said so much in favor of bread and other
thick victuals; which, by the bye, he began to make use of for his own children
(from its success in whom he has ventured to recommend it,) only at the age of
six or seven months; a matter very different from stuffing an infant with it
almost as soon as it is born. For every thing the stomach cannot digest, it has
been said, may be justly considered as a poison, which if not puked up, or very
soon voided by stool, may occasion sickness, gripes, what are called inward
fits, and all the train of bowel complaints, which may terminate in one or
other of the evils just mentioned.

Milk itself is produced from food taken in by the mother, and is the richest
part of it. It is in her stomach that the aliment is dissolved, or digested,
which by a combination of powers in the chylopoetic viscera, or parts preparing
the chyle, is so far animalized as to be converted into a kind of white blood;
from whence it has been observed, every animal body is daily recruited. Hence
it is very apparent, that previous to an infant having acquired strength enough
to convert solid food into this wholesome chyle, or white blood, the parent, by
this wise substitution in nature, has previously accomplished this work for the
infant she is to nourish. Whether the parent be able to suckle her own child,
or that office be performed by a wet-nurse, is not here particularly
considered. The design is only to prove that milk is in general the most proper
food for an infant. Whether that be prepared by its own mother, a nurse, or
even by animals, as the cow, or the ass, is equally to the purpose; where the
former cannot be had, the best, and most natural substitute, should be provided.


It can scarcely be improper before I quit the article of suckling, to relate a
recent instance, and a remarkable one out of many, as a proof of the great
degree to which infants may pine for the breast, even to the great hazard of
perishing for the want of it, where the real cause of the disease is not
suspected.

This infant was very healthy when it was three months old, and was then weaned
on account of the illness of the wet nurse; but soon afterward ceased to
thrive, and had continual bowel complaints. At the age of nine months I was
desired to visit it, and was informed that it slept very little, was almost
incessantly crying, and had for many days brought up almost all its food; was
become very rickety, and had all the appearance of an infant almost starved. It
had made trial of almost every kind of food, except the breast, and had been
many weeks under the care of an experienced apothecary; was constantly in a
state of purging, and seemed to have been just kept alive by art.

On the first sight of the child, and upon the very face of this account, it
was very evident, that the infant was not nourished by the food it received,
and that the complaint lay wholly in the first passages. But reduced as it was,
I had little expectation from medicines, and therefore gave as my opinion that
either the child still pined for the breast, in which case, I doubted not, it
would take it, though it had now been weaned six months; or that it ought to be
carried immediately into the country, and be supported for some time only upon
asses milk, or perhaps be fed, now and then, with a little good broth.

My advice being taken, a good breast was procured, which the infant seized the
moment it was put to it, and after sucking sufficiently, soon fell asleep for
several hours; waked without screaming, and took the breast again. It is
sufficient to add, that the child ceased to puke or be purged, and recovered
from that hour; and after sucking eight or nine months longer, became in the
end a fine healthy child.

To return; I am free then to lay it down as an axiom, that milk ought to be
the chief part of the diet of Infants for a certain time, whether it be
breast-milk or any other; I might perhaps say ninety-nine out of a hundred.
Exceptions, I believe, there may be, but much fewer children would perish if no
exception were to be made, than by absurdly rushing into the contrary extreme.
But supposing a very strong child, at the end of the month, really not
satisfied with milk only, and always craving the moment it has been thus fed,
it, doubtless, may have a little boiled bread added to it, two or three times
in the day; but I should be very cautious how I extended it farther. "In Italy,
Holland, Turkey, and through the whole Levant, children are rarely allowed any
other food than the breast-milk, during the first year." BUF^ON. -- In some
extreme northern climates we know they can have no other food, for a much
longer time, and yet, there, the death of an infant is as rare an event as that
of a suckling mother.
In the case, however, of an infant at the breast, if it be always craving as
soon as it is taken from it, previous to allowing a more solid food, the
quality of the nurse's milk, as well as the state of her health should be
inquired into, and the milk be changed if its goodness be suspected. Perhaps
where bread and milk is allowed, whether at a very early or a later period, it
would be an advantage to boil a piece of roll, together with the upper crust,
in a good deal of water, till it is very soft; by which means the bread will
part with some of its acescent quality: the water should then be strained off,
and the bread mixed up with some milk, which ought to be boiled if the child is
very young, or inclined to a purging.

It would, I perceive, lead me beyond all bounds to enter farther into this
matter; and I should not, indeed, have said so much on the subject, had I not
had it much at heart to persuade those whose affections would ever lead them
right, were their judgments not previously perverted. -- I shall only add, that
infants certainly ought not to be fed lying on their backs, but sitting
upright; as they will in this position swallow their food more easily, as well
as more readily discover when they shall have had enough.

If Milk be the proper food for infants brought up by hand, the next inquiry
will naturally be, what milk is the best? and what is the fittest instrument
for feeding with? And herein it is with great pleasure I acknowledge my
obligations to Dr. Hugh Smith, for his ingenious contrivance, set forth some
years ago in his judicious treatise on the Management of Children, in a series
of letters addressed to married women. The milk he likewise advises, is cow's
milk in preference to all others; and I wish to refer the inquisitive reader to
the reasons the Doctor has given, to which I can add nothing but my own
experience of their validity. To the milk, either from the birth or a few weeks
afterward, (but I think in general the sooner the better) should be added a
small quantity of a light jelly made from hartshorn shavings, boiled in water
to the consistence that veal broth acquires when it has stood to be cold. There
is sometimes a difficulty in making this jelly, on account of the hartshorn
being bad; those who shave it, often mixing with it the shavings of trotters,
which may, however, be distinguished by their brittleness. If the shavings are
good, two ounces of them boiled very slowly in a quart of water to a pint, will
make the jelly of a proper consistence.
The design of the jelly is obvious, and rational, at once calculated to render
the food more nutritive, as well as to correct, in some measure, the acescency
of the milk; this quality being thought to abound in the milk of different
animals, in proportion to the quantity of vegetables on which they feed. See
Dr. Young, De Natura et Usu Lactis, in diversis Animalibus.
And the milk of quadrupeds, we know, is produced from vegetable juices only,
whilst breast-milk is formed by a mixture of animal and vegetable food. A
little Lisbon sugar may be added to this compound of jelly and milk, if the
child be not inclined to a purging, or in that case a little loaf sugar; but
the less of either the better. It will be proper to have the milk and jelly
warmed separately, and no more at a time than may be wanted; when it should be
put into the small pot Dr. Smith has contrived for the purpose, which must be
very carefully cleansed and scaled, at least once every day, and the spout be
thoroughly rinsed, lest any four curds should stick about it; and to this end,
it may be convenient to be provided with two. The objection to this mode of
feeding, made by a late writer at Dover, that the pot may often be left foul,
and therefore the food become four, appears to me to be very far fetched: since
if nurses are not to be depended upon in matters of cleanliness, and the
sweetness of the food they are to administer, we can trust them in nothing, and
infants must be continually suffering; there being a hundred particulars
essential to children's health, in which servants cannot be always
superintended, but must be entirely consided in.
At first the milk ought to be boiled, to render it less opening, but when the
child is several months old, or may chance to be costive, the milk need only be
warmed. If it be fresh from the cow, and very rich, a portion of water may be
added to it, whilst the infant is very young.

The boat, the spoon, and the horn, are in no wise comparable to the pot; which
is so contrived, not only as to please the child by its resemblance to the
nipple, and the milk coming slowly into its mouth, but also to afford the
infant some little degree of labor, in order to acquire the quantity it needs,
(which the horn does not); by which means the food is also duly mixed with
saliva. The like little fatigue takes place in children nourished at the
breast, and by this mean it is, that infants, especially when very young, are
not so apt to over-suck, as they are to be overfed by the boat or the spoon,
the food of which being sweet and pleasant, and requiring only the trouble, or
rather the pleasure of swallowing, the child is tempted to take too much at a
time; whilst the nurse often forces down a second or third boat full, in order
to put a stop to the cries, which indigestion from the first or second may have
occasioned.

The writer just now alluded to, as well as Mr. Le Febure de Villebrune,
detracts from the advantages of this mode of feeding, by observing, that
infants may be fed as slowly and cautiously by the spoon: but the fact is, that
a servant will not so feed them, whilst there are so many temptations to the
contrary, (at least I have never met with such an one), nor will children,
indeed, oftentimes suffer it, if they can anywise prevent it, but will be
screaming all the while, instead of being kept quiet by their food; though the
hope of quieting them, it has been observed, is frequently the nurse's sole
motive for giving it. But when an infant can get it only slowly from the pot,
and yet is itself all the while employed in the business, it will be agreeably
diverted while it is acquiring its nourishment, in the same manner that it is
amused at the breast.

The pot is formed in the shape of an Argyle, or gravy-pot, with a long spout,
rising from the bottom, and pierced only with a few small holes at the end,
which is to be covered with a piece of vellum, or parchment; which being left
loose a little way over the spout, is soft and pleasant to the infant's mouth,
and it has been said, is nearly as acceptable to many children as the breast,
as I have often been a witness.

This manner of feeding is not only pleasant to the child but very convenient
to the nurse, and the food equally at hand in the night-as the day, being
easily kept warm by a lamp, or even in the bed. The only objection I have ever
known made to it by those who have made trial of it, is that which I esteem one
of its highest recommendations, which is, that children thus fed are frequently
hungry, that is, they are what nature designed them to be; this food sitting
light on the stomach, and being easily digested, like the breast milk, children
often need a supply of it.

It is a common direction in works of this kind, to point out the properest
times for feeding an infant brought up by hand, and to direct how often it may
safely be fed. I shall just observe therefore, that no adequate rules can be
laid down on the occasion, and on that account none ought to be attempted,
since none can be sufficiently comprehensive; and I am happy in not being at
all at a loss in this instance, wherein writers have differed so widely. For
infants not usually taking too much at a time in this manner of feeding, on
account of the little fatigue which, it was observed, they undergo in acquiring
their nourishment, may generally be permitted to partake of it as often as they
might of the breast. Optimum vero medicamentum est, opportune cibus datus.
Celsus. De Med.
This is, however, by no means the case, when children are allowed to eat thick
victuals, and are fed by the spoon, by which, it has been said, they are always
in danger of taking too much; an evil that cannot be too often pointed out.

I shall only mention one popular objection to the plan here recommended. This
is taken from the many fine children we meet with, who have been brought up by
hand from the birth, and fed with thick bread victuals all the day long, whilst
we every now and then see some of those who have been debarred that sort of
diet, weak and tender till they become a year or two old. Not to stop here to
observe, that this objection militates equally against children living on the
breast, though that is the food nature has designed for them, it will be
sufficient to say, that it is only strong children who may be bred up almost
any how, that can at all digest thick victuals, and that weakly infants, who
are scarcely preserved by the most careful attention to their food, would soon
be hurried out of the world if that were withheld. And this reminds me of an
observation of a very judicious friend in the north of England, which greatly
surprised me at the time, as I had never met with any observation from him
before, the propriety of which was not exceedingly obvious and convincing. Upon
seeing a number of fine children one day in London, he with some shrewdness
observed, that we did not seem to have so many weakly half-starved children as
he met with in the country, and that he had often before made the like
observation in his journies to town. It appeared to me that my friend must lie
under some mistake, and I accordingly mentioned my surprise at such a remark
coming from him; when he removed my astonishment by insisting on the fact, with
the following obvious solution of it. There are, says he, scarcely any but fine
and strong children in London, I apprehend, that live to be two or three years
old, the weaker ones, for want of good air, and exercise, sinking under their
infirmities; whilst the tenderest children in the country by being turned out
to crawl in the wholesome open air, or by sitting at the door almost all the
day, escape the fatality of your gross air and warm nurseries, and survive the
trying periods of infancy, though some of them remain weak and rickety till
they become old enough to endure severe exercise, which is alone able to
strengthen them effectually.

I have no doubt of there being certain exceptions to this mode of feeding,
although very few have actually come to my knowledge, and though I am
persuaded, that as a general plan, it is both a natural and salutary one.
Instances may be met with, however, of some very athletic children who may
require a more nourishing, and perhaps somewhat more solid diet; and the state
of bowels in others, will call for a greater variety of food, and of a kind not
calculated to be administered in the mode here recommended, as has been
already noticed under the head of purging. On these accounts, I would offer
another observation or two, in regard to thick victuals; and first, that in
families accustomed to bring up their children by the spoon, I think I have
found a greater number of infants well nourished by the french roll boiled in
water to a jelly, and afterward diluted with milk, than on any other kind of
pap. From such families I have likewise learned, that some change in the food
is, however, frequently necessary, and will be indicated by the degree of
relish which the infant may discover toward different kinds of food, as well
as by their effects on the bowels; though the child be not supposed to be at
such times really unwell. Such changes principally respect the different kinds
of bread, or other farinaceous substance usually mixed with milk, and sometimes
the substitution of broth, for a few days, in the place of the latter.

When children brought up by hand become four or five months old, especially if
strong and healthy, they may, doubtless, be allowed a thicker kind of victuals,
because their digestive powers being by this time become stronger, they are
able to extract good nourishment from it; though this change is not equally
necessary for children brought up at the breast, at least, such do not require
it so early; breast milk being more nourishing than any other. The first
addition of this kind however, whenever it becomes necessary, I am persuaded,
ought to be broth "I cannot help remarking here, that the gravy of beef or
mutton, not over roasted, and without fat, properly diluted with water, is the
wholsomest and most natural, as well as nourishing broth that can be made." See
the abovementioned Letters of Dr. Hugh Smith.
, which with a little bread beat up in it in the form of panada, will be at
once an agreeable and wholesome change, and prepare them for farther advances in
this way. But as this cannot well be given oftener than once or twice aday, a
little bread and milk may also be allowed them every morning and evening, as
their strength and circumstances may require. A crust of bread likewise, as
soon as the child has a couple of teeth, will amuse and nourish it, whilst it
will assist the cutting of the rest, as well as carry down a quantity of the
saliva; a secretion too precious to be lost, when the digestive powers are to
be farther employed. As the child grows older, to broth may be added light
puddings, made of bread, semolina, tapioca, The best tapioca, I believe, comes
from the French West India Islands, and is called by the general term, farine.
It is in very common use also in our West India Islands, where it is made into
thin cakes, and is called cassada; in this form, therefore, it is most likely
to be genuine, and may be preserved for a very long time.
or rice; salep boiled in milk, and such like. But to feed a child with veal,
chicken, or other animal food, before nature has given it teeth enough to chew
it, howsoever small it may be minced in the kitchen, is altogether unnatural,
Ante dentium eruptionem non convenient cibi solidiores. Ideo natura quae nih^
frustra facit, and non deficit in necessariis, dentes ipsis denegavit, fed lac
concessit, quod masticatione non eget. Primeros.
and can prove nourishing only to such children, as from the great strength of
their natural constitution, need least of all the assistance of art. It is by
degrees only, that children ought to be brought to such food, which at a
certain period, indeed, is as necessary as a light diet at an earlier age. It
is true, the error of some parents runs the contrary way, and their children
are kept too long upon a fluid, or too slender diet, whence their bellies and
joints become enlarged, and the bones of the lower extremities too weak to
support them, at an age when they want more exercise than their nurses can give
them. And when they can go alone, not only is a little light meat and certain
vegetables to be allowed them once a day, with puddings, or blamange,
white-pot, custards, and such like kitchen preparations of milk, "Infancy and
childhood demand thin, copious nourishing aliment." Arbuthnot, On Aliments.
but even a little red wine is beneficial to many constitutions. This will not
only promote digestion, and obviate in a great measure a disposition to worms,
but by strengthening the habit, will also render children less liable to become
rickety, at the very period they are very much disposed to it. But so many
little infants, on the other hand, fall a sacrifice to the use of indigestible
food under the age of six months, being carried off by vomiting, purging, or
fits, that whoever would preserve them over the most dangerous period of
infancy, cannot too cautiously attend to their diet at this time. From a note
in Dr. Smith's letters it appears, that the average of births annually, within
the bill^ of mortality, for ten successive years, was 16, 283; out of which
were buried under five years of age 10, 145, and from amongst these 7, 987 were
under two years. So that almost two thirds of the children born in London and
its environs, become lost to society, and more than three-fourths of these die
under two years of age. This proves how hazardous a period that of infancy is
in this country; and I am sorry there is so much reason to be persuaded, that
the want of air, exercise, and a proper diet, has added, unnecessarily, to its
dangers; there being no such mortality in barbarous nations, whose inhabitants
live in a state of nature, or in any part of the known world, amongst other
young animals. Although these, and other calculations I have seen, should be
found ever so accurate, it is a pleasant reflection, (to whatsoever the
circumstance may be owing) that since the time they were taken, the proportion
of deaths at the early period above alluded to, has been very considerably
decreasing; and the writer has noticed that for the last three years the
average of deaths according to these bills has not been more than six in
sixteen.


Before I close this head of the management of children, perhaps the most
important of all, I shall point out the most suitable diet under the different
complaints to which they are most liable. And after the hints that have been
thrown out through the former part of this work, I need only observe, for the
sake of those who are unacquainted with diseases, that as light a diet as is
possible is usually called for when a child is unwell, let the disorder be
almost whatever it may. If a fever should accompany it, the child will require
still less food than in any other complaint, but plenty of drinks; which may
also be so calculated as to furnish nearly as much nourishment as the infant
will require, and may in summertime be given cold. Such are barley-water,
water in which a crust of bread has been boiled, or if a purging attends,
rice-water, and a drink made of hartshorn shavings, with a little baked flour
in it. In this complaint, wherein more nourishment is required to support the
child under it, baked flour mixed up with boiled milk, (as mentioned under the
article of purging) is admirably calculated both as a proper diet and medicine;
and if kept in a dry place, may be preserved fit for use for a considerable
time. For the like complaint, the food directed by Dr. Smith is very well
adapted, and will afford a little variety. He orders a table-spoonful of ground
rice to be boiled with a little cinnamon, in half a pint of water, till the
water is nearly consumed; a pint of milk is then to be added to it, and the
whole to summer for five minutes: it is afterward to be strained through a
lawn sieve, and made palatable with a little sugar. In this way, or joined with
baked flour, as mentioned above, milk may generally be made to agree perfectly
well even when the bowels are purged; and when it does so, proves exceedingly
nourishing. Should it chance to disagree, owing to an acidity in the first
passages, good beef-broth ought to be made trial of, which may be thickened
with baked flour, instead of bread, and makes a very pleasant, as well as
antiacescent diet.

Perhaps much more has been said on the subject of acidity, by some writers,
then really ought to have been, or it may at least be suspected, that a proper
attention has not been paid to the peculiar circumstances of infants, who are
all much disposed to it. Acidity is probably rather an effect, than the first
cause of the disorders of infants; though there is no doubt, that their
complaints are afterward aggravated by an abounding acid; or rather, probably,
from this natural acid becoming morbidly acrid, through its being accidentally
confined in the first-passages. Nature, however, designed the food of infants
to be acescent, and and till the body be disordered, and digestion hurt from
one cause or other, Such cause, it has been observed, is very generally an over
quantity of food, of heavy and indigestible diet; which, indeed, prove a more
frequent occasion of acidity, than any thing else.
this quality of their food is not likely to be very injurious to them. It is
true, indeed, that as any similar complaints in adults, who feed on different
diets, will, caeteris parihus, have their varieties, and each have some
relation to the different qualities of their food; so it is not to be wondered
at, that the complaints of infants should be attended with wind and other marks
of acidity, which in adults are the least hurtful of all; and are, indeed,
pretty easily corrected in children. When they are much troubled with wind,
therefore, it cannot be wrong to mix some carminative seeds, or the waters
distilled from them, now and then, with their food, Though such an occasional
addition to their food is often exceedingly useful, I cannot help speaking
against its being made a constant practice, by which children not only suffer
when by accident, or absence from home, it has been neglected, but it destroys
the very design with which it was used, by the stomach becoming accustomed to
it.
such as sweet fennel, or cardamon seeds, bruised very fine; but dill-water is
that I have usually recommended, and being a liquid, is always ready to be
added to the food, without loss of time.

Children, however, become less subject to wind and hurtful acidities as they
grow older, and the stomach gets stronger, as it is called. But should these
complaints, notwithstanding, continue obstinate, a little fine powder of
camomile flowers, mixed in water, and warmed with a little ginger, will prove
exceedingly bracing to the stomach and bowels, and render them less disposed to
acidity. Exercise also, according to the age and strength, is a grand
preservative and remedy, and especially making infants break wind after sucking
or feeding. And this may generally be effected, as every nurse knows, by
raising the infant up, and gently tapping it on the back, or rubbing its
stomach, before it be lain down in the cradle to sleep.

I shall only add farther, that when milk is frequently thrown up curdled, a
little prepared oyster-shell powder may be added to it, or a very small
quantity of almond-soap, or of common salt, It is a very great mistake, though
a common one, to imagine that salt will dispose to the scurvy. This mistake is
founded upon the bad effects of the long use of salted meats; but salt taken
with fresh meats is quite a different thing. And I shall just remark, that salt
and water is one of the best lotions for the mouth, and preservative from the
toothache, and also makes an excellent wash for the face; which will remove
some kind of pimples without any risk of injury to the constitution.
which will not at all injure the flavor, and will prevent this change
happening too soon in the stomach.

I shall now close this head, with some observations relating to wet-nurses and
to weaning.

The first and essential point in a wet-nurse is doubtless, that her milk be
good, to which end it is necessary she be healthy and young, her bowels rather
costive than otherwise; and not of weak nerves, nor disposed to menstruate
whilst she gives suck. The chief marks of good milk, are, its being thin, of a
bluish color, rather sweet, and in great quantity; and if under six months
old, it is, doubtless, an advantage. Her nipple ought to be small, but not
short, and the breast round and prominent. She ought to have good teeth, at
least, her gums should be sound, and of a florid color. She must be perfectly
sober, and rather averse from strong liquors; which young and healthy people
seldom need in order to their having plenty of milk. She should be cleanly in
her person, good-tempered, careful, fond of children, and watchful in the
night, or at least, not liable to suffer in her health from being robbed of her
sleep. And I cannot help adding here, that she ought not to be disposed to
prescribe medicines; otherwise something improper can scarcely fail at one time
or other to be administered, and perhaps to the no small injury of the child.

Previous to the observations I have to offer on the head of weaning infants,
it may not be amiss to drop a few words on the proper diet for wet-nurses. And
here, an invariable attention should be paid to natural constitution and habit.
Due allowance being made for these, it may be said, that milk, broth, and white
soups, plain puddings, flesh meats of easy digestion, and a due mixture of
vegetables, with plenty of diluting drinks, and such proportion of more
generous liquors, (spirits excepted) as the variety of circumstances shall
direct, will be a proper diet for suckling women. Respecting vegetables
particularly, the strictest regard should be had to constitution and habit.
Wherever vegetables, or even acids, uniformly agree with the suckling parent or
nurse, I believe a healthy child will never suffer by their partaking of them,
but on the contrary, the milk being thereby rendered thin and cooling, will
prove more nourishing and salutary, in consequence of being easier of digestion.

The proper age for weaning a child is to be gathered from the particular
circumstances attending it. The child ought to be in good health, especially in
regard to its bowels, and doubtless, ought first to have cut, at least four of
its teeth. This seldom takes place till it is about a twelvemonth old; and it
may be observed, that healthy women who suckle their own children, and take
proper exercise, do not usually become pregnant again in less time. We shall
not be very wide of the matter, therefore, if we say that children in general
ought not to be weaned much earlier than this; making proper allowances,
however, for all just exceptions to general rules. Astr^c advises children to
be suckled till they are two years old; but, I think, without giving any
sufficient reasons.


Any preparation for weaning is generally needless, and especially that of
feeding children beforehand, though made a common excuse for stuffing them
whilst at the breast, with indigestible food. I have seen many mothers
needlessly torturing themselves with the fear of their children being weaned
with difficulty, because they could not get them to feed when eight or ten
months old, and still at the breast; but I have always found such children
wean, and feed just as well as others, when once taken wholly from it. I,
therefore, never have any fear in that respect, and should be happy if any
thing I can say from experience, may be the means of lessening the trouble of
parents on this occasion, as well as counteracting, if possible, a sentiment
encouraged by several writers, which has, I believe, no real foundation in
fact, but has too often been productive both of much inconvenience and
mischief. But I do not by this intend to say, that a child of eight or ten
months old would be injured, or oftentimes not benefited, by a little food
once a day of a more solid nature than the breast-milk, as indeed I have
intimated before; but when children happen to be weaned much earlier, and are
fed almost from the birth merely with that view, (which is often the case) they
may be essentially injured by it.

When the weaning is once entered upon, a great part of their food ought still
to be of milk, with puddings, broths, and but little meat; and they should
never be fed, or even suffered to drink in the night, from the first; supposing
them to be weaned at a proper age. The mere giving them drink, even only a few
nights, creates the pain and trouble of two weanings instead of one, and if it
be continued much longer, it not only breaks the rest, but the child will
acquire a habit of being fond of drinking; the consequence of which very often
is a large belly, weak bowels, general debility, lax joints, and all the
symptoms of rickets. The child need only to be fed the last thing before the
nurse goes to bed, which may be generally done without waking it: and whilst
the child seems to enjoy this sleepy meal, it becomes a most pleasant
employment to the nurse, and much more to a mother, from observing (...)
greedily the child takes its food, and how satisfied it will lie for many hours
on the strength of this meal; -- the mention of which naturally leads me to
consider the next article proposed, viz.

SLEEP and WATCHING.
AFTER what has been already advanced on this article, under the head of their
complaints, it will be necessary only to observe, that healthy children sleep a
great deal for the first three or four days after they are born, probably from
having been previously accustomed to it. They ought not, however, to be
suffered to continue this habit in the day time, but should be gradually broken
of it, and indeed if not indulged, they will not be so much disposed to sleep
as is generally imagined, and will therefore take more rest in the night, which
is mutually beneficial to the child and the mother; who, especially if she
suckles, will be the less disturbed, at a time when she herself particularly
requires this refreshment.

Therefore, when infants are sleepless in the night, they should be kept more
awake, and have as much exercise as possible in the day time, which though they
be ever so young may be pretty considerable, (as will be directed more at large
in its place,) by playing with them, or dandling on the knee, and otherwise
amusing them; and when older by every kind of exercise they can bear. The
child, if healthy, will soon contract a habit of being very much awake while it
is light, through that lively and restless spirit peculiar to infancy, and by
this means, another evil will be much avoided, that of often laying a child
down to sleep in the day time, for hours together, loaded with a thick dress,
and covered besides with heavy clothes in a soft bed, or the cradle.

But though I am confident these cautions will have their use, I am equally
satisfied that many children have much less sleep than they require, as I shall
have occasion presently to notice; but then this deficiency is chiefly in the
night, and is often the consequence of some complaints which the child labors
under. Upon these, however, sufficient has already been said in the former part
of this work, to which therefore the reader is referred.

Before I quit this article, it may be remarked, that the custom of constantly
placing infants on their backs, whether in the cradle or bed, is very improper:
for by this means, the superfluous humor secreted in the mouth, which, in the
time of teething especially, is very considerable, cannot be freely discharged,
and must fall down into the stomach, where its abundance occasions various
disorders. Infants should therefore be frequently laid on their sides,
particularly the right, as favorable to the stomach getting easily rid of its
contents; to which side also children, when strong enough, will instinctively
turn, if not prevented by the weight or confinement of their own clothes, or
those of the cradle or bed. The chief apology, for all which, is a fear of the
infant's falling, or turning on its face; but this is rather an apology for the
neglect of that necessary attention to children, which whenever, it can be
commanded should never be spared them.

It only remains, under this article, to say something of the Cradle, which
most writers have spoken against. I believe, there is no doubt but the custom
of laying children down awake, and rocking them in a cradle in the day time, or
at seven or eight o'clock in the evening, when they are to go into their
night's sleep, as it is called, may be an occasion of making them more wakeful
in the night, or at least may may cause them to expect that kind of motion
whenever they awake. But yet I cannot help thinking, there is something so
truly natural, as well as pleasant, in the wavy motion of a cradle, (when made
use of at proper times) and so like that children have been used to before they
are born, being then suspended and accustomed to ride, as it were, or be gently
swung in a soft fluid, upon every motion of the mother, and even during her
sleep, from the effects of respiration; that always wishing to follow nature as
I do, I cannot, on the whole, but give an opinion rather in favor of the
cradle. the objections made by some late writers to this sentiment militate
only against the abuse of it, from any violent rocking; as though infants must
necessarily be jumbled in a cradle like travelers in a mailcoach.
It is, at least, among the little things in which we may harmlessly err, and
in which every mother may therefore be safely guided by her own opinion, or
even by her feelings. And if the child in consequence of being sometimes rocked
to sleep in the day time, shall expect it when it awakes in the night, it will
not be very difficult to find a substitute for it; and indeed parents seem, as
it were by instinct, to pat and gently move a child, whether lying on the lap
or the arm, whenever it appears to awake prematurely. -- I shall only add on
this head, what cannot be too often urged, that however wakeful a child may be
in the night, it cannot receive a greater unkindness than from the exhibition
of Godfrey's cordial, syrup of poppies, or any other opiate, and given as they
usually are, to procure sleep, not because it is necessary, or proper for the
child, but because it is convenient to the nurse. It were, therefore, a good
rule in a nursery, to forbid administering any kind of medicine without
particular permission. And in regard to watchfulness, as was observed in
another place, it is usually a mere symptom, and should be treated according to
its cause; but in a general way it may be said, that nothing can so safely and
effectually contribute to procure natural rest as that exercise to be farther
considered under the next head.

MOTION and REST.
IT is only the former of these that will claim much of our attention, as
infants ought scarcely ever to be in a quiescent posture, but when they are
asleep; and happy for them, that active principle with which nature has
endowed them, is so vigorous and overflowing, that they will hardly submit to
it. Exercise, like air, is indeed of so much importance to children, that they
cannot possibly be truly healthy without it; care only should be taken that it
be properly suited to their age.

The first kind of exercise, it has been said, consists in dandling, as it is
called, patting the back after feeding, and gently raising the child up and
down in the arms; taking care at first not to toss it very high, infants being
very early susceptible of fear, and even capable of being thrown into fits by
it. Another exercise adapted to this tender age, and of the utmost advantage,
is rubbing them with the hand. This should be done all over, at least twice a
day, when they are dressed and undressed, and ought to be continued for some
time, being peculiarly agreeable to the child, as it constantly testifies by
stretching out its little limbs, and pushing them against the hand, with a
smile expressive of the satisfaction it receives from it. Such gentle exercise
may be partially repeated every time the child's cloths are changed, by rubbing
the lower limbs, and every other part within reach.

When children are older, their exercise should be proportionally increased,
and as has been observed, they ought never to be carried in a quiescent
posture, but the arm that supports them should be continually in such motion as
the nurse is able to continue. For children, it has been noticed, delight to be
in constant motion; and this exuberant activity is given them for the wisest
purposes, and ought by no means to be connteracted. And I notice the mode of
carrying them, because I have seen children flung carelessly over the arm in
such a manner, as neither affords a child any exercise, nor allows it to give
any motion to itself; which a lively child will always endeavor to do. And,
indeed, the manner of carrying an infant, is of more importance than is
generally imagined, for from it, the child will contract a habit, good or bad,
that it will not readily give up, and may be as much disposed to become rickety
by improper management in the arms, as if it were lying wet in the cradle; the
ill effects of which have been pointed out already.

Much as there has been said on this article, I cannot suffer it to be closed
without dropping a hint or two with a peculiar reference to females; upon whom
beside every infirmity common to the other sex, is imposed the painful task of
childbearing. It is the benefit of the lower class of people, indeed, that I
have here principally in view; though the caution is not utterly unnecessary
elsewhere. -- The many distressing, and sometimes fatal labors I have been
witness to, have led me to regard with a kind of horror a rickety, distorted
female infant, whose parents or nurse's neglect, or ignorance, is heaping up
for it additional sufferings and dangers, to those which are great enough under
every advantage that art, and good health contribute.

From the age of two years therefore, or rather earlier, this care is
especially called for, and beside every caution already pointed out, lays a
strict prohibition on girls being suffered to sit, for hours together, on a low
seat, whereby that assemblage of bones, called the pelvis, or basin, is pressed
between the lower extremities and the inferior part of the back bone, and is
made to grow out of its natural form. The consequences of this change of
figure, if it be any wise considerable, cannot fail to be productive of
increased pain and dangers in parturition, frequently equally fatal both to the
parent and her offspring.

I am aware, that many poor people are not in a situation to give their
children all the exercise they require; they may, however, suffer them to
afford as much as possible to themselves, by allowing them to crawl about on
the floor, near an open window or door, instead of compelling them to lie on
their back, or to sit upright, pinned in a chair; the ill-consequences of which
are so exceedingly evident.

It is hoped no apology may be thought necessary for these obvious remarks,
since no pains should be thought too great if they may prevent the evils here
pointed out, nor can too much be said to inculcate good nursing (and especially
exercise) which is alone adequate thereto. A proper attention to these articles
has been conceived to be of so much importance, that the benevolent Governors
of the British Lying-in hospital, have lately given orders, that some brief
Directions on these heads should be drawn up, and given to every mother, on her
leaving that Charity.


It may be a proper inquiry in this place, at what age children should be put
on their feet, a point on which people have differed considerably; but I
apprehend nothing more is required than to follow nature, whose progress is
always gradual, as our imitations of her should be, and we shall then seldom
run very wide of her intention. If we take notice of a healthy child, it is, as
has been said, always in motion, and as soon as it gets strength, it will
support itself by the help of its hands and feet, and will crawl about wherever
it is permitted. From this exercise, it will soon acquire an increase of
strength, and whenever it is upheld by the arms, and disentangled from the
weight of its clothes at the time of dressing and undressing, it will naturally
walk up the waist of its mother, or nurse, I cannot help taking notice here of
an imprudence on this occasion, which it is well if it has not been prejudicial
oftener than has been suspected; I mean, that of suffering a child to crawl so
high up the neck, as renders the mother, or nurse, incapable of raising the
arms high enough to support it. For not only may a child be suffered to slip
out of the hands, but the mother may be injured. I have felt much on this
occasion, from seeing tender and delicate ladies with their arms on a stretch,
suffering a heavy child, perhaps with its shoes on, to crawl over the breasts,
distended with milk, and squeezing them so forcibly against the edge of the
stays, that they have sometimes cried out from the pain, and yet not been able,
at the moment, to bring the infant down into the lap.
and by its manner of moving its limbs, and its bearing more or less on the
arms, will show what advances it has made. Whenever it is strong enough,
however, it will have attained sufficient knowledge to walk by itself, and will
never attempt it till it is fully equal to the task. It will then be perfectly
safe to permit it to follow its inclination, at least as far as the straitness
of its limbs is concerned; and I think I may defy any one to produce a single
instance of a child getting crooked legs, from being suffered to walk as soon
as it has been disposed to make the attempt. The mischief is, we lead on
children prematurely to the trial, by leading-strings, goe-carts, and other
contrivances, calculated only to spare idle nurses, I cannot avoid once more
risking giving offense, that I may do every thing in my power to induce parents
to give the utmost attention in regard to exercise, for the want of which I
have with much concern beheld some children of people of large fortune turn out
as rickety as those of the laboring poor. In some instances, I have been so
satisfied this has been owing merely to a want of exercise, that I have
informed ladies, that from the appearance and manner of the nursery-maid, I was
certain their children were not exercised sufficiently; and have pointed out
the bad consequences that must ensue. And where the advice has not been taken,
I have as constantly been consulted some months afterward, about the
cold-bath, for children a year and half, or two years old, who have only been
able to waddle across the room, with their knees knocking together, and reeling
at every step, so as not to be trusted alone.
or what is really pitiable, to allow poor people time to attend to other
concerns, who are obliged to work for their bread. But where this is not the
case, such contrivances are unpardonable, and are the consequence of ignorance,
or idleness, which are productive of great evils; and then by way of excuse it
is asked, at what age a child may be put on its feet -- A question, I
apprehend, that ought to be answered only in the manner I have done -- I have
seen a child walking alone before it has been nine months old, and ten months,
carrying a heavy play-thing in his hands; whilst other children, rendered weak
and rickety by mismanagement, have been unable to go alone at two years of age.
Leave children to themselves, and they will afford a satisfactory answer in
time.

It is said, however, by a sensible writer Dr. Hugh Smith's Letters to married
women.
, that children's legs do not become crooked by putting them too early on their
feet, and asks if any other animal has crooked legs, though they stand on them
almost as soon as they are born. But the cases, I apprehend, are widely
different; quadrupeds and fowls are designed by nature to be early on their
legs, and it is necessary they should be so. They are accordingly calculated
for it, their bones being strongly ossified from the birth; but this is, by no
means, the case with the human species, and therefore no argument can be
founded upon it without considerable latitude, and making such allowances for
the different circumstances of children as have been pointed out. But if it is
meant only to suffer children to feel their way, if I may so speak, for
themselves, they will never deceive us, nor do I think their limbs ever become
crooked, but by urging them to it by contrivances of our own, for which poverty
is the only apology that can possibly be offered.

A Note of Dr. Buchan on the subject of giving exercise to children, which some
people from their poverty cannot spare time to afford them, charmed me
exceedingly. The good sense and philanthropy manifested in it, as well as a
desire of extending its useful contents, will I hope be apology sufficient for
transcribing it, especially as it is at present so apposite to my purpose. And
though I cannot flatter myself that government, however benevolently disposed,
will, or perhaps can, at this time, adopt such a plan, either from his
recommendation or mine, it is, nevertheless, in the power of people of large
fortunes, both in town and country, to give it very considerable influence,
especially if the premium were made double for such children as should be
produced in good health. The Doctor's words are,

"If it were made the interest of the poor to keep their children alive, we
should lose very few of them. A small preimum given every year to each poor
family, for every child they have alive at the year's end, would save more
infants lives than if the whole revenue of the crown were expended on hospitals
for that purpose. This would make the poor esteem fertility a blessing, whereas
many of them think it the greatest curse that can befall them;" and I may add, I
have known them express great thankfulness when their children were dead.

A very few words may suffice on the article of Rest, the irregularities
therein being far less numerous and important than in the former. It will be
sufficient to notice them in regard to the improper inducement of young
children to continue in action after they feel themselves wearied, and in
keeping them out of their beds beyond a proper hour. Children in health never
wish to sit still when they do not actually feel it to be necessary, much less
to go to bed unseasonably soon. But it is to remembered, that young people
require more sleep, and to be longer in a horizontal posture than adults; for
though they usually rise very early, they get to rest more than proprtionally
soon, being disposed to fall asleep almost the moment they are still; and this
is natural to them, and is one demonstration of the advantage of exercise.

If I had not already far exceeded the bounds I had intended, I should be
induced to say something on the Manner in which Exercise becomes so beneficial
to children -- I shall, however, just observe, that it tends to push forward
the blood through the small vessels, and to unfold them in the manner nature
has designed them to be extended, in order to promote the growth of the infant,
whilst it preserves the blood in a proper state of fluidity, and promotes both
the Secretions and excretions; which are the next things it was proposed to
consider.

RETENTION and EXCRETION.
EVERY medical reader will be sensible, how greatly health depends upon a due
proportion between the daily supplies, and the various discharges of the body:
the latter will vary according to the diet, age, and particular mode of life of
each individual. The excretions of infants, however, insensible perspiration
excepted, are chiefly from the bowels and bladder; but the latter is not very
liable to disorders. It will be sufficient therefore to say, that the retention
of urine is chiefly soon after birth, and is usually removed by applying a
bladder of hot water to the belly, and gentle rubbing with a little warm
brandy, or an onion, and throwing up a clyster; or should these fail, the
infant may be put up to the breast in a pan of (...) water, and take a little
marsh-mallow, or parsley-tea, sweetened with honey, with the addition of a few
drops of the spirit of nitrous ether. This, if there be no mal-formation of
parts, will generally produce the desired effect in the course of a few hours;
though cases have occurred in which infants have voided no urine for the space
of four days, and have suffered very little inconvenience. Some of the old
writers have spoken also of incontinence of urine, arising from weakness of the
sphincter of the bladder, but I have never met with it in the infant-state.
They prescribe agrimony and myrrh, and direct astringent fomentations of red
wine to the belly, the perinaeum, or feat, and the loins.

The present observations are therefore chiefly confined to the Bowels, which
would call for a scrupulous attention in this place, if so many things relative
to them had not been discussed in the former part of this treatise. It were
needless, therefore, to say more, than to remind common readers, that infants
are rarely healthy long together, who have not two or three stools every day;
or should they be more, for the first three months, if the child be brought up
at the breast, and the nurse have a sufficiency of milk, it will generally
thrive the better. The stools likewise ought to be loose, of a yellow color,
free from lumps, or curdly matter, and should come away without griping. On the
other hand, if an infant is brought up by hand, the danger generally lies in
the other extreme, such children being disposed to be purged, and to have
griping and sour stools, from the acescent, and often indigestible nature of
their food, especially if fed by the spoon; and therefore require an early
attention when their bowels are disposed to be open, and their food to be
changed, in the manner directed under the article of Purging.

THE PASSIONS of the MIND.
THIS is the last Article mentioned as included in the Non-naturals, and on
which I shall be very brief, it being the happiness of Infants to be very
little affected by them. This article, can, therefore, relate to them merely in
regard to their mode of expressing such passions, and principally in respect to
Laughter and Crying. The former, if too long kept up, or too violent, may not
only induce the hiccough, but it is said, may even throw an infant into fits.
The latter is, indeed, much oftener suspected of being mischievous, and chiefly
by occasioning fits, or a rupture: the excess of both these affections should,
therefore, be guarded against. Moderate, and not too frequent crying, however,
ought not to be alarming; and, indeed, a variety of considerations induce me to
believe, that this expression of the passions in Infants is not only much more
harmless in itself than is generally imagined, but is also, in some respects
salutary. The first Cries it makes we know to be so, and that children recover
from the paroxysms of some complaints (as was mentioned in regard to the Croup)
by an effort of this kind. It is evident likewise, how very much Health depends
on a free circulation of the blood through the lungs, and on their free
expansion from the dilatation of the bronchial, or air-vessels, that run
through them. Fletus moderatus pueris non obest -- pectus dilatat et calefacit.
Primeros.
But as infants are incapable of giving themselves any exercise, and indeed of
receiving that kind which tends to promote such an effect, I have conceived
Crying to be an effort which Nature may have wisely substituted in its stead.
In support of this sentiment, which I conceived not to be a very common one, I
quoted, in the former edition, the above authority of Primerose. Mr. Le Febure
de Villebrune's translation has since furnished me with a better and more
ancient one. -- Aristot. Politic. Lib. vii. C. 17, where the idea is supported
more at large.
Whatever is truly natural I always conceive to be right, though every thing is
capable of being abused, and the most beneficial dictates of nature may be
exceeded. I am satisfied, however, that the pacifying of children by improper
means, and especially cramming them with food when they are not hungry,
(against which so much has been said) occasions far greater evils in thousands
of instances, than ever were produced by the efforts of Crying. -- But the
Nurse who can with calmness, hear an Infant cry, without attempting to pacify
it, by every proper means, is a Monster in human shape, unfit to be trusted
with the care of any animal being, much less with a tender, helpless creature,
whose only language, by which it can express its wants or its sufferings, is
its Tears.

It cannot help trespassing on the reader's time to make one apology more for
having dwelt so long on this, as well as on several other heads; my motive has
been the desire of instructing, though in some instances at the risk of
displeasing; and for the sake of my fair readers, who may do me the honor of
consulting this work, I have endeavored to lessen their Fears, as far as they
have appeared to be needless, wherever no other Remedy could be offered.

I shall conclude by observing, that, though the Passions of the Mind refer so
little to Infants, they relate very materially to the Wet-nurse; who besides
endeavoring to keep her spirits as calm as possible, ought to be exceedingly
careful not to put a child to her breast, when under the influence of any
violent passion, of whatever kind it may be, the bad effects of which have
already been instanced in the former part of this treatise. And I shall think
myself well recompensed for the trouble I have had, if this, or other hints,
may prove the means of lessening the dangers of the infant-state, and the
consequent sad fatality that attends it; as well as of abating the anxiety of
the fond Mother, who after having brought her tender Charge into the world with
Sorrow, is pierced with double Pangs at its leaving it. -- An Event which, as
Experience warrants me to say, may by Art and good Management, be often
prevented, the author ardently hopes the fond Parent may have fewer occasions
to lament, and her rising Sons being athletic.

THE END.
An Alphabetical List of Medicines recommended in this Work, to which the
College of Physicians has given new Names. -- Both the Latin and English Names
are given, of which, that one will stand first which more frequently occurs in
the Work.
A.
NEW NAMES. Names formerly in Use. ANTIMONIUM tartarisatum, Tartarum emeticum,
Tartarised Antimony. Emetic Tartar. Argentum nitratum, causticum lunare,
Nitrated Silver. Lunar Caustic. Aromatic Confection, Cordial Confection,
Confectio Aromatica. Confectio cardiaca. Aqua Cupri ammoniati, Aqua Sapphirina,
Water of ammoniated Copper. Sapphire water. Aqua Kali puri, Lixivium
saponarium. Water of pure Kali. Soay-Ley. Aqua Ammoniae, Spirius Salis
Ammoniaci, Water of Ammonia. Volatile Spirit of Salt ammoniae. Aqua ammoniae
acitatae, Spiritus Mindereri, Water of acetated Ammonia, Minderus's Spirit. C.
Catechu, Terra Japonicae. Calx of Antimony, Calcined Antimony, Calx Antimonii.
Antimonium calcinatum. Camphorated Spirit, Camphorated Sp. of wine, Spiritus
camphoratus. Spiritus vinosus camphor. Compound water of acetated Litharge,
Vegeto-mineral water. Aqua Lithargyri acetati composita. Aqua vegetabilis
minerali^. Compound Tincture of Gentian, Bitter Tincture, Tinctura Gentianae
composita. Tinctura amara. Compound Tincture of Aloes. Elixir of Aloes Tinctura
Aloes composita. Elixir Aloes. Compound Spirit of vitriolic Ether, Hoffman's
anodyne Liquor, Spiritus Ether is vitriolici compositus. Liquor anodynus
mineralis. Compound Spirit of Ammonia, Aromatic volatile Spirit, Spiritus
Ammoniae compositus. Spiritus volatilis aromat. Hydrargyrus muriatus, Merc.
corros. subl. alb. Muriated Quicksilver. White corrosive sublimate. L.
Labdanum-plaister, Stomach-plaister, Emplastrum Ladani. Emplastrum
stomachicum. Litharge-plaister, The common plaster, or Simple Diachylon,
Emplastrum lithargyri. Emplastrum commune. M.
Muriatic Acid, Spirit of Sea Salt, Acidum muriaticum. Spiritus Salis marini. N.
Natron praeparatum, Sal Sodae, Prepared Natron. Salt of Soda. O.
Ointment of acetated Cerusse, Ointment of Lead, Ung. Cerussae acetatae,
Unguentum Saturnium. P.
Powder of Scammony with Calomel, Basilic Powder, Pulvis e Scammonio cum
Calomelane. Pulvis Basilicus. S.
Sp. aeth^ris vitriolici, Spiritus Vitrioli dulcis, Sp. of vitriolic Ether.
Sweet Spirit of Vitriol. Spirit of nitrous Ether, Sweet Spirit of Nitre,
Spiritus aetheris Nitrosi. Spiritus Nitri ^ulcis. T.
Ta^^arisated Natron, Rochelle Salts, Natron tartarisatum. Sal Rupellensis.
Tinctura Catechu, Tinctura Terrae Japonicae, Tincture of Catechu. Tincture of
Japan-earth. Tincture of Opium, Laudanum, U.
Unguentum Calcis Hydrargyri albae, Unguentum e Mercurio praecipitato, Ointment
of the white Calx of Quicksilver. Ointment of white Precipitate. Unguentum
Hydrargyri nitrats, Unguentum citrinum, Ointment of Nitrated Quicksilver.
Citrine Ointment. V.
Volatile Liquor of Hartshorn, Spirits of Hartshorn, Liquor vol. cornu Cervi.
Spiritus volatilis cornu-Cervi. W.
Water of Kali, Ley of Tartar, Aqua Kali. Lixivium Tartari. Water of acetated
Litharge, Extract of Lead, Aqua Lithargyri acetati. Extractum Saturni.

Definition of Technical and other Terms, not fully explained in every passage
where they may occur; with a view to render the work more familiar to some
readers, when consulting particular or detached parts.
A.
A BDOMEN, The Belly. Anus, The opening of the great gut, or lower bowel. D.
Dentition, Teething. Diaphoretics, Medicines promoting Perspiration.
Diarrhoea, A Purging. Drastic, Rough or violent. Duodenum, One of the small
Bowels. Duramater, A Membrane covering the Brain. E.
Erysipelas, Saint Anthony's sire. G.
Gangrene, A Mortification of any part. Gastric juices, Secretions in the
stomach, and from various glandular parts contained within the Belly. I.
Icteric, Appertaining to the Jaundice. Intestines, The Bowels or Guts.
Intestinal, Belonging to the Bowels. L.
Longitudinal Sinus, A passage for the blood from the forepart of the head to
the hind-head. M.
Medulla spinalis, The Marrow of the backbone. Mesentery, The connecting
Membrane of the Bowels. O.
Os sacrum, The extreme part of the backbone. P.
Palatum molle, The back parts of the Mouth and Throat. Pancreas, The
Sweetbread, a large gland. Pathognomonic Symptoms Symptoms denoting the Essence
of any disease. Periosteum, A Membrane covering the bones, and uncut-teeth.
Pubes, The space between the two groins. Pylorus, The inferior opening of the
stomach. S.
Spine of the Tibiae, The edges of the shin-bones. U.
Urethra, The Passage from the Bladder. Uvula, The small pendulous portion of
flesh, at the back of the mouth. V.
Vertebrae, The joints of the neck, back, or loins Viscera, The Bowels or
Entrails.


