REPORT OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE, ON THE PRIVILEGES AND RESTRICTIONS ON THE
COMMERCE OF THE UNITED STATES IN FOREIGN COUNTRIES.

PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY CHILD'S AND SWAIN.

M, DCC, XCIII.

PHILADELPHIA, December 16, 1793. SIR,
ACCORDING to the pleasure of the House of Representatives, expressed in their
resolution of February 23, 1791, I now lay before them, a REPORT on the
PRIVILEGES and RESTRICTIONS on the COMMERCE of the United States in Foreign
Countries. In order to keep the subject within those bounds, which I supposed
to be under the contemplation of the House, I have restrained my statements to
those countries only, with which we carry on a commerce of some importance, and
to those articles also of our produce, which are of sensible weight in the
scale of our exports; and even these articles are sometimes grouped together,
according to the degree of favor or restriction, with which they are received
in each country, and that degree expressed in general terms, without detailing
the exact duty levied on each article.

To have gone fully into these minutiae, would have been to copy the tariffs
and books of rates of the different countries, and to have hidden under a mass
of detail, those general and important truths, the extraction of which in a
simple form, I conceived, would best answer the enquiries of the House, by
condensing material information within those limits of time and attention,
which this portion of their duties may justly claim. The plan, indeed, of
minute details, would have been impracticable with some countries, for want of
information.

Since preparing this Report, which was put into its present form, in time to
have been given in to the last session of Congress, alterations of the
conditions of our commerce with some foreign nations have taken place, some of
them independent of the war, some arising out of it. France has proposed to
enter into a new treaty of commerce with us, on liberal principles; and has, in
the mean time, relaxed some of the restraints mentioned in the report. -- Spain
has, by an ordinance of June last, established New-Orleans, Pensacola, and
Saint Augustine into free ports, for the vessels of friendly nations having
treaties of commerce with her, provided they touch for a permit, at Corcubion
in Gallicia, or at Alicant; and our rice is by the same ordinance, excluded
from that country. -- The circumstances of the war have necessarily given us
freer access to the West-Indian islands, whilst they have also drawn on our
navigation, vexations and depredations of the most serious nature.

To have endeavored to describe all these, would have been as impracticable as
useless, since the scenes would have been shifting, while under description. I,
therefore, think it best to leave the report, as it was formed, being adapted
to a particular point of time, when things were in their settled order, that is
to say, to the summer of 1792.

I have the honor to be, With the most profound respect, SIR, Your most
obedient, and Most humble servant, TH: JEFFERSON.

To the SPEAKER of the House of Representatives of the United States of America.
The SECRETARY of STATE, to whom was referred by the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES,
the REPORT of a COMMITTEE on the written MESSAGE of the PRESIDENT of the UNITED
STATES, of the 14th of February, 1791, with instruction to report to Congress
the nature and extent of the PRIVILEGES and RESTRICTIONS of the COMMERCIAL
INTERCOURSE of the United States with Foreign Nations, and the measures which
he should think proper to be adopted, for the improvement of the Commerce and
Navigation of the same, has had the same under consideration, and thereupon
makes the following REPORT:
THE countries with which the UNITED STATES have their chief commercial
intercourse, are, SPAIN, PORTUGAL, FRANCE, GREAT BRITAIN, the UNITED
NETHERLANDS, DENMARK, and SWEDEN, and their American possessions: and the
articles of export which constitute the basis of that commerce, with their
respective amounts, are -- Bread-stuff, that is to say, bread-grains, meals,
and bread, to the annual amount of 7,649,887 Dollars. Tobacco 4,349,567
Dollars. Rice 1,753,796 Dollars. Wood 1,263,534 Dollars. Salted fish 941,696
Dollars. Pot and pearl-ash 839,093 Dollars. Salted meats 599,130 Dollars.
Indigo 537,379 Dollars. Horses and mules 339,753 Dollars. Whale oil 252,591
Dollars. Flax-seed 236,072 Dollars. Tar, pitch and turpentine 217,177 Dollars.
Live provisions 137,743 Dollars. Ships Foreign goods 620,274 Dollars.


To descend to articles of smaller value than these, would lead into a
minuteness of detail neither necessary nor useful to the present object.

The proportions of our EXPORTS, which go to the nations before mentioned, and
to their dominions, respectively, are as follows: To Spain and its dominions
2,005,907 Dollars. Portugal and its dominions 1,283,462 Dollars. France and its
dominions 4,698,735 Dollars. Great Britain and its dominions 9,363,416 Dollars.
The United Netherlands and their dominions 1,963,880 Dollars. Denmark and its
dominions 224,415 Dollars. Sweden and its dominions 47,240 Dollars.


Our IMPORTS from the same countries, are -- Spain and its dominions 335,110
Dollars. Portugal and its dominions 595,763 Dollars. France and its dominions
2,068,348 Dollars. Great Britain and its dominions 15,285,428 Dollars. United
Netherlands and their dominions 1,172,692 Dollars. Denmark and its dominions
351,364 Dollars. Sweden and its dominions 14,325 Dollars.


These imports consist mostly of articles on which industry has been exhausted.

Our NAVIGATION depending, on the same commerce, will appear by the following
statement of the tonnage of our own vessels, entering in our ports, from those
several nations, and their possessions, in one year, that is to say, from
October 1789, to September 1790, inclusive, as follows: -- Spain 19,695 Tons.
Portugal 23,576 Tons. France 116,410 Tons. Great Britain 43,580 Tons. United
Netherlands 58,858 Tons. Denmark 14,655 Tons. Sweden 750 Tons.


Of our commercial objects, SPAIN receives favorably, our bread stuff, salted
fish, wood, ships, tar, pitch, and turpentine. On our meals, however, as well
as on those of other foreign countries, when re-exported to their colonies,
they have lately imposed duties, of from half a dollar, to two dollars the
barrel, the duties being so proportioned to the current price of their own
flour, as that both together, are to make the constant sum of nine dollars per
barrel.

They do not discourage our rice, pot and pearl ash, salted provisions, or
whale oil: but these articles, being in small demand at their markets, are
carried thither but in a small degree. Their demand for rice, however, is
increasing. Neither tobacco, nor indigo are received there. Our commerce is
permitted with their Canary Islands, under the same conditions.

Themselves, and their colonies are the actual consumers of what they receive
from us.

Our navigation is free with the kingdom of Spain; foreign goods being received
there in our ships, on the same conditions as if carried in their own, or in
the vessels of the country of which such goods are the manufacture or produce.

PORTUGAL receives favorably our grain, and bread, salted fish and other
salted provisions, wood, tar, pitch, and turpentine.

For flaxseed, pot, and pearl ash, though not discouraged, there is little
demand.

Our ships pay twenty per cent. on being sold to their subjects, and are then
free bottoms.

Foreign goods (except those of the East Indies) are received on the same
footing in our vessels, as in their own, or any others; that is to say, on
general duties of from twenty to twenty-eight per cent. and, consequently, our
navigation is unobstructed by them. Tobacco, rice and meals, are prohibited.

Themselves and their colonies consume what they receive from us.

These regulations extend to the Azores, Madeira, and the Cape de Verd Islands,
except, that in these, meals and rice are received freely.

FRANCE receives favorably our bread-stuff, rice, wood, pot and pearl ashes.

A duty of five sous the kental, or nearly four and an half cents, is paid on
our tar, pitch and turpentine. Our whale-oils pay six livres the kental, and
are the only foreign whale-oils admitted. Our indigo pays five livres the
kental; their own two and an half: but a difference of quality, still more than
a difference of duty, prevents its seeking that market.

Salted beef is received freely for re-exportation; but if for
home-consumption, it pays five livres the kental. Other salted provisions pay
that duty in all cases, and salted fish is made lately to pay the prohibitory
one of twenty livres the kental.

Our ships are free to carry thither all foreign goods, which may be carried in
their own, or any other vessels, except tobaccoes not of our own growth: and
they participate with theirs the exclusive carriage of our whale-oils, and
tobaccoes.

During their former government, our tobacco was under a monopoly, but paid no
duties; and our ships were freely sold in their ports, and converted into
national bottoms. The first national assembly took from our ships this
privilege. They emancipated tobacco from its monopoly, but subjected it to
duties of eighteen livres fifteen sous the kental, carried in their own
vessels, and twenty-five livres, carried in ours; a difference more than equal
to the freight of the article.

They and their colonies consume what they receive from us.

GREAT BRITAIN receives our pot and pearl ashes, free, while those of other
nations pay a duty of two shillings and three pence the kental. There is an
equal distinction in favor of our bar-iron; of which article however we do not
produce enough for our own use. Woods are free, from us, whilst they pay some
small duty from other countries. Indigo and flax-seed, are free from all
countries. Our tar and pitch pay eleven-pence sterling the barrel. From other
alien countries, they pay about a penny and a third more.

Our tobacco, for their own consumption, pays 1 s3 sterling the pound, custom
and excise, besides heavy expenses of collection. And rice, in the same case,
pays 7 s4 sterling the hundred weight; which, rendering it too dear, as an
article of common food, it is consequently, used in very small quantity.

Our salted fish, and other salted provisions, except bacon, are prohibited.
Bacon and whale-oils are under prohibitory duties: so are our grains, meals,
and bread, as to internal consumption; unless in times of such scarcity as may
raise the price of wheat to 50 s. sterling the quarter, and other grains and
meals in proportion.

Our ships, though purchased and navigated by their own subjects, are not
permitted to be used, even in their trade with us.

While the vessels of other nations are secured by standing laws, which cannot
be altered, but by the concurrent will of the three branches of the British
legislature, in carrying thither any produce or manufacture of the country to
which they belong, which may be lawfully carried in any vessels, ours, with the
same prohibition of what is foreign, are further prohibited by a standing law
(12. Car. 2.18.. 3.) from carrying thither all and any of our own domestic
productions and manufactures. A subsequent act, indeed, has authorized their
executive to permit the carriage of our own productions in our own bottoms, at
its sole discretion: and the permission has been given from year to year by
proclamation; but subject every moment to be withdrawn on that single will, in
which event, our vessels having any thing on board, stand interdicted from the
entry of all British ports. The disadvantage of a tenure which may be so
suddenly discontinued, was experienced by our merchants on a late occasion
April 12. 1792.
, when an official notification that this law would be strictly enforced, gave
them just apprehensions for the fate of their vessels and cargoes dispatched or
destined to the ports of Great Britain. The minister of that court indeed
frankly expressed his personal conviction that the words of the order went
farther than was intended, and so he afterward officially informed us: but the
embarrassments of the moment were real and great, and the possibility of their
renewal, lays our commerce to that country, under the same species of
discouragement as to other countries, where it is regulated by a single
legislator* and the distinction is too remarkable not to be noticed, that our
navigation is excluded from the security of fixed laws, while that security is
given to the navigation of others.

Our vessels pay in their ports 1 s^ sterling per ton, light and trinity dues,
more than is paid by British ships, except in the port of London, where they
pay the same as British.

The greater part of what they receive from us is re-exported to other
countries, under the useless charges of an intermediate deposite, and double
voyage. From tables published in England; and composed as is said, from the
books of their custom-houses, it appears that of the indigo imported there in
the years 1773, -- 4, -- 5, one third was re-exported; and from a document of
authority, we learn, that, of the rice and tobacco imported there, before the
war, four fifths were re-exported. We are assured indeed, that the quantities
sent thither for re-exportation since the war, are considerably diminished, yet
less so than reason and national interest would dictate. The whole of our grain
is re-exported when wheat is below 50 s. the quarter, and other grains in
proportion.

The UNITED NETHERLANDS prohibit our pickled beef and pork, meals and bread of
all sorts, and lay a prohibitary duty on spirits distilled from grain.

All other of our productions are received on varied duties, which may be
reckoned, on a medium at about three per cent.

They consume but a small proportion of what they receive. The residue is
partly forwarded for consumption in the inland parts of Europe, and partly
re-shipped to other maritime countries. On the latter portion they intercept,
between us and the consumer so much of the value as is absorbed by the charges
attending an intermediate deposite.

Foreign goods, except some East India articles, are received in vessels of any
nation.

Our ships may be sold and naturalized there, with exceptions of one or two
privileges, which somewhat lessen their value.

DENMARK lays considerable duties on our tobacco and rice, carried in their own
vessels, and half as much more, if carried in ours; but the exact amount of
these duties is not perfectly known here. They lay such as amount to
prohibitions on our indigo and corn.

SWEDEN receives favorably our grains and meals, salted provisions, indigo,
and whale-oil.

They subject our rice to duties of sixteen mills the pound weight, carried in
their own vessels, and of forty per cent additional on that, or 22 4/10 mills,
carried in ours, or any others. Being thus rendered too dear as an article of
common food, little of it is consumed with them. They consume some of our
tobaccoes, which they take circuitously through Great Britain; levying heavy
duties on them also; their duties of entry, town duties, and excise, being 4.34
dollars, the hundred weight, if carried in their own vessels, and of forty per
cent on that additional, if earned in our own or any other vessels.

They prohibit altogether our bread, fish, pot and pearl ashes, flax-seed* tar,
pitch, and turpentine, wood, (except oak timber and masts) and all foreign
manufactures.

Under so many restrictions and prohibitions, our navigation with them is
reduced almost to nothing.

With our neighbors, an order of things much harder presents itself.

SPAIN and PORTUGAL refuse, to those parts of America which they govern, all
direct intercourse with any people but themselves. The commodities in mutual
demand, between them and their neighbors, must be carried to be exchanged in
some port of the dominant country; and the transportation between that and the
subject-state must be in a domestic bottom.

FRANCE by a standing law, permits her West India possession^ to receive
directly our vegetables, live-provisions, horses, wood, tar, pitch, and
turpentine, rice, and maize, and prohibits our other bread-stuff: but a
suspension of this prohibition having been left to the colonial legislatures,
in times of scarcity, it was formerly suspended occasionally, but latterly
without interruption.

Our fish and salted provisions (except pork) are received in their islands
under a duty of three colonial livre the kental, and our vessels are as free as
their own to carry our commodities thither, and to bring away rum and molasses.

GREAT BRITAIN admits in her islands, our vegetables, live-provisions, horses,
wood, tar, pitch, and turpentine, rice, and bread-stuff, by a proclamation of
her executive, limited always to the term of a year, but hitherto renewed from
year to year. She prohibits our salted fish, and other salted provisions. She
does not permit our vessels to carry thither our own produce. -- Her vessels
alone, may take it from us, and bring in exchange, rum, molasses, sugar,
coffee, cocoa-nuts, ginger, and pimento. There are, indeed, some freedoms in
the island of Dominica, but, under such circumstances, as to be little used by
us. In the British continental colonies, and in Newfoundland, all our
productions are prohibited, and our vessels forbidden to enter their ports.
Their governors, however, in times of distress, have power to permit a
temporary importation of certain articles, in their own bottoms, but not in
ours.

Our citizens cannot reside as merchants or factors within any of the British
plantations, this being expressly prohibited by the same statute of 12. Car. 2.
C. 18, commonly called the navigation act.

In the DANISH-AMERICAN possessions, a duty of five per cent. is levied on our
corn, corn-meal, rice, tobacco, wood, salted fish, indigo, horses, mules, and
live stock; and of ten per cent. on our flour, salted pork, and beef, tar,
pitch, and turpentine.

In the AMERICAN islands of the UNITED NETHERLANDS and SWEDEN, our vessels and
produce are received, subject to duties, not so heavy as to have been
complained of: but they are heavier in the Dutch possessions on the continent.

To sum up these RESTRICTIONS, so far as they are important:

1st. IN EUROPE --

Our bread-stuff is at most times under prohibitory duties in England, and
considerably dutied on re-exportation from Spain to her colonies.

Our tobaccoes are heavily dutied in England, Sweden and France, and prohibited
in Spain, and Portugal.

Our rice is heavily dutied in England and Sweden, and prohibited in Portugal.

Our fish and salted provisions are prohibited in England, and under
prohibitory duties in France.

Our whale-oils are prohibited in England and Portugal.

And our vessels are denied naturalization in England, and of late in France.

2d. IN THE WEST INDIES.

All intercourse is prohibited with the possessions of Spain, and Portugal.

Our salted provisions and fish are prohibited by England.

Our salted pork, and bread-stuff (except maize) are received under temporary
laws only, in the dominions of France, and our salted fish pays there a weighty
duty.

3d. IN THE ARTICLE OF NAVIGATION.

Our own carriage of our own tobacco, is heavily dutied in Sweden, and lately
in France.

We can carry no article, not of our own production, to the British ports in
Europe.

Nor even our own produce to her American possessions.

Such being the restrictions on the commerce and navigation of the United
States, the question is, in what way they may best be removed, modified, or
counteracted?

As to commerce, two methods occur, 1. By friendly arrangements with the
several nations with whom these restrictions exist: Or, 2. By the separate act
of our own legislatures for countervailing their effects.

There can be no doubt, but that of these two, friendly arrangement is the most
eligible. Instead of embarrassing commerce under piles of regulating laws,
duties, and prohibitions, could it be relieved from all its shackles in all
parts of the world -- could every country be employed in producing that which
nature has best fitted it to produce, and each be free to exchange with others
mutual surplusses, for mutual wants, the greatest mass possible would then be
produced of those things which contribute to human life, and human happiness;
the numbers of mankind would be increased, and their condition bettered.

Would even a single nation begin with the United States this system of free
commerce, it would be advisable to begin it with that nation; since it is one
by one only, that it can be extended to all. Where the circumstances of either
party render it expedient to levy a revenue, by way of impost, on commerce, its
freedom might be modified, in that particular, by mutual and equivalent
measures, preserving it entire in all others.

Some nations, not yet ripe for free commerce, in all its extent, might still
be willing to mollify its restrictions and regulations for us in proportion to
the advantages, which an intercourse with us might offer. Particularly they may
concur with us in reciprocating the duties to be levied on each side, or in
compensating any excess of duty, by equivalent advantages of another nature.
Our commerce is certainly of a character to entitle it to favor in most
countries. The commodities we offer, are either necessaries of life; or
materials for manufacture; or convenient subjects of revenue: and we take in
exchange, either manufactures, when they have received the last finish of art
and industry; or mere luxuries. Such customers may reasonably expect welcome,
and friendly treatment at every market: customers too, whose demands,
increasing with their wealth, and population, must very shortly give full
employment to the whole industry of any nation whatever, in any line of supply
they may get into the habit of calling for, from it.

But should any nation, contrary to our wishes, suppose it may better find its
advantage by continuing its system of prohibitions, duties, and regulations, it
behooves us to protect our citizens, their commerce and navigation, by
counter-prohibitions, duties, and regulations also. Free commerce and
navigation are not to be given in exchange for restrictions, and vexations; nor
are they likely to produce a relaxation of them.

Our navigation involves still higher considerations. As a branch of industry,
it is valuable; but, as a resource of defense, essential.

Its value, as a branch of industry, is inhanced by the dependence of so many
other branches on it. In times of general peace it multiplies competitors for
employment in transportation, and so keeps that at its proper level; and in
times of war, that is to say, when those nations who may be our principal
carriers, shall be at war with each other, if we have not within ourselves the
means of transportation, our produce must be exported in belligerent vessels at
the increased expense of warfreight and insurance, and the articles which will
not bear that, must perish on our hands.

But it is as a resource for defense that our navigation will admit neither
neglect nor forbearance. The position and circumstances of the United States
leave them nothing to fear on their land-board, and nothing to desire beyond
their present rights. But, on their seaboard, they are open to injury, and they
have there too, a commerce which must be protected. This can only be done by
possessing a respectable body of citizen-seamen, and of artists and
establishments in readiness for ship building.

Were the ocean, which is the common property of all, open to the industry of
all, so that every person and vessel should be free to take employment wherever
it could be found, the United States would certainly not set the example of
appropriating to themselves, exclusively, any portion of the common stock of
occupation. They would rely on the enterprise and activity of their citizens
for a due participation of the benefits of the seafaring business, and for
keeping the marine class of citizens equal to their object. But if particular
nations grasp at undue shares, and more especially, if they seize on the means
of the United States to convert them into aliment for their own strength, and
withdraw them entirely from the support of those to whom they belong, defensive
and protecting measures become necessary on the part of the nation whose marine
resources are thus invaded, or it will be disarmed of its defense; its
productions will lie at the mercy of the nation which has possessed itself
exclusively of the means of carrying them, and its politics may be influenced
by those who command its commerce. The carriage of our own commodities, if once
established in an other channel, cannot be resumed in the moment we may desire.
If we lose the seamen and artists, whom it now occupies, we lose the present
means of marine defense, and time will be requisite to raise up others, when
disgrace or losses shall bring home to our feelings the error of having
abandoned them. The materials for maintaining our due share of navigation, are
ours in abundance; and, as to the mode of using them, we have only to adopt the
principles of those who thus put us on the defensive, or others, equivalent and
better fitted to our circumstances.

The following principles, being founded in reciprocity, appear perfectly just,
and to offer no cause of complaint to any nation.

1st. Where a nation imposes high duties on our productions, or prohibits them
altogether, it may be proper for us to do the same by theirs, first burthening
or excluding those productions which they bring here, in competition with our
own of the same kind; selecting next such manufactures as we take from them in
greatest quantity, and which at the same time we could the soonest furnish to
ourselves, or obtain from other countries; imposing on them duties, lighter at
first; but heavier and heavier afterward, as other channels of supply open.
Such duties having the effect of indirect encouragement to domestic
manufactures of the same kind, may induce the manufacturer to come himself into
these states, where cheaper subsistence, equal laws, and a vent of his wares,
free of duty, may ensure him the highest profits from his skill and industry.
And here it would be in the power of the state governments to cooperate
essentially, by opening the resources of encouragement which are under their
control, extending them liberally to artists in those particular branches of
manufacture, for which their soil, climate, population, and other
circumstances, have matured them, and fostering the precious efforts and
progress of household manufacture by some patronage suited to the nature of its
objects, guided by the local informations they possess and guarded against
abuse by their presence and attentions. The oppressions on our agriculture in
foreign ports would thus be made the occasion of relieving it from a dependence
on the councils and conduct of others, and of promoting arts, manufactures, and
population at home.

2d. Where a nation refuses permission to our merchants and factors to reside
within certain parts of their dominions, we may, if it should be thought
expedient, refuse residence to theirs in any and every part of ours, or modify
their transactions.

3d. Where a nation refuses to receive in our vessels any productions but our
own, we may refuse to receive, in theirs, any but their own productions. The
first and second clauses of the bill reported by the committee, are well formed
to effect this object.

4th. Where a nation refuses to consider any vessel as ours, which has not been
built within our territories, we should refuse to consider as theirs, any
vessel not built within their territories.

5th. Where a nation refuses to our vessels the carriage even of our own
productions, to certain countries under their domination, we might refuse to
theirs, of every description, the carriage of the same productions to the same
countries. But as justice and good neighborhood would dictate, that those who
have no part in imposing the restriction on us, should not be the victims of
measures adopted to defeat its effect, it may be proper to confine the
restriction to vessels owned or navigated by any subjects of the same dominant
power, other than the inhabitants of the country to which the said productions
are to be carried. And to prevent all inconvenience to the said inhabitants,
and to our own, by too sudden a check on the means of transportation, we may
continue to admit the vessels marked for future exclusion, on an advanced
tonnage, and for such length of time only, as may be supposed necessary to
provide against that inconvenience.

The establishment of some of these principles by Great Britain, alone, has
already lost us in our commerce with that country and its possessions, between
eight and nine hundred vessels of near 40,000 tons burden, according to
statements from official materials, in which they have confidence. This
involves a proportional loss of seamen, ship-wrights, and ship-building, and is
too serious a loss to admit forbearance of some effectual remedy.

It is true we must expect some inconvenience in practice, from the
establishment of discriminating duties. -- But in this, as in so many other
cases, we are left to choose between two evils. These inconveniences are
nothing, when weighed against the loss of wealth, and loss of force, which will
follow our perseverance in the plan of indiscrimination. When once it shall be
perceived that we are either in the system, or the habit, of giving equal
advantages to those who extinguish our commerce and navigation, by duties and
prohibitions, as to those who treat both with liberality and justice,
liberality and justice will be converted by all into duties and prohibitions.
It is not to the moderation and justice of others, we are to trust for fair and
equal access to market with our productions, or for our due share in the
transportation of them; but to our own means of independence, and the firm will
to use them. Nor do the inconveniences of discrimination merit consideration.
Not one of the nations before mentioned; perhaps, not a commercial nation on
earth, is without them. In our case, one distinction alone will suffice, that
is to say, between nations who favor our productions and navigation, and those
who do not favor them. One set of moderate duties, say the present duties, for
the first, and a fixed advance on these, as to some articles, and prohibitions
as to others, for the last.

Still it must be repeated that friendly arrangements are preferable with all
who will come into them; and that we should carry into such arrangements all
the liberality and spirit of accommodation, which the nature of the case will
admit.

France has, of her own accord, proposed negotiations for improving, by a new
treaty on fair and equal principles, the commercial relations of the two
countries. But her internal disturbances have hitherto prevented the
prosecution of them to effect, though we have had repeated assurances of a
continuance of the disposition.

Proposals of friendly arrangement have been made on our part, by the present
government, to that of Great Britain, as the (...) states: but being already on
as good a footing (...) and a better in fact, than the most favored nation,
they have not, as yet, discovered any disposition to have it meddled with.

We have no reason to conclude that friendly arrangements would be declined by
the other nations, with whom we have such commercial intercourse as may render
them important. In the mean while, it would rest with the wisdom of Congress to
determine whether, as to those nations, they will not surcease exparte
regulations, on the reasonable presumption that they will concur in doing
whatever justice and moderation, dictate should be done.

TH: JEFFERSON.


