THE CHARACTER OF A METHODIST.

BY JOHN WESLEY, M. A. Late Fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford.

Not as though I had already attained. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOHNSTON and
JUSTICE, AT FRANKLIN'S HEAD, NO. 41, CHESNUT-STREET -- For William Glendinning.
Preacher of the Gospel. M.DCC.XCIII.

TO THE READER.
SINCE the name first came abroad into the world, many have been at a loss to
know what a methodist is: what are the principles and the practice of those,
who are commonly called by that name; and what the distinguishing marks of this
sect, which is every where spoken against.

2. And it being generally believed, that I was able to give the clearest
account of these things (as having been one of the first to whom that name was
given, and the person by whom the rest were supposed to be directed) I have
been called upon, in all manner of ways, and with the utmost earnestness, so to
do. I yield at last to the continued importunity both of friends and enemies;
and do now give the clearest account I can, in the presence of the Lord and
Judge of heaven and earth, of the principles and practice whereby those who are
called methodists, are distinguished from other men.

3. I say those who are called methodists; for let it be well observed, that
this is not a name which they take to themselves, but one fixed upon them by way
of reproach, without their approbation or consent. It was first given to three
or four young men at Oxford, by a student of Christ Church: either in allusion
to the ancient sect of physicians so called from their reaching, that almost
all diseases might be cured by specific method of diet and exercise, or from
their observing a more regular method of study and behavior, than was usual
with those of their age and station.

4. I should rejoice (so little ambitions am I to be at the head of any sect or
party) if the very name might never be mentioned more, but be buried in eternal
oblivion. But if that cannot be, at least let those who will use it, know the
meaning of the word they use. Let us not always be fighting in the dark. Come,
and let us look one another in the face. And perhaps some of you who hate what
I am called, may love what I am (by the grace of God:) or, rather what I follow
after, if that I may apprehend that, for which also I am apprehended of Christ
Jesus.

The Character of a Methodist.
1. THE distinguishing marks of a methodist are not his opinions of any sort.
His assenting to this or that scheme of religion, his embracing any particular
set of notions, his espousing the judgment of one man or of another, are all
quite wide of the point. Whosoever therefore imagines, that a methodist is, a
man of such or such an opinion is grossly ignorant of the whole affair, he
mistakes the truth totally. We believe indeed, that all scripture is given by
inspiration of God; and herein we are distinguished from Jews, Turks, and
Infidels. We believe the written word of God to be the only and sufficient
rule, both of christian faith and practice; and herein we are fundamentally
distinguished from those of the Romish church. We believe Christ to be the
eternal supreme God, and herein are we distinguished from the Socinians and
Arians. But as to all opinions which do not strike at the root of christianity,
we think and let think. So that whatsoever they are, whether right or wrong,
they are no distinguishing marks of a methodist.

2. Neither are words or phrases of any sort. We do not place our religion, or
any part of it, in being attached to any peculiar mode of speaking, any quaint
or uncommon set of expressions. The most obvious, easy, common words, wherein
our meaning can be conveyed, we prefer before others, both ordinary occasions,
and when we speak of the things of God. We never therefore willingly or
designedly deviate from the most usual way of speaking; unless when we express
scripture truths, in scripture words, (which we presume no christian will
condemn) neither do we affect to use any particular expressions of scripture,
more frequently than others, unless they are such as are frequently used by the
inspired writers themselves. So that it is as gross an error, to place the
marks of a methodist in his words, as in opinions of any sort.

3. Nor do we desire to be distinguished by actions, customs, or usages, of an
indifferent nature. Our religion does not he in doing what God has not
enjoined, or abstaining from what he has not forbidden. It does not lie in the
form of our apparel, in the posture of our body, or the covering of our heads;
(...) abstaining from marriage, nor from meats (...), which are all good if
received with thanksgiving. Therefore neither will any man who knows whereof he
affirms, six the mark of a methodist here; in any actions or customs purely
indifferent, undetermined by the word of God.

4. Nor, lastly, is he to be distinguished by laying the whole stress of
religion on any single part or it. If you say, "Yes, he is; for he thinks we
are saved by faith alone:" I answer, you do not understand the terms. By
salvation he means holiness of heart and life. And this he affirms to spring
from true faith alone. Can even a nominal christian deny it? Is this placing a
part of religion for the whole? Do we then make void the law through faith? God
forbid! Yea we establish the law. We do not place the whole of religion (as too
many do, God knows) either in doing no harm or in doing good, or in using the
ordinances of God. No, nor in all of them together; wherein we know by
experience a man may labor many years, and at the end have no true religion at
all, no more than he had at the beginning. Much less in any one of these; or, it
may be in a scrap of one of them: like her who fancies herself a virtuous
woman, only because the is not a prostitute; or him who dreams he is an honest
man, merely because he does not rob or steal. May the Lord God of my (...)
preserve me, from such a poor, starved religion as this! were this the mark of
a methodist, I would soones choose to be a sincere Jew, Turk, or Pagan.

5. "(...) then is the mark? Who is a methodist according to your own account?"
I answer: A methodist is one, who has the love of God shed abroad in his heart,
by the Holy Ghost given unto him: one who loves the Lord his God with all his
heart, and with all his soul, and with all his mind, and with all his strength.
God is the joy of his heart, and the desire of his soul; which is constantly
crying out, "Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon Earth that
I desire beside thee! My God and my all! Thou art the strength of my heart, and
my portion for ever!"

6. He is therefore happy in God, yea, always happy, as having in him a well of
water, springing up into everlasting life, and overflowing his soul with peace
and joy. Perfect love having now cast out fear, he rejoices evermore. He
rejoices in the Lord always, even in God his Savior: And in the Father,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom he has now received the (...). Having
found redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of his sins, he cannot but
rejoice whenever he looks back on the horrible pit out of which he is
delivered, when he sees all his transgressions blotted out as a cloud, and his
iniquities as a (...). He cannot but rejoice, whenever he (...) on the state
wherein he now is, being justified (...), and having peace with God, through
our Lord Jesus Christ. For he that believes has the witness of this in
himself: being (...) the son of God by faith: because (...) son. God has (...)
forth the spirit of his son unto his heart, (...) out, Abba, Father! And the
spirit itself bears witness with his spirit, that he is a child of God. He
rejoiceth also, whenever he looks forward, in hope of the glory that shall be
revealed: yea, his joy is full and all his bones cry out. Blessed be the God
and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his abundant mercy has
begotten me again to a ^^ving hope -- of an inheri^^^^e (...), unde^^led and
that fades not (...), (...) in heaven for me.

7. And he who has this hope thus full of immortality, in every thing gives
thanks: as knowing that this (whatsoever it is) is the will of God in Christ
Jesus concerning him. From him therefore he cheerfully receives all, saying,
Good is the will of the Lord: and whether the Lord gives or takes away,
equally blessing the name of the Lord. For he has learned in whatsoever state
he is therewith to be content. He knows both how to be abased and how to
abound. Every where and in all things he is instructed, both to be full and to
be hungry, both to abound and suffer need, whether in ease or pain, whether in
sickness or health, whether in life or death, he gives thanks from the ground
of the heart to him who order it for good: Knowing that as every good gift
comes from above, so none but good can come from the father of lights, into
whose hands he has wholly committed his body and soul, as into the hands of a
faitful creator. He is therefore careful (anxiously or uneasily careful) for
nothing: As having cast all his care on him that cares for him, and in all
things resting on him, after making his request known to him with thanksgiving.

8. For indeed he prays without ceasing. It is given him always to pray and not
to faint. Not that he is always in the house of prayer; though he neglects no
opportunity of being there. Neither is he always on his knees, although he
often is, or on his face, before the Lord his God. Nor yet is he always crying
aloud to God, or calling upon him in words. For many times the spirit makes
intercession for him with groans that cannot be uttered: but at all times the
language of his heart is this, "Thou brightness of the eternal glory, unto thee
is my mouth, though without a voice, and my silence speaks unto thee." And
this is true prayer, the lifting up the heart to God. This is the essence of
prayer, and this alone. But his heart is ever lifted up to God, and at all
times and in all places. In this he is never hindered, much less interrupted by
any person or thing. In retirement, on company, in leisure, business or
conversation his heart is ever with the Lord. Whether he lie down or rise up,
God is in all his thoughts; he walks with God continually, having the loving
eye of his mind still fixed upon him, and every where seeing him that is
invisible.

9. And while he thus always exercises his love to God, by praying without
ceasing, rejoicing evermore, and in every thing giving thanks, this commandment
is written in his heart, that he who loves God, loves his brother also. And he
accordingly loves his neighbor as himself; he loves every man as his own soul.
His heart is full of love to all mankind, to every child of the father of the
spirits of all flesh. That a man is not personally known to him is no bar to
his love: No, nor that he is known to be such as he approves not, that he
repays hatred for his good will. For he loves his enemies, yea, and the enemies
of God, the evil and the unthankful. And if it be not in his power to do good
to them that hate him, yet he ceases not to pray for them, though they continue
to spurn his love, and still despitefully use him and persecute him.

10. For he is pure in heart. The love of God has purified his heart from all
revengeful passions, from envy, malice, and wrath; from every unkind temper or
malign affection. It has cleansed him from pride and haughtiness of spirit,
whereof alone comes contention. And he has now put on bowels of mercies,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering; so that he forbears and
forgives, if he had a quarrel against any; even as God in Christ has forgiven
him. And indeed all possible ground for contention, on his part, is utterly cut
off. For none can take from him what he desires; seeing he loves not the world,
nor any of the things of the world; ^^ing now crucified to the world, and the
world crucified to him; being dead to all that is in the world, both to the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life. For all his
desire is unto God, and to the remembrance of his name.

11. Agreeable to this his one desire, is the one design of his life, namely,
not to do his own will, but the will of him that sent him. His one intention at
all times and in all things is, not to please himself, but him whom his soul
loves. He has a single eye. And because his eye is single, his whole body is
full of light. Indeed where the loving eye of the soul is continually fixed
upon God, there can be no darkness at all, but the whole is light; as when the
bright shining of a candle does enlighten the house. God then reigns alone. All
that is in the soul is holiness to the Lord. There is not a motion in his
heart, but is according to his will. Every thought that arises points to him,
and is in obedience to the law of Christ.

12. And the tree is known by its fruits. For as he loves God, so he keeps his
commandments. Not only some, or most of them, but all, from the least to the
greatest. He is not content to keep the whole law, and offend in one point; but
has in all points, a conscience void of offense, toward God and toward man.
Whatever God has forbidden, he avoids; whatever God has enjoined he does; and
that whether it be little or great, hard or easy, joyous or grievous to the
flesh. He runs the ways of God's commandments, now he has set his heart at
liberty. It is his glory so to do; it is his daily crown of rejoicing, To do
the will of God on earth, as it is done in heaven; knowing it is the highest
privilege of the angels of God, of those that excel in strength, to fulfill his
commandments and hearken to the voice of his word.

13. All the commandments of God he accordingly keeps, and that with all his
might. For his obedience is in proportion to his love, the source from whence
it flows. And therefore, loving God with all his heart, he serves him with all
his strength. He continually presents his soul and body, a living sacrifice,
holy, acceptable to God; entirely and without reserve devoting himself, all he
has, and all he is, to his glory. All the talents he has received, he
constantly employs, according to his master's will; every power and faculty of
his soul, every member of his body. Once he yielded them unto sin and the
devil, as instruments of unrighteousness; but now, being alive from the dead,
he yields them all, as instruments of righteousness unto God.

14. By consequence, whatsoever he does, it is all to the glory of God. In all
his employments of every kind, he not only aims at this, (which is implied in
having a single eye) but actually attains it. His business and refreshments as
well as his prayers, all serve to this great end. Whether he sit in his house,
or walk by the way, whether he lie down or rise up, he is promoting in all he
speaks or does, the one business of his life; whether he put on his apparel, or
labor or eat and drink, or divert himself from too wasting labor, it all
tends to advance the glory of God, by peace and good will among men. His one
invariable rule is this, Whatever ye do in word or deed, do it all in the name
of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him.

15. Nor do the customs of the world at all hinder his running the race that is
set before him. He knows that vice does not lose it nature, though it becomes
ever so fashionable; and remembers, that every man is to give an account of
himself to God. He cannot therefore, even follow a multitude to do evil. He
cannot fare sumptuously every day, or make provision for the flesh to fulfill
the lusts thereof. He cannot lay up treasures upon earth, no more than he can
take fire into his bosom. He cannot adorn himself (on any pretense) with gold
or costly apparel, he cannot join in, or countenance any diversion, which has
the least tendency to vice, of any kind. He cannot speak evil of his neighbor
no more than he can lie, either for God or man. He cannot utter an unkind word
of any one; for love keeps the door of his lips. He cannot speak idle words. No
corrupt communication ever comes out of his mouth, as is all that which is not
good, to the use of edifying, not fit to minister grace to the hearers. But
whatsover things, are pure, whatsover things are lovely, whatsoever things are
justly of good report, he thinks and speaks, and acts, adorning the gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ in all things.

16. Lastly, as he has time, he does good unto all men; unto neighbors and
strangers, friends and enemies. And that in every possible kind; not only to
their bodies by feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, visitting those that
are sick or in prison; but much more does he labor to do good to their souls,
as of the ability which God gives: to awaken those that sleep in death; to
bring those who are awakened to the atoning blood, that being justified by
faith, they may have peace with God, and to provoke those who have peace with
God, to abound more in love and in good works. And he is willing to spend and
be spent herein, even to be offered up on the sacrifice and service of their
faith, so they may all come unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ.

17. These are the principles and practices of our sect, these are the marks of
a true methodist. By these alone do those who are in derision so called, desire
to be distinguished from other men. If any man say "Why these are only the
common, fundamental principles of christianity!" Thou have said; So I mean;
this is the very truth; I know they are no other; and I would to God both
thousand all men knew, that I, and all who follow my judgment, do vehemently
refuse to be distinguished from other men, by any but the common principles of
christianity. The plain, old christianity that I teach, renouncing and
detesting all other marks of distinction. And whosoever is that I preach (let
him be called what he will; for names change not the nature of things) he is a
christian not in name only, but in heart and in life. He has inwardly and
outwardly conformed to the will of God, as revealed in the written word. He
thinks speaks, and lives according to the method laid down in the revelation of
Jesus Christ. His soul is renewed after the image of God, in righteousness and
in all true holiness. And having the mind that was in Christ he so walks as
Christ also walked.

18. By these marks, by these fruits of a living faith do we labor to
distinguish ourselves from the unbelieving world, from all those whose minds or
lives are not according to the gospel of Christ. But from real christians of
whatsoever denomination they be, we earnestly desire not to be distinguished at
all: Not from any, who sincerely follow after what they know they have not yet
attained. No: whosoever does the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same
is my brother, and sister and mother. And I beseech you brethren, by the
mercies of God, that we be in no wise divided among ourselves. Is thy heart
right, as my heart is with thine? I ask no farther question. If it be, give me
thy hand. For opinions or terms, let us not destroy the work of God. Do thou
love and serve God! it is enough. I give thee the right hand of fellowship. If
there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship
of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies. Let us strive together for the faith
of the gospel; walking worthy of the vocation wherewith we are called; with all
lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another in love,
and endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace:
remembering, there is one body and one spirit, even as we are called with one
hope of our calling: One Lord, one faith, one baptism; One God and Father of
all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all!

FINIS.

