A BRIEF VINDICATION OF THE PARTICULAR COMMUNION OF THE BAPTIST CHURCHES: BEING
A REPLY to the REMARKS OF The Rev. NOAH WORCESTER, A. B. IN A "FRIENDLY LETTER"
to the Author. WHEREIN THE SUBJECTS (...) ARE PARTICULARLY CONSIDERED.

BY THOMAS BALDWIN, PASTOR OF THE SECOND BAPTIST CHURCH IN BOSTON.

How forcible are right words! but what does your arguing reprove?

-- JOB. This is the love of God, that we keep his commandments.

-- JOHN. Boston: PRINTED BY MANNING AND LORING. MDCCXCIV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Subscribers for the following work are desired to excuse its not being
done in the form and on the paper proposed, as that could not be conveniently
had.

NOTE. -- The terms "Infant Baptism," and "Infant-sprinkling," which often
occur in the ensuing sheets, are used chiefly for the sake of distinction; the
former will not be understood as a concession, nor is the latter designed in
the least as a reflection.

A BRIEF VINDICATION, etc.
SECTION I. Preliminary Observations on the Subject in Dispute.
REVEREND SIR,
YOUR Friendly Letter, which was published in December, 1791, I could not
obtain until several months after; and have not the pleasure of acknowledging
your politeness in sending me a copy; although from an apology offered by your
generous brothers, I am inclined to hope it was not a designed omission.

In my other Piece I observed, "that it was not the love of controversy which
induced me to write." I have the happiness still to believe, that this is not
my greatest motive. And had your arguments proved our sentiments and practice
respecting communion, to be unscriptural, or inconsistent with that brotherly
affection which the Gospel requires, I should indeed have been a gainer by the
controversy, and would have acknowledged myself indebte^ ^o you for the
instruction. But after I had carefully examined your arguments, I did not find
the evidence sufficient to produce conviction: therefore, am obliged in
sincerity to abide by my former opinion.

Was the dispute between us to be considered merely personal, and unconnected
with the interests of religion, I should not think myself called upon to
attempt a reply. But since the honor of Christ as Head of the church, and
Lawgiver in his own kingdom, and the peace and tranquillity of two
denominations of Christians are in some measure involved in this dispute, it
appears to me of importance that the ground of the controversy should be fully
ascertained. And as you have endeavored to lay the blame wholly to our
denomination, I shall most cheerfully come forward with a vindication of myself
and brethren.

In pursuing my present design, I shall be led to remark upon several things,
which are offered to consideration in your Friendly Letter. In doing of which,
I hope to be governed by a spirit of candor and Christian love; and can assure
you, that nothing would give me more sensible regret, than to misconceive, or
misrepresent your meaning. In some instances I could have wished that you had
been more explicit, which would have relieved me from the fear of mistaking you.

It will not be expected, that I should follow you in the exact order in which
you have treated the subject; nor that I should reply to all that you have
written. Some of your observations are agreeable to my views; and some of them
appear to be unconnected with the subject in dispute. To avoid prolixity, I
shall omit many things which might with propriety be urged in the present
controversy.

You have observed, that with some degree of care you had perused the pamphlet
which I had written: if so, you must have observed our main objections to free
communion to consist, essentially, in two things; viz. 1. That Baptism is a
divinely appointed pre-requisite to communion at the Lord's table. 2. That
immersion upon a profession of faith is essential to Gospel baptism.
The first of these I take for granted you have given up: for you observe, (p.
9) The question is not, whether baptism in some mode be an essential
qualification; you also add, (p. 13) I do not deny that baptism was prior to
coming to the Lord's table in the apostolic practice. I suppose it was: and I
also suppose their example to be worthy of imitation in like circumstances.
Thus, Sir, he who is unbaptized; however amiable his character may appear, is
essentially disqualified in your esteem. In this particular we seem to be
agreed, that baptism in some mode is essential to a due qualification for the
Lord's table. And I believe this to be the general sense of the two
denominations. The other objection remains yet to be disputed; which may be
divided into two questions: i. e. Who are the proper subjects of baptism? And,
What is the appointed mode? I have said in my other Piece, that we consider
"professed believers as the only proper subjects of baptism;" and that
immersion is not a mere circumstance, or mode of baptism, but essential to the
ordinance. I have not observed in your Letter that you have disproved these
sentiments; but what you have said in this respect, shall be attended to in its
place. For the present we shall only say, that you have raised a huge host of
suppositions and consequences, and brought them all against our sentiments, as
if you were determined to frighten us out of our allegiance to the great
Lawgiver: but we may say as Saint Paul in another case, None of these things
move us.

If I have rightly comprehended your reasoning in favor of free communion, the
most material arguments are the following. 1. That the essence of baptism does
not consist in any one particular mode whatever. (p. 10.) 2. If it should
finally appear, that you had missed the divine appointment, yet, as godly
sincerity is the very SOUL and ESSENCE of conformity to Christ, you are
therefore as well accepted in the sight of God, as though your outward conduct
had been according to the appointed mode. (p. 19, 21.) 3. Supposing that the
Paedo-baptists are really in an error, if Christ does not view the error as so
essential but that he will commune with them, why cannot you commune with those
at the table, with whom God communes? (p. 28, 29.)


These appear to be the main pillars on which your superstructure is built; and
shall each of them be particularly considered. Having thus stated the
constituent parts of the dispute, we are now prepared to attend to each
particular.

SECTION II. Professed Believers the only appointed Subjects of Baptism.
IN your third part you observe, The question to be disputed is summarily this:
Whether, for a person to be baptized by immersion, after believing, be an
essential term of communion at the Lord's table? Of this question you inform
your readers that I take the affirmative side. But, my dear Sir, you have not
stated the question right: that is, if you mean to have me take the
affirmative. Nor will your quotations from me support such a statement. The
passages quoted, and from which you make the mistake, are in these words; that
"baptism is to be administered only in one mode, and to one kind of subjects."
That "professed believers are the only proper subjects of baptism." I suppose
the difference to be easily discerned. I said "professed believers," you say to
be baptized after believing. The former supposes that a person may satisfy a
judgment of charity, and yet be a hypocrite: the latter, that he is infallibly
a believer. I conclude, that a person may be baptized according to Christ's
institution, and yet be a hypocrite; but he cannot be baptized institutionally,
without a profession of faith. We are obliged by the Gospel rule to require a
profession; but we are not obliged to know the sincerity of the person who
makes it.

Now, Sir, to some the question may appear to be the same; but it is evident
that there is a very specific difference; and, from the wrong manner in which
you have stated it, you have gone on to draw false conclusions, and to saddle a
train of disagreeable consequences upon our sentiments, which will appear of no
force, when the question is rightly considered.

You inform you readers, (p. 12) that we suppose, "not only that immersion is
essential to the ordinance of baptism, but that none are proper subjects of it
but visible believers." From this you draw the following inference: If none are
proper subjects but visible believers, none are proper subjects but real
believers. You illustrate it as follows: For although a person's outwardly
appearing to be a proper subject, may give him a right in the sight of men, it
does not in the sight of God.

You will permit me here to inquire, whether you have any other method to judge
of the 'real piety,' the 'godly sincerity,' or the proper qualifications of
persons for special ordinances, but what is visible, or in the sight of men? If
you have, it is a prerogative which we do not claim. I think, Sir, the
inference grants, that they have a right in the sight of men; and although God
may know them to be hypocrites, as he is not pleased to interpose and make the
matter visible, who will dare to challenge their right, and forbid their
^roceeding?

That this observation may appear in its proper light, we will bring the matter
upon trial; and, if you please, we will borrow an example from the New
Testament to illustrate it by. In the eighth chapter of the Acts, we have an
account of Philip's visiting and preaching the Gospel in Samaria, and of the
happy effects which followed. That a people who had long been bewitched, were
now reduced to reason and religion, which was the occasion of great joy in that
city; and it is said, "when they believed Philip preaching the things
concerning the kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were
baptized, both Men and Women." It is also added, that Simon believed; that is,
he appeared to Philip and others to believe: for we cannot suppose, from the
account afterward given of him, that he was a real believer, though at this
time there was nothing appeared to the contrary. Now, what was Philip's duty in
the present case? It is evident that he required, as a pre-requisite in his
candidates, that they believe with all the heart; as appears from another
circumstance recorded in the same chapter. And although Simon appeared to him
to be a true believer, yet, in the sight of God, he was nothing but a hypocrite.

It is abundantly evident, that Philip required the same qualifications, in
order to baptism, that the Baptists do at the present day. It is equally
evident, that he baptized a person, who, in the sight of God, had not those
qualifications. The present inquiry is, whether he did right or not? If you
should choose to say, he did not act consistent with his principles; this will
lead us to inquire again, what reasons could determine him in acting otherwise,
as he did not know the heart of Simon? But as this answer would necessarily
involve you in a controversy with him, I shall for the present leave it, to be
settled between you. But should you give your opinion in favor of his conduct,
by whatever arguments you would vindicate that, the same will serve to
vindicate ours, under similar circumstances.

It may be proper here to attend to the consequences you have drawn from the
preceding observations; i. e. that upon our principles it may be necessary to
administer the ordinance of baptism fifty or a hundred times to the same
person. Alarming as these consequences may appear to you, they do not greatly
terrify us: For our principles have had a practical existence for ages past;
and yet I can assure you, I have never heard of a person's being baptized five
and twenty times. Nor is it common with us to baptize a person more than once.
But if we should think it necessary upon any occasion to repeat it,
Paedo-baptists do even the same. Some of them have become so liberal, as not
only to immerse, or sprinkle, as the candidate may choose; but, to immerse
those who have been sprinkled in infancy, and have been members of their
churches for many years! If I am rightly informed, the Rev. Mr. P. -- Pastor of
a church in your vicinity, has baptized a number who had been baptized in
infancy. The same has been done by the Rev. Mr. B. -- of Randolph, in V^^mont.
Other instances might be mentioned if necessary.
If it be necessary to perform it twice, I know not but that some circumstances
may render it equally necessary to perform it fifty times.

But, Sir, I wish to bring the instance of Philip and Simon once more into
view, as I think it may serve to remove some of your supposed difficulties. It
will undoubtedly be granted, that Philip baptized the sorcerer, upon the same
footing which he did the other Samaritan converts, i. e. upon a profession of
faith. But, when Peter and John came to visit the brethren at Samaria, and had
laid their hands on a number, by which means the miraculous gifts of the Holy
Ghost were conferred; Simon beholding, was filled with astonishment, and
proceeded to offer them money, in order to obtain this power. This conduct
betrayed his ignorance of the true sp^^^^ of religion; and exposed him to that
most severe reproof from Peter; "Thy money perish with thee, -- thou have
neither part nor lot in this matter: for thy heart is not right in the sight of
God. For I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity." He was no longer to be considered as a Christian, but under the
reigning power of guilt and unbelief.

Now should we suppose Philip to return this way again in a few weeks, and
after inquiring into the state of his young converts, he is informed of the
situation of Simon, and from the account he receives is desirous of a personal
interview with him: -- It is agreed to, -- and when the time arrives, Simon
comes before him; blushing and confusion appear in his face, shame and sorrow
mingle in his eyes; he pauses -- he sighs! -- at length thus addresses the
sweet Evangelist: "I have indeed done dishonor to the Christian name, and have
given ample proof to the world, that I was a stranger to the power and divinity
of the Gospel: and although my admiration was raised by the miracles I beheld,
my passions moved and charmed by the soft cloquence of your persuasive tongue;
yet, alas! I was but in love with myself, instead of a Savior; but my iniquity
has found me out, and now appears hateful to me." He informs Philip, that the
exhortation given him by the Apostle Peter to repent, was so accompanied with
the divine energy, that he had now reason to hope that he had become a true
penitent. Philip, and the church at Samaria, are fully satisfied, that although
Simon, when he made a profession, was in the gall of bitterness and bond of
iniquity, yet that he is now become a true child of God.

You will permit me here in my turn to inquire, Whether Simon can now be looked
upon as a visibly qualified member for church fellowship and communion? or
whether he is to be baptized again? I do not wish to anticipate your answer;
but as it is a difficulty of your own proposing, I think it reasonable to give
you the laboring oar; and whatever way you are pleased to decide in this case,
will undoubtedly relieve us under similar circumstances.

Upon the whole, does it not appear evident to every candid reader, that we
require no more, nor any other qualifications in our candidates for baptism,
than what were required in the apostolic age? They required their candidates to
believe with all the heart; we require no more. Therefore, whatever
consequences are fairly deducible from our principles in this point, the same
are equally chargeable upon theirs.

Agreeably to the foregoing observations are the sentiments of many
Paedo-baptist writers. I will here cite the words of one. "It is manifest
(says he) that Philip's principles were, to baptize none but what had saving
grace, and believed with all their hearts." Also, "It is manifest that the
Apostles did not intend to baptize any adult persons, except they had knowledge
or satisfaction that they had the seed of grace sown in their hearts. Witness
the instance of Philip's baptizing the eunuch; again, for proof, Peter's
baptizing Cornelius, and those Gentiles that believed, after they had received
the Holy Ghost, as well as the believing Jews: So also the instance of the
jailor's family. Not to multiply instances, it is well known, or may be well
known, that faith is always spoken of in the word of God before baptism, and we
all agree that baptism is to be administered to a person before the Lord's
supper." Frothingham's Right to the Lord's Supper, p. 65, 66.
If this be a just statement of facts, that neither Philip nor the Apostles
meant to baptize any adults, but those who believed with all the heart; and
that it is well known that faith is always spoken of in the word of God before
baptizing; surely the Baptists cannot be reasonably blamed, for endeavoring to
imitate apostolic practice.

From the preceding remarks, you may probably see wherein you have mistaken the
matter, in charging our sentiments with ^rror respecting the qualifications of
candidates for baptism. You seem to suppose, that because we require them to be
visible believers, that we are obliged to know that they are real believers:
This is evidently implied in your objection, That if none are proper subjects
but visible believers, none are proper subjects but real believers. That every
man who professes religion ought to be what he professes, no one will deny;
but, that we are obliged to know them to be sincere, I have never yet
conceived. Were we, for fear of the consequences, to refuse to administer
either the ordinance of baptism, or the Lord's supper, until we absolutely knew
who were sincere, I believe we should administer no more until the day of
judgment.

But, should we allow all the consequences which you have supposed to be true
-- (which will by no means be granted) and should we then suppose again, that
some imagination, more fertile than yours, might suggest twice as many more --
what then? Are we to mutilate or lay aside a positive institution, for fear of
consequences which are very unlikely ever to take place? Is our obedience to be
measured by our own convenience, or to be withheld because of some supposed
difficulties? Surely not.

Positive institutions require our implicit obedience to the sovereign will of
Him who instituted them, without assigning any reasons for their fitness, or
making a proviso in case of supposed difficulties. They are well distinguished
from moral precepts, by a late learned writer. His words are as follow: "Moral
precepts, are precepts the reason of which we see; positive precepts, are
precepts the reason of which we do not see. Moral duties arise out of the
nature of the case itself, prior to external command; positive duties do not
arise out of the nature of the case, but from external command; nor would they
be duties at all, were it not for such command, received from Him whose
creatures and subjects we are." Bishop But (...) Analogy of Religion, p. 172.
Our obligations to precepts of this kind, are well described by President
Edwards; his words are -- "Such precepts are the greatest and most proper trial
of obedience, because in them the mere authority and will of the Legislator is
the sole ground of the obligation (and nothing in the natures of the things
themselves;) and therefore they are the greatest trial of any person's respect
to that authority and will." Discourses on Important Subjects, p. 68.


Had the excellent Mr. Edwards viewed positive institutions in the same
indifferent light which you do, it is not probable he would have written after
this manner; but perhaps he had never thought of your happy succedaneum;
'sincerity,' which, like the ancient philosopher's stone, can turn all our
external omissions of positive duties into real acts of obedience!

I conclude it will not be denied; that professed believers are proper subjects
of baptism: but the question before us is, Whether they are the only proper
subjects? When (...) the term proper, I mean not, what is become so by
tradition; but what is agreeable to the institution, as recorded in the sacred
history of baptism. That no other instances are recorded you implicitly
acknowledge, when you say; I would query, Whether the evidence that believers
were baptized, is any evidence that infants were not also baptized? This query,
in the first instance, grants, that there is evidence that believers were
baptized. Secondly, it asks, Whether that is any evidence that infants were not
also baptized? It will be granted that it is not positive evidence that they
were not; nor is it that they were not anointed with the holy chrism, or signed
with the sign of the cross, or twenty other things done to them of which the
'scripture is silent.' But it is circumstantial evidence that they were not:
for, that the sacred historians, when recording the many instances of the
baptism of believers for the space of near sixty years, until the volume of
inspiration was closed, and never once mentioning a single instance of an
infant, must look like a design against Infant Baptism, provided it was then in
practice. It is not easy to account for their neglecting to record a fact, on
which so much depended, as the future peace, and order of the church of Christ.
Nor does it appear to us a sufficient apology for an omission so interesting to
say, that the right of infants was so well established under the Jewish
dispensation, that it was unnecessary that any express mention should be made
of it in the New Testament: unless baptism is to be considered as a Jewish
r^te, rather than a Christian institution. For, under the Gospel dispensation,
the priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the
law, with respect to positive institutions.

In order to bring this head to a close, you will permit me to inquire, Whether
Paedo-baptists in general do not require, in all unbaptized adults, a personal
profession of faith, in order to their being admitted to the ordinance of
baptism? That they do, will appear from their own testimony. "Baptism is not to
be administered to any that are out of the visible church, until they profess
their faith in Christ, and obedience to him." Assembly of Divines* Cate^^ism.


Shall I add to this another, from a late advocate for Infant Baptism, who has
complained much of the Baptists for their "assuming" language, in calling the
baptism administered by them, by way of distinction, "Believers' Baptism."
"Whereas, (says he) there is no other baptism administered in our churches but
the baptism of believers, or those who are accounted such, either upon their
personal profession, or in the repute of the church, and God's gracious
acceptance. As to adult persons unbaptized, they are no otherwise admitted to
baptism among us, it is known; than upon a personal profession of faith."
Clark's Defense of Infant Baptism, p. 2.


This gentleman, from the general manner of his expressions, must be understood
to represent the whole denomination; and evidently carries the matter quite as
far as we do. If a profession of faith be the only terms on which you admit
adults to baptism; if, after this, they should prove their profession to be
false, you are as much obliged to baptize them 'fifty times,' in order to be
consistent upon your sentiments, as we are upon ours. The strongest terms you
have quoted from me are, "That none are proper subjects of baptism but
professed believers." We have just heard, that there is "no other baptism
administered in your churches, but the baptism of believers:" not will it
relieve the matter for any to say that it is added, "or those who are accounted
such upon their personal profession." This is all that we contend for as
answering the rule: for we do not pretend absolutely to know, that those whom,
we baptize are real believers, only we account them such upon their personal
profession. Nor can it be considered as an exception what is further added,
That they are believers. "in the repute of the church:" for no church could
consistently repute a person to be a believer, without rational evidence, that
he was such. But the last, expression seems to carry the matter to a degree of
certainty; That they are believers in "God's gracious acceptance:" for
although persons may profess, and churches may account them to be believers;
yet certainly God, as he cannot be deceived, will not accept any as such but
those who are so in reality.

We will next take notice of that very scriptural account given by Dr. Hopkins.
When describing the subjects of baptism, he says, "The proper subjects of
baptism, if adult, are those who, by profession and appearance, are believers
in Christ and true friends to him. None but they who are really such, do in
heart put on Christ: They must therefore be really holy, in order to put on
this visibility and profession of it, with propriety and truth, which they do
in baptism: for if they be not really such, they are utterly unqualified in the
sight of God, to be admitted to baptism, as it is, on their part, only a piece
of hypocrisy. Therefore none are to be admitted to this ordinance, but those
who, in the view of the church, appear to be true friends to Christ or
believers in him, and really holy, and are justly considered by them as such;
who can judge only by outward appearance, and cannot certainly know the heart.

"That none but such, who are thus visibly, and in the charitable judgment of
the church, and of those who administer this ordinance, believers in Christ and
really holy, are the proper subjects of this ordinance, and to be admitted to
baptism, is abundantly evident from scripture, as well as from the nature of
the transaction, and the reason of things. The Apostles, when they first began
to administer Christian baptism, and form a church, baptized none but such who
gladly received the word. When the eunuch desired to be baptized, Philip said,
If thou believe with all thine heart, thou may. This implies that he was
not qualified for baptism, or a fit subject of that ordinance, unless he were a
true believer in Christ: and that he could not baptize him, unless he professed
and appeared to be such a believer. Hence all who were baptized, and formed
into churches, were considered and addressed by the Apostles, in their letters
to them, an saints for holy persons, believers in Christ, and friends to him;
as those who were saved, and heirs of eternal life; or, which is the same, as
real Christians: of which every one must be sensible, who reads the Acts of the
Apostles, and their epistles." System of Divinity, Part II. Chap v. p. 305, 306.
These are words fitly spoken, and are like apples of gold, in pictures of
silver.

If indeed it be evident from scripture, and in the charitable judgment of the
church, "That none but such, who are thus visibly believers in Christ, and
really holy, are the proper subjects of this ordinance, and to be admitted to
baptism," as has just been asserted; and, that the Apostles, when they first
began to administer Christian baptism, and form a church, baptized none but
such who gladly received the word, we can but wonder that a body of Christians
who profess to take the WORD OF GOD, as their only rule of faith and practice,
should blame us for so nearly imitating those first builders of the Christian
church! For had the gentleman but now quoted, been giving a narrative of the
sentiments and practice of the Baptist churches at the present day, he could
not have given an account dissimilar, without contradicting sober fact. If it
should be objected to what has new been said, that the preceding is only an
account of the true qualifications of adults, it will be readily granted; and
at the same time asserted, that the Bible knows but of one kind of
qualifications in candidates for baptism; it knows nothing of higher and lower,
of positive and negative qualifications.

"Neither the Forerunner, nor the Apostles of Christ have said any thing on
which such a distinction can be founded; as they insisted on repentance and
faith as necessary in order to acceptance with God, and remission of sins, so
they insisted upon the profession of them, in order to their being admitted
into the visible kingdom or church of CHRIST. They baptized none, but upon this
ground. Those who appeared, to a judgment of charity, to have these
qualifications, they admitted to baptism, and those only." "In a word, from the
whole tenor of the New Testament, it is plain, that nothing less or lower than
a profession of faith and true repentance was required in order to a person's
enjoying the privilege of baptism." And "the distinction of higher and lower
qualifications for the two ordinances, and the notion of negative evidences
being a sufficient qualification for baptism, was never learnt from the New
Testament, but is, doubtless, of human invention." Dr. Robbins's Reply to Mr.
Cotton's I says, p. 6, 7.


Evidence of this kind might be multiplied, but it is hoped that what has been
offered will give full satisfaction. We hope we shall not be thought obstinate
if we should still say, That we think the scripture abundantly justifies the
observation, That professed believers are the only proper subjects of baptism.
If you should repeat your former query, 'Whether that is any evidence 'that
infants were not also baptized?' you will not think the request unreasonable,
if we should call on you to make out scripture proof, that ever one infant was
baptized, by Christ or his Apostles. Should you assert it without proof, it
will be thought a sufficient answer to ^en^ it without.

We should now be prepared, in a direct way, to treat upon the Mode of baptism,
were it not for an objection you have made against St. John's baptism, which it
may be necessary first to consider.

SECTION III. Whether JOHN'S Baptism belonged to the Jewish or Christian
Dispensation, particularly considered.
YOU ask (p. 10) By what authority do you make immersion essential to the
ordinance of baptism, in contradistinction ^o other modes and circumstances? I
answer* By the authority of God's word, and the confess^d meaning of the Greek
verb ((...),) to baptize.

You have endeavored to evade part of the scripture evidence in favor of
immersion, by suggesting that the baptism administered by John was not
Christian baptism. Your objections are the following. You say, We have no
reason to suppose that John baptized in all respects agreeable to the Christian
mode of baptism: But why not? Because, it is pretty evident, that he did not
baptize in the name of the Trinity. But suppose, Sir, he had baptized in the
name of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednege, it would afford no argument in favor
of a different mode, or any reason to suppose that the act of baptizing was not
the same. John and the Apostles baptized among the same people; hence it is
most likely they understood the word in the same sense. In support of your
observation, you mention the instance in the nineteenth chapter of Acts. From
which you infer, That the twelve disciples would certainly have heard of the
Holy Ghost, and would not have been again baptized, had John's baptism and the
Christian institution been the same.

It appears evident that the question did not respect the ordinary influences,
or name of the Holy Ghost: for, they could not be believers without the former,
nor John's disciples without having heard of the latter. John expressly
declared, at the time of his baptizing, That One should come after him mightier
than he, who should baptize with the HOLY GHOST and fire. This was the subject
of Paul's inquiry, and had reference only to the miraculous gifts of the Holy
Spirit, the bestowment of which they had not yet heard. But, you ask, Why were
these disciples again baptized? I shall not undertake to tell why, nor do I
believe that they were. I see nothing in the reading which requires this
construction: for the passage before us appears not to be Luke's account of
Paul, but Paul's account of John's doctrine and baptism. For it is written,
Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying
unto the people, that they should believe on him who should come after him,
that is on Christ Jesus. When they heard this, (that is, the people whom John
taught) they were baptized (by John) in the name of the Lord Jesus. This
concludes* Paul's account of John. The historian then takes notice of Paul's
conduct, that when he had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on
them; and they spoke with tongues, and prophesied.

You seem to think that these disciples were rebaptized by Paul in the
Christian mode; but did you observe, Sir, that the Holy Ghost is not mentioned
in the form of administration here recorded? It is only said, They were
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.

That the reader may not consider us to be partial in the explanation now
given, I would observe that many eminent Paedo-baptists have understood it in
the same light which we do. I shall mention but two or three, as sufficient to
my present purpose. Dr. Robbins, when speaking of John's baptism, has the
following remark upon this passage; "When they heard this, they were baptized
IN THE NAME OF THE LORD JESUS; that is, they were baptized by John himself."
Reply to Cotton's Essays, p. 21.


In perfect agreement with this are the sentiments or Mr. Poole, "When they
heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus; that is, the
disciples, or those that John preached to, who, when they heard what the
Baptist said in the foregoing verse, were baptized." "As for Paul's imposing
his hands upon them who are said to be baptized, it might very well be: That
the twelve disciples might have been baptized by John, and now receive the Holy
Ghost in these extraordinary gifts by the laying on of the hands of St. Paul:
For to what end should these disciples, who had been baptized with St. John's
baptism, be again baptized by Paul?" He further adds, "It is evident that the
Apostles themselves were only baptized with the baptism of John, for there were
none else to baptize them." Vid. Pol. in loc.


As in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall be established, I
will only add the opinion of Calvin. Speaking of these twelve disciples, he
says, "Whereas therefore they answer that they know not whether there be any
Holy Ghost, it is (...) be understood as if they had said, they have no^ yet
heard whether the graces of the Spirit, of which Paul asked them, were given to
the disciples of Christ. But I grant that that was the true baptism of John's,
and all one and the self-same with the baptism of Christ; but I deny that they
were baptized again." And in another place he says, "Whereby also it is made
most certain, that the ministry of John was altogether the same which was
afterward committed to the Apostles. For the different hands wherewith it was
administered, make not the baptism different; but, the same doctrine shows it
to be the same baptism. John and the Apostles agreed in one doctrine; both
baptized into repentance, both into the forgiveness of sins, both into the name
of Christ." Ins^^tat. Christ. Relig. Lib. IV. Chap. xv. 18, 7.


Should it still be insisted upon, that they were rebaptized by Paul, it will
by no means help your argument, unless proved, that they were sprinkled, or had
water poured on them, instead of being immersed. To allow that they were
rebaptized, will still be in our favor, and vindicate our conduct in
baptizing those who have not been baptized according to the Christian mode.

In concluding your remarks upon this head, you say, John's baptism was both
begun and ended under the Jewish dispensation. But, may I not inquire by what
authority you assert this? Was there any thing in the manner of John's
ministry, which resembled a Jewish priest? Or was there any thing in the Jewish
ritual that required John to baptize repenting sinners in Jordan? If so, you
will oblige us in making it appear.

If John's baptism belonged to the Jewish dispensation, why were the chief
priests and elders so surprisingly ignorant of it, that when Christ asked them,
Whether it were from heaven or of men -- they said, We cannot tell? Matt. xxi.
^^.
You will please to observe, that the persons to whom Christ put this question,
were not the ignorant multitude, but the chief priests and elders, and it had
particular reference to the authority by which John baptized; which, if
received from them, they must certainly have known it, and it would have been
much to their advantage in this pinching case to have owned it.

But, Sir, when you say, John's ministry was under the Jewish dispensation, you
evidently mean, that he belonged to it. If so, he must have been inaugurated
according to their ritual, or otherwise be considered as an impostor. But do
the sacred pages any where teach us to believe, that John ever passed under
those consecrating ceremonies, or was ever clad with a priestly vestment? Or,
do you consider him only as a Prophet of that dispensation? If the Latter, then
the translators made a mistake when they finished the prophecy of Malachi, in
saying, "THE END OF THE PROPHETS." For certainly they ought to have included
John, otherwise the ignorant and inattentive would be very apt to think he
belonged to the New Testament dispensation.

But, is it not abundantly evident, that the Jewish clergy considered John as
introducing a new dispensation? That this was the case, and that the matter may
stand in a fair light, let us consider what is written, John i. 19 -- 25. The
Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, (John) Who art thou?
And he confessed, and denied not; but confessed. I am not the Christ. And they
asked him, What then? Art thou Elias? And he says, I am not. It may be
observed, that the Jews were thought to have imb^^ed the Pythagorean
philosophy, which taught the doctrine of transmigration; therefore, when they
asked John whether he was ^lias, their meaning was this, whether the soul of
Elias were not now come in another body? To which John answered no. But christ
told his disciples that Elias had already come, not in the Jewish, (...) sense.
Art thou that prophet? (or a prophet?) And he answered, No. Then said they
unto him, Who art thou? He said, I am the voice of one crying in the
wilderness, make straight the way of the Lord, as says the prophet Esaias. And
they asked him, Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias,
neither that prophet?

These inquiries, made by the Jewish clergy respecting John's baptism,
abundantly manifest ^wo things: 1. That they were totally ignorant of John's
being a minister of their dispensation. 2. That they expected, when either
Elias or Christ came, they would introduce a new state of things.


Now as John had come baptizing with water, in a way different from all the
requirements of the ceremonial law, and by an authority unknown to them, they
reasonably concluded that he must be one or the other of those persons they
were looking for.

I wish to add two passages of scripture, as fully confirming the above
observations. The first is Luke xvi. 16. The law and the prophets were until
John: since that time the kingdom of God is preached, and every man presses
into it. This observation made by Christ, cannot reasonably be referred to
John's birth or death; but evidently respects the beginning of his ministry:
for then he began to preach the kingdom of God, and to proclaim the advent of
the Savior; and men in multitudes flocked to this new dispensation, called the
kingdom of God. The other passage is, Mark i. 1 -- 4. THE BEGINNING OF THE
GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST the Son of God: As it is written in the prophets,
Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before
thee. The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the
Lord, make his paths straight. John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach
the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins.

Thus, Sir, the Evangelist here calls John's ministry The beginning of the
gospel of Jesus Christ. But you inform your readers, that it was under, or
belonged to the Jewish dispensation. It will now be lest to the impartial to
judge, whether, for the sake of supporting a particular hypothesis, you have
not erred from the truth. And although you conclude that every 'candid
inquirer' must view the matter in the same light which you do, it is very
possible that some who are entitled to that character, may differ from you.

But, Sir, you have left your readers still under one difficulty respecting the
matter. As you deny that John's minisiry belonged to the Christian
dispensation, you have not informed them when that begun. From the analogy of
your reasoning, we must suppose you begin it at the death of Christ.

You will now permit me to inquire, whether the baptism administered by the
Apostles of Christ before his death was Jewish baptism? Or, which dispensation
it belonged to? Or, whether to neither? It is said, John iii. 22 -- 24, After
these things' came Jesus and his disciples into the land of Judea; and there he
tarried with them, and baptized. And John also was baptizing in Enon, near to
Salim, because there was MUCH water there: -- For John was not yet cast into
prison. The Pharisees also heard that Jesus made and baptized more disciples
than John, (though Jesus himself baptized not, but his disciples.) This baptism
was cotemporary with John's, and undoubtedly under the same dispensation.

But will Christians in general be willing to allow, that both Jesus and John
were ministers of the legal dispensation? And that the ordinances instituted,
and administered by them, belonged to that dispensation? I said ordinances:
for, if baptism is to be considered in this light, undoubtedly the sacred
Supper is to be ^ewed upon the same footing; for, this was instituted and
administered by Christ before his death, and never instituted by him afterward.

As Christ was the same divine person before his death, that he was after he
arose, it was by his appointment and authority, that his disciples were sent to
teach and baptize. They did not receive their commission from the chief
priests, but from JESUS. And John's preaching, and baptism, were as independent
of the Jewish dispensation, as that of the disciples of Christ.

The authority by which John the Baptist acted, both in preaching and
baptizing, is expressly declared by the Evangelist John, chap. i. verse 6.
There was a man sent from God, whose name was John. The same came for a
witness, etc. What St. Paul said of his commission to preach, with a little
variation may be said of John's: For he neither received it of man, neither was
he taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. Neither went he up to
Jerusalem, to them which were in the priest's office before him; Gal. ^.11, 17.
but he went into the wilderness of Judea, and entered upon the work he was
appointed unto, by him who sent him to baptize with water. John i. 23.


The Jewish rulers knew nothing of John's baptism as belonging to their
dispensation; you know nothing of its belonging to the Christian, and perhaps
it might puzzle you both, to determine whether it w^^ from heaven or of men!

Upon the whole, if the baptism administered by John, as the beginning of the
gospel of Jesus Christ, and that which was administered by the disciples of
Christ, by his authority, and in his presence, were not Christian baptism, we
know of none which is deserving of the name.

I have been more particular upon this point, because modern writers lay so
much stress upon it. But it really appears, that to consider John's ministry as
a part of the Jewish dispensation, is both unscriptural, and prejudicial to the
cause of religion.

Finally, should it even be supposed, that there could be a distinction made
between the baptism of John and the Christian institution, respecting the form
of words used in the administration, it would by no means affect the case
before us. For you will please to remember that the dispute is not about the
form of words; but the act of baptizing. Hence if Mahomet had written his Koran
in Greek, and had ordered his disciples to be baptized in his name; and had
expressed the act by the same Greek verb by which Christian baptism is
expressed; should we not reasonably conclude that they baptized in the same
mode which Christians did, notwithstanding the difference of says and names
into which they were baptized? Let candor judge, and I will abide the decision.

Therefore until you, or some other person, shall prove that John's ministry
belonged to the Jewish dispensation, we shall confide in the judgment of the
Evangelist, that it was the beginning of the gospel dispensation. And
consequently the manner of John's baptizing, may be consistently urged to
establish the mode of Christian baptism.

SECTION IV. The Mode of Baptism, and its Connection with the Subject in
Dispute, particularly considered.
BAPTISM, like man in his primeval state, when it first came out of the hand of
its institutor, was pure. But it has been basely contaminated, and perverted
from its original design, to very different purposes. It is no longer dependent
on original institution; but can become all things to all men, as circumstances
may require.

It is evident, Sir, that you and I differ, both in opinion and practice,
respecting the mode of baptism. I have ventured to say in my other Piece, that
"baptism is to be administered only in one mode," and that "^mmersion is
essential to the ordinance." You have given it as your opinion, (p. 10) That
the essence of baptism does not consist in any one particular mode whatever;
and that it may be acceptably performed either by sprinkling, by pouring on
water, or by immersion. In the following page you add, It may be scrupled
whether you, or any other man, can ascertain precisely the apostolic mode of
baptism. If this be indeed the case, then we may undoubtedly do as the children
of Israel did when they had no king, every man what is right in his own eyes.

But, whether the subject be involved in so much uncertainty as you suggest, is
worthy of serious inquiry. We cannot suppose you to be confident with regard to
your own mode, nor that you will attempt to prove it to be apostolic; unless
you mean to emphasize the adverb precisely, and include in it all those trivial
circumstances you have mentioned (p. 10): Such as whether the subjects were put
into the water backward or forward, or what length of time they kept them under
water, or at what time they called the name of the Trinity over them, etc. But
supposing it should be difficult to determine upon some of the circumstances
you have mentioned, and we should possibly mistake one or more of them, --
would any reasonable person conclude, that such an omission would affect the
validity of the ordinance, as much as to change it from immersion to sprinkling?

But, Sir, you say the essence of baptism does not consist in any one
particular mode whatever. What you mean by ' essence' without, or independent
of mode, or of any particular mode, appears unintelligible. For, if the essence
of baptism can exist without the instituted mode, it can undoubtedly in any
mode, or without any. But by what chemical art you extract the essence of
baptism from the mode, you have not yet told us. We cannot suppose by essence,
that you mean the holy desires or gracious dispositions of the subjects of
baptism: for, from the infant-condition of the greater part of those whom you
baptize, it is presumed there can be no evidence of their being possessed of
such holy tempers. If by the essence of baptism, you mean the form of words
used in the administration of it, then undoubtedly that must be considered
valid where the due form of words is used, although water be wholly left out:
which if we may credit history, has been the case in several instances.

In the dark ages of superstition, when newborn infants dying unbaptized were
doomed to eternal death, a priest was obliged to attend at the call of a
midwife; and sometimes, when the infant was likely immediately to expire, they
not having water prepared made use of wine. Robinson's History of Baptism, p.
442.


An instance is mentioned by Nicephorus, a Greek historian of the 14th century,
of "a certain Jew, performing a journey in company with Christians, and being
suddenly seized with a dangerous illness, who earnestly desired baptism at the
hands of his fellow travelers. They not having a priest in their company, and
being destitute of water, were at first reluctant; but he conjuring them not to
deny him the favor, they yielded to his request. On which, taking off his
clothes, they sprinkled him thrice with sand, instead of water; adding that
they baptized him in the name of the Father, and so on." Apud Centur.
Migd^^urg. Cent. ii. c. vi. p. 32. in Booth's Paedo. Exam. p. 144.
The same author informs us, both from Deylingius and Seckendorf, that a little
before the reformation, there were, in Upper Saxony, and in some other places,
those who taught and practiced baptism, upon sickly newborn infants, with only
using the baptismal form of words, without the application of water, in any
form whatever! -- "TO BAPTIZE, by sprinkling a few drops of water, to BAPTIZE,
by sprinkling of sand without any water; to BAPTIZE, by merely pronouncing a
form of words; -- what an improvement upon the institution of Christ!" Ib^^ p.
145.


"In the twelfth century, a council in Ireland ordained, that children should
be baptized in pure water by trine immersion; but, as a history of facts cannot
be collected from mere laws, it may be observed, that some of the Irish
baptized by plunging their children in milk, and were superstitious enough to
imagine, that every part so plunged became invulnerable." Godolphin's
Repertorium, in Robinson's History.


I might go on to multiply instances of this kind, but the preceding are
sufficient to show the absurdity of placing the essence of baptism in a mere
form of words.

Although we would not attempt, or even wish to dictate to our Paedo-baptist
brethren with regard to their practice; yet we claim it as a privilege, to
judge for ourselves what is essential. Christians in different periods have had
their different opinions of it. Tertullian in the beginning of the third
century, and Agrippinus and Cyprian after him, with many more, rebaptized
those who came to them, not merely because they had been baptized by heretics,
(as they were pleased to call them) but because they lacked what they
considered essential to the ordinance: for they "considered the probity and
good faith of the person baptized the very essence of baptism; and if a
professor of Christianity were an unholy man, they adjudged his baptism like
his profession, vain and invalid, and himself not a weak believer of
Christianity, but a mere unprincipled pagan." Ibid. 461.


The Council of Nice, in the 4th century, seemed to consider the essence of
baptism as consisting in the form of words used in the administration; and
accordingly directed, that such as came to them from the Paulianists, both men
and women, should be rebaptized, because the ordinance had not been
administered in the name of the Trinity: While they admitted the Novatians with
only laying on of hands.

The Bohemians considered the essence of baptism as consisting in the virtue or
competency of the administrator; and consequently rebaptized those who had
every other requisite of baptism, only a corrupt administrator.

The Greeks place the assence of baptism in dipping in water; and had a person
been sprinkled ever so decently in any period of life, they would not therefore
think him baptized; because, in their opinion, to baptize is to dip, and
nothing else. Vide Robinson's History of Baptism, p. 463, 464.


The Baptist churches in America, and those of Great Britain, Poland,
Lithuania, Transylvania, and many more, all hold that immersion in water, and a
personal profession of faith and repentance, are essential to baptism.

But, Sir, whatever you are pleased to consider as essential to baptism, that
being omitted, would undoubtedly invalidate the ordinance in your view; at
least this is the case with us. And why we should think some circumstances
essential to baptism which you do not, will more fully appear in the sequel.

Many writers on your side the question, have endeavored to prove Christian
baptism to have had its origin in the washing of Jewish proselytes; which may
reasonably be considered as a Jewish fable, unknown in the ritual of Moses, or
any part of the Old Testament. A practice not to be found in the writings of
Josephus and Philo, those two great historians, but is principally taken from
writers of a much later date, and particularly from the Yad Chazaka of
Maimonides. A celebrated Jewish writer, who was the head of a famous school in
Egypt, in the beginning of the twelfth century.


It is worthy of observation, that the Paedobaptist writers in this controversy
rarely, if over, mention the baptism administered by John, unless in some
negative sense, or to answer some arguments drawn from it against their
sentiments. But the washing of Jewish proselytes is frequently mentioned, as an
indisputable auxiliary to Infant Baptism, by many noted writers on that side.
Dr. Lightfoot, Dr. Wall, Dr. Lathrop of West-Springfield, and others; but
scrupled by the learned Dr. Benson, and positively denied by others.


A question here naturally suggests itself to the mind; Why do Paedo-baptists
go back to Jewish tradition, or forward to the death of the Savior, in order
to ascertain the origin of gospel baptism, and cautiously omit the first
accounts given of it in the sacred history? Perhaps the most natural answer is,
because that appears incongruous with their practice. It will require a large
stock of art and ingenuity, to persuade a candid inquirer that John baptized
any beside aduits, or administered the ordinance in any other way than by
immersion. The particular places which he chose for the convenience of
baptizing, must afford a strong argument in favor of immersion; nor can there
be a very rational account given of his conduct upon any other footing. Had
John administered in the present popular mode, I presume a single cask of water
would have been sufficient for all he ever baptized! -- and in whatever place
people had lived, there could have been no want of water sufficient to baptize.

In order to evade the force of this argument, many things have been said. One
time we are told, that Jordan was so shallow that there was not a sufficient
depth of water to immerse, or bury a person in; again, that the large quantity
of water was necessary, for the people and their beasts to drink; again, when
John baptized in Enon because there was much water there, we are told that
((...) John iii. ^3.
) many waters, means many little springs, not sufficient to immerse in. Now as
to the first of these, no person who is acquainted with that ancient
geographical account drawn by the pen of inspiration, can possibly believe it.
If any are at a loss, let them observe, that it was only fordable at particular
places, as appears by Ehud, Gideon and the Gileadites taking those passages.
Judges iii. 28. vii. 24. xii. 6.
And also David's crossing it with his family in a ferry-boat. 2 Samuel xix. 15
-- 18.
As to the second observation, if there was much water, it was necessary to
"supply the multitudes that came to John's baptism, for drink for themselves,
and their horses and camels." Clark's Defense of infant Baptism, p. 436.
If John's preaching had been such, that it had broken up the city of
Jerusalem, and collected all the people from the region round about, and they
had all gathered to him in one day, yet still it would not be true, that they
needed a river half as large as Jordan to have supplied them all with drink;
unless they drank like Job's behemoth! Job. xl. 23.
I do not remember ever to have heard, that when any large gathering of people
has been proposed, either for a military review, or for the sacred purpose of
an ordination, that they have once mentioned the propriety of having it near
some large river or fountain of water, in order to accommodate the people and
their horses for drink; and yet it is highly probable, that upon some such
occasion, there have been as many together as ever at one time collected round
the ancient Baptist.

The fact appears to be this, that John's ministry continued for a considerable
time, and that the people from time to time went out to hear him, and often we
may suppose he had crowded assemblies. It is said he preached in the wilderness
of Judea, but he baptized in Jordan.

Having thus mentioned the places chosen by John, we shall next take notice of
the place where Philip baptized the eunuch, which you suppose to be a matter of
necessity rather than choice; be that as it may, the account informs us, --
they came unto a certain water; -- supposed by Mr. Poole to be a fountain in a
town called Bethsora, or a river called Eleutherus, which in that road must be
passed over. Pol. in loc.


Jerome describes the town of Bethsoron, and mentions the fountain in it, in
which he says, "the Acts of the Apostles relate, that the eunuch of queen
Candaece was baptized here by Philip," De locis Hebraicis, Fol 89.6.


Borchardus is of opinion, that it was " Nehel Escol, that is, The Brook of the
Cluster, from whence the spies carried the grapes; to the left of this valley,
for the space of a mile, runs a river, in which Philip baptized the eunuch of
queen Candace, not far from Sicelech." Descript. terrae Sanct. c. 9. in Dr.
Gill in loc


Thus we have traced John and his candidates, and Philip and the eunuch, to the
waterside; we are now prepared to consider the consequent action. It is said
of John that the people who went out to him, were baptized of him IN Jordan. --
And Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway OUT OF THE WATER. Matt.
iii. 6, 16. Mark 1.9.
It is added by Mark -- And it came to pass in those days, that Jesus come from
Galilee, and was baptized of John IN Jordan, and straightway COMING UP OUT OF
THE WATER. It is said of Philip and the eunuch. -- they went down both INTO THE
WATER, both Philip and the eunuch; and he baptized him; and when they were come
up out of the water, he went on his way rejoicing.

Now, Sir, can any person compare these accounts for a moment, and not see the
manifest agreement in the action of John and Philip. Let the rite be performed
in what mode soever, it is evident it was the same in the people whom John
baptized, and in the Savior, and in the eunuch. You observe in this last
instance, there is no account of any particular mode whatever. I must take the
liberty here, again to dissent from you: for, I conclude it is a very
particular account of the mode of plunging. Were you to be informed by a person
of your acquaintance, that he saw a minister who was a stranger to him, go down
into the water with a candidate, and that he baptized him, and that they came
up out of the water, -- I am persuaded, without hesitation, you would conclude
that they were Baptists; and the account here given would decide the point in
your mind, and perhaps in any other person's, in what mode the ordinance was
administered. Again, if instead of saying they went down both into the water,
it had been said that the candidate ascended, or was carried up the pulpit
stairs, (which is now the custom in many places) it would afford a strong
presumption in favor of affusion.

You observe the instance abovementioned is the only one, recorded in
scripture, of going to a river, pond, pool, or brook, to baptize with Christian
baptism. Sir, you will please also to observe, that this is the only instance
recorded, after the death of the Savior, in which the act of baptizing is
described; and here it evidently describes immersion.

But you say, If we admit, according to out translation, that they both of them
went down into the water, this is no evidence that either of them were plunged
all under water. You will not suppose, that this text is a proof that Philip
went all under water. But why not? If going into the water proves immersion, it
proves that both were immersed; for they went down both into the water. To some
of your readers, this criticism does not appear in the most logical light; for
no person ever supposed, that for Philip and the eunuch to go into the water up
to the knees or loins, would be to immerse either; but when they had got into
the water, there was evidently something done to one, that was not to the
other; i. e. Philip baptized or immersed the eunuch; but he did not baptize
Philip. Therefore for the sake of immersing the eunuch, they went both into the
water, as that could not be consistently performed without. In this light their
going into the water will appear rational; but in every other view, totally
inconsistent. Had the object been only to sprinkle the eunuch, this could have
been performed at the water side, without going down into it; yea, probably it
might have been done decently in the chariot: for it is most reasonable to
suppose, that a person of his distinction and equipage would not travel that
desert country, without some vessels to obtain and convey water, when he came
to it; unless he meant to serve himself in the way that Gideon's men did.

Upon the whole, does it not appear to be the most easy and natural
construction of the passage, to suppose the baptism of the eunuch to be an
immersion? I might here, if necessary, produce a cloud of witnesses from
Paedo-baptist expositors, full to my purpose; but I omit them for the present.
And although I would not address you in that full strain of assurance, which
the great Apostle did king Agrippa, yet I may modestly inquire, Believe thou
not these things thyself? yea, I doubt not but thou believe.

You take notice of this as a single instance, in which Christian baptism has
the appearance of immersion. But, Sir, would you think it reasonable, that in
every instance where it is said that persons (...) ^aptized, that all the
circumstances relating to the act should be particularly described? Surely you
could not. You might as reasonably suppose, that where circumcision is
mentioned, and the act not formally described, that it was performed upon a
different part, or in a different way from what the institution pointed out,
as, that baptism was administered in a different mode from the specimens given
of it.

It may be profitable here to reflect upon the subject a moment, and put a few
circumstances together, which may afford some light in the present case.

When John, that bright morning star, appeared, to give knowledge of salvation,
he came to prepare the way, and proclaim the approach of the Sun of
righteousness. In order to this, he came preaching repentance for the remission
of sins, and baptizing with (or in The preposition to might perhaps be better
rendered in, as it is Matt. xii. 41. and many other places.
) water. The manner in which John baptized is so particularly described, that
very few Christians, of any denomination, have doubted its being by immersion.
This was the beginning of the institution; therefore it was proper to describe
it. The act was performed in Jordan. But, as the Baptist had informed the
people, that there would come one after him mightier than he, who should
baptize with the Holy Ghost and fire, -- therefore, to avoid the danger of a
mistake which might possibly be made from this, in supposing that Christ, when
he came, would introduce a different mode of baptism from what John practiced,
-- we are expressly told, not only that he was baptized by John, but that it
was administered in the same way to him, as to the people. He, also, was
baptized in Jordan, and came up straightway out of it.

After Jesus had passed in triumph through the dark domains of death, he came
to his disciples vested with all power in heaven and earth, and enlarged their
commission, and sent them to preach to Gentiles as well as Jews; with an
express command, to baptize in the name of the triune God. Now, lest we should
look for soma alteration in the mode of baptism, it is again exemplified, and
here we see it to be the same as before; Philip and the candidate go down into
the water, he is baptized, and they come up again out of it. Thus we see the
baptism administered by John, in the beginning of the Christian dispensation,
before Christ began his personal ministry; and that administered to Christ
himself; and that administered after he gave the great commission, as to the
mode, were uniformly the same.

From this, we think it r^^ional to conclude, that those instances of baptism
mentioned in the New Testament, where the act is not described, were performed
in the same manner as those were of which an account is given.

Incompetent as this evidence may appear to you, we think it a sufficient
answer to your question, wherein you ask by what authority we make immersion
essential to baptism, etc. I would also assure you, that whenever you will make
out as much proof from scripture for sprinkling, as being an instituted mode of
baptism, a^ has now been produced in favor of immersion, I will lay down my
pen, and for ever drop the dispute.

Although what has been offered may be considered as ample proof of the
question in dispute, yet being desirous of giving you full satisfaction, I
shall proceed to lay before you one consideration more, which appears to us of
considerable weight in the present case; and that is, the native signification
of the Greek verb, ((...)) to baptize, which we suppose necessarily requires
dipping. We are fully sensible at the same time, that this sense has been
controverted by many men of eminent abilities; notwithstanding, we think the
evidence greatly preponderates in our favor. Nor shall we think it a difficult
task to prove the sense for which we plead, from Paedo-baptists themselves; and
that too, from some as learned and judicious as any whose names adorn the
biographical page. This kind of evidence I conclude you can have no reasonable
objection to, because you cannot suspect them of any design against themselves,
nor will they make any concessions to sentiments which they oppose, further
than truth obliges them to; therefore, I may say of their evidence in the
present case, as David did of Goliah's sword, there is none like it.

I may have occasion hereafter to mention some writers of a much earlier date,
but I shall here begin with Luther. In his translation of the New Testament, he
has rendered the Greek word to baptize by the German taufen, and in his works
he has expressly declared, that the baptismal verb taufen, signifies to
immerse, or to plunge into the water. Op Debaptismo, in Robinson's Hist. Bap.
p. 442.
Thus Matt. iii. 1. Zuder zeit kam Johannes der tauffer; -- In those days came
John the dipper. To this we may add the testimony of the Genevian oracle,
Calvin, who says, "The word baptize signifies to dip; and it is certain that
the manner of dipping was used of the ancient church." Institut. Christ. Relig.
L. iv. C. xv. 19.
Shall I add to this, the testimony of that celebrated Professor of divinity,
Witsius. "It cannot be denied (says he) that the native signification of the
word Baptein and Baptizein, is, to plunge, to dip." O^^onom. F^^d. L. iv. C.
xvi. 13.
Full to the same point are also the words of Vitringa. "The act of baptizing,
is the immersion of believers in water. This expresses the force of the word.
Thus also it was performed by Christ and his Apostles Aphorismi Sanct. Theolog.
Aphoris. 884. in Booth.


If you please, we will now look at the ancient Helvetia Confession, first
written in the year 1536, by or under the direction of Bucer, ten years before
the death of Luther, and afterward published again by the pastors of Zurich,
in 1566: In which we have the following unequivocal declaration: "Baptism was
instituted and consecrated by God, and the first that baptized was Jehn, who
DIPPED CHRIST IN THE WATER IN Jordan; from him it came to the Apostles, who
also did baptize with water."

The Confession of Saxony, written by Melancthon, in the year 1551, perfectly
agrees with the above; I will now transcribe it. "Baptism is an entire action,
to wit, a DIPPING, and the pronouncing of these words, I baptize thee in the
Name of the Father," and so on. Harmony of Confessions, p. 395, 404.
These two last are not to be considered merely as the testimony of two men, or
two particular churches, but as including a number of churches in two large
districts.

As Mr. Poole was justly esteemed a learned and critical expositor, you will
perhaps be willing to hear his opinion in the present case. "A great part
(says he) of those who went out to hear John were baptized, that is, dipped in
Jordan." "To be baptized is to be dipped in water; metaphorically, to be
plunged in affictions: I am, says Christ, to be -- overwhelmed with sufferings
and afflictions." Annot. on Matt. iii. 6. and xx. 22.
To this we may add the testimony of Mr. Daniel Rogers: "None (says he) of old
were wont to be sprinkled; and I confess myself unconvinced by demonstration
from scripture for Infant-sprinkling. It ought to be the church's part to
cleave to the institution, which is dipping; and he betrays the church, whose
officer he is, to a disorderly error, if he cleave not to the institution,
which is to dip. That the minister is to dip in water as the meetest act, the
word (...) notes it. For the Greeks wanted not other words to express any other
act beside dipping, if the institution could bear it." "To dip therefore is
exceeding material to the ordinance; which was the usage of old, whithout
exception of countries, hot or cold." Treatise of the two Sac, Part I, Chap. v.
and viii, in Booth's Paedo-bap. Exam. (...). 23.


The above quotations are all made from Paedo-baptist writers, to which I wish
to add one observation from a late learned historian: -- "A linguist (says he)
determines himself by his own knowledge of the Greek language, and an
illiterate man, by the best evidence he can obtain from the testimony of
others, whom by his condition he is obliged to trust.

"To the latter it is sufficient to observe, that the word is confessedly
Greek, that native Greeks must understand their own language better than
foreigners, and that they have always baptized, and do yet baptize, by
immersion. This is an authority for the meaning of the word infinitely
preferable to that of European lexicographers; so that a man, who is obliged to
trust human testimony, and who baptizes by immersion, because the Greeks do,
understands a Greek word exactly as the Greeks themselves understand it; and in
this case the Greeks are unexceptionable guides, and their practice is in this
instance safe ground of action." Robinson's Hist, of Baptism, p. 5, 6.
This last remark is confirmed by Dr. Wall, who assures us that "The Greek
church, in all the branches of it, in Europe, Asia, Egypt and Ethiopia, has
always preserved the custom of dipping infants in baptism, that were in health,
and able to bear it." Defense of Hist, of Infant Baptism, p. 148.
By the term always, we must understand from the time when they first began to
baptize infants.

I will not for the present trouble you with any more quotations from
Paedo-baptists, but will hold myself engaged to produce five times as many,
whenever there shall be a reasonable demand. I conclude, if human testimony can
establish any point, we must allow, from the disinterested nature of the
evidence now considered, that the native signification of the Greek verb
Baptizo, (which must determine the proper sense of our English word to baptize)
to be fairly settled.

Should it be objected that any, or all the persons above quoted, held,
notwithstanding, that baptism might be lawfully administered, either by pouring
or sprinkling, in ordinary, or at least in particular cases; this would by no
means invalidate their evidence, with respect to the point in hand; it would
only prove them inconsistent with themselves, and that they supposed that they
had a right to depart from the instituted way, and adopt one which, in their
view, appeared better calculated to serve the interests of religion.

Should we suppose a number of persons, of established veracity, to appear
before a court of judicature, to give evidence upon oath in a certain case, and
they should all jointly agree in confirming a particular fact; but at the same
time should add, that it was their opinion, that there might be other
circumstances connected with the attested fact, which, if true, would be
equally important to the case in hand, although they could not be positively
proved; -- no person would be at a loss how to decide a case of this nature,
nor would he put this supposititious evidence upon an equal footing with sober
fact, unless he were governed by interest or prejudice.

Thus, Sir, we have traced the MODE of baptism up to its origin: and have found
it first in the bands of John the Baptist, who had his commission from heaven.
John. (...) 6.
He administered it to the Savior, and probably to the disciples, C^^p lii. 23
who by virtue of the great commission baptized others; and wherever the act
is described, it certainly has the appearance of immersion.

We have also heard the testimony of several celebrated writers, in
establishing the meaning of the word to baptize. These declarations, taken from
Paedo-baptists, must always remain in our favor, notwithstanding all that may
be said of their practicing in a different way.

Hence we conceive that immersion, as the appointed mode of baptism, has been
fairly made out, both from scripture and reason, and from the full concessions
of the writers upon your own side. And if what has now been said, should not
convince you or any of your brethren, yet it will undoubtedly suggest some of
our reasons for differing from you in our practice.

If the mode of applying the water of baptism be indifferent, then the dispute
is at an end; but, if it be important, the necessity of one condemns the other.
But to me it appears inconsistent to suppose, that there can be a positive
command, and the mode of our obedience be indifferent: for this at once takes
off the authority of the command. Yet here, Sir, we have not the happiness to
be agreed in opinion: for you suppose the matter to be indifferent, and attempt
to illustrate it by the posture of the body in prayer. But a moment's
reflection must convince you, that the cases are not parallel. The posture of
the body makes no part of prayer, any more than the place does where the man is
when he prays: for prayer is properly a mental exercise, and not immediately
connected with any position of the body whatever. But this can by no means be
said of the application of water in baptism: for this makes a material part of
the ordinance, and is essential to its very existence.

If the institution require no more than to sprinkle a few drops of water in
the face, any person must be strangely superstitious to be immersed. And on the
other hand, if it does really require immersion, then those who only sprinkle
must fall materially short, and have scarcely the shadow of the ordinance. To
suppose that sprinkling, pouring, or immersion, are all indifferent, is in fact
to suppose that nothing is commanded; or at least no more than sprinkling. The
three terms in dispute are all used in Lev. iv. 6, 7, in the following manner;
"And the priest shall ((...)) dip his singer in the blood, and ((...)) sprinkle
of the blood seven times before the Lord; -- and shall ((...) Septuag uta in
loc.
) pour all the blood of the bullock at the bottom of the altar. That these
rites were not the same and to be used indifferently, the following familiar
transposition will abundantly show: And the priest shall pour his singer in the
blood, and shall dip of the blood seven times before the Lord; and shall
sprinkle all the blood at the bottom of the altar.


When persons believe this, there is an end to immersion; for men are not
generally fond of doing more than is required. This, Sir, your practice
demonstrates. You believe either way answers the institution; (...) you with
other Paedo-baptists in general, choose sprinkling; I think it probable that I
should do the same, could I be convinced that your views were right. It is also
probable, that John the Baptist, Christ and his Apostles, Philip, and the
ancient Christians, had they viewed the matter in the same light which you do,
would have invariably administered it by sprinkling: for there could have been
no possible occasion which would have required immersion, in case the other way
would equally well express the design.

From a careful retrospection of the arguments made use of in the course of
this lengthy Section, the candid will be able to judge, whether we are
unreasonable, in saying that immersion is essential to the right administration
of the ordinance. That I have not exaggerated sober fact, will be made evident
by a quotation which I shall now subjoin. Dr. Wall, who has before been
mentioned, was so highly esteemed by the English clergy for his learning and
zeal in defending Infant Baptism, that in a general convocation, Feb. 9, 1706,
they passed the following vote; "Ordered, That the thanks of this house be
given to Mr. Wall, Vicar of Shoreham in Kent, for the learned and excellent
book he has lately written concerning Infant Baptism." Yet not withstanding
this gentleman's profound learning, and all the advantages he had derived from
his painful research into the remotest depths of antiquity, to procure
materials of defense, -- he was obliged to acknowledge, that Dr. Gale had drawn
him into a dispute upon the mode of baptism, "wherein (says he) he knew, that
the examples of scripture and other antiquity, and the full persuation of that
people, and of all the Eastern church to this day, is on his side; and I had
the disadvantage to plead for a way of baptism, of which the best I could say,
was, that it was sufficient for the essence of baptism; but could not deny the
other (except in the case of danger of health) to be the fittest." Defense of
the H^st, Inf. Bap. p. 404.
It must be acknowledged, that Dr. Wall was under most painful disadvantages in
vindicating his cause: for he had not only to oppose the learned Dr. Gale, but
the full conviction of his own mind, that scripture example, and the whole
current of antiquity, were against him.

Upon the whole, this much is certain, that there is neither express command,
or example, either in the law of Moses, or in the gospel of Jesus Christ, to
sprinkle water upon newborn infants, as an initiating feal of any covenant
whatever. The male children of the Jews were to be circumcised on the eight
day, by divine appointment; but past the middle of the third century, the
honest Bishop Fidus wrote to Cyprian of Carthage, too know whether children
might be baptized before they were eight days old; for by his Bible he could
not tell. Nor could Cyprian tell, without first consulting a Council upon the
subject. -- A presumptive evidence that the business was new. -- Primit.
Christ. p. 193. and Rob. Hist. p. 284.
Therefore, we may say with Dr. Whitby, whose words shall close this Section --
"The argument is always ways good: We read of no such doctrine in the
scripture; therefore it neither is, nor can be any article of faith, because we
have no other rule of faith besides the holy scriptures." Annot. in Matt. vi. 9.


SECTION V. The Mode of Baptism farther illustrated, from the Practice of the
primitive Christians; and the Manner in which it was reduced from Immersion to
Sprinkling, briefly pointed out.
MUCH has been already said upon the mode of baptism; but as it is evidently a
constituent part in the present dispute, it appears necessary to set it in the
clearest light. Hence we shall proceed to consider the practice of the ancient
Christians.

The primitive Christians not only understood the word in the sense for which
we plead, but they practiced accordingly. This has been touched upon already,
but will be more fully illustrated in what follows.

Dr. Cave, who wrote about a hundred and twenty years ago, (not particularly as
a disputant, but as a historian) in describing the religion of the fathers,
after mentioning several things which they connected with baptism, he says;
"The action having proceeded thus far, the party to be baptized was wholly
immersed or put under water, which was the almost universal custom of those
times, whereby they did more notabl^, and significantly express the three great
ends and effects of baptism; for as in immersion there are in a manner three
several acts, the putting the person into the water, his obiding there for a
little time, and his rising again: so by these were represented Christ's death,
burial, and resurrection to a new course of life. By the person's being put
into the water, was lively represented the putting off the body of the sins of
the flesh; -- by his abode under it, which was a kind of burial in the water,
his entering upon a state of death or mortification; like as Christ remained
for some time under the state or power of death; therefore as many as are
baptized into Christ, are said to be baptized into his death, and to be buried
with him by baptism into death, that the old man being crucified with him, the
body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth he might not serve sin; for he
that is dead is freed from sin, as the Apostle clearly explains the meaning of
this rife. And then, by his emersion, or rising up out of the water, was
signified his entering upon a new course of life." Primitive Christianity, Part
I. Chap. x. p. 203, 204. Edit. 7.


The words of Mr. Lock are very similar to the above; "We Christians (says
he) who by baptism were admitted into all the kingdom and church of Christ,
were baptized into a similitude of his death; we did own some kind of death by
being BURIED UNDER WATER; which being buried with him, i. e. in conformity to
his burial, as a confession of our being dead, was to signify, that as Christ
was raised up from the dead into a glorious life with his Father, even so we,
being raised from our typical death and burial in baptism, should lead a new
sort of life, wholly different from our former, in some approaches toward that
heavenly life that Christ is risen to." Paraphrase on Romans vi. 3, 4.


Mr. Burkit also, fully acknowledges this to be the practice of the ancient
church, when he says, "The Apostle no doubt alludes to the ancient manner and
way of baptizing persons in those hot countries, which was by immersion, or
putting them under water for a time, and then raising them up again out of the
water; which rise had also a mystical signification, representing the burial of
our old man sin in us, and our resurrection to newness of life." Expository
Notes on Romans vi. 4.
Mr. Poole's words are nearly verbatim. Pol. in loc.


But, Sir, you are sensible that very few expositors have written concerning
the practice of the first Christian church, who have not acknowledged, that it
was the almost universal custom of those times to baptize by immersion. This
fact will manifest itself as we proceed.

You will undoubtedly recollect, that the first instances to be met with in
ancient history, wherein they pretended to baptize otherwise than by immersion,
were in cases of supposed necessity; and considered even in those cases as not
fully answering the institution.

The baptizing of sick or dying persons by affusion, originated in the third
century Robinson's Hist. p. 449.
(a period fruitful of religious inventions) and had its founddation in error.

Several things united in bringing it into existence: as 1. Misconstruing that
passage of the Apostle, where it is said, If they who have once been
enlightened, (which at this time, by many, was understood of baptism) shall
fall away, it is impossible to renew them again to repentance. This led
Constantine, and many other serious persons, to delay their baptism until near
the close of life. 2. Another sentiment equally erroneous arose, from a
misapplication of the words of Christ -- Except a man be born of water, and of
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Thus on the one hand, they
fearing a fatal relapse after baptism, and on the other, (as Dr. Cave.
observes) "Not daring to pass into another world without this badge of their
initiation into Christ, -- they presently signified their earnest desire to be
baptized, which was accordingly done, as well as the circumstances of a sick
bed would permit. These were called Clinici, (of whom there is frequent mention
in the ancient writers of the church) because baptized as the lay along in
their beds." "This (continues the Doctor) was accounted a less solemn and
perfect kind of baptism; partly because it was done not by immersion, but by
sprinkling, partly because persons were supposed at such a time to desire it
chiefly out of fear of death." Primitve Christianity, Part I. C. 10. p. 196.
This kind of baptism was considered so imperfect, that if the persons
recovered, they were by the Neocaesarean Council, rendered ordinarily incapable
of being admitted to the degree of presbyters in the church.

We have a fair specimen of this in the instance of Novatus, the Greek
philosopher. Sometimes called Novatianus.
According to Eusebius, "He fell into a grievous distemper, and it being
supposed that he would die immediately, he received baptism (being besprinkled
with water) on the bed whereon he lay: (if that can be called baptism)." De^l.
Hist. Lib. vi. C. xliii. p. 113.
Thus it appears, that this ancient father will hardly allow sprinkling to be
called baptism. This took place near the middle of the third century, and
serves to show in what light sprinkling, even in cases of necessity, was viewed
in that day.

It may afford us further light in our present inquiries, to consider the case
of Constantine. He has generally been honored as the first Christian Emperor.
But if according to your argument, a man is not to be considered as a Christian
without baptism, then he must be looked upon as a heathen, long after he fought
under the banner of the cross. And consequently, must be considered as a
Christian but a few hours before his death. But, to suppose this, is to
suppose, that baptizing a man makes him a Christian, which is too absurd to be
admitted in this enlightened period. We may as well argue that the epelette
worn by an officer, is what makes him an officer; as, that baptism makes the
person baptized a Christian. Whereas a person must be an officer before he can
have any right to wear the badge; so a person ought to be a Christian, before
he takes upon him the sacred badge of that profession.

It appears that Constantine was brought to believe the Christian doctrine in
the beginning of his reign, which continued upwards of thirty years; but he was
not baptized until a little before his death. He was proclaimed Emperor in the
1st year of the 271 Olympiad, or A. D. 305.
Being at this time in an ill state of health, he repaired to the warm baths at
Constantinople; but his complaints increasing, he went from thence to
Helenopolis, and from thence to the suburbs of Nicomedia; where he called the
Bishops together, and spoke to them in the following manner. "This was the time
long since hoped for by me, when I thirsted and prayed, that I might obtain
salvation in God. This is the hour, wherein even we may also enjoy that seal
which confers immortality. -- I had heretofore taken a resolution of doing this
in the stream of the river Jordan, where our Savior himself, in likeness to
us, is recorded to have partaken of the laver." Eusebius. Life of Constable. Lib. iv.
Chap. lxii.
After this we are told, that they performed the rites, and completed the
divine ceremonies. It is a given point that he was baptized by immersion; but,
if it had then been considered as a matter of such indifferency, as is plead
for in the present day, he would undoubtedly have excused himself from going
into the water, in his ill state of health.

This instance must carry a degree of evidence to every unprejudiced mind, in
favor of immersion: for in this we have the opinion of this great man, in what
mode the Savior was baptized; and of his determination to imitate him in it,
both as to the manner and place. It is abundantly evident, that many persons
who were born of Christian parents, and educated in the Christian faith, were
not baptized until they came to adult years, and made a personal profession.
Helena, the mother of Constantine, was a very devout and zealous Christian, yet
he was not baptized upon her faith. Nor did he dedicate his own children to God
in baptism by virtue of his faith: for we are informed by Socrates, that his
son Constantius, who succeeded his father in the empire, was baptized by
Euzoius when he was preparing for his expedition against Julianus, and
immediately after ended his life at Mopsucrenia, twenty-five years after the
death of his father. -- Eccl. Hist. Lib. ii. Chap. xlvii.

Basil, the son of Basil, bishop of Nicene, was baptized in Jordan when far
advanced in years.

Gregory the great, the son of Gregory, bishop of Nazianzen, was born while his
father was bishop, and yet not baptized until he was twenty, some say thirty
years old. -- See Osiander's Book, Cent. iv. L. 3, and Robinson's Hist. p. 250.

Grotius says, that Chrysostom was born of believing parents, and was educated
by Melitius, a bishop, yet not baptized till the age of twenty-one.

Erasmus testifies, that Jerome was born in the city of Shydon, of Christian
parents, was brought up in the Christian religion, and was baptized in the
thirtieth year of his age.

Vessias affirms, that Nectarius was chosen bishop of Constantinople before he
was baptized.

Theodosius, the emperor, was born in Spain; his parents were both Christians,
and from his childhood had been trained up in the Nicene faith; was baptized at
These do^^a, by Ach^lio, when he was upwards of th^^ty years old. -- (...)
J^^^^s, junior, p. 68. Rol^. p. 250.




Perhaps some into whose hands these sheets may fall, may wish to be informed,
how immersion came to be laid aside, and another rite so entirely different,
generally practiced in its room? In answer to this, the reader is desired to
call to mind what has already been said, that sprinkling first made its
appearance in Africa, in the third century, in favor of Clinicks or bed-ridden
people. But even African Catholics derided it, and reputed it no baptism, or at
least a very imperfect one. Jo. Andreae Bosii de clinicis exercit. Hist. Jence.
They considered it only as a substitute in cases of imminent danger, where
baptism in the instituted way could not with safety be administered. Sprinkling
in these cases, appears to have been in use several centuries before pouring
was ever practiced for baptism.

The first appearance of baptizing by pouring, (which has occurred in my
reading) was in the eighth century; when Pope Stephen III. allowed the validity
of such a baptism of infants in danger of death.

The question proposed to him was, Whether in case of necessity occasioned by
illness of an infant, it were lawful to baptize by pouring water out of the
hand, or a cup, on the head of the infant? Stephen answered, if such a baptism
were performed, in such a case of necessity, in the name of the holy Trinity,
it should be held valid.

The learned Basnage makes several remarks on the canon of Stephen, referred to
above. "Although (says he) it is accounted the first law for sprinkling, yet
it does not forbid dipping: that it allows sprinkling, only in cases of
imminent danger: that the authenticity of it is denied by some Catholics: that
many laws were made after this time in Germany, France, and England, to compel
dipping, and without any provision for cases of necessity: therefore, that this
law did not alter the mode of dipping in public baptisms. And that it was not
until five hundred and fifty-seven years after, that the legislature, in a
council at Ravena, in the year thirteen hundred and eleven, declared dipping,
or sprinkling indifferent." Jacobi Basnagii, Monument. Vol. I. Praefat. Cap. v.
4. De canone Stephani III, Papae. in Robinson.


There was indeed in some parts of the Christian church, long before this, such
a ceremony as pouring water upon the head, but was distinct from baptism, and
like exorcism considered only as a preparation. This pouring was called
capitulavium, or washing of the head; and was usually performed on Palm Sunday
upon the competents, as a preparatory to baptism.

If history can establish any fact, it undoubtedly does this. that baptism was
universally administered by immersion in the whole Christian church (except in
cases of necessity as above) for thirteen hundred years together; and continued
so in the English nation until about the middle of the sixteenth century. And
how the change was made in the English church, we are sufficiently informed by
Dr. Wall. "Calvin (says he) was, I think, the first in the world, that drew up
a form of liturgy, that prescribed pouring water on the infant, absolutely
without saying any thing of dipping (this was done in the year 1556.) It was
his admirers in England, who in queen Elizabeth's time, brought pouring into
ordinary use, which before was used only to weak children. But the succeeding
Presbyterians in England, about the year 1664, (when their reign began) went
farther yet from the ancient way; and instead of pouring, brought into use in
many places sprinkling. Declaring at the same time against all use of fonts,
baptisteries, etc." Defense of Hist. Infant Baptism, p. 146.


I wish to add one remark more from Dr. Wall under this head. "There has (says
he) no novelty or alteration, that I know of, in point of baptism, been brought
into our church, but in the way or manner of administering it. The way that is
now ordinarily used, we cannot deny to have been a novelty, brought into this
church by those that learned it in Germany, or at Geneva. And they were not
content to follow the example of pouring a quantity of water, (which had there
been introduced instead of immersion) but improved it (if I may so abuse that
word) from pouring to sprinkling; that it might have as little resemblance of
the ancient way of baptizing as possible." Ibid. p. 403, 404.


This indefatigable historian has assigned two reasons for this alteration,
which are as follow; "I must own in the first place, that many of the clergy
seem to be of the opinion of the late bishop of Salisbury, That the coldness of
our climate is a good reason to change dipping into pouring." Upon which he
observes, "That our climate is no colder than it was for those thirteen or
fourteen hundred years from the beginning of Christianity here, to queen
Elizabeth's time, and not near so cold as Muscovy, and some other countries,
where they do still dip their children in baptism, and find no inconveniency in
it." It is probable the following incident had not taken place when the Doctor
wrote his Defense, or he would have made an exception. It is said by an English
historian, that at Petersburgh they sometimes baptize their children in a river
or canal, by cutting a hole through the ice; upon which he observes, "I have
heard that a priest, in immersing a child, (for baptism, is performed by the
immersion of the whole body) let it slip, through inattention, into the water.
The child was drowned; but the holy man suffered no consternation. -- "Give me
another," said he, with the utmost composure, "for the Lord has taken that to
himself." The Empress, however, having other uses for her subjects, and not
desiring that the Lord should have any more, in that way, at least, gave orders
that all children to be baptized in the hole in the river should henceforth he
let down in a basket." -- W. Richardson'^ Anecdotes of the Russian Empire, p.
335. in Robinson.


Although this, with many, might be accounted a sufficient reason for the
alteration, the Doctor supposes the following had more influence. That "It was
not the coldness of the climate, but the imitation of Calvin and the church at
Geneva, and some others thereabouts."

Thus, Sir, from the observations now made, we clearly see what was the
practice of the ancient Christians; and how the alteration has been brought
about. If the facts now related by Dr. Wall are true, (and he is certainly
supported by the current testimony of history) I hardly think you will again
ask, By what authority we make immersion essential to baptism.

As sprinkling is acknowledged to be a novelty by those who practice it, and
that it was brought in, in "imitation of Calvin," and not in "imitation of the
baptism of Jesus Christ," -- we do not see our way clear to acknowledge the
validity of it. The advice given to Israel of old may be applied in the present
case; Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways and see, ask for the old paths,
where is the good way, and walk therein; and ye shall find rest for your souls.
Jer. vi. 16.


SECTION VI. Godly Sincerity, as connected with external Obedience, considered.
IN my other Piece I have a few times used the term sincere, and its
substantive sincerity. I have said, that "sincerity is not the term of
communion, but being conformed to the Apostles' doctrine, and continuing
steadfastly therein. I have also said, that "whatever we practice which is not
according to the will of Christ, is contrary thereto; although we be ever so
sincere in doing it." To this you reply, If I rightly conjecture, it exhibits a
sentiment which is false in its nature, pernicious in its consequences, and a
first principle of your mistake respecting close communion. Sir, if your
conjecture be right, we are now in a fair way to get at the root of the
difficulty. You however acknowledge the first part of the sentence. "that
whatever we practice which is not according to the will of Christ, is contrary
thereto:" This, you say, is very plain and good doctrine; but when I added,
although we be ever so sincere, you say, I present a difficulty. Really, Sir,
it appears to me as you construe the passage, it presents a much greater
difficulty: for, if an act were really disagreeable to the will of Christ, and
our performing it in sincerity would render it agreeable, we must suppose his
will to be dependent on the sincerity of his creatures; if so, his will cannot
be a rule of conduct for us, but we must be governed by our own sincerity.

That we may not dispute about words rather than sentiments, it may be proper
here to settle the meaning of the term sincere. You allow that the word is
ambiguous in the customary use of it; but conclude, as it is used in scripture,
it generally, if not invariably, implies or intends pure and upright affections
of heart. That it is used in this sense in the epistle to the Philippians, will
be granted; but, that it is used in somewhat ^f a different sense by the
Apostle Peter, must also be acknowledged: For he speaks of the since e milk of
the word, which being of the neuter gender, does not include affections of any
kind. These two, are perhaps the only instances in scripture, in which this
adjective is used, except in the marginal reading.

But should it even be granted that the word, when used in scripture, is
constantly used in the sense for which you plead; will you hence argue that I
am obliged to use it in this sense? Have I not a right to use it according to
common acceptance? Surely I have not mentioned godly, or scripture sincerity.
I have indeed annexed the adverb ever, to sincere; which you are pleased to
say, extends to all kinds and to all degrees of sincerity. But have you, by the
fair rules of criticism, a right to this conclusion? Most certainly yoy have
not. It will be allowed, that the term used will extend to the highest degree;
but by no means determines the kind or quality of sincerity.

Should you agree to meet a friend tomorrow evening at eight o'clock, and
should say, I will not fail of being there although it should be ever so dark
-- It might with as much propriety be argued, that this included all kinds of
darkness, natural, preternatural, moral and spiritual; as, that ever so sincere
includes all kinds of sincerity.

To prevent any mistake in future, I am willing to let you know how I
understand the word, and how I wish to be understood when I use it. The plain,
natural signification of the word appears to be this -- The honest persuasion
of the mind, according to the degree of light in the understanding; and in
general is to be understood in distinction from hypocrisy. Thus, a man may be a
sincere friend to the Federal Constitution. He may be a good man in a moral
sense, and yet his sincere attachment to the laws of his country, may be the
effect of his political sentiments, rather, than his piety. Another man may
sincerely believe the xxxix articles of the Church of England, and as sincerely
believe that all the Dissenters are wrong. I shall not pretend to say that this
is godly sincerity, or that it is not; but I will venture to say he may be a
good man, and this may be his sincere opinion.

In farther remarking upon this part of the subject you say, Your words imply,
that a person may, in the exercise of godly sincerity, act contrary to the will
of Christ. In order to make a satisfactory reply to this, is will be proper to
inquire what is meant by the will of Christ. -- When I use the term, I mean his
WILL revealed in his word: For I know nothing of his will farther than he has
therein made it known. It is a general maxim with Protestants, that the word of
God is a perfect rule of faith and practice. Therefore, to talk of things as
being agreeable or disagreeable to the will of Christ, in any other sense than
as they are approved or disapproved by the word of God, is to talk merely upon
the footing of conjecture. Hence, Sir, if you understand the will of Christ in
this sense, I freely acknowledge it to be my opinion, that a good man may
sincerely act contrary to it. You may call this godly sincerity, or by any
other name that your please.

If good men cannot be sincerely wrong, or in other words, sincerely erroneous,
then all their errors and mistakes, must be considered as agreeable to the will
of Christ; or otherwise, as acts of criminal hypocrisy! But you ask, Is not
godly sincerity the very soul and essence of conformity to Christ? I answer, it
is impossible to conform to the will of Christ without sincerity, or
uprightness of heart; but mere sincerity is by no means conformity to Christ's
will, with respect to positive institutions. It can only be considered as a
necessary qualification for conformity. Unden the Mosaic economy, a lamb for
sacrifice must be without blemish; but the perfection of the lamb did not make
it a sacrifice, this only rendered it suitable; but it was its being actually
offered up. So with regard to our obeying any positive precept, sincerity is
absolutely necessary to acceptable obedience. A man may be convinced that it is
his duty to relieve a needy brother; and also sincerely determine at a
convenient season to do it; yet certain circumstances may take place, so as
finally to prevent its being accomplished. That God may approve of his sincere
intention, will not be disputed; but we can have fellowship in his charity no
farther than we know it, which is only by his acting it out. It will be granted
that Christ judges the moral qualities of our actions by the intentions of the
heart; but he has not given this as a rule to us, any farther than it discovers
itself in the action. Christ pronounces the man guilty of adultery, who looks
on a woman criminally to lust after her; but we have no right, either by the
laws of God or man, to charge any person with that crime, without the actual
commission of it.

I conclude, that a good man may, in one period of its, sincerely believe that
he is acting according to the will of Christ, and at another, as sincerely
believe that what he then did, was never commanded, or enjoined by Christ; but
was the mere effect of education or tradition.

Nothing can bring the matter more familiarly into view, than the subject now
in dispute. -- We will suppose, that in the sincerity of your heart, you have
desired to open a door for free communion with some of the Baptists; and as
sincerity is the very essence of conformity to Christ, we must conclude, in
this particular you act agreeably to his will. On the other hand, the Baptists
to whom you make the friendly proposal, as sincerely believe, that it is not
according to the will of Christ, that they should communicate with you in your
present situation. This also contains the essence of conformity to Christ.

Thus, Sir, if I understand your argument, this must be the conclusion; that it
is the will of Christ, that the Paedo-baptists should communicate with the
Baptists; and at the same time, it is his will, that the Baptists should not
communicate with them! I shall take it for granted, that the Baptists do in the
sincerity of their hearts, refuse to communicate with those whom they look upon
as not baptized according to Christ's institution. If this refusal be made with
godly sincerity, (and who will dare to say it is not) then according to your
argument, it must be above every thing else pleasing to Christ; equally so, as
communicating with other denominations at the table.

To illustrate your doctrine of sincerity you ask, Would it be according to the
will of Christ, for a person to conform to your mode of baptism, while he
really thinks it would be contrary to the will of Christ for him so to do? To
answer this, it will be necessary first to inquire, whether the mode of baptism
practiced by us, is according to Christ's revealed will? If not, neither our
thinking, or not thinking, can possibly make it so. If it be according to his
will, our thinking otherwise cannot alter it, unless his will is entirely
dependent on the opinion of his creatures.

Again, you ask, Would it be according to the will of Christ, for a person to
neglect to have his children baptized in our mode, while he really thinks it is
the will of Christ for him thus to bring them to the ordinance? Answer. If
Christ has any where declared it to be his will, that newborn infants should
be dedicated to him, by sprinkling water upon them in the name of the sacred
Trinity, it can by no means be duty to neglect it. If not, it may with
propriety be asked, who has required this service at your hands?

But may we not further inquire, Would it be according to the will of Christ,
for a person to neglect to have his male children circumcised, while he really
thinks that it is the will of Christ that they should be?

Again, Would it be according to the will of Christ, for a person to neglect to
bring his baptized infants to the communion, while he really thinks that it is
his will that they should be brought? Vide Pierce's Essay on giving the
Eucharist to Children.
In short, to grant your argument, will not this be the consequence, that every
thing which a pious person sincerely believes to be according to the will of
Christ, is according to it, however absurd or inconsistent it may be?

You have attempted to extricate yourself from this consequence, in your
marginal note, (p. 24) wherein you say; What has been said does not imply, that
a man always does right when he thinks he does right; nor that a man's conduct
is always acceptable to God, when he acts agreeably to his own sentiments. A
man may act according to his own sentiments from selfish desires, as well as
from holy desires. True, Sir; and how are we to know which of these govern his
conduct? You have now suggested the difficulty; but have not proposed a remedy.
If men's actions did always represent the sentiments of their hearts, we should
not be exposed to the liability of a mistake; but as they do not, we may
suppose that they may deceive themselves, and others, with respect to their
motives of sincerity, as well as any thing else.

As you have put your theory of sincerity upon trial, in some of the foregoing
instances, we are willing to compare the matter a little farther. We will
grant, that the Paedo-baptists, in the sincerity of their hearts, believe it to
be the will of Christ, that they should give up their children to him in
baptism; and that sprinkling sufficiently answers the mode. On the other hand
we ^ill allow, that the Baptists, influenced by the same kind of sincerity,
really believe that it is the will of Christ, that they should be immersed upon
a profession of faith (whether they have been sprinkled in infancy or not) and
that there is no command to baptize their children; but to bring them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord. Now, sincerity being the very essence of
conformity to Christ, and under the exercise of godly sincerity, they cannot
act contrary to his will; they are both in complete conformity to it; unless
you will undertake to prove one of them insincere. Hence it follows, that it is
the will of Christ, that one part of his church should imitate HIS baptism IN
Jordan, by being immersed; and that another part should believe, that the
baptism of Jesus Christ is not to be imitated by Christians. That one branch of
his church should give up their children to him in baptism, and thereby
initiate them into the school of the sacred mysteries, without their knowledge
or consent, at a period of life when they are incapable of acting for
themselves; and that another part of his church should, from principle, neglect
the baptism of their infants; whilst they consider Christianity as addressing
itself to the consciences of all; and that none can become the disciples of
Christ, without their personal consent. How complex! how variable, does this
doctrine represent the will of Christ!

But you inform us that you have one more serious question to ask. (it shall
now be attended to,) (...) the will of Christ such, that, while a person is a
Paedo-baptist in sentiment, he must be under a natural and unavoidable
necessity of disobedience? This question appears to me, rather more curious
than serious. To suppose a person to be under a natural and unavoidable
necessity of disobedience, is to suppose he acts without choice, or that he has
not natural ability to do otherwise. I confess I cannot see any natural
necessity, which compels one person to be a Paedo-baptist, rather than another;
or of continuing in those sentiments, rather than to embrace others. Our
sentiments ever are, and ever ought to be the effect of choice; and not of
natural necessity. If we choose sentiments contrary to the will of Christ, so
long as we retain them, we necessarily disobey hi^; but this is by no means '
natural and unavoidable necessity,' but entirely of a different kind. I humbly
conceive, there can be no natural necessity, of either saints or sinners
disobeying Christ: For there is a degree of criminality in disobedience, which
is not to be found in 'natural unavoidable necessity.'

To illustrate the doctrine of sincerity now under consideration, you introduce
the following simile. A physician may, in certian circumstances, with
benevolent intention, through mistake, administer a potion to his patient,
which may be productive of immediate death. In this case he is not criminal.
Here is no evil, but natural evil, to be imputed to his conduct. -- Sir, I have
no desire to run the indictment any higher than you do. But, should the patient
be so happy as to discover the physician's mistake, would he be under any
obligation to take the deadly po^^on, because it was not delivered with
criminal intention? Yea, would he not be in the highest sense criminal to do
it? To apply this figure. Admitting, that with benevolent intention, you have
proposed free communion with us, yet if we really believe it to be inconsistant
with some part of Christ's revealed will, we cannot with the same purity of
intention comply.

But it is time to attend to the application you make from the above
observations. You say -- Granting that immersion be the appointed mode of
baptism, and believers the, only proper subjects, yet if a Paedo-baptist really
think otherwise, and with an obedient heart offer up his children in our mode
-- the person in so doing, is as well accepted in the sight of God, as though
his outward conduct had been according to the appointed mode of baptism.
Granting this, and I beg to know what foundation Paedo-baptism stands upon! --
If it be not supported by divine appointment, it can have no other origin than
human tradition; and consequently must fall to the ground; unless you can make
it appear, that your sincere opinion is of equal authority with divine
appointments. If a Paedo-baptist really think otherwise. -- that then? Why this
supersedes the whole force of the divine command, and authorizes his own
opinion as the rule of his conduct! And lest he should scruple the validity of
it, he is assured, that in so doing he is as well accepted in the sight of God,
as though his outward conduct had been according to the appointed mode.
According to this argument, divine appointments are of little consequence to
Paedo-baptists, if they have a right whenever they think proper to set them
aside, and substitute others in their room. Perhaps the following words of our
Savior, may not be thought wholly inapplicable to this sentiment. Full well ye
reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your own traditions. Mark vii.
9.


Is it reasonable to suppose, that God would make appointments for his people
which he did not think proper for them to observe? Or has he left discretionary
orders with any man, or any body of men, to set aside, alter, or amend any of
his positive institutions? But I recollect you have said, P. 6.
that it is not necessary that men should think in all respects as God thinks;
and perhaps this is one instance where you would apply it. For, if God has
thought fit to appoint the mode, and describe the subjects of baptism; and a
Paedo-baptist may offer subjects essentially different from those described in
the institution, and that in a mode quite unlike the divine appointment, and
yet be 'as well accepted,' as though he had observed the most exact conformity
to God's law; surely then, we may very sincerely make void the commandments of
God, and establish our own pious traditions!

To sanction the foregoing argument you say, This is agreeable to common sense
and revelation.

How far common sense may be in favor of your argument I shall not here
pretend to say; but if divine revelation fairly establish it, it must be
conceded to^. But before we decide upon this point, it may be proper to hear
revelation speak for itself. Decked with fovereign majesty it thus addresses
us; "What thing soever I command you, observe to do it: thou shall not ADD
thereto, nor DIMINISH from it." Deuteronomy. xii. 3^.
What, not if we really think otherwise? By no means. But constantly " Teaching
them to OBSERVE ALL THINGS WHATSOEVER I HAVE COMMANDED YOU." Matt. xxviii. 20.
Granting this but, if we sincerely think, and act otherwise sha^ we not be^^^
as well accepted?' "To obey^s better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the
fat of rams." 1 Samuel xv. 22.
"If ye love me, keep my commandments." John xiv. 15.
For "In vain do ye worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of
men." Matt. xv. 9.


This is the voice of revelation with respect to positive institutions; and
notwithstanding you have challenged the judgment of common sense in favor of
your sentiments, we are willing to recommit the matter, and abide the impartial
decision. If it be not a dictate of common sense, that God's commands should be
implicitly obeyed, and his positive institutions strictly observed, without the
least known deviation; and that the sincere observance of his appointments
should be more acceptable to him than the sincere neglect of them; then, of
course your argument will be established, and we must conclude, that like the
Athenians, in these things we have been too superstitious.

You acknowledge, (p. 27) that integrity of heart does not render the judgment
infallible, with respect to ascertaining the will of God. -- This indeed
appears to me to be true; but why then do you blame me for supposing a person
with godly sincerity, may act contrary to the will of Christ? I think it
undeniably follows, that if he may with integrity of heart mistake his will, or
not ascertain it, then he may with the same uprightness act contrary to it. But
did you not tell us above, that sincerity is the very soul and essence of
conformity to Christ? What, in the height of conformity to the will of Christ!
-- and yet not able to ascertain what it is? This, at best, is but accidental
conformity!

The sentiment expressed in my other Piece, of acting contrary to the will of
Christ, "although we be ever so sincere," you conjecture to be false in its
nature, and p^rnicious in its consequences. It is true, conjecture is not the
most forcible argument; but yet it may be right. -- I am not satisfied however,
that you have proved the sentiment to be false; or that it is in your power to
do it, after granting the first part of it. As to the pernicious consequences
which you have discovered in it, I may have overlooked them; probably, because
they are not so high colored as the charge. But what pernicious consequences
can we imagine from our conformity to the Apostles' doctrine, and steadfast
continuance in it? -- Or from following the plain directions in God's word,
rather than our own sancied notion of sincere obedience, without external
conformity? I think you will not pretend to say, that I have insisted upon a
conformity to the Apostles' doctrine, which did not include sincerity. You
cannot say it without injuring me, and contradicting youself. If, as you say,
(p. 12.) I insist upon a person's being a real believer in order to his being a
proper subject of baptism, then Le must certainly be sincere.


It appears to me, that the particular sentiment now in dispute with come to
this point. I am contending for sincere conformity to the positive institutions
of Christ, in the exact order in which he has placed them. You are pleading for
the acceptableness of sincere deviations from Christ's appointments.

To proceed -- You observe, that it is not the enternal conduct which is
pleasing or displeasing to Christ; but it is sincerity or insincerity. I and
far from thinking that the strictest external conformity without sincerity
would be pleasing to him. Yet, I think it reasonable to suppose, that a sincere
external obedience to the positive commands of Christ, must be more pleasing to
him than a sincere omission of them. For, says he, Whosoever therefore, shall
break one of these least commandments, and teach men so, he shall be called the
least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall DO and TEACH them, the same
shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven. Matt. v. 19.
Should you say this has special reference to the moral law, it will be
granted; but it may not be wholly inapplicable to the case before us.
Therefore, with a little variation, I may use the language of an inspired
writer; "Show me thy sincerity without thy external obedience to the
appointments of Christ; and I will show thee my sincerity by my external
obediencer to them.

Whether sincerety departing from God's positive commands, be as pleasing to
him as sincere external conformity, will more fully appear in what follows.

When God had sent Samuel to ^^^oint Saul king over the chosen tribes, he
thought proper to try his loyalty, by sending him to destroy the Amalekites,
for their cruelty to his people when they came up out of Egypt. The command
was, Utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them not; but stay both man
and woman, infant and suckling, o^ and sheep, earned and ass. Saul went with
his chosen band, and spread death and carnage through Amalek's devoted country!
He undoubtedly returned from the victorious fields, in full confidence of
meeting the prophet's approbation. But while coming, God made known to Samuel,
that Saul had turned back from following him. When Samuel came forth in the
morning, Saul met him, and thus addressed him: -- "Blessed be thou of the Lord,
I have performed the commandment." Although he had not gone to the extent of
the commandment, yet he might sincerely think, as he had made ample provision
for one of the richest sacrifices that ever smoaked upon the Jewish altar, that
in thus doing, he should be 'as well accepted,' as though he had wholly
followed the divine command. -- We may suppose his soul almost in an ecstasy,
fully expecting the prophet's benediction; when, to his surprise, the grieved
Seer thus interrogates -- What means this bleating of the sheep in mine tars!
and the lowing of the oxen which I hear? What means this? Why, the people
spared the best of the sheep and oxen, to do sacrifice to the Lord thy God. A
very pious design indeed^^ Who would challenge their sincerity? I do not
recollect that the prophet charged Saul with hypocrisy, or insincerity; but
with the want of external obedience. I shall not pretend to say that Saul had
any godly sincerity, or that he had not; but it is evident until this time,
that his character was unimpeached, and he was honored as the Lord's anointed.

Another instance still more to our purpose, presents us in the sacred page.
When the wicked sons of Eli were slain by the Philistines, they took the ark of
the God of Israel, and carried it into the temple of their idol. The
uncircumcised had scarcely began to rejoice, when they found themselves
involved in strange and unlooked for calamities. Their idol Dagon fell before
the ark, while terror, death and destruction were spreading every where. The
ark of God soon became more terrible to them than an army with banners. A
general council was called -- they resolved to send it back into the land of
Israel; but not being acquainted with the sacred oracles, they were at a loss
as to the mode of conveyance. -- It was finally determined to send it in a new
undirected cart, drawn by two milk-kine. When it was come into the land of
Israel, after a short tarry at Be^^s^emeth, it was carried to Kirjath-jea^i^,
into the house of Abmadah, where it was kept for twenty years, until David was
established upon the throne, After this, he assembled thirty thousand chosen
men, with a view to bring the ark of the God of Israel up into the city of
David.

This ark by divine appointment was to be borne by the priests, by the staves
which went through the rings of it. But as the instituted mode might appear
rather inconvenient at this time, they might think the one adopted by the
Philistines would do as well. And as they might call to mind, that "God
delighted more in mercy than in sacrifice;" both David and his people very
sincerely concluded, that it would do to carry it in a decent new cart. But the
way being rough, and the oxen unaccustomed to this hallowed business, so
agitated the sacred ark, that Uzzah put forth his hand and took hold of it. And
the ^^^ger of the Lord was kindled against Uzzah, and God smote him there for
his ERROR, and there he died by the ark.

What there was, either in the conduct or disposition of Uzzah, which was so
offensive to the Divine Being, as to mark him out as a monument of sacred
displeasure, is perhaps unknown to mortals. It is evident that David did not
discover, any criminality in the conduct of Uzzah; for if he had, he would not
have been displeased because the Lord made a breach upon him. There was at
least the appearance of sincere regard, in his attempting to steady the
agitated ark. But God sees not as man sees; and has ever been jealous for his
own honor as lawgiver, which glory he will not give to another.

This alarming providence checked their pious joy, and put a sudden period to
all their tuneful numbers. An awful fear of the great Jehovah was now impressed
upon their minds. -- Silent, and sollemn, they retire and leave the ark without
the city!

Will any person say that David did not go in the sincerity of his heart? Let
those who deny it, make out the proof.

It may perhaps be difficult for us to discover any real difference in the
design, or sincerity, of David and his people at this time, or three months
after, when they brought up the ark into the city of David with shouting. But,
we shall readily discover a difference in their visible conduct. In the former,
they followed their own imaginations. In the latter they went according to
divine appointment. Their departing from the instituted way, (however sincere)
drew on them God's displeasure. Their obedience to it obtained his approbation.
If I mistake not, Sir, this instance is a fair trial of your argument, and it
appears to me that it fails.

I have one more observation from scripture to make upon this head. If I
rightly understand the revealed will of God, we are strictly forbidden to
worship any creature, however exalted. For it is written, thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him ONLY shall thou serve. Matthew. iv. 1^.


Yet I find that the Apostle John twice sell down to worship an angel! I hardly
think you will scruple the sincerity of the beloved discriple upon this
occasion. The question now is, whether it were agreeable to the will of Christ
for John to worship the angel? It is evident he thought it to be his duty; and
his conduct has every appearance of sincerity. Allowing John to be sincere, and
his conduct in this particular instance agreeable to the will of Christ, then
the above mentioned prohibition must be understood conditionally. "It is
written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve;"
unless thou shall sincerely think it duty to worship a creature. If it were not
agreeable to the will of Christ that John should worship the angel, then it
necessarity follows, that a good person may, in the exercise of sincerity, act
contrary to his will.

If, to evade the force of this argument, you should say, Although John
sincerely thought it to be his duty to worship the angel, yet he was
undoubtedly mistaken, this it to give up the argument: for we have always been
willing to allow, that Christians may be sincere, and yet be mistaken as to the
will of Christ. That this was the case, with either John or the angel, is
abundantly evident. And in order to save your argument from falling, it appears
necessary to be proved, either that it was agreeable to the will of Christ for
John to worship the angel; or, that he was insincere in attempting it. Until
one or the other is made out, we shall conclude he sincerely attempted to do
that, which was expressly forbidden in the revealed will of God. Many more
instances might be produced, but the preceding are thought sufficient, to show
the absurdity of considering sincerity of heart as actual conformity to the
will of Christ, with respect to his positive institutions.

In pursuing your argument you conclude, those persons differ from Christ, who
suppose, that a good tree may bring forth corrupt fruit. They certainly do, if
the words are taken in a proper sense. But if by the good tree we understand a
Christian, including all his exercises both of flesh and spirit, it is not
true, that he cannot bring forth corrupt fruit. To deny this, would be to
assert that he is in a state of sinless perfection: for all imperfect and
depraved creatures can, and do sin.

Now if good men have some holy, and some selfish desires; and are sometimes
governed by pur^, and sometimes by corrupt motives; how are we to know which of
these govern their conduct, when they plead their sincerity in departing from
God's appointments?

I conclude, Protestants in general look upon Cavin as a good man; but as a
tree he bore some fruit, which the taste of a modern Christian would not call
good: particularly his unchristian resentment, and inhuman treatment of
Servetus. This learned and ingenious Spaniard was born at Villeneuva, in
Aragon, 1509. He studied the civil law at Toulous, where he began to read the
scriptures, and to be fond of trinitarian notions. He soon became resolved to
retire into Germany and set up for a reformer. He there printed two tracts, De
Trinitatis errorious, and Dialog^um de Trinitate, lib^^ d^o; this spread his
name throughout all Europe. After this, Servetus returned to Paris, and was
admitted a doctor of physic in the university there. Here a correspondence
betwixt Calvin and him commenced, which was kept up for sixteen years;
notwithstanding which, he continued in his former opinion, and, resolved to
publish a third work in favor of it: this came out at Vienna, in 1533, with
this title, Christianismo Restitutio, etc. without his name; but Calvin took
care to inform the Roman catholics in France who was the author. On this
Servetus was imprisoned, and would certainly have been burned then; it he had
not made his escape. He proposed to retire to Haples, but was imprudent enough
to go through Geneva, where he was scized on Calvin's information, and
prosecuted for heresy. All his public writings and private letters to Calvin,
were cansacked for every thing that could be trained to a bad sense in
consequence of which the unfortunate Servetus was burned alive, Oct. 25th,
1553. "to the eternal shame of his inconsistent brutal reformed persecutors." "
Servetus was a man of great acuteness, of prodigions learning, and admirably
skilled in his own professions -- See Calvin's Life, Glasgow editions, p. 17,
19 -- and Nothouck's Ringraphical Dictionary. Calvin's historians informs us,
that the death of Servetus raised such a flame, as set Poland, Transylvania and
Hungary all on fire; which he supposed Servetus to have foretold by the spirit
of the devil. This controversy led many rationally to inquire, whether
heretics ought to be put to death, or left to the judgment of God?

That Servetus was an antitrinitarian will not be denied. This probably was the
greatest cause of Calvin's opposition to him, but not the whole: for he
considered him as a "monster composed of many ancient and pro^igious heresies."
He calls him an anabaptiss, and has attempted to answer twenty arguments
brought by Servetus against infant baptism -- I ^stitut. Christ. Relig. p. 649.


. It in evident that Calvin, in this piece of conduct, thought he was doing God
service. To suppose the contrary, and that he was not sincere, would be to
suppose him a much greater monster than he represented Servetus. Allowing this
to be an act of sincerity, and the question is fair before us, Was it agreeable
to the will of Christ, for Calvin thus to persecute Servetus? If you should
answer in the negative, you give up your theory; if you should answer in the
affirmative, then it will neccessarily follow, that if it were the will of
Christ two hundred and forty years ago, that antitrinitarians and anabaptists
should be burnt, merely for their sentiments, it undoubtedly is agreeable to
his will now, as he is the same yesterday; today, and forever.

In the mild reign of Edward VI. king of England, but two persons suffered for
their religious sentiments. And although these persons were both put to death,
I do not find that they were charged with any other crime, than differing in
opinion from the ruling party.

The former of these was Joan Bocher, commonly called Joan of Kent. The other
was George Van Part, a Dutchman; he was burnt in Smithfield, April 25, 1551. He
suffered with great constancy of mind, and kissed the stake and faggots, that
were to burn him. He is said to have been a man of uncommon strictness of life
and devotion. These persons were both Baptists. -- V^l. Hi^^ Reform. Vol. ii.
Lib. i. p. ^12
Archbishop Cranmer was employed to persuade the young king to sign the warrant
against her. He used various reasonings, which served rather to silence, than
satisfy the king. But at length he did it with tears in his eyes, telling
Cranmer, that if he did wrong, since it was in submission to his authority, he
should answer for it to God. This made such an impression upon the mind of the
bishop, that he used farther means for her conviction; but as she obstinately
continued in her sentiments, she was finally burnt alive.

That Cranmer was sincere in this piece of conduct, we have the testimony of
bishop Barnet, who says, "One thing was certain, that what he did in this
matter flowed from no cruelty of temper in him, no man being farther from that
black disposition of mind; but it was truly the effect of those principles by
which he governed himself." Ibid.


I confess here is a difficulty in my mind (and probably may be in many others)
to conceive, how this conduct could be agreeable to the allmerciful Redeemer,
who came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them. It is not to be believed
from any thing which Christ has said; but merely because it was the sincere
opinion of an archbishop! I have no difficulty in believing the sincerity of
Cramner, but I have not yet attained to the faith of assurance, that his
conduct was agreeable to the revealed will of Christ.

It may also be observed, that Mr. John Rogers, that famous martyr, cordially
consented to the burning of Joan of Kent. "For (says Mr. Fox) when the
Protestant bishops had resolved to put her to death, a friend of Mr. John
Rogers the divinity-reader in St. Paul's church, came to him, earnestly
desiring him to use his interest with the archbishop, that the poor woman's
life might be spared, and other means used to prevent the spreading of her
opinions. -- Rogers on the other hand pleaded, she ought to be put to death. --
Well, then, says his friend, Supposed to be Fox himself.
if you are resolved to put an end to her life, together with her opinion,
choose some other kind of death, more agreeable to the gentleness and mercy
prescribed in the gospel; there being no need that such tormenting deaths
should be taken up in imitation of the papists. Rogers answered, that burning
alive was no cruel death, but easy enough. His friend then hearing these words,
which expressed so little regard to poor creatures' sufferings, answered him
with great vehemence -- Well, perhaps it may so happen, that you yourself shall
have your hands full of this mild burning. And so it came to pass; and Rogers
was the first man who was burnt in Queen Mary's time."

"This Rogers (says Pierce) was a nonconformist, and a very excellent man, and
died nobly in the cause of Christ; but this barbarity of his deserves to be
exposed: and the rather, because God in his providence seems to have shown his
great displeasure against it." Pierce's Answer to Nichols, p. 33, in Crosby.
If this indeed were the case, it could not be agreeable to the will of Christ.

It is quite remarkable, that Cranmer, Ridley, and Rogers, who had a principal
hand in burning these two persons in the reign of Edward, were all burnt in the
succeeding reign of Mary.

I do not mention these things with a view of glorying in the sufferings of my
own denomination, nor, for the sake of reproaching others; but to show, what
enormous cruelties good men may practice, under the specious show of godly
sincerity and a zeal for the truth.

SECTION VII. Whether there be any Morality in 'Externals' or 'Sentiments;' and
whether sincerity of heart secures the judgment from error; briefly considered.
SIR, you have anticipated an objection against your theory; i. e. That a good
intention will sanctify a wicked action. We shall only notice two things in
your answer. -- First you say, That mere externals are neither holy nor sinful,
is evident from this consideration, that the same modes of external conduct are
convertable to both good and bad purposes. Marginal Note, p. 24.
But, Sir, is the^e no morality in good and bad purposes? You seem to convert
them neither to one or the other, but to a state of indifferency. I suppose the
same external modes of conduct may be the expressions both of holy and sinful
affections. But this by no means proves, that there is no morality in our
external conduct. If we are rational agents (and we certainly are) whatever
mode of external conduct we pursue, must be our choice, rather than any other;
and how this can be without morality, I am totally at a loss.

I conclude, Sir, that you will allow that eating bread and drinking wine, are
external acts; but if there be no morality in them, it is hardly worth while to
waste our time in a dispute about such trifling things. I do not conclude,
however, that the morality of the act is merely in masticating bread, or in
swallowing wine, which a brute may do as well as an intelligent agent; but the
circumstances which lead us to choose and adopt this particular mode of
conduct, undoubtedly tinge the act with morality.

Your other observation which I shall take notice of, is the following, that
There is nothing of a moral nature in mere sentiments or mere externals. If by
'mere sentiments,' you mean no more, than those fugitive thoughts which flutter
upon the surface of the brain, as butterflies do in the sunbeams, we shall not
contend. But, if by sentiment, we understand that result of the mind which
leads us on to external acts, we shall undoubtedly find that it is connected
with the heart, as well as the head. The fool has said, not in his head, but
in his heart, there is no God. This is his sentiment, and a very innocent one
it is, if destitute of morality!

You will permit me to add a remark from a very sentimental writer. Says he,
"Error in judgment and sentiment, especially in things of a moral nature, is
always wrong; and does not conust or originate merely in any defect of the
moral faculties of the mind; but is of a moral nature, in which the taste,
affection, or inclination of the heart is concerned; and therefore is always,
in every degree of it, morally wrong, and more or less criminal. Were the moral
faculties of the mind, were the heart, perfectly right, man would not be
capable of error, or of judging wrong, or making any mistake especially in
things of religion. The natural faculties of the mind, considered as separate
from the inclination or will, do not lead, and have no tendency in themselves,
to judge wrong, or contrary to the truth of things. To do so, is to judge
without evidence, and contrary to it, which the mind never would or could do,
were not the inclination or heart concerned in it, so as to have influence,
which must be a wrong inclination, and contrary to truth and to evidence; and
therefore is morally wrong or criminal."

"Therefore, all the mistakes and wrong opinions which men entertain respecting
the doctrines, institutions and duties revealed in the bible, are criminal, and
of a bad tendency." Hopkins's Syst. Treatise on the Millen. Vol. II. p. 61.
If this reasoning be true, it cannot be said that there is nothing of a moral
nature in our sentiments.

I conclude that the bible exhibits a fair system of truth, supported by
rational evidence; and were it not for the blindness of the human heart, and
the prejudices occasioned by sinful affections, men would yield their cheerful
assent to truth, in exact proportion to the evidence laid before them; and
would not choose darkness rather than light. It is believed that good men,
(however they may differ in opinion here) in the coming state, will see eye to
eye: perhaps not owing so much to the superior light of truth, as to their
being delivered from those sinful affections which oppose the truth. This
observation will appear evident from this consideration, that those who have
the greatest advantages to know the truth, often appear to be most opposed to
it. The Jews, who had the oracles of God, and consequently the best information
respecting the Messiah, when he was preached to them, opposed and blasphemed,
while the Gentiles believed.

Upon supposition, that there is nothing of a moral nature in mere sentiments,
why is unbelief a crime? or why is a man to blame for being an infidel? this is
a mere sentiment. In short, why do we blame the Jews for accusing and
delivering Christ to be crucified? It is evident they did not believe him to be
the Son of God. The Apostle Peter, after charging them with killing the Prince
of Life, said to them; Now brethren, I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as
did also your rulers. Act^ III. 17
Saint Paul supposed that they did not know him to be the Messiah: for, said
he, None of the princes of this world knew it: for had they known it, they
would not have crucified the Lord of glory. 1 Cor. ii. 3.
No, they would have been shocked at the horrid thought! But their sentiments
were that he was a deceiver, and a blasphemer; and they had a law given them by
Moses against such, and by this law they said he ought to die. And their
external conduct was to put him to death. Now where was their criminality? You
will probably say it originated in their hearts, where all real criminality is
to be found. It will be granted. And did not their sentiments originate there
likewise? Out of the HEART proceed evil thoughts, murders, etc. and not out of
the head as unconnected with it.

In order to apply the foregoing observations to the subject before us, we are
willing to acknowledge, that we do not think a man to blame, for sincerely
acting according to his conscience, although it be ever so erroneous. But he
may be exceedingly to blame, for having an erroneous conscience. If we do not
improve the best means of information which we are favored with, we are
certainly to blame for the neglect.

It is a maxim in civil law, "That a man is obliged to know it at his peril."
This holds good with regard to the divine law. The man who transgressed the law
of Moses through ignorance, however sincere, was nevertheless guilty; and when
it came to his knowledge he was obliged to offer a sacrifice. I. cv. iv. 13,
22, 27.
And he who killed his neighbor at unawares, without in the least designing
his death, was nevertheless doomed to suffer a certain punishment; for, to be
confined to a particular city, without permission upon any occasion to go out
until the death of the high priest, cannot be accounted otherwise. Number. xxxx.
25.


Upon the whole, what reason can be given for our construing the divine law
differently? Or why should one man see a revealed truth, and another under
equal advantages should not; unless the latter be under the influence of moral
blindness? If the positive institutions of the gospel are sufficiently plain
(as they undoubtedly are) why should we read and understand the same bible so
very differently? I cannot think we are both right. If Christ has commanded his
people to dedicate their infant seed to him in baptism, then we must conclude
that all the Baptist churches are in an error in this particular. On the other
hand, if the gospel teaches us, that with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation; and that
this confession is to be made by every candidate for baptism; then we must
suppose our Paedo-baptist brethren are in an error, in not insisting upon the
same visible qualifications which the Apostles did. In short, can it be
supposed that the same divine law, which enjoins either the one or the other,
can approve of the neglect? If not, it must necessarily follow, that if you are
right, we are wrong; and so vice versa.

But it is often said by our opponents, "We are willing to acknowledge your
baptism to be valid, and why cannot you be as liberal with respect to ours?" We
are sorry to bear the charge of illiberality; but had much rather do it than
violate our consciences. When persons are so liberal, as to be willing to
divide and mangle an institution of Christ, in order to accommodate a painful
dispute; while (...) seems to show a condescending temper in them, it at the
fame time excites a suspicion of the justice of their cause. This kind of
liberality of sentiment naturally leads us to recollect an instance recorded in
ancient history, concerning two women who came to a certain king, to decide a
controversy between them respecting a living child. Each contended that she was
the true mother, and that the child was here is. For a time, their claims
appeared equally well founded, until at length the wise king called for a
sword, and proposed to divide the living child, and give half to the one and
half to the other! The woman whose the child was, could by no means consent;
but would either have it alive undivided, or else give it up so to the other:
but the other said, Let it be neither mine nor thine, but divide it. To have
divided the child, would have destroyed its existence: So to divide an
institution of Christ, is to make it mean any thing, and every thing, and
consequently nothing. For when a divine law is supposed to be conditional, and
is to be left to the judgment or fancies of men to determine, whether one mode
of obedience be not as acceptable as another, it of course loses its authority,
and ceases to be a law

From the above argument it will not be concluded, that one man has a right to
dictate, or prescribe a mode of obedience for another: for to our own Mafler we
stand or fall. Nevertheless, the divine law is not conditional, but absolute;
and its requirements must be fixed and determinate, although we may not
understand them. ONE LAW shall be to him that is home born, and unto the
stranger that sojourneth among you.

To conclude this Section, dear Sir, I wish you seriously to consider your
arguments upon sincerity, whether you have not carried the matter too far; and
whether they are not calculated in some instances, to disserve the cause of
Christ, and to strengthen the hands of error. For admitting that either you or
we are in an error with respect to one of the institutions of Christ, yet as
your sentiments assure us, that if we sincerely think we are right, We are as
well accepted in the sight of God, as if our external conduct had been
according to his appointments, shall we not be apt to release ourselves from a
painful inquiry into the evidences for, and against our particular sentiments;
and conclude to slide smoothly on, in the good old way which our fathers went;
and perhaps, have no higher reason to believe it to be right, than because they
belived it to be so?

It is often said, "When we get to heaven, we shall not be asked what
particular principles we were of." This objection implies too great an
indifferency to the requirements of truth; and leads us to suppose that many
determine to get to heaven as cheap as they can. And whenever persons would
wish a release from the toil of inquiry, and expense of retraction, they may
improve your argument as a cordial auxiliary.

But were we even to grant sincerity to be a term of communion, yet should we
not be obliged to fix upon some external acts of obedience, as evidential of
sincerity? Or are we to judge a man to be sincere by the looks of his face? Or
by the tincture of his thoughts? Or are we to believe it because he professes
to be sincere? Perhaps the man was never yet found propagating any sentiment of
religion whatever, who would own himself insincere.

If sincerity be the only thing sought for, and agreement in sentiment
unnecessary to Christian fellowship, then we may open the door wide, and
receive all who appear to be sincere, however erroneous, and by whatever names
distinguished, wherever they appear sincere.

Perhaps there is no one act in the circle of Christian duty, which expresses
more fellowship, than communicating at the Lord's table. And if we can
occasionally communicate together, why can we not statedly? We shall also be
led farther to inquire, upon what principle is separation to be justified? Why
did the Protestants come out from the church of Rome? There were undoubtedly
many sincere Christians in that church, notwithstanding the body of clergy
might be thought to be corrupt. Why did the dissenters leave the church of
England, and the independents the presbyterians, and these dissent one from
another? It would be uncharitable to suppose, that there were not many sincere
Christians in those churches. Objections similar to those now mentioned have in
fact taken place.

When presbyterianism was about to be established by the British government,
the assembly of divines at Westminster appointed a committee to hear and answer
the petition of those who should not conform to the government.

To these the independents presented their request, Dec. 4, 1645, which was
only this: "That they may not be forced to communicate as members in those
parishes where they dwell; but may have liberty to have congregations of such
persons who give good testimony of their godliness, and yet out of a tenderness
of conscience cannot communicate in their parishes, but do voluntarily offer
themselves to join in such congregations."

To this the assembly gave a flat denial, Dec. 15. The independents, unwilling
to lose the privileges of the establishment, made the following concession.
"That they would maintain occasional communion in their churches." But still
their presbyterian brethren would not allow them separate congregations. They
rather improved this compliance, to strengthen their arguments against granting
such liberty. "If (say they) they may occasionally exercise these acts of
communion with us once, a second, or a third time, without sin; we know no
reason why it may not be ordinarily without sin, and then separation and
church-gathering would have been needless. To separate from those churches
ordinarily and visibly, with whom occasionally you may join without sin,
seems to be a most unjust separation." Schism tried and condemned, p. 25, 27,
28. in Crosby.


Every candid reader will judge, whether the questions now suggested, are not
involved in the idea of occasional communion, upon the term of sincerity.
Another interesting question appears to be connected, viz. Whether it be
consistent to communicate with any person, or body of Christians, with whom we
could not unite in full fellowship, as members of the same church? If there be
any act more solemn, more expressive of unity and agreement, let it be pointed
out! For persons to separate from each other, merely on account of disagreement
in sentiment, and yet hold occasional communion (which expresses their
agreement) is the height of absurdity.

Upon the whole, if baptism was prior to coming to the Lord's table in the
^postolic practice (which you have acknowledged, p. 13) -- if it was then an
immersion upon a profession of faith, which I trust has been made out in the
preceding pages; and no scripture evidence appearing to the contrary; then you
will not blame us for continuing in the apostolic doctrine, and for
endeavoring carefully to imitate their practice. Hence it is probable our
objections may continue, until proof shall be made out from the word of God,
that the apostolic church did admit persons to her communion merely upon the
footing of sincerity, without any regard to the external mode of their
obedience to Christ's other appointments.

SECTION VIII. Whether the Divine Conduct toward us be the Rule of Duty
toward our Christian Brethren, rather than God's revealed Will; briefly
considered.
IT will be readily granted, that some parts of the divine conduct are to be
imitated by all who love God. Yet our obligation to be followers of God as dear
children, does not originate so much from what he does, as from what he
commands. Therefore, we are not to imitate the divine conduct, in any thing
which would lead us contrary to his revealed will.

There are some parts of the divine conduct, which it would be highly improper
for us to attempt to imitate; such as the following: He suspended the
established laws of nature, "and held the falling day," until Israel had gained
the victory over his enemies. He arrested Jordan in its course, and compelled
its waters to retire, and made a passage for his chosen tribes. He opened the
mouth of Balaam's ass, and caused the stupid brute to reprove the more brutish
prophet. He commanded Abraham; as a test of his love and obedience, to offer up
his beloved son for a sacrifice; and it is certain he highly approved of
Abraham's conduct, and blessed his unreserved obedience. I presume no one will
infer from this, that we are to express our love to God by sacrificing our
children to him. God has at several times destroyed his enemies by fire from
heaven; but when the two disciples were desirous of punishing the ungrateful
Samaritans in the same way, Jesus reproved their blind zeal, and told them
plainly, they knew not what spirit they were of. Genesis xix. 24. 2 Kings, i. 10.
Luke ix. 54.


Instances might be multiplied from scripture, to show, that the divine conduct
is not in all cases the rule of our duty; but you have supposed one, which you
conclude is worthy of our imitation -- It shall now be the subject of our
inquiry.

You take it for granted, that God communes with the Paedo-baptists at his holy
table; and hence ask, Why cannot you commune with those at the table, with whom
God communes? As this question was anticipated in my other Piece, you have from
thence introduced the following reply, i. e. "It is not what God can or does
do, but his revealed will, which is the rule of our duty." On this you observe,
I hope, Sir, I shall never object to your making the revealed will of God the
rule of your duty. But this, Sir, is a part of his revealed will, Be ye
followers of God, as dear children. And if God be willing to commune with
Paedo-baptists, why should you be unwilling to imitate his example in this
respect?

You will permit me, Sir, to inquire, whether you sincerely think, that the
Apostle had particular reference to communion at the Lord's table, when he
exhorted the Ephesians to be followers of God? If he had not, it affords no
proof for your argument. If this were his object, he must be understood as
addressing them in the following manner: Brethren, God communes with you, and
why cannot you communicate with one another? Be ye followers of God, as dear
children. But was the church of Ephesus at this early period so divided, that
they did not hold visible communion together? Were there then in the church
Paedo-baptists, and Anti-paedobaptists, who had set up separate communions?
When this is fairly proved, we ought to believe it.

You go on to say -- Supposing that the Paedo-baptists are really in an error;
if Christ does not view the error as so essential, but that HE will commune
with them, why should you? -- Is the servant grester than his lord? By no
means: for the servant knows not what his lord does. And although he gives
rules to his servants to regulate their conduct by; yet he is not particularly
bound by them himself. But you seem to suppose, that Christ commune, with you
in a certian sense, in which we are unwilling to. But how are we to understand
you? Surely not that Christ comes personally among you, or that he actually
communicates with you in ^he bread and wine? If not, we must suppose it is
spiritually. That is, he may own and bless you, notwithstanding there may be
some imperfections in your obedience. But are we unwilling to commune with you
spiritually? Have not all good men, as far as they have the knowledge of each
other, communion in this sense? And do they not heartily approve of all sincere
Christians, as far as they view them walking in the truth? We may not from
hence infer, that Christ approves of the errors of any, or that the most
profuse charity requires it of us.

To suppose that the Paedo-baptists are in an error, and that this is of such a
nature that Christ could not commune with or bless them, would it not be to
suppose it fatal, and inconsistent with their eternal salvation? And should it
be granted, that God communes at his table with the pure in heart of both
denominations, yet never in such a sense as to approve of the errors of either.

That God has communed with, or blessed good men, notwithstanding they were
guilty of some errors, will appear from what follows: -- It is said of Solomon,
that he loved the Lord, and walked in the statutes of David his father; only he
sacrificed and burnt incense in high places. -- The same is said of Jehoash,
and Jotham, that they did that which was right in the sight of the Lord: But
the high places were not taken away: the people still sacrificed and burnt
incense in the high places. 1 Kings, iii. 3. 2 King xii. 2, 3, and xv. 34, 35.
We can here only conceive, that God approved of what was right according to
his commandments; while he wholly condemned their sacrificing in high places
and groves.

When the ordinance of the passover had not for a long time been observed as it
was written, king Hezekiah issued his proclamation, summoning all Israel to
attend the solemn feast. But when the people came together, many of them had
not those external qualifications which the ordinance required; and
consequently did eat the passover otherwise than it was written: but Hezekiah
prayed for them, saying, the good Lord pardon every one that prepares his
heart to seek God, the Lord God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed
according to the purification of the sanctuary. 2 Chronicles. xxx. 18, 19.
Hence it is evident, that they were in some degree guilty, for omitting those
external pre-requisites which the ordinance required; notwithstanding they
prepared their hearts to seek the Lord. If this were not the case, they could
not have needed a pardon, for this ever supposes guilt. Thus while they
experienced the divine approbation in preparing their hearts to seek God, they
needed his pardon for some external omissions.

You will recollect, Sir, that you have given it as your opinion. That the
essence of baptism does not consist in any one particular mode whatever.
Undoubtedly this may be said, with as much propriety, respecting communion;
that the essence of it does not consist in any particular mode whatever; but in
right affections of heart.

If this observation be just, that the essence of an ordinance does not consist
in the externals of it, but in sincerity of heart; and that Christian communion
does not require agreement in sentiment, but only a union of 'affection and
desires;' in this sense, I presume, the Baptists and Paedo-baptists do
cordially commune.

In remarking upon the motto of my other Piece, you have said, There must be a
union between God and man, or they cannot commune together -- there must be a
cordial union. We must love the same objects which God loves, and hate that
which he hates. You suppose, the same kind of agreement is essential to our
walking together? Now, Sir, if this cordial affection and union can fully
exist, and we disagree in one divine institution, why can it not, and we
disagree in another? Why is it thought more essential to our Christian
fellowship and union to be agreed in the ordinance of the supper, than in the
ordinance of baptism? Or are there any reasons for exalting the former so much
above the latter? If agreement in sentiment be unnecessary to our Christian
fellowship, then it can be of no consequence for us to be agreed in the
ordinance of the supper. For according to this argument, two persons or
churches may enjoy mutual communion together, although one of them should
partake of the bread and wine, and the other sit by at the same time and not
partake.

Upon the whole, I see nothing to forbid this conclusion, That we do commune
with the Paedo-baptists in the same sense which God does. We may not indeed in
the same degree, as we have not the same degree of knowledge, with respect to
their conformity to his moral image, or positive requirements; but so far as we
see them bearing the image of truth, so far we love and esteem them.

But, Sir, do you conceive that God communes with you in a higher, or different
sense, in the ordinance of the supper, than what he does in the ordinance of
baptism? If not, why may you not draw an argument equally forcible from that,
to urge us to a compliance with your mode of baptism? I am willing to own, that
I am enthusiastic enough to believe, that God as really manifests his
all-approving presence with us in the ordinance of baptism, as in that of the
supper. But, should we from hence urge the propriety of your adopting our mode
of baptism, without producing any other proof in support of it, would you think
the argument conclusive? Most certainly you would not.

You have taken it for granted, that God communes with the Paedo-baptists, and
that his example is worthy of imitation. But have we not as much reason to
believe, that the baptism of Christ by an immersion in Jordan, was designed as
an example for believers through every age, as that his communing with your
denomination is designed as an example for us to imitate? But, the sacrilegious
practice of imitating Jesus Christ in his baptism, has been loudly exploded, b^
^he united efforts of two learned gentlemen, Messrs. Fish and Crane.
in a publication with this extraordinary title, "The Baptism of Jesus Christ,
not to be imitated by Christians." A person cannot reflect upon this title a
moment, without concluding, that some Paedo-baptists cautiously endeavor not
to imitate the baptism of Jesus Christ! We can hardly forbear asking, Who do
they mean to imitate? Surely not John; for they say he was under the law. Not
Christ, because he was baptized before his death. Not Philip, and the eunuch,
for they went down both INTO THE WATER. Not the primitive church; for we are
authorized, upon the restimony of Paedo-baptists themselves, to say, that
immersion was the universal practice (except in particular cases) for nearly
thirteen hundred years after the Christian era.

We cheerfully acknowledge that this is not the case with us; for we do really
endeavor to imitate the baptism of Christ; nor did we ever yet feel conscious
of reproof, for the presumptuous act! It is an argument of no small weight in
the minds of many, that our baptism is an imitation of HIS, who has taught us
to take up our cross and FOLLOW HIM. Were it necessary to invite you to follow
an example so evidently designed for unitation, I might address you in the
spontaneous language of a text pressed into your service; Be ye followers of
God, as dear ^hildren.

Should you think the question not fully answered by what has been already
observed, and still inquire, If God communes with the Paedobaptists, why should
you be unwilling to follow his example? -- I would wish to ask, Whether you
would think it duty for us to be followers of God, otherwise than according to
the rules laid down in his word? You will permit me to remind you, that you
have acknowledged, that those rules require baptism antecedent to communion.
This is evidently your meaning when you say, I do not deny that baptism was
prior to coming to the Lord's table in the apostolic practice. I suppose it
was. I suppose so too, Sir; and would beg to know, whether there has been any
different rule of practice established since? If so, by whom was it done, and
by what authority? If the system of inspiration was closed by the Apostles,
then undoubtedly the practice of the church, as recorded by them, is a proper
rule for us. To this you seem to assent (though with a degree of caution) when
you say, I also suppose their example to be worthy of imitation in like
circumstances. As if some circumstances might take place, which might make it
necessary to alter the mode or order of divine institutions. But, Sir, if
institutions are divine, it is not in the power of circumstances, however
combined, or any thing else short of the power which made them, to alter either
their mode or order. Some circumstances may render it necessary to omit, but
never to alter an institution. The moment we alter an institution, we destroy
its authority. It can no longer claim the high privilege of a divine origin;
but must be looked upon as the base-born offspring of human invention.

That there can be circumstances in our present situation which may render it
necessary, or even justifiable, to depart from the apostolic practice, I cannot
conceive. Yet here we are not so happy as to be agreed in opinion; for you say
-- I am not certain that there can be no circumstances in which it might be
lawful to admit to the Lord's supper prior to baptism. Especially if the mode
of baptism be immersion. For a real Christian may for many years be subjected
to such bodily disorders, that it would be presumption rather than duty, to be
plunged all under water; and yet at certain times he might be able to attend
the ordinance of the Lord's supper. And must he be debarred this privilege, or
forbidden this duty, merely because he is unable to be immersed? P. 14.


It appears to me, Sir, that you draw conclusions without premises. For you
suppose we debar a person from a privilege in one instance, because he is
unable to do his duty in another. I suppose you are mistaken in both. For
first, I do not believe that God requires any duty of his creatures, which his
holy providence has rendered them unable to perform: which is the supposed case
with regard to baptism. Nor secondly, do I believe that it is the duty or
privilege of any person to attend one sacred ordinance, while God in his
providence prevents his attending another, which has a prior claim on his
obedience; and while the latter, by apostolic practice, is a necessary
qualification for the former. This idea you have fully illustrated in your next
page, where you observe; that Many things which are ordinarily incumbent
duties, are not so in all circumstances. This observation appears perfectly
just, and the very circumstance you have mentioned of the person's being
unbaptized, renders it inconsistent with duty for him to partake of the Lord's
supper.

For I can as easily conceive of its being a person's duty or privilege to go
to meeting, while by the providence of God he is confined at home; as to
believe that it is his duty to go to the communion table, while by the same
providence he is unable to attend the previous qualifications which the
institution requires.

Allowing immersion to be essential to gospel baptism, and a person to become a
real Christian when but nine years old, and the state of his health such as
would render it unsuitable for him to be baptized, should he live to be nine
hundred and sixty-nine, I should never suppose it to be his duty to communicate
while in that situation; nor can I suppose any well enlightened Christian would
ever desire it.

But, should it even be supposed, that the order of the institutions might be
dispensed with in particular case^, so far as to admit to communion pious
persons, whose bodily infirmities would not allow of their being baptized --
What then? Shall we from hence argue to a general practice, and admit
unbaptized persons to communion who have no such infirmities to plead? If this
be not the case, your argument loses the whole of its force; unless your
communicants are all invalids!

The inconclusiveness of this argument will more fully appear, by attending to
the observations you have brought to illustrate it by. The first is, the
instance of David's taking the show bread. You observe, He was hungry, and had
need of it for the sustenance and preservation of life; but will you from hence
conclude, that it was lawful for David, or any other person in ordinary cases,
to have taken the hallowed bread, when there was no such necessity? If this be
not the case, it will not help your cause; for the matter in dispute is not a
case of necessity, but of supposed convenience; and which, in order to its
being practiced, must be lawful in ordinary cases. Your other observation
respecting a person's being necessarily detained from the house of God, is much
of the same tenor: for granting that a person's infirmities may excuse him from
the duty of attending public worship, shall we hence infer that this is any
excuse for others, or even for the same person when well? Surely we shall not.

You suppose when David violated a positive precept, he did it to preserve his
life, and that in this sense he conducted himself agreeably to the moral law.
Now, Sir, when it can be made to appear, that a person's life, or eternal
salvation, depend on communicating at the Lord's table, I cannot say but in
such a case, it may be lawful to go contrary to positive institutions; to
depart from apostolic practice; and plunge ourselves into almost every
inconsistency, rather than a weak brother should perish for whom Christ died.

Your observations in favor of giving the communion to the sick who are not
institutionally qualified to receive it, lead us to compare it with the ancient
custom of baptizing the clinics.

A learned historian observes, "At first all times were alike, and persons were
baptized as opportunity and occasion served, but it was after restrained to two
solemn and stated times of the year, viz. Easter and Whitsuntide." These
included the fifty days between: "Yet if there was a necessity, (as in case of
sickness and danger of death) they might be baptized at any other time." Dr.
Cave's Primitive Christianity. p. 104.
And notwithstanding they allowed immersion to be the proper mode, yet, in case
of danger of death, they would sprinkle persons as they lay in their beds. It
is evident they overrated the institution; and your notion of giving the
communion to the sick who are unable to be baptized, has a little of the same
appearance.

I do not find that these ancient Christians plead apostolic authority for this
practice, nor did they allow of this mode of baptism in ordinary cases.

But why should it be thought necessary for a real Christian to receive the
communion, so long as his bodily infirmities forbid his being regularly
baptized? It cannot be thought necessary to his eternal salvation; for if a
Christian, that is already secured: nor that the gospel rule requires it; for
that enjoins, that all things be done decently and in order: nor yet the glory
of God, for that never requires submission to any positive law, but of those
who are capable of the positive pre-requisites to obey it. Hence I conclude,
that every unbaptized Christian, whose infirmities may be such, as to render it
unsuitable for him to be baptized and join the visible church, ought
submissively to wait, until God in his providence opens a door for him in a
regular manner to approach his holy table; and not to act foolishly like Saul,
who grew impatient in waiting for Samuel, and forced himself and offered a
burnt-offering. 1 Samuel xiii. 1^.


I have endeavored thus far to trace your argument, and have not yet found
sufficient reason to depart from the apostolic practice, but as we are so happy
as to be agreed in this point, that baptism according to their practice was
prior to coming to the Lord's table, on this ground we will bring the matter to
trial. Now, Sir, I would wish to ask, How we can consistently communicate with
you. If we communicate with you as baptized persons, we practically give up our
principles; if we communicate with you as unbaptized, then we unwarrantably
depart from the apostolic practice. You cannot be insensible, my dear Sir, that
this is the very pith of the controversy; and that one or the other of the
above difficulties will inevitably fall to our share, in case we establish
communion with you.

It is a fact generally known, and which we do not wish to conceal, that we
cannot acknowledge Infant-sprinkling to be gospel baptism. Could this be
allowed, the dispute would be at an end; and our sentiments at an end with it.
For if the institution requires no more than sprinkling, then plunging must be
forever unnecessary; and besides, we shall be justly chargeable with
re-baptizing, a practice we condemn as much as you do. But you seem to be
willing that we should be Baptists, and yet blame us for not communicating with
other denominations. But, why do you not lay the axe to the root of the tree,
and blame us for being Baptists, and not blame us for being consistent?

I doubt not but every unprejudiced mind will readily perceive, that the matter
comes to this point with us, that in order to communicate with you we must
either give up what you and we agree was the apostolic practice, or our
sentiments as Baptists. One or the other of these will be a rational inference
from our conduct.

From what has now been observed, it will be easy to perceive the different
situations we stand in to each other. When persons join your churches, who have
been baptized by us, I have never heard of your baptizing them again. On the
other hand, we always baptize those who come from your churches to us, unless
they have been immersed upon a profession of faith. But is this difference of
conduct to be attributed to catholicism in you, or the want of it in us? By no
means. The truth is this, immersion includes sprinkling; but sprinkling does
not include immersion: therefore the person who is immersed, is in your view
lawfully baptized; whilst he who is only sprinkled is not so in ours. It hence
follow, that, consistently with your sentiments and view of the 'apostolic
practice,' you may invite us to communicate in your churches; while we, having
the same views, cannot invite you.

It is hoped that the preceding observations will fully satisfy our
Paedo-baptist brethren, that our reasons for not communicating with them, do
not arise from the want of brotherly affection toward them; but from a
conscientious regard to what we understand to be the order of the gospel.

So long as we allow the gospel to contain a complete system of faith and
practice, we must endeavor to follow the rules there given, rather than
imitate other supposed parts of the divine conduct.

But should we even carry the matter as high as you have supposed; that Christ
should personally come to one of your communions, and actually partake with
you; and should address you as his friends, and bid you eat and drink: I am not
certain that his conduct in so doing would call for our imitation, so long as
the established laws of his kingdom remain as they now are.

When Christ first commissioned his disciples, and sent them forth to preach
the gospel, heal the sick, etc. -- he commanded them saying, Go not into the
way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not. Matt. x.
5.
Nevertheless, he himself went into the borders of Tire and Sidon, and there
healed the daughter of the Syrophenician woman, who was a Gentile. Mark vii. 24
-- 30.
He also passed through Sama^ia, conversed with the woman at the well, where he
made known himself to her as the Messiah. And afterward, at the request of the
people, he tarried two days; in which time many more believed on him. John iv.
26, 39, 40.
Hence we see, that Christ did those things which his disciples were not
authorized to do. Therefore I conclude we are to follow the particular rules
laid down by Christ in his word, rather than any supposed appearances or
manifestations he may make to his people in any way whatever. If this be not
the case, we are likely to ramble in eternal uncertainty! But, blessed be God,
we have a more sure word of prophecy, to which we do well to take heed.

It may be proper here to take notice of the consequences you have drawn, from
the supposition of our proving, that a conformity to our mode of baptism is an
essential term of communion. You say, Should this be made to appear, it will
then also appear, that all the Paedo-baptists, who have thought, they enjoyed
communion with God at his table, have been most miserably deluded. If so, the
consequence is dreadful indeed! Enough to shock the tender feelings of every
pious Paedo-baptist, and lay an effectual bar in the way of their admitting the
evidence of a truth so disgusting, though shining with the greatest clearness.
You also conclude, that if baptism in our mode be an essential qualification;
then the Paedo-baptists are essentially wrong and wicked in coming to the
table; and their conduct an abomination in the sight of God. Page. 28.
My dear Sir, are you so intoxicated with sentiment as to forget your own
system? No farther back than page 20, you have said, I deny that there can be
any moral evil in conduct which proceeds from godly sincerity; yet I grant
there may be natural evil, or incongruity, through inadvertency or
misapprehension. Is it possible that 'natural evil' or 'incongruity,' should
account for all the frightful things now mentioned, such as 'miserable
delusion,' 'wicked' conduct, even such as is abomination in the sight of God?
If not, your argument fails in one or the other: either your conduct must be
chargeable with moral evil, or your consequences cannot be just.

In your next page you go on to say, Granting that immersion be the appointed
mode of baptism, and believers the only proper subjects, yet if a Paedo-baptist
really think otherwise, and with an obedient heart offer up his children in our
mode, his conduct is not chargeable with any moral evil. All the evil which is
to be imputed to his conduct, is of the natural kind. -- And the person in so
doing, is as well accepted in the sight of God, as if his external conduct had
been according to the appointed mode of baptism. It is peculiar indeed, that
with regard to the institution of baptism, you should conclude, that if you
honestly mistake both the subjects and mode, and practice in a way entirely
different, it by no means hinders the divine approbation and acceptance. But
with regard to the ordinance of the supper, if it should be proved that you had
as honestly made a mistake with regard to a previous duty, and have thought
that you enjoyed communion with God at his table, the consequence must b^, that
you have all been miserably deluded!

According to the above argument, all that is necessary to render baptism
acceptable, is only to 'really think' you are right: hence by a parity of
reasoning, if you are not accepted of God in the ordmance of the supper, we
must suppose you do not 'really think' you are right when you come to the
table. But are you not as sincere in coming to the Lord's table, as in offering
up your children? If you are not, I shall join with you, that your conduct is
an abomination to the Lord. But, allowing you to be sincere, and to really
think you are right, and we must suppose that you have as much reason to think
you have been miserably deluded in the former, as in the latter.

Thus, Sir, I have endeavored carefully to attend to the argumentative part of
your Friendly Letter, and have attempted to answer those arguments on which I
supposed you laid the greatest stress; either in a direct way, or by showing
the invalidity of the evidence by which they were supported. And however an
impartial public may judge, I have the satisfaction to think, that in the
preceding sheets the following particulars have been fairly established, by
evidence from scripture, reason, and the concurring testimony of many eminent
Paedo-baptist writers. 1. That visible, or professing believers, are the only
proper subjects of baptism, known and described in the word of God. 2. That an
entire immersion in water, is necessary to the due administration of the
ordinance. 3. That by apostolic practice, which is a standing law to the church
of Christ, baptism was, and therefore still is, prior to coming to the Lord's
table.
Hence it follows, by necessary consequence, that a conformity to our mode of
baptism (if that has been proved to be the gospel mode) is to the considered as
a necessary prerequisite or (if it suits you better) term of communion at the
Lord's table, so long as we think it important to follow the 'apostolic
practice.' We do not mean by this to dictate to our brethren of other
denominations with regard to their terms of communion; but only show the
general principles on which we proceed among ourselves.

SECTION IX. Observations on the Plan of Communion proposed in the 'Friendly
Letter,' with Remarks on several other Things connected with the Subject.
SIR, your professed design in writing, has too much of the appearance of
friendship, to be passed over unnoticed. But whether if your plan were adopted,
it would produce the desired effect, is a matter of serious inquiry.

To promote the peace and prosperity of Zion, by opening a door for free
communion between the Baptists and Paedo-baptists, is your professed object.
And notwithstanding I have appeared upon the other side of the question, I
persuade myself, that no person would be happier in seeing our objections
fairly removed, and a consistent way pointed out for a mutual interchange of
communions. But if it must be done at the expense of our sentiments as
Baptists, you will not think us unreasonable in requiring ample proof that we
are wrong, before we do it.

The particular boundaries of your plan are expressed in the following words.
It is not my design, nor my desire, to have a door opened for free communion
among all who prosess religion on either side; but only with regard to those
whose visible conduct is evidential of real piety. It is a little difficult
here to understand your meaning. If you mean to establish communion with some
churches which you may consider as orthodox in doctrine, and regular
indiscipline, while you reject others, your plan may be practicable. But as the
terms or qualifications you propose, may be the lot of individuals rather than
churches, it appears to be attended with some difficulty. For it is reasonable
to suppose that in every Christian, community there may be some sound, whose
visible conduct is evidential of real piety. With those it seems you would wish
to communciate, while with the church as a body you could by no means hold
fellowship.

In order to reduce the idea to practice, we will suppose ten members of a
Baptist church in your vicinity, attend at one of your communion seasons, with
a desire to enjoy privileges with you; but when the church is called upon to
act upon their request, they inform those brethren that with five of them they
are fully satisfied, and bid them a cordial welcome to a seat in their
communion; but to the others they observe, they have not obtained the evidence
of their real piety; and therefore must conscientiously refuse to partake with
them. It is natural to suppose that the feelings of these brethren would be
wounded upon such an occasion; some on their own account, and some on account
of others. And the church to which they belong might consider themselves
injured; and it is likely the effect would be contention, rather than peace.
Difficulties similar to the above are fairly supposeable.

If you please, Sir, we will now suppose a different case. It so happens, that
several of your brethren remove into the neighborhood of a Baptist church, and
from their situation are desirous of enjoying privileges with them. The
Baptists, enlightened by your sentiments, are equally desirous of indulging
them; and although these brethren have not received baptism in the way which
the church understand the institution, yet as they appear to be sincere, which
is the very, SOUL and ESSENCE of conformity to Christ, the church cordially
grant their request. For a season they enjoy privileges together, and no
particular difficulty arises; but at length one of those communicants becomes
diffatisfied with respect to his Infant Baptism; and in the exercise of godly
sincerity is led to believe, that it is his indispensable duty to be immersed.
But while waiting a convenient opportunity for that purpose, a communion season
intervenes; it now becomes a serious question, both with him and the church,
whether it be duty for him to communicate in his present situation? As the
church adopted this new mode of communion in conformity to your system; they
think proper to recur to it, in order to decide the present doubtful case. They
first consult the terms on which you propose free communion; these they find to
be 'real piety' or 'godly sincerity.' That the man was a subject of these
qualifications when they first admitted him, they have no doubt; and they are
equally satisfied of his sincerity and piety with his present views; and (...)
first are inclined to think it may be his duty to communicate. But there is one
difficulty still which seems to embarrass their proceeding; that is, if they
understand you right, (p. 9) it is not a question with you, Whether baptism in
some mode be an essential qualification. And although the person once sincerely
believed himself to be baptized, he now as sincerely believes he is not; and as
a man thinks in his heart so is he. For the scripture being ' silent
respecting his Infant Baptism,' the only thing which gave it validity, either
with himself or the church, was his sincerity; but that failing in this
particular, this must consequently fail with it; and he can no longer be
considered as baptized, than while he sincerely believes himself to be so. He
is now, in his own view, and in the view of the church, unbaptized. And I
cannot see but that he must appear in the same light to you, upon your own
scale of reasoning. But, however, he is unquestionably possessed of real piety
and godly sincerity, which are your distinguishing terms of communion; and yet,
as he is in his own opinion unbaptized, he lacks an 'essential qualification.'
It follows, that by your system he is both qualified, and unqualified, at the
same time.

Besides, the Baptist church would not appear in the most consident light, to
baptize a person with whom they had probably communed several years; and yet
the man cannot act consistently with godly sincerity without it. Upon the
whole, I am in^li^ed to think, when you review your plan in its operation, you
will conclude some amendment are necessary.

In connection with your design, you have another observation, upon which I
shall make one or two remarks. You say, I shall neglect to pay any partic^lar
attention to the subject of Infant Baptism; not because that I think our side
fails of scripture evidence, but because many abler hands have been employed on
the subject, and because I think it to be needless with respect to the subject
of close communion, This observation appears a little extraordinary, and that
for two reasons. 1. That you should suggest that the scripture affords ample
proof in favor of your sentiments; and yet in another part of your Letter, (p
35) if I am not much mistaken, you make this honest concession, That the
scripture as to Infant Baptism is SILENT. Strange indeed! Full of evidence, and
yet silent! entirely silent! We cheerfully yield you the unmolested enjoyment
of all the evidence which Infant Baptism can derive from the silence of
scripture respecting it. That the scripture is silent, is acknowledged by Mr.
Clark. "The Paedo-baptists (says be) do not place the evidence of
Infant Baptism, in the history of fact, or in any express mention of (...) in
the New Testament, No man even presended it" "That if there be no direct
evidence for Infant Baptism from the historical relation of fact in the
New Testament, surely no argument against it can be made out from the filque of
the sacred writers in reference thereunto." -- Defense of Infant Baptism, p.
79, 85.
2. That you should suppose that Infant Baptism is not connected with the
subject in dispute. I suppose, Sir, that it is particularly connected; for it
is entirely upon the supposition of its validity, that you claim a right to
communicate with us. Therefore, had you brought forward that testimony from
scripture which you inform us your side does not fail of, and had proved by
e^ample or precept (I mean not by silent evidence, however) that Infant Baptism
was of divine appointment, this would have ended the whole dispute. To admit
that the silence of scripture respecting any point in dispute a^iords full
evidence in its favor, appears to me ^^^rational, as to admit the evidence of
the watch set to keep he b^ly of Jesus, who declared that his disciples stole
him away wh^e THAT S^^^^.
You cannot be insensible that this objection has always been made on our part,
and to me it appears rational and important. I endeavored carefully to state
it in my other Piece, and as yours is said to contain an answer to it, I did
not expect it in this way, that you should neglect to say any thing about it.


It may be proper in the next place to attend to the manner in which you answer
a case proposed in my other Piece. The case was plain, and I humbly conceive
quite to the point in hand. The substance of the question was this; Had Enoch,
Noah, or Melchizedeck, been contemporary with Moses, would he have permitted
them to communion in the paschal supper while uncircumcised? Or had Noah been
present when the tabernacle was erected, and had been disposed to have given
the people a sermon, upon the incarnation of the Son of God, and the
righteousness of faith, of which that sacred structure was typical would not
Moses and the people have cheerfully heard him? (...) yet the positive law of
Jehovah would ha^^ forbidden his partaking at the paschal feast.

To this you answer, We shall not dispute but that Moses would have admitted
those ambassadors to preach; being convinced of their divine commission. Nor
would he have forbidden their partaking of the paschal feast, had they been
circumcised, whether it were done in infancy or adult age, before or after
believing, with a knife, a razor, a scythe, a sickle, or even a sharp stone.

Sir, did you think this would be considered as an answer? It certainly will
not. Instead of looking the argument fairly in the face, you have endeavored
quite to evade it.

You agree that Moses would have admitted those ambassadors to preach. The
question then was, whether he would have received them to the paschal feast,
while uncircumcised? Instead of a direct answer, you reply, Nor would he have
forbidden their partaking of the paschal feast had they been circumcised. True,
Sir; nor will your victory cost you any thing; for this point was never
disputed. You proceed to remark several circumstances respecting circumcision;
but take particular care not to mention any which would affect the validity of
the rite. Nor are the cases parallel between the circumstances mentioned, and
that of Infant Baptism. This will sufficiently appear by what follows: as 1.
Whether it were done in infancy or adult age, no matter which; for infants of
eight days old were expressly mentioned in the institution, and they were
commanded on that day to circumcise them; and repeated examples from scripture
prove that it was done. Let the right of infants to baptism be as fairly made
out, and the point will be given up. 2. Whether 'before or after believing;'
this was entirely immaterial. For the command was, And he that is eight days
old shall be circumcised among you, every man-child in your generations, he
that is born in the house or bought with money of any stranger, which is not of
thy seed -- must needs be circumcised. Genesis xvii. 12, 13.
It hence follows, that believing was not required in the subjects for
circumcision, nor yet that the parents should be believers; for the child of an
idolatrous heathen, bought for a slave, had as fair a claim to that
institution, as any of the believing sons of Abraham. This cannot be said of
the gospel institution; for when one said, See here is water; what does hinder
me to be baptized? The reply was, If thou believe with all thine heart, thou
may. Acts viii. 36, 27.
And although some believing parents claim the privilege of baptism for their
children, I do not remember to have heard that any ever did for their servants.
Nor does the benevolent doctrine of Infant Baptism make any provision for the
ill-fated infant, whose parents are both unbelievers. 3. Whether circumcision
were performed with a knife, a razor, a scythe, a sickle, or even a sharp
stone, we acknowledge it equally valid, providing the rite was performed. So
likewise should we look upon baptism to be valid, if performed in Jordan, in
the Tiber, in a pond, in a po^^, in a cistern, in a font, or in any other
place, where water could conveniently be had sufficient to immerse in.


But if you please, Sir, we will vary the circumstances a little. If instead of
performing the rite upon the part appointed, a person had opened a vein in his
e^m, cut off the end of his toe, his thumb, or the tip of his right ear: had
either of these been performed with all the sole ^^^ties of the other rite, it
cannot be supposed that it would have been accepted for circumcision. And yet,
perhaps, the dissimilarity is not greater between either of the supposed cases
and the commanded rite, than between sprinkling and immersion.

We will now take notice of what you observe (p. 31.) You say, It has been
difficult for us to see the consistency of your conduct, in refusing to commune
at the Lord's table with our denomination; while at the same time, you
practically acknowledge our Ministers to be authorized and qualified to preach
the gospel. That we are perfectly free from inconsistency will not be
pretended; nor do we think that a compliance with your mode of communion, would
free us from the charge. Perhaps with our present different views, we cannot
act more consistently than to follow the advice given by the Apostle; "Whereto
we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same
thing." Phil. iii. 16.
We have attained to an agreement in praying to the same God and Father of all;
and also in preaching the gospel of his Son Jesus Christ. But we have not
attained to an agreement with respect to the subjects and mode of baptism; nor
in the visible qualifications of communicants for the Lord's table. How can two
walk together except they be agreed? But must we be charged with inconsistency,
for not disagreeing in the things we are agreed in, or merely because we are
agreed in some things, and not in all? If so, we must patiently submit to the
charge, until the happy time comes when we shall see eye to eye.

Although we do not think of clearing ourselves of inconsistency, by charging
your conduct with the same; yet it may not be improper here to inquire, whether
your conduct toward us in some instances, be quite consistent with your
professions of friendship in establishing free communion with with us? If you
consider us as a branch of Christ's church, with whom you would be willing to
enjoy Christian communion, why do you refuse to dismiss and recommend your
members to us, when they are in good standing in your churches, and wish to
join ours? I conclude, Sir, you are sensible that this privilege has been
generally denied, and this reason has been often assigned for the denial: That
to dismiss a member to a Baptist church, would be to acknowledge it a church of
Christ. But would you be willing to communicate with any who do not belong to
his church? You certainly would not.

Permit me, Sir, to mention one thing more. Why are your pulpits so frequently
denied to the Ministers of our denomination? Is it because they are heterodox
in doctrine, or vicious in their conduct? They are not charged with either. Is
it because they may want literary accomplishments? This might be imagined, were
it not that those who possess them are often denied as well as others. Is it
because we do not communicate with you at the table? If you complain of our
being uncharitable in this, remember you are not to render evil for evil; but
contrariwise Perhaps some who have thus been denied, by their 'sincere' but
differing brethren, have been indulged with the spacious temple of their royal
Master, and with much the same accommodations which he had. Whilst 'The Lord of
lords and King of kings, is neither afraid nor 'ashamed' to accompany them to
some friendly sh^^^, or to a humble stall, resembling the birthplace of
Immanu^l; and there blesses their labors to the comfort and salvation of his
people.


These objections are not to be taken indiscriminately; no, many of our
Paedo-baptist brethren meet us upon the most friendly terms; reciprocal love
and esteem mingle in our society; and although we pretend not to have dominion
over each others faith, yet we become helpers of one another joy. 2 Cor. i. 24.


SECTION X. Several Objections particularly answered. -- The Subject concluded.
SIR, I cannot do justice to myself and the denomination to which I belong,
without taking notice of several charges which you have brought against us. In
the first place, you have charged me with 'quoting scripture' in a method
'calculated to mislead the ignorant and inattentive;' of 'arrogancy and
uncharitableness;' and of having done great injury to the Apostle Paul. (Page
17, 35, 38.)

The first instance of which you complain, is in the following words,
"Sincerity is not the term of communion; but being conformed to the Apostles'
doctrine, and continuing steadfastly therein. Acts ii. 42." Upon which you thus
observe; From the manner of your citing, or rather alluding, to this text, it
would be natural to expect that upon examination we should find the inspired
writer describing the terms of communion. I conclude, Sir, upon examination
this does abundantly appear. Nor am I convinced, that the passage is not
pertinent to the purpose for which it was cited; and if it does not describe
the terms of communion, I know not of any one which does. But (you say) instead
of this, we find him simply relating the conduct of some young converts, who
had been already admitted to communion. But, Sir, are you not mistaken? He is
here describing the very manner in which these converts were admitted; and
which fully shows the 'apostolic practice.'

But what is the account given of their proceedings? You answer, Let us read
the 41st and 42d verses in connection. Then they who gladly received the word
were baptized; and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand
souls. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles' doctrine and fellowship,
and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. And were they not baptized until they
received the word? No, they were not; and were they baptized and no others? The
scripture is totally '^lent' as to any others. Nor did they join the body of
believers or church, until they received the word, and were baptized. You say,
They had already been admitted to communion. I would beg to know, where you
find any account of their having been admitted before this?

You farther observe, That any person of good discernment may see, that in this
text there is no appearance of design to ascertain the terms of communion. Let
the design be what it may, here is evidently ascertained the apostolic
practice; and the exact manner, step by step, in which they proceeded to
communion.

The passage of scripture which you introduce, as being so very apposite to
your mode of communion, and on which you lay much stress, is this; 'Be ye
followers of God as dear children.' The 'discerning reader' will now judge,
whether in this passage there is any greater appearance of design, to ascertain
the terms of communion, than in the one which I alluded to. But, however, "If
to be conformed to the Apostles' doctrine, and continuing steadfastly in it," be
a dangerous practice, and calculated to mislead the ignorant and inattentive,
we should be glad to see the danger pointed out, and a better system of
doctrine proposed for imitation.

In my other Piece, in answering several pleas in favor of free communion, I
observed that it had been urged, "That the scripture account of baptism, was
left in so much darkness and ambiguity, both as to the subjects and mode, that
nothing certain could be determined." In remarking upon which I made the
following observation; "It may be remembered that when the talents were
committed to the servants to occupy, the two who improved made no complaints;
the other had a hard master, an austere man, and a great many difficulties
stood in the way of duty." After making your sarcastical paraphrase upon my
observation, you bring forward your charge of arrogance and uncharitableness;
to which it may be replied -- The observation was designed entirely for those
who make the above plea; and no one will feel himself injured by the
application, if he be not the character described. And however arrogant and
uncharitable it may appear, thus to blame the conduct of those who bring
forward the plea, so long as they are considered only as servants; it cannot be
thought more so, than the plea itself, against Christ our royal Master.

To plead the want of sufficient light in the scriptures, as the reason of our
wrong sentiments, is indeed to impeach Christ. "To suppose this, (says Dr.
Hopkins) is a reproach on divine revelation, and the Author of it, andian
implicit denial that it comes from God." Vid. System, Vol. II, p. 303.


But lastly, you accuse me of having done great injury to the Apostle Paul. If
it be so I shall be sorry indeed. But what have I done to the Apostle? Why you
say, You have quoted his words without any appearance of regard to the
connection. And what then? Is this injuring the Apostle? Are we never to use the
words of the inspired writers in any other sense than what they did? Do not the
best writers frequently quote scripture (by way of accommodation, or for the
sake of the phrase) without attending strictly to the connection? In short, have
you not frequently done it yourself? One or two of your quotations will
determine the matter. As a man thinks in his heart so is he. Did you attend
to the connection here, and use the words in the same sense which the royal
preacher did? It is evident you did not. Again, when you would fix the charge
of inconsistency upon us, for refusing to communicate with those with whom you
suppose Christ communes, you can introduce the Apostle Paul as exhorting the
Baptists, to be followers of God as dear children. I shall not say that you
have 'greatly injured the Apostle;' but I hardly think that in the passage
above, he had reference to our communicating with you at the Lord's table.

The passage which I quoted was the following; "Now we command you in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw youselves from every brother who
walks disorderly, and not after the tradition which he received of us." (...)
These. iii. 6.
In applying this to my brethren, I observed, "(...) may be your duty to
withdraw from them whom you consider as not conformed to the tradition of the
Apostles, so far, as not to partake together at the Lord's table." No candid
mind can be at a loss, as to the exact sense in which I used the Apostle's
words; nor can they think that I used the word tradition, absolutely in the
same sense which he did. His words are quite in the imperative, mine in the
mild subjunctive mood.

You have been, pleased to style St. Paul an eminent peacemaker; and have
collected many passages of scripture to prove, that to this end he was made all
things to all men, (not for the sake of communicating with them, but) that he
might by all means SAVE some. But shall we, from the condescending light in
which you have represented the Apostle, conclude, that if he were among the
Baptists, he would become a Baptist; and fully approve of their mode of
baptism, and of their denying the right of infants, while at the same time he
might know, that the institution did not require the former, and that it
expressly enjoined the latter. Or on the other hand, if he were among the
Paedo-baptists, shall we suppose him one with them; and that he would cordially
approve of their mode of baptizing infants, when at the same time he might
know, that neither subjects nor mode, were according to the institution. Would
sober reason venerate such a character as this? No. It would look upon him as
an unprincipled time-server.

To suppose that St. Paul would conform to every party which he might
occasionally be among, would be to make him resemble that peculiar animal,
which partakes of the color of every substance which it happens to be upon! I
confess, I form no such opinion of this great Apostle's catholicism; but
conclude, were he among us, he would say to those in the right, "Now I praise
you, brethren, that ye remember me in all things, and keep the ordinances, as I
delivered them to you." But to those in the wrong, "Now in this that I declare
unto you, I praise you not." 1 Cor. xi. 2, 17.


But we pass on,

Secondly, To consider the charges which you exhibit against our sentiments. In
your viith. part you proceed to show, what appears to you to be the natural
tendency of our sentiments and practice; and finally conclude, that they tend
to break up all churches, and to destroy all visible communion among
Christians. Although I have not written documents to prove, yet I have tre^^ble
information, that a Conference, or Council, was sometime since called at
West-Stock bridge, to advise, whether it were consistent for the two
denominations in that place to build a church, and walk together. -- It was
unanimously agreed in the negative. Two of the Paedo-baptist Ministers were,
Rev. Dr. WEST, Rev. Mr. CAMP. Baptists, Rev. Messrs. WORDEN and BLOOD.
If this be the case, no wonder you are alarmed. But, Sir, you are mistaken.
The churches of our denomination in America, contain upwards of sixty thousand
members, which hold visible communion together: nor did I ever know, that any
attempt had been made on our part, to destroy the visible communion of
Christians in general. And cetainly, were our sentiments universally to
operate, they would unite in one great body all Christians to the ends of the
earth.

But you object again and say, Your sentiment and practice tend to lead people
to place the essence of religion in the external observance of ceremonial
institutions, to the neglect of the weightier matters of the law.

This, Sir, is not true. For our sentiments carry the fullest demonstration to
the contrary. It is a fact universally known, that no person can be admitted as
a member in a Baptist church, let his externals be what they may, without
sufficient evidence that he has experienced a change of heart, and has become a
real Christian. We do not baptize persons to make them Christians, but because
we look upon them to be such already. And it is well known, that a person
cannot be accepted with us, on account of lineal descent from Abraham, or any
other believer; nor by virtue of a pretended federal holiness; nor can they
make a profession by proxy or sponsors; but by their own voluntary act. We
never baptize persons out of our ordinary way, who are in danger of death; nor
do we ever give the communion to any who are unbaptized. How then can you
possibly say, with any appearance of modesty or justice, that our sentiments
tend to lead people to place the essence of religion, in the external
observance of ceremonial institutions.

You follow this charge with a number of ungenerous reflections, upon the
Ministers of our denomination. To make this appear, I would only ask; Were I to
charge your Ministers with taking up much of their time in public and in
private, disputing about Infant Baptism; and should have the vanity to say,
they had better inculcate upon their hearers the nature and importance of
universal benevolence, the duties of brotherly love, justice, mercy, and
compassion; to live useful lives, serving their generation by the will of God;
(as if these were almost, if not entirely neglected; and should assure them,
that if they would take my advice) they would do much more good in the world,
appear much less like the Scribes and Pharisees, which they now resemble, and
much more like CHRIST and his APOSTLES, which we so exactly imitate. Would you
not think me justly chargeable with 'arrogancy and uncharitableness?' I leave
the matter to your own feelings. A word to the wise is sufficient.

Another thing you charge us with, is, that we lay an 'undue stress' upon the
ordinance of baptism, or at least upon our particular mode. This comes rather
with an ill grace, from one of a denomination, which evidently make as much, if
not more of the ordinance than we do.

But we will not rest the matter here, without a fair examination. D^^^e insist
on baptism in any mode, as essential to salvation? you allow that we do not. Do
we place it in the room of redeeming blood, and think that by our immersion we
wash away our sins? No, you acquit us from this also. Do we look upon it as an
institution of Christ which we are sacredly bound to observe? We do; and so do
you. Do we look upon it as an enjoined pre-requisite to communion? We do; and
so do Paedo-bapt^^^s in general. But how does it appear then that we lay an
'undue stress' upon it? Why you say; 'I verily fear!' -- (quite a conclusive
way of arguing; but go on) I verily fear, that with many, a ^^ange in sentiment
in favor of your opinions has been allowed great weight as an evidence of a
real change of heart. I wish, Sir, you had proved the matter, instead of
suggesting your fears, But you add, It has been frequently mentioned by those
of your denomination, as an evidence of great selfdenial, for a person to be a
Baptist, or to be plunged. And when I hear such things, it always excites fears
in my mind -- Sir, the mere thoughts of a person's being plunged, seems to have
struck you with a hydrophobia, and quite agitated your mind! -- But let us try
calmly to examine the matter.

It will probably be granted, that the time has been, when it required some
degree of selfdenial to be a Baptist: When the pen of the historian, and the
tongue of the orator, were invidiously employed, in representing us in the most
ridiculous, and whimsical light. While the pulpit thundered, and the press
groaned, with heavy charges against the daring innovators. At the same time,
the civil law added its mild discipline of ejection, banishment, and
pros^ription. But thanks be to Heaven, a milder morn has dawned upon us; the
cross is lightened, and we have few complaints of this kind to make.

It may be proper now to com^der, what stress has been^ and is, laid upon this
ordinance, by Paedo-baptists. It was said by our Savior, "Except a man be born
of water, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." This passage was very early
expounded literally of water baptism, and the consequence admitted, that no
person could be saved without it. Hence all infants dying unbaptized,
inevitably perished.

In the year 416, a council was held at Mela in Numedia, in order to establish
a law to compel Christians to baptize their infants. They issued twenty-seven
new commandments, among which are the following. "It is the pleasure of all the
bishops present in this holy synod to order, 1. That whosoever says Adam was
created mortal, and would have died, if he had not sinned: be accursed. 2. Also
it is the pleasure of the bishops to order, that whosoever denies that infants
newly born of their mothers are to be baptized, or says that baptism is to be
administered for the remission of their own sins, but not on account of
original sin derived from Adam, and to be expiated by the laver of
regeneration: be accursed." Vid. Council. M^levitan, in Robinson. -- "An honest
indignation, (says a historian) rises at the sound of such tyranny; and if a
man were driven to the necessity of choosing one saint out of two candidates,
it would not ^e Austin, it would be Saint Balaam, the son of B^sor, who indeed
loved the wages of unrighteousness, as many other saints have done; but who
with all his madness had respect enough for the Deity to ^^y, How shall I curse
whom God has not curse^!".



In the reign of the emperor Charlemagne, a law was established, making it
death for a man to refuse to be baptized; and a heavy fine was levied on the
parent, who did not have his child baptized within the year. But as at first
they only baptized at two times in the year, it was found that many died
between; to remedy which, priests were empowered to baptize at any time, and in
any place, in case of sickness. When it was remarked that a priest was not
always at hand, new canons empowered him to depute others to perform the
ceremony, and midwives were licensed. It happened sometimes, while the midwife
was baptizing a child not likely to live many minutes, the mother was neglected
and died. It was finally decreed, that any body, licensed or unlicensed; a Jew^
or degraded priest, a scullion or felon, might baptize. Robinson's Hist. p.
427. And Primitive Christianity, p. 192.


Let us now attend to an instance of a later date. About the year 1690, there
were two dissenting Ministers in Wapping. Hercules Collins, who ^aught a
Baptist congregation; and Francis Mence, who ^aught a congregation of
independents. Collins published a book of reasons for believers' baptism, in
which he observed, among other things, that there was no "reason to baptize an
infant under pretense of saving it: for that original sin was not washed off by
baptismal water, but by the blood of Christ, and the imputation of his
righteousness," Me^ce thought it his duty to guard his congregation from this
error, and he both preached and printed, that this was "infant-damning
doctrine." "The principle (he said) evidently excluded dear infants from the
kingdom of God, which was an audacious e^^elty; sending them by swarms into
hell!" Collins attempted to explain himself, and vindicate his doctrine -- but
all in vain. The opposition r^s^ to such a height, that his life was
endangered; the streets resounding with the cries of tender another, who
sarieked as they sold fish, " There goes Collins, who holds the damnation of
infants." Robinson's History, p. 476.
And all this because he denied the necessity of baptism to their salvation.
But the sentiments of the present day, next call for our attention.

The form of service now in use among our brethren of the Episcopal church,
leads us to suppose, that they ascribe quite as much efficacy to the ordinance
as we do. For they, immediately after baptizing, make the following address:
"Seeing, dearly beloved brethren. that this child is regenerate, and grafted
into the body of Christ's church, let us give thanks to Almighty God for these
benefits. -- We yield thee hearty thanks, most merciful Father, that it has
pleased thee to regenerate this infant with thy Holy Spirit, to receive him for
thin^ own child by adoption." And when the children are thought capable of
catechetical instruction, the catechist thus interrogates; "Who gave thee this
name? My sponsors in my baptism, WHEREIN I WAS MADE a member of Christ, a child
of God, and an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven." Vid. The office of public
baptism of infants, and the catechism.
Dr. Hopkins when speaking of the Westminster Catechism, takes notice of this
answer; "Baptism is a sacrament, wherein the washing with water, in the name,
etc. does signify and seal our ingrafting into Christ. -- This catechism is
received by the church of Scotland, and by all, or most of the presbyterian and
congregational churches in England, Ireland, and America; and taught to their
children." He then adds, "If baptism signifies and seals, what it is here said
to do; then infants, when they are baptized, are visibly, or in the view of the
church, ingrafted into Christ, and made partakers of the blessings of the
covenant of grace." System, Vol. ii. p. 394.


Now, Sir, let us just collect these scattered rays of evidence ^o a focus. To
conclude that all who die unbaptized eternally "perish;" to "levy heavy fines"
to obl^ge parents to baptize their children; to "license even midwives" to
baptize rather than it should not be done; to "curse" those who deny the
necessity of it to the salvation of infants; to call the denial of it
"infant-domning doctrine;" to thank God that the infant by baptism is
"regenerated;" to teach children to believe, that in their baptism they were
"made members of Christ, and children of God," and that baptism does signify,
and "seal their ingrafting into Christ," and that they are thereby made
partakers of the blessings of the covenant of grace -- If, after attending to
the evidence here exhibited, the charge against us of laying an "undue stress"
upon baptism should be continued; the author of the 'Friendly Letter' is
modestly requested to produce proof from the writings of the Baptists to show,
that they ascribe any greater efficacy to it, than their Paedo-baptist brethren
do. It is a question with some thinking persons, whether to teach children to
believe, that by baptism they are "regenerated" and "ingrafted into Christ, and
made partakers of the blessings of the covenant of grace," is not laying an
'undue stress' upon the ordinance? I will add the sentiment of a late writer.
"A virtuous profession (says he) of the Christian religion is founded in faith
in Christ, and from this first element all af^^r actions naturally flow: but
where, as in professing infants, the primordial element is not, and cannot be,
religion rises on a postulatum, or assumed proof. The lives of such nominal
Christians give too much evidence that they are Christians only by
prepossessions, and hence come innumerable errors, passions and vices. Having
no reasons of their own for either faith or virtue, they know nothing of the
religion which they profes^, and avoid none of the crimes which it was intended
to destroy."


The last thing which I shall remark upon, is a 'query' which you suggest in
the following words: May it not be owing to the manner in which some preachers
of your denomination have treated the subject of baptism; that so many
professors of your sect have turned deists, shakers, universalists, etc.? Upon
this I would briefly observe -- It is thought you would have acted more
consistent with your title page, and other professions of candor, that if you
had known any instances in which the subject had been so treated, to have
pointed them out to the imprudent teacher, rather than to have cast the slur,
indiscriminately upon the whole denomination.

But, Sir, we cannot admit the supposed fact to be tr^^. For although it may be
difficult to determine the exact number of deists, shakers, and universalists;
and what their sentiments have heretofore been; yet we think ourselves under as
good advantages to know the state of our churches, as any others can be: for we
have an annual correspondence with them from the district of Main, to the State
of Georgia; and also with our brethren on the other side the Adamtis. Hence we
are consident, that if they principally originate from us, their number must be
small.

But, should it even be allowed, that a greater number of our denomination had
gone over to the above sentiments than from any other, will it hence follow,
that it was because they had once been 'plunged all under water?' Do you
seriously think that one in thirty would acknowledge, that any circumstances
connected with their being immened, led them to embrace those sentiments? It is
doubted whether this would appear upon examination.

You inform us that you suggest this query without any design to reproach. Sir,
your design falls not within our jurisdiction to judge; but the query itself,
we are obliged to view, as a groundless, illiberal reflection. If the cause you
are engaged in cannot be supported by sober facts, founded on rational
evidence, without making use of such feeble auxiliaries as your own fears,
suggestions, and queries, you will not think it strange if we should not become
converts to your sentiments. But you continue your suggestion and ask, Is it
not supposeable, that from the manner in which some have treated the subject of
baptism, these apostates were first led to suppose it a great attainment in
religion, to be plunged all under water? This supposition places the whole of
these apostates, (as you call them) to our account: and that they were led on
to this apostasy, merely, by wrong instructions respecting baptism. But, do you
know this certainly to be the case with any one individual? Or with any
considerable number of them? If not, your supposition must appear in an
unfriendly light, and calculated to mislead the ignorant and inattentive.

You conclude your alarming description, by presenting them to the eye of
imagination, as now sinking in the quicksands which border on final perdition!
Pandora's fatel box could scarce contain more evils, than you attribute to
baptism by immersion! Enlightened reason, however, makes a pause, -- and asks,
Began it be so? Hoary experience instantly comes forward and asserts, that the
fact is known to be otherwife.

O thou condescending Redeemer, is an humble imitation of thy innoceat example,
thus charged with leading the fatal way to infidelity, and final perdition?
Have thou not commanded us to follow thee? and said, "If ye love me keep my
commandments."

Sir, I have now finished my remarks upon your Friendly Letter, and shall only
beg leave to add my sincere wishes for your prosperity in the cause of truth;
and that you may be honored as an instrument in bringing many sons to glory. I
now cheerfully submit the foregoing observations to the judgment of a candid
public. At the same time humbly imploring the Father of mercies so to overrule
the present controversy, that truth may be supported, o^ror detected, and the
ordinances restored to their primitive purity. That we may be agreed, not only
so as to bold occasional communion together, but according to the Apostle's
desire, that we may be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the
same judgment, with respect to the MODE and ORDER of gospel institutions; and
that we may all speak the same thing. Then indeed, what the prophet saw in
vision shall in a gospel sense be accomplished; The envy of Ephraim shall
dep^rt, and the adversaries of Judah shall be ent off: Ephraim shall not envy
Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. ^ai. xi. 13.
With joy we anticipate the happy day, when in a peculiar sense, The LORD shall
be KING over all the earth: in that day there shall be one LORD and his name
one! Zech. xiv. 9.
One faith! One baptism! Ephesians. iv. 5.
His church, one body, and the watchmen, with regard to gospel institutions,
shall see eye to eye; and all disputing cease for ever.

While waiting the arrival of that happy period, it shall be my constant prayer,

"If I am right, thy grace impart,
Me in the right to stay;
If I am wrong, O teach my heart
To sind that better way."
THE END.
ERRATA.
In page 19, 2d paragraph, instead of the three first lines, read as follows:
-- If indeed it be evident from scripture, "That none but such, who are thus
visibly, and in the charitable judgment of the church, believe^," etc.

In page 22, line 16, for "agreeable," read agreably.

In page 45, line 21, for "further," read farther.


