JONATHAN EDWARDS President.


THE MILLENNIUM OR, THE THOUSAND YEARS OF PROSPERITY, PROMISED TO THE CHURCH OF
GOD, IN THE OLD TESTAMENT AND IN THE NEW, SHORTLY TO COMMENCE, AND TO BE
CARRIED ON TO PERFECTION, UNDER THE AUSPICES OF HIM, WHO, IN THE VISION, WAS
PRESENTED TO ST. JOHN. AND I SAW, AND, BEHOLD, A WHITE HORSE; AND HE THAT SAT
ON HIM HAD A BOW; AND A CROWN WAS GIVEN UNTO HIM: AND HE WENT FORTH CONQUERING
AND TO CONQUER.

We are journeying unto the place, of which the Lord said, I will give it you:
come thou with us, and we will do thee good, for the Lord has spoken good
concerning Israel.

MOSES. ELIZABETH TOWN: PRINTED BY SHEPARD KOLLOCK -- 1794.

PREFACE.
IF the prophetic parts of the oracles of God, form what may be styled "a
sacred Calendar;" or, "an Almanac of Prophecy," it is with the greatest
propriety, that the Watchmen of Zion are disposed, now and then, to ^^^^ult
this sacred calendar, in view of determining the watch of the night, and, of
consequence, how long before the arrival of the long-wished-for promised day.
From premises which the sacred scriptures afford, calculations may, with a good
degree of precision, be made, respecting the time of the accomplishment of the
prophecies which relate to the future prosperity of the Zion of God. The
redemption of the church of God from the bondage of Papal Babylon, as well as
from the general dominion of the Powers of Darkness, is a glorious and
animating subject of prophecy. The Lord has spoken, and the decree shall be
fulfilled. -- If, ^n ancient time, the people of God believed what the Lord had
spoken respecting the redemption of his people; if, from the sacred calendar,
they discovered the time of the promised redemption -- prayed for, and actually
saw the fulfillment of the object of their hopes, in temporal and in spiritual
deliverances; what forbids that, in this day of general captivity, the prophets
of the Lord should look with the same faith and prayer for the fulfillment of
those promises which respect the spiritual deliverance of the Christian Church,
both from the bondage of Babylon, and from the thraldom of Satan? -- And more
especially, as we evidently see marks of the divine progress in this work, in
his present judgments among the nations of the earth, and particularly on
mystical Babylon; which all allow, are but a little to precede the glorious
redemption and prosperity of the Church in the Millennial-day. -- " One
circumstance, says Dr. Hallifax, Hallifax's Sermon, preached at Bishop
Warburton's Lecture, (...), London (...) 96, pu^^^^hed 1776.
ought not to be passed by unnoticed -- namely, the menaces of certain
vengeance to be hereafter inflicted on the enemies of the true religion,
intimated by the destruction of the body of the fourth beast; and subsequent to
that the promise of the universal establishment of the reign of Christ, when
the stone cut out of the mountain without hands, shall strike and break to
pieces the image on its sect; and become a great mountain, and fill the whole
earth. This part of the prophecies is yet unfulfilled; nor is it for us to
ascertain the manner in which so important a revolution, in the religious
world, will be effected: The use intended by the observation here is, from the
symptoms of decline which are now discernible in the system of the Papal power,
to point out to you the presumption that arises in favor of the truth of the
prophetical denunciations, and from the concussions which have already shook
the tottering throne of superstition, to learn to expect, in God's good time,
its full and final demolition."

And if this celebrated Author, in his day, thought there was ground to use the
following language, in view of prophecies already fulfilled, and events then
existing, with how much nore reason may we confidently adopt it now, and say,
that, "under the auspices of such a guide we may hope to advance, securely, in
our projected work; and to have the pleasure of those, who, after long
traveling in a dreary night, perceive, at last, the darkness to diminish, and
the reddening streaks of the morning, betokening to them, that the day is at
hand?" --

The object in publishing Dr. Bellamy's discourse is to establish the doctrine
of the Millennium as to matter of fact: and by publishing President Edwards 's
"Humble Attempt to promote explicit Agreement and visible Union in Prayer;" it
is hoped attention will be excited to the use of those means which God has
ordained to be used in view of a gracious fulfillment of every promise made to
his Church and to his People. Thus says the Lord, I will yet for this be
enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them.

The design of the third and last discourse is to support the objects of the
two former, by an appeal to existing facts, to the demonstration of present
events. By these it appears, that what Dr. Hallifax termed "the reddening
streaks of the morning," have become entitled to the style of the dawn, if not
to the morning of the day. -- How does our faith grow -- our confidence
increase, and our joyful hearts exult at the sight, or rather at the sound of
the stately steppings of our God in the present revolutions of his providence,
fulfilling the purposes of his great decree! -- From what we observe to have,
already, taken place, may we not confidently anticipate all that is to come? --
The testimony of Jesus, says the angel to St. John, is a spirit of prophecy.
-- If, in a spirit of prophecy, the Great Head of the Church has spoken of
things to come, to strengthen the faith, and to cheer the hope of his
followers, it cannot be denied, but our time and talents are well employed,
whilst, in study, with meekness and prayer, we labor to understand and to
possess the blessings he has so graciously prepared, and so abundantly
promised to his Church.

If, in the day in which President Edwards lived, it was thought time for the
Zion of God to go into labor, in view of the approach of the time of promised
redemption to Israel, with how much more courage and confidence may the Church
of God now proceed in the arduous, yet noble and interesting work?

The arguments which his invaluable tract suggests for explicit Agreement and
visible Union of God's People in extraordinary Prayer, for the Revival of
Religion, and the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom on Earth, pursuant to
Scripture-promises and Prophecies, concerning the LAST TIME, are as applicable
to the state of the Church, and of the world, now, as they were then, and the
encouragement, from present circumstances, much more animating.

If any individual Christian, any society of Christian People, or any Minister,
or association of Ministers, should be so far impressed with the propriety of a
present compliance with what President Edwards labored to bring about in his
day, as to desire that measures should be taken for the accomplishment of the
object of his work, and express a willingness to aid in laying a foundation for
a general and united exertion in prayer throughout all the Christian Churches
in our land; the Editor pledges his whole heart in aid to any such proposal,
and would think himself highly favored by any communications, from any quarter,
on the sublime and animating subject.

That the Great Head of the Church would graciously take this humble attempt to
the honor of his name, and for the interests of his Zion, under his holy
protection, and prosper, and do his own blessed will in all things which it
strives to accomplish, is the fervent prayer of one, who knows no higher object
of present or future ambition, than to approve himself, and to be approved of
his Lord and Master, as an industrious h^wer of wood, and drawer of water for
the church of God.

DAVID AUSTIN.
ELIZABETH TOWN, May 1, 1794.
CONTENTS.
PART I. A Discourse by Reverend the Dr. Bellamy, founded on Revelation XX. 1,
2, 3. And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
bottomless pit, etc.
PAGE. 9. The Scriptures, by their Promises and Prophecies of good Things to
come, are well calculated to keep alive the Faith of God's People in the Day of
Trial. PAGE. 21. A Summary of Promises respecting the Increase of the
Redeemer's Kingdom. PAGE. 23. When shall these Things be? PAGE. 25. From the
Faithfulness of God we have no Cause to doubt the Fulfillment of his gracious
Promises to his People. PAGE. 34. Human Mistakes, a^ to Time, no Bar in the Way
of the final Event. PAGE. 36. Because Christ once styled his People a little
Flock, it is no Sign they will always appear so. PAGE. 42. Seventeen Thousand
may be saved to one Soul finally lost. PAGE. 44. God knows best when to bring
these Things to pass. PAGE. 45. A Veteran in the Service of God, animating the
Followers of the Lamb. PAGE. 48. Christ loves to have his Ministers and People
faithful. PAGE. 49. As David gathered Materials for the Temple, to be built in
Solomon's Day, so we are to do our Endeavor to favor the great Building of God.
PART II. A Treatise by the late learned and highly esteemed President Edwards,
entitled, "An Humble Attempt to promote explicit Agreement and visible Union of
God's People in extraordinary Prayer. for the Revival of Religion, and the
Advancement of Christ's Kingdom on Earth, pursuant to Scripture-promises and
Prophecies concerning the last Time" -- founded on Zechariah viii. 20, 21, 22.
Thus says the Lord of Hos^s, It shall yet come to pass, that there shall come
people, and the inhabitants of many cities: -- And the inhabitants of one city
shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to
seek the Lord of Hosts: I will go also. Yea, many people and strong nations
shall come to seek the Lord of Hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord.
PAGE. 63. Text is opened, and Union in Prayer recommended. PAGE. 81. An
Account of the Concert for Prayer. PAGE. 90. A Memorial from Scotland.
Motives to a Compliance with what is proposed in the Memorial.
PAGE. 97. The Latter-Day Glory not yet accomplished. PAGE. 115. The great
Glory of the latter Day. PAGE. 122. The Holy Spirit the Sum of Christ's
Purchase. PAGE. 127. The latter Day, eminently the Day of Salvation. PAGE. 130.
How the Creation travaileth in Pain for that Day. PAGE. 136. Scripture
Precepts, Encouragements and Examples of Prayer for Christ's Kingdom. PAGE.
156. Dispensations of Providence at this Day, present with many Motives to
Prayer for it. PAGE. 171. The Beauty and good Tendency of uniting in such
Prayer. PAGE. 176. The particular and great Encouragement in the Word of God to
express Agreement in Prayer.
Objections answered.
PAGE. 179. No Superstition in the Case. PAGE. 185. The Concert not whimsical.
PAGE. 198. The Concert not Pharisaical. PAGE. 201. The slaying of the Witnesses
considered. PAGE. 237. The Fall of Antichrist approaching. PAGE. 241. The Time
not known beforehand. PAGE. 246. The Time not at a very great Distance. PAGE.
266. His Fall will be gradual. PAGE. 276. Good reason to hope that that Work of
God's Spirit will soon begin, which will, in its Progress, overthrow Antichrist
and Satan's Kingdom on Earth. PAGE. Ibid. The sixth Vial probably now in
fulfilling. PAGE. 296. Antichrist's Ruin speedily follows it. PAGE. 304.
However if otherwise, yet our Prayer will not be in vain. PAGE. 305. Such an
Agreement in Prayer no new Thing. PAGE. 305. Such an Agreement in Prayer no new
Thing. The Duty of agreeing to pray no new Duty. The like practiced in 1712,
with the wonderful Consequence. PAGE. 311. The Conclusion.
PART III. A Discourse by the Reverend Mr. Austin, entitled -- The Downfall of
MYSTICAL BABYLON; or, a Key to the Providence of God in the political
Operations of 1793-4 -- founded on Revelation xviii. 20. Rejoice over her thou
heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God has avenged you on ^er.
PAGE. 328. All Holy Beings are called upon to rejoice in the Calamities which
God brings on his and their Enemies. PAGE. 330. Plan of the Discourse. PAGE.
331. Prophetic Figures point us to Papal Rome, as the Object of the divine
Decree. PAGE. 336. A Parallel run between ancient Heathenish, and modern
Antichristian Rome. PAGE. 337. Sketch of the awful Persecutions of Papal Rome,
in a note. PAGE. 344. The two Witnesses. PAGE. 350. The present is the Time of
the slaying of the Witnesses, and affords a ^^y to the Cause of the present
Dearth of Reliligion in ma^y Parts of the Christian Church. PAGE. 361. The
Prophecies of Daniel, of St. Paul, and of St. John respecting Babylon brought
to a Point. PAGE. 365. Of the Rise, Continuance, and probable Destruction of
this antichristian Power. PAGE. 371. Causes of this Disaster. PAGE. 375. Means
by which it shall be brought about. PAGE. 388. The little Stone smiting the
Image, and becoming itself a great Mountain. PAGE. 393. Two great Revolutions
to usher in the Latter-Day Glory; outward and political -- inward and
spiritual. PAGE. 395. The foundation of universal Joy in the Prospect. PAGE.
401. ^^e Time of the Falling of the Stars of Heaven is come. PAGE. 403. ^he
Doctrine of the Millennium is true. PAGE. 405. Duty of Ministers and Churches.
PAGE. 408. The Protestant Dragon. PAGE. 413. The Her^ of America on his War to
demolish the Usurpations of Protestant, Papal and Pagan Rome. PAGE. 415. The
Eagle and her ^tation. PAGE. 416. The Dragon of D^^^ons, and his efforts
against the Church of God. PAGE. 417. Address to an In^^^^^. PAGE. 421. -- to
Men of understanding. PAGE. 421. Address to the Ambitious. -- to the Miser. --
to the Man of Business. PAGE. 422. -- to the Stupid and Obstinate. -- to the
Elevated and Polite. Hopes from the Example and Influence of the Fair. PAGE.
423. The Fair Penitent led by a Guardian Angel to the Throne of Grace.
ERRATUM -- Page 344, line 5, after the word supposed, add, have prophesied in
sackcloth.

THE MILLENNIUM. BY JOSEPH BELLAMY, A. M. MINISTER OF THE GOSPEL AT BETHLEM.
[First published at Boston in 1758.]
REVELATION XX. 1, 2, 3. And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the
key of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand. And he laid hold on
the dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, and bound him a
thousand years. And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set
a seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more, till the thousand
years should be fulfilled.


IN a great variety of respects the Bible is the most remarkable book in the
world. In it we have God's moral character clearly exhibited to view, by a
history of his conduct, as moral governor of the world, from the beginning; and
the nature of fallen man painted to the life, by a history of their behavior
for four thousand years. In it we have opened the glorious and astonishing
method that has been entered upon to disappoint all Satan's designs, by the
interposition of the Son of God; and are informed of his birth, life, death,
resurrection, ascension and exaltation, and of the glorious designs he has in
view. And the whole is so contrived as to be admirably suited to all the
circumstances and needs of a good man, that, as it was designed to be the good
man's book, in a peculiar sense, so it is perfectly suited to his case. It is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all
good works.

That sincere concern for the cause of truth and virtue, for the honor of God
and interest of true religion, which is peculiar to a good man, whose character
it is to love Christ above father and mother, wife and children, houses and
lands, yea, better than his own life, must naturally subject him to a peculiar
kind of solicitude; even as a child, of a truly filial spirit, is pained when
it goes ill with his father's family, to whose interest he is closely attached,
and has a whole system of inward sensations that a stranger intermeddles not
with. The Bible, the good man's book, is, therefore, wisely adapted to ease the
good man's pained heart, and afford consolation in this interesting and most
important point, as it gives the strongest assurances that the cause of virtue
shall finally prevail.

How insupportable must the grief of the pious Jews have been, sitting on the
sides of the rivers of Babylon? There we sat down, say they, yea, we wept when
we remembered Zion. And on the willows they hung their harps, nor could any
thing divert their minds. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand
forget her cunning! If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof
of my mouth! -- How insupportable, I say, must their grief have been, while
their glorious holy temple, and their holy city, the place of all their sacred
solemnities, were lying desolate, and God's people in captivity, had it not
been for that promise, so often repeated, that after seventy years God would
visit them, and cause them to return to their own land. God knew beforehand
the anguish which would be apt to fill their hearts, the sinking
discouragements, and all the train of dark and gloomy thoughts they would be
incident to, and beforehand provided a remedy. Yea, no sooner had he denounced
their doom in the xxxixth chapter of Isaiah, but immediately in the next
chapter, and for ten or twenty chapters together, does he provide for their
support. Comfort ye, comfort ye, my people; speak comfortably to Jerusalem,
etc. etc.

So, how insupportable would have been the grief of the church of Christ,
through the long, dark, cruel reign of mystical Babylon, while they beheld
error and wickedness universally prevail, Satan getting his will in almost
every thing, and, to appearance, no signs of better times, but all things
wearing a dreadful aspect before their eyes: -- How great their grief? How
sinking their discouragements? How almost insuperable their temptations to
apostatize, and forsake a cause that heaven seemed to forsake, had not the day
of deliverance been expressly foretold, and the glory that should follow opened
to view by the spirit of prophesy? But in a firm belief that the cause they
were engaged in, and for which they spilt their blood, would finally prevail,
and prevail in this world, where they then beheld Satan reigning and
triumphing; I say, in a firm belief of this, the whole army fo martyrs could
march on to battle courageously, willing to sacrifice their lives in the cause,
not doubting of final victory, although they themselves must fall in the field.

Indeed, were the salvation of his own soul the only thing the good man had in
view, he would naturally be quite easy upon a full assurance that this was
secured. So, had Moses cared for nothing but the welfare of himself and of his
posterity, he might have been satisfied, while the whole (...) ^egation of
Israel were destroyed, if he might becaome a great nation, and that without any
solicitude for the honor of the great name of the God of Israel; yea, although
the idolatrous nations round about were fully established in the belief of the
divinity of their idols, and brought to look upon the God of the Hebrews with
ever so great contempt by the means. But, attached as he was to the honor of
the God of Israel, nothing could give him satisfaction, but a prospect that
that would be secure. The welfare of himself and of his family was of no
importance in his esteem, compared with this. See Exodus xxxii.

It must, therefore, be remembered, that, as the Son of God lest his father's
bosom, and the realms of light and glory, and expired on the cross in the
utmost visible contempt, that he might spoil principalities and powers, bruise
the serpent's head, destroy the works of the Devil, so his true disciples have
imbibed a measure of the same spirit, and, as volunteers enlisted under his
banner, have the same thing in view; they long for the destruction of Satan's
kingdom, and these petitions are the genuine language of their hearts; Our
Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy will be
done on earth as it is in heaven Nor can the salvation of their own souls,
although ever so safely secured, satisfy their minds, without a clear view and
fair prospect of Christ's final victory over all his enemies: But if our great
GENERAL, who has sacrificed his life in the cause, may but at last obtain a
complete victory, notwithstanding all the present dark appearances, this is
enough," says the Christian Soldier; I am willing to risque all in his service,
and die in the battle too. But if Satan were always to carry the day, Oh, who
could live under the thought!

This having been the temper of good men, more or less, even from the early
ages of the world, and through all successive generations to this day, they
have evidently wanted a peculiar support, which the rest of mankind stood in no
need of, to carry them comfortably through such a long scene of darkness;
wickedness prevailing, God dishonored, Satan triumping, the world perishing,
the true church of God more generally in sackcloth. And accordingly the final
victory of the cause of truth and virtue was intimated in the very first
promise made to fallen man; and, from time to time, God repeated this
comfortable prediction to his church and people; and finally made it the chief
subject of the last book of holy Scripture he ordered to be wrote for the use
of his church.

Now let us take a brief view of the whole series of these divine predictions,
from the beginning of the world, even down to this in our text, contained in
one of the last chapters in the Bible, that we may see what full evidence there
is of this truth, and so what abundant cause for consolation to all the people
of God.

1. Immediately after the fall, when the serpent, even the Old Serpent the
Devil, had just seduced mankind to revolt from God; and had, to all appearance,
laid this whole world in perpetual ruin, even in the depths of this midnight
darkness, a ray of light shone down from heaven -- The seed of the woman shall
bruise the serpent's head. As if God had said, I see the scheme that Satan has
laid to ruin the world, and establish his impious, malicious cause: I see it,
and am determined to defeat it. The feebler woman he has over-matched, but her
almighty seed shall conquer him, and as effectually subdue him, and prevent all
future mischief by him, as a serpent is subdued and incapacitated for further
mischief when his head is crushed to pieces, under the indignant heel of one
determined on his death. This was a complete doom, indeed, denounced against
Satan, at the head of the kingdom of darkness. And it fully implied, that the
cause of light, truth and righteousness, should finally obtain a complete
victory.

2. After this gracious and glorious promise had been the chief foundation of
all the hopes of God's people for two thousand years, God was pleased to point
out the particular family from whence this mighty deliverer should spring, and
to intimate what a universal blessing he should be to all the nations of the
earth. And in thy SEED shall ALL the families of the earth be blessed, said God
to Abraham; which again plainly supposed, that the cause of truth and
righteousness, notwithstanding the dark state the world then was in, all
sinking fast into idolatry, and would for many ages be in, buried in heathenish
darkness, should yet, in due time, universally prevail over the whole earth.
For in thy SEED shall ALL the families of the earth be blessed. This same
promise was repeated again and again to Abraham, and afterward to Isaac and to
Jacob.

3. Hitherto God had supported his peoples' hopes chiefly with promises, with
verbal predictions; but from the days of Moses to the days of Solomon king of
Israel, to assist his peoples' faith, God did, besides repeated promises of the
same thing, by a great variety of wonderful works, shadow forth the glorious
day; and, at the same time, show that he had sufficient wisdom and power to
accomplish the greatest designs. That his people might be convinced that he
could easily bring to pass, for the good of his church, whatsoever seemed good
in his sight.

Israel, in the Egyptian bondage, were a designed type of a fallen world, under
the dominion and tyranny of Satan; nor was Pharaoh more loath to let Israel go,
than Satan is to have his subjects desert him, and his kingdom go to ruin; but
notwithstanding all the seeming impossibilities in the way of Israel's
deliverance, infinite wisdom knew how to accomplish the divine designs. God
could even cause a member of Pharaoh's family to educate one to be an
instrument of this designed deliverance. And, in due time, behold all the
armies of Israel march forth from the land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage; and Pharaoh, and his chariots, and all his host, lie buried in the Red
Sea! So easily can God bring forth his people, even out of the antichristian
kingdom, which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt; and, if he pleases, raise
up the instruments of this glorious work, even in the court of Rome.

And when the name of the true God was almost forgotten through all the earth,
and the Devil worshipped in his room, in idols of various names, through all
the nations, God knew how to make his name known, and to cause his fame to
spread abroad, and fill the whole earth with his glory, by wonders wrought in
the land of Ham; by descending on Mount Sinai; by leading the armies of Israel
forty years in the wilderness, in a pillar of cloud by day, and of fire by
night, giving them bread from heaven and water out of the flinty rock; dividing
Jordan; delivering up one and thirty idolatrous kings to the sword of Joshua;
raising up judges, one after another, in a miraculous manner, to deliver his
people, until the days of David and Solomon, types of Christ. -- Of David who,
Messiah-like, subdued the enemies of Israel all around; of Solomon, who built
the Holy Temple, and filled Jerusalem with riches and glory. -- He who has
done all these things, can easily accomplish all the designs of his heart,
preserve his church, raise up deliverance, break to pieces the kingdoms of the
earth for her sake, make truth victorious, and set up the New-Jerusalem in all
her spiritual glory, build up his church as a glorious Holy Temple, and set the
Son of David upon the Throne; by whose hands Satan, and all the powers of
darkness, shall be subdued, chained, sealed up in the bottomless pit, as much
afraid, and as much unable, to attempt any mischief, as the subdued nations
around Israel were in the very height of David's power.

But when shall the Son of David reign, and the church have rest? When shall
the cause of truth and righteousness thus prevail? Perhaps the very time was
designed to be shadowed forth in the law of Moses, in the institution of their
holy days. The seventh day, said God, who always had this glorious season of
rest in view -- "The seventh day shall be a Sabbath of Rest, the seventh month
shall be full of holy day, the seventh year shall be a year of rest." -- So,
perhaps, after six thousand years are spent in labor and sorrow by the church
of God, the seven thousandth shall be a season of spiritual rest and joy, an
holy sabbath to the Lord. -- And as God the Creator was six days in forming a
confused chaos into a beautiful world, and rested the seventh; so God the
Redeemer, after six thousand years labor in the work of the new creation, may
rest on the seventh, and then proclaim a general liberty to an enslaved world,
and grant a general pardon to a guilty race; as in the year of jubilee, among
the Jews, every enslaved Jew was set at liberty, and the debts of all the
indebted were cancelled.

4. These things, thus shadowed forth in types, were also expressly declared by
the mouths of the ancient prophets, from the days of David and forward, to the
end of that dispensation; and the same things are hinted here and there in the
New Testament, and largely opened to view in the Revelation of St. John. So
that both the Old and New Testaments join to raise in us, who live in these
ages, the highest assurance that it is God's design to give his Son the Heathen
for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession.
For all kings shall bow down before him and all nations shall serve him. And
the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the
mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow
unto it. They shall beat their swords into plough-shears and their spears into
pruning hooks, and learn war no more. For the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea. A nation shall be born in a
day. All thy people shall be righteous. They shall all know the Lord, from the
least to the greatest. And holiness to the Lord shall be written on every
thing. Kings shall become nursing fathers, and queens nursing mothers; and
there shall be nothing to hurt or offend. The inhabitants shall ^et [so much
as] say I am sick. And this kingdom shall fill the whole earth. And all nations
and languages shall serve him. And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness
of the kingdom under the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the
saints of the Most High God; and the Jews shall be called in, and the fullness
of the Gentiles. For the Gospel shall be preached to every nation, and kindred,
and tongue, and people. And Satan shall be bound, and Christ shall reign on
earth a thousand years. Satan shall be bound, etc. "The church of Christ shall
enjoy purity of religion in peace, without any disturbance from those old
enemies of mankind, working in the children of disobedience." Daubuz on the
Place. "And this seems to imply, that all shall be converted -- However, if
there be any that remain unconverted, they will, during the imprisonment of
Satan, be in so small a number, and so feeble in comparison of the true
Christians, that they shall neither dare, nor be able to disturb the peace of
Christ's kingdom." Lowman on the Place.

A spirit of strict piety shall rise so high, and so universally prevail, that
it shall be as though all the martyrs of former ages were risen from the dead,
and appeared upon the stage all at once. This seems to be the sense of those
words in Rev. xx. 4. The martyrs are said to rise from the dead and reign with
Christ a thousand years, much in the same sense as John the Baptist is called
Elias, viz. because he was a man so nearly resembling that celebrated prophet.
See Lowman on the Place.


And as surely as the Jews were delivered out of the Babylonish captivity, and
Babylon itself destroyed, even so surely shall all these things be accomplished
in their time; and mystical Babylon shall sink as a millstone into the sea, and
shall be found no more at all.

5. But when shall these things be? I answer, in the first place, it is plain,
as yet they have not been; these great things have not been accomplished. They
were not accomplished when the Jews were brought out of their Babylonish
captivity; for, from thence to the coming of Christ, they never were in so
flourishing a state as they had been before. They were not accomplished in the
apostolic age; for St. John, when most, if not all, of the other apostles were
dead, spoke of these things, in the Revelation, as yet to come to pass. They
were not accomplished in the three first centuries, for that was almost one
continued scene of blood. They were not accomplished in the days of Constantine
the Great; for it is since then that the Man of Sin has been revealed. Nor are
they accomplished to this day; for Satan is still walking to and fro through
the earth, and going up and down therein: Babylon is not fallen; the Jews are
not called, nor is the fullness of the Gentiles come in, but the greatest part
of the earth, to this day, sit in heathenish darkness.

When then shall they be accomplished? Not till the holy city has been trodden
under foot forty and two months. Not till the witnesses have prophesied a
thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth. And not till
the woman has been in the wilderness a time, and times, and half a time. Now a
time, and times, and half a time, i. e. three years and a half is equal to
forty-two months, which is equal to one thousand two hundred and sixty days,
which doubtless means one thousand two hundred and sixty years, a day for a
year; as the event has proved, was the case in the prophecy of Daniel, who
declared it to be seventy weeks, from the going forth of the commandment to
build Jerusalem to the death of Christ; for it proved to be four hundred and
ninety years, which is seven times seventy, a day for a year. Dan. ix. 24.

So that there is no difficulty in determining the downfall of Antichrist, but
what arises from the uncertainty we are at when to date the beginning of his
rise and reign. -- The Bishops of Rome were some hundred years rising gradually
from the honest character of a scripture-bishop to the grand title of UNIVERSAL
POPE, which was obtained, A. D. six hundred and six. And it was a long time
from this before they got to the height of their grandeur, and the Pope was
constituted a TEMPORAL PRINCE, which was not till A. D. seven hundred and
fifty-six.* And perhaps he may fall as gradually as he rose. And as now he has
been falling two hundred and forty years, even ever since the beginning of the
REFORMATION, so we may rationally expect he will continue to fall till BABYLON
sinks AS A MILLSTONE INTO THE SEA. And then the mountains and the hills shall
break forth into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their
hands. And all the hosts of heaven, as loud as thunder, shall say, Hallelujah!
For the Lord God omnipotent reigns. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give
honor to him; for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made
herself ready.

And thus we have taken a brief view of the scripture-evidence, that the cause
of truth and righteousness will finally become gloriously victorious.

6. Nor is there the least reason to doubt the accomplishment of these things;
for God (...)
in all times past has been faithful to his word, and is evidently sufficiently
engaged in this affair -- knows how, and can easily accomplish it, and it will
be much to the honor of his great name to do it.

God has been faithful to his promises to his church from the beginning of the
world. To all human appearance, it was a very unlikely thing that the Hebrews,
enslaved in Egypt, under Pharaoh, a very powerful monarch, and sunk down into
idolatry, and very low-spirited, should arise and go forth with all their
flocks and herds, and march through the wilderness, and conquer the seven
nations of Canaan, and possess their land. And so it was, to all human
appearance, equally unlikely, that the Jews in Babylon should ever return to
their own land. -- But God had promised in both cases, and God performed. And
an event more surprising than either of these, yea, the most ^^onishing that
could have happened, has also come to pass, just as God had said. -- (...)
promised SEED ha^ been born, and the ^er^e^, has bru^sed hi heel; and methinks
n^^^or only God's faithfulness but even ^he nature of the case i^self, should
lead us (...) shall ^or^^^ h^s heel.

For after God has appeared to be so infinitely engaged to destroy the works of
the Devil, as to give his only begotten Son, it can surely never once be
imagined that he wants sufficient resolution to carry him through what yet
remains to be done.

And he who could send Pharaoh's daughter to take up Moses, when an infant, out
of his basket of bulrushes, and educate him in Pharaoh's court, that he might
be skilled in all the arts of government; and when he had spent forty years in
this situation banish him into the land of Midian, that in the solitary life of
a shepherd for another forty years, he might attain to the meekest man on
earth, that he might, by both, be thoroughly qualified for the work designed
him; and he, who could take David from feeding his father's sheep, and, after a
course of trials, so exceeding necessary to prepare frail man for high honors
and great usefulness, exalt him to the throne of Israel, so thoroughly
furnished to head their armies and subdue their foes, advance their external
grandeur, and put great honor upon their religion; and he, who could take
Daniel, one of the Jewish captives in Babylon, and raise him to such high honor
and great authority, to be a father to his people through their seventy ye^^^
captivity, and by his means, perhaps, influence Cyrus so generously to release
them, and assist them in their return: As Bariel understood the prophecies of
J^remiah, which had determined the time of the captivity to be seventy years,
Dan. ix. 2. and had his heart so much in the affair of their return, as to set
(...) face to seek the L^^d by (...) and prayer, verse 3; and being the chief
man in the kingdom, must have free access to Cyrus, ^ian, vi. so nothing could
be more natural than to show him an ancient Jewish prophecy, wherein he was
mentioned by name, near two hundred years ago, and pointed out as the person
who was to let go the Jewish (...), ^^ild Jerusalem, ^ad lay the foundation of
the ten (...) Is^^^ v. 28. and chap. xlv. 1^3. To which Cyrus no d^^^ (...) in
his (...). E^^^ 2.3, 4. Thus says Cyrus (...) of Pers^^^, The Lord God of
(...) ^^^ath given (...) brush him (...) use in Jeruslem, which i^ in (...).
W^^^ (...)
and finally, he, who could take a number of poor illiterate fishermen, and the
persecuting Saul, and by them lay the foundation of the Christian church, in
spite of the united opposition of earth and hell; and after their death cause
the Christian church to live through, yea, at last to triumph over the ten
bloody persecutions, and even conquer the Roman empire; and that which is still
more wonderful, to subsist to this day, notwithstanding all the subtle and
cruel methods which have, for so many hundred years, been taken by Antichrist
to extirpate Christianity out of the world; I say, he who could do these
things, cannot be at a loss for means, or want power to effect the glorious
things foretold, which yet remain to be accomplished.

And what if mankind are ever so estranged from God? And what if they are ever
so averse to a reconciliation? And what if Satan reigns in the courts of
princes, in the councils of the clergy, as well as in the cottages of the poor?
And what if even the whole world in a manner lies in wickedness? So that a
g^^eral conflagration might rather be exp^cted, as it is so eminently deserved
-- are these things any bar in the way?

What if mankind have abused divine grace from the beginning of the world? What
if they have murdered his prophets, his Son, and his apostles? What if they
have resisted and grieved the Holy Spirit, and perverted the doctrines, and
gone counter to the precepts of his holy word? Yea, what if it appears that
mankind are really on Satan's side? And this, after all the kind methods God
has taken to reclaim a guilty world, so that even the best man on earth, or the
kindest angel in heaven might be discouraged, totally and finally discouraged,
and think it never worth while to take any more pains with such a perverse
race, but that it were more suitable to the rules of good government to resign
them to destruction! -- Are any, or all these things together, a sufficient bar
to the accomplishment of God's designs, whose goodness is absolutely infinite?
Can they be so, after the Son of God has been offered as a sacrifice of
atonement, to secure the honor of the divine government, and open a way for
the honorable exercise of his grace? -- What! after the Messiah has been
exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance and remission of sins?
-- And after all power and authority in heaven and earth is given into his
hands, on purpose to destroy the kingdom of Satan, and bring every nation,
kindred and tongue, to bow the knee to God! Yea, when the infinitely wise
Governor of the world has before determined to permit the wickedness of mankind
to come out and stand in so glaring a light, and to suffer Satan so long to
practice and prosper, to this very purpose, that his power, wisdom and grace,
might be the more effectually and the more gloriously displayed, in the
accomplishment of all his glorious designs?

Instead of being discouraged, from a view of the past, or the present state of
the world, as without the light of divine revelation we should naturally have
been, methinks now, viewing all things in the light of holy scripture, it must
be perfectly rational to conclude, that all these things are only preparatory,
as an introduction to the glorious day: even, as all the cruel bondage of
Israel in Egypt, and all the haughty conduct of Pharaoh, were but preparatory
as an introduction to the glorious event that God had then in his eye. And what
unspeakable honor will redound to God most High, if after all the vile conduct
of this apostate world, and notwithstanding all their ill-desert; and after all
the subtle methods Satan has taken to make his kingdom strong; I say, what
unspeakable honor will redound to God most High, if, after all this, he should
accomplish his glorious designs? And when things have been ripening these five
or six thousand years, and are now so nearly every way prepared for God, to get
himself a great name in the total destruction of Satan's kingdom, can we once
imagine, that God will let the opportunity ilip? Or rather, ought we not firmly
to believe, that when every thing is quite ripe, then God will arise, make bare
his arm, and fill the whole world with his glory?

Especially, considering that, as things stand, the honor of all his glorious
perfections lies at stake; for ever since the Almighty gave out the word, that
the SEED of the woman should bruise the serpent's head, even from that very
day, that Old Serpent, with all his subtilty, has employed his whole power to
defeat the divine designs, maintain his kingdom in the world, and escape the
dreadful blow. He stirred up Cain to kill his brother, and never ceased till
the whole earth was filled with violence, which brought on the general deluge;
and after the flood, he was industrious to divert mankind from the knowledge
and worship of the true God, and to establish idolatry and the worship of the
Devil, in all the kingdoms of the earth; and since Christianity appeared, he
has turned himself into every shape to defeat the gracious designs of the
gospel, and has prevailed and reigned above a thousand years, at the head of
the grand antichristian apostasy; and should the Almighty suffer him to go on
and prosper, and finally prevail, what would become of his own great name? and
how great would be their triumph in the infernal regions, to think that in
spite of God and of his Son, from the beginning to the end of the world, they
have held out in a constant war, kept the field, and at last come off
victorious? -- Wherefore, as when God repeats the wonderful works which he had
done for Israel in the days of old, in the xxth chapter of Ezekiel, he
constantly says, I wrought for mine own great name. So here, in this case, will
he do it again, and that in the most eminent manner; as it is written, The zeal
of the Lord of Hosts will perform this.

So that, in a word, if almighty power and infinite wisdom, at the head of the
universe, infinitely engaged, are a sufficient match for the guilty, impotent
powers of darkness, then we may depend upon it, Satan will meet with an
overthrow, as notable as did Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea; -- and as
proud Babylon, once the mistress of kingdoms, is now no more, so mystical
Babylon shall sink as a millstone in the sea, and rise no more for ever. And,

7. Whatever mistakes the Jewish Rabbis might fall into, in their
interpretation of Daniel's seventy weeks, and in their attempts to fix the
precise time of the Messiah's coming; and whatever mistaken notions any of them
had about the nature of his kingdom, as though it was to be of this world, and
he to appear in all earthly grandeur; and although his coming, to some, might
seem to be so long delayed, that they began to give up all hopes of it, and to
contrive some other meaning to all the ancient prophecies, or even to call in
question the inspiration of the prophets; yet neither the mistakes of some, nor
the infidelity of others, at all altered the case. Days, and months, and years
hastened along, and one revolution among the kingdoms of the earth followed
upon another, till the fullness of time was come, till all things were ripe, and
then, behold, the Messiah was born. Even so it shall be now.

Whatever mistakes Christian Divines may fall into, in their interpretation of
six hundred and sixty-six, the number of the beast; or in their endeavors to
fix the precise time when the one thousand two hundred and sixty years of
Antichrist's reign shall begin and end; or whatever wrong notions some have
had, or may have about the nature of the Millennium, as though Christ was to
reign personally on earth; and if some, mean while, begin to think, that all
things will go on as they have done, and to conclude, that the expectation of
these glorious days, which has prevailed in the Christian Church from the
beginning, is merely a groundless fancy: Yet none of these things will at all
alter the case. Days, and months, and years will hasten along, and one
revolution, among the kingdoms of the earth, follow upon another, until the
fullness of time is come -- till all things are ripe for the event; and then the
ministers of Christ will accomplish in reality, what St. John saw in his
visions: -- I saw an angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting
gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and
kindred, and tongue and people. And then shall it come to pass that the veil of
ignorance, which has so long spread over all nations, shall be destroyed; and
knowledge shall so greatly increase, that it shall be (...) though the light of
the moon were as the light of the sun, and ^^e light of the sun sevenfold;
until the knowledge of the Lord cover the earth as the waters do the sea; and
then there shall be nothing to hurt or offend in all God's holy mountain; for
babylon shall fall, Satan be bound, and Christ will reign, and truth and
righteousness universally prevail a thousand years.

REMARKS AND INFERENCES.
1. When, therefore, our Savior, in the days of his flesh, denominated his
followers a little flock, from the smallness of their number, he had no design
to teach us that this would always be the case; for although it was very true,
that his flock was at that time a little flock, yet the day was coming, when
that little leaven should leaven the whole lump, and the stone cut out without
hands should become a great mountain, and fill the whole earth. So, although it
was a saying very applicable, not only to our Savior's day, but to most other
periods of the church, that many are called, and few are chosen; yet it does
not hence follow, that this will be the case, when a nation shall be born in a
day, and all the people shall be righteous. -- And although it has commonly
been so, that of the MANY who have sought to enter in at the strait gate, but
FEW have been able, and the GENERALITY have, from age to age, gone in the broad
way, which leads down to destruction; yet it shall be quite otherwise, when
Satan is bound, that he may deceive the nations no more; and when all shall
know the Lord, from the least to the greatest, when the kingdom, and the
greatness of the kingdom, under the whole heavens, shall be given to the people
of the saints of the Most High. For it is very plain, that these, and such like
expressions used by our Savior, which were applicable to the then times, and
to most other periods, when the number of true converts has been comparatively
very small, were never designed to be applicable to that glorious period yet to
come, which is to be the grand harvest time, when the Jews, who are, to this
day, for that very purpose, no doubt, by divine Providence, preserved a
distinct people, and the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in. Nor can it be
right to interpret such expressions in such a sense, as to render them
inconsistent with what the scriptures so plainly teach shall be the case in the
latter days: Therefore,

2. Notwithstanding hitherto but few have been saved, there is no evidence but
that yet the greater part of mankind may be saved. Nothing can be argued
against this from such expressions as have been just mentioned, for the reason
already suggested. Nor can any thing be argued from any other passages of
scripture; for the scripture no where teaches, that the greatest part of the
whole human race will finally perish. I am sensible, many seem to take this for
granted, and they are greatly strengthened in this belief from a view of the
awful state mankind have been in from the beginning of the world to this day.
But if we should even grant, that hitherto not one in ten thousand have been
saved, yet it may come to pass, (there may be time enough for it, and men
enough yet born;) I say, it may yet come to pass, that by far the greatest part
of mankind may be saved.

For as the scriptures constantly teach that. in these glorious days, universal
peace shall prevail, and instead of war the nations shall employ their time in
useful labor, shall beat their swords into plow shares, and their spears into
pruning hooks; so it will naturally come to pass, that mankind, who are now in
vast multitudes destroyed in the wars from one generation to another, will be
greatly increased in numbers, and plentifully provided for. Only remove wars,
famines, and all those desolating judgments, which the sins of mankind have,
from age to age, brought down on a guilty world, and let that universal peace
and prosperity take place, which indeed will naturally result from the sincere
practice of pure Christianity, and mankind will naturally increase and spread,
and fill all the earth. And while every one improves his time well, and is
diligent in his calling, according to the rules of our holy religion, and all
luxury, intemperance and extravagance are banished from the nations of the
earth, it is certain that this globe will be able to sustain with food and
raiment a number of inhabitants, immensely greater than ever yet dwelt on it at
a time. And now if all these shall know the Lord from the least to the
greatest, as the scripture asserts, so that the knowledge of the Lord shall
fill the earth as the waters cover the sea, for a thousand years together, it
may easily, yea, it will naturally come to pass, that there will be more saved
in these thousand years, than ever before dwelt upon the face of the earth from
the foundation of the world.

Some indeed understand the thousand years in the Revelation, agreeable to
other prophetical numbers in that book, a day for a year; so the time, and
times, and half a time, i. e. three years and an half, and the forty two
months, and the one thousand two hundred and sixty days are no doubt to be
reckoned; and if the dark period is to be reckoned by this rule, it should seem
that the light period should likewise; for otherwise the dark period, which in
that book is represented to be the shortest, will indeed be the longest -- the
one thousand two hundred and sixty days longer than the thousand years; and if
the thousand years is reckoned a day for a year, as the scripture-year contains
three hundred and sixty days, so the one thousand years will amount to three
hundred and sixty thousand years; in which there might be millions saved to one
that has been lost. But not to insist upon this, if this glorious period is to
last only a thousand years literally, there may be many more saved than lost.

If it be granted, that it is difficult to compute with any exactness in such a
case as this, yet it is easy to make such a computation as may satisfy us in
the point before us; for in Egypt the Hebrews doubled at the rate of about once
in fourteen years; in New England the inhabitants double in less than
twenty-five years; it will be moderate, therefore, to suppose mankind, in the
Millennium, when all the earth is full of peace and prosperity, will double
every fifty years. But at this rate, there will be time enough in a thousand
years to double twenty times, which would produce such a multitude of people,
as that although we should suppose all who live before the Millennium begins to
be lost, yet if all these should be saved, there would be above seventeen
thousand saved to one that would be lost; as may appear from the table below. 1
2 2 4 3 8 4 16 5 32 6 64 7 128 8 258 9 512 10 1, 024 11 2, 048 12 4, 096 13 8,
192 14 16, 384 15 32, 768 16 65, 536 17 131, 072 18 262, 144 19 524, 288 20 1,
048, 576 Sum total 2, 097, 150 In the first column, we have the twenty periods,
which one thousand years will make at fifty years to a period. In the second
column, we see in what proportion mankind will increase, if they are supposed
to double in every fifty years. At the end of the first fifty years there will
be two for one, and so on. At the end of the twentieth period there will be
above a million for one. Now suppose the world to stand six thousand years
before the Millennium, and suppose it in every age to be as full of inhabitants
as it will be when the Millennium begins. And suppose, through all the six
thousand years, all the inhabitants of the earth to have died off, and new ones
come in their room, at the rate of once in fifty years, six thousand years, a^
fifty years to a period, will be one hundred and twenty periods -- one hundred
and twenty worlds full, all lost; suppose, yet by the table we see, that the
seventh period alone, which is one hundred and twenty-eight, would more than
counter-balance the whole --

Suppose all before the Millennium lost =120

Suppose all in the Millennuim saved =2, 097, 150

Then 120 2, 097, 150 1 17, 456 40/120 Q. E. D.

That is, above seventeen thousand would be saved to one lost, which was the
point to be proved; therefore nothing hinders but that the greatest part of
mankind may yet be saved if God so pleases. There is time enough for it, and
may be men enough yet born; and if these calculations may serve to clear up
this, they answer the proposed end. What proportion of mankind will finally be
saved, and what lost, no one can tell -- it is no where revealed; God was not
obliged to save one out of all this guilty lost world. Hitherto the generality
may have perished, and the Lord is righteous; but who can tell to what a degree
God may yet glorify his grace? The holy scriptures encourage us to look for
things exceeding great and glorious; even for such events as may put a new face
on all God's past dispensations.




3. The periods past, that have been so dark, ought to be considered as
introductory to this bright and glorious scene, and in various respects as
preparatory thereto.

An apostate race, who had joined with the fallen angels in a course of
rebellion against the Governor of the Universe, might justly have been forsaken
of God, and given up to a state of perfect darkness and woe, from generation to
generation, entirely under the power of the Prince of Darkness. -- What has
happened in dark ages past, may help us a little to realize what might justly
always have been the woeful state of a fallen world. We have had a specimen of
the dreadful nature and tendency of Satan's government in all the idolatry,
wickedness and woe which have filled the world; and we have seen a little what
is in the heart of fallen man, who have slain the Lord's prophets, crucified
his Son, and shed the blood of thousands, yea, of millions of his servants. And
what has happened may help us to realize a little what must have been the state
of a fallen world, if grace had never interposed. At the same time it has
appeared, after the best contrived experiments have been sufficiently tried,
that it is not in the heart of fallen man to repent, nor can he be brought to
it by any external means whatsoever, whereby the absolute necessity of the
interposition of supernatural grace has been set in the most glaring light.
And now, if after all, God should effectually interpose, destroy the influence
of Satan, scatter the darkness which fills the world, recover mankind to God,
and cause truth and righteousness at last to prevail, it would appear to be
altogether of God, of his own mere self-moving goodness and sovereign grace.
And after so long and sore a bondage mankind will be the more sensible of the
greatness of the deliverance. Nor can it ever be said by a proud and haugh^,
^orld, We did not need (...) ^^^uences of divine grace to bring us right;
whereas all other methods had been sufficiently tried, and tried in vain. But
God may justly say, What could have been done more to reclaim mankind that I
have not done? And to what purpose would it have been to have taken one step
further? I tried them enough -- there was no hope -- their heart was a heart of
stone; therefore, behold I, even I, will take away the heart of stone, and give
an heart of flesh; and an apostate world shall be ashamed and confounded, and
shall never open their mouth when I shall do all these things for them.

We are apt to wonder why these glorious days should be so long delayed, if
God, indeed, intends such mercy to men; but God, infinitely wise, knows what is
best -- knows how to conduct the affairs of the universe -- knows when is the
fittest time to introduce this glorious sta^e of things -- knows when matters
will be all ripened, and every thing in the moral world prepared, so that this
glorious day may be ushered in to the best advantage, in a manner most suited
to honor God and his Son, to humble a haughty world, and to disappoint Satan
most grievously, after all his wily schemes, great success, and high
expectations; I say, God knows when this will be; and this is the very time he
has fixed upon for this glorious work.

4. It therefore becomes all the followers of Christ, in their several spheres,
under firm belief of these things, to be of good courage, and exert themselves
to the utmost, in the use of all proper means, to suppress error and vice of
every kind, and promote the cause of truth and righteousness in the world, and
so be workers together with God.

If one stood at the head of this glorious army, which has been in the wars
above these five thousand years, and has lived through many a dreadful campaign,
and were allowed to make a speech to these veteran troops upon this glorious
theme, he might lift up his voice, and say -- Hail, noble heroes! Brave
followers of the Lamb! Your General has sacrificed his life in this glorious
cause, and spoiled principalities and powers on the cross, and now he lives and
reigns! He reigns on high, with all power in heaven and earth in his hands!
Your predecessors, the prophets, apostles and martyrs, with undaunted courage,
have marched into the field of battle, and conquered dying, and now reign in
heaven! Behold, ye are risen up in their room, are engaged in the same cause,
and the time of the last general battle draws on, when a glorious victory is to
be won. And although many a valiant soldier may be slain in the field, yet the
army shall drive all before them at last; and Satan being conquered, and all
the powers of darkness driven out of the field, and confined to the bottomless
pit, ye shall reign with Christ a thousand years -- reign in love and peace,
while truth and righteousness ride triumphant throug'r the earth; wherefore lay
aside every weight, and, with your hearts wholly intent on this grand affair,
gird up your loins, and with all the spiritual weapons of faith, prayer,
meditation, watchfulness, etc. with redoubled zeal and courage, fall on your
spiritual enemies: Slay every lust that you lurks within, as knowing your
domestic foes are the most dangerous; and with gentleness, meekness and wisdom,
by your holy conduct, your pious examples, your kind instructions, your
friendly admonitions, spread the favor of divine knowledge all around you, as
ye are scattered here and there through a benighted world, laboring to win
souls to Christ, to induce the deluded followers of Satan to desert his camp,
and enlist as volunteers under your prince MESSIAH. And if the powers of
darkness should rally all their forces, and a general battle, through all the
Christian world, come on, O love not your lives to the death! Sacrifice every
earthly comfort in the glorious cause! Sing the triumphs of your victorious
General, in prisons and a^ ^^e stake and die courageously, fir^^y believing the
cause of truth and righteousness will finally prevail.

Surely it is infinitely unbecoming the followers of him who is King of Kings
and Lord of Lords, to turn aside to earthly pursuits, or to sink down in
unmanly discouragements, or to give way to sloth and effeminacy, when there is
so much to be done, and the glorious day is coming on. How should those who
handle the pen of the writer, exert themselves to explain and vindicate divine
truths, and paint the Christian Religion in all its native glories! How should
the pulpit be animated, from Sabbath to Sabbath, with sermons full of knowledge
and light, full of spirit and life, full of zeal for God and love to men, and
tender pity to infatuated sinners! Christ loves to have his ministers faithful,
whether the wicked will hear or not. -- And let pious parents be unwearied in
their prayers for, and instructions of their children, and never faint under
any discouragements; as knowing, that Christ is exalted to give repentance and
remission of sins, and can do it for whom he will. Bring your children and
friends, with all their spiritual diseases, and lay them at his feet; as once
they did their sick, when this kind Savior dwelt upon earth. -- Let pious
persons of every age, and in every capacity, awake from sleep, and arise from
the dead, and live and act worthy their glorious character and high
expectations; and in their several stations exert themselves to the utmost to
promote the Redeemer's glorious cause. -- Let this age do their share, as
David, although the temple was not to be built in his day, yet exerted himself
to lay up materials for that magnificent edifice, on which his heart was
intently set; as knowing that, in his son's day, it would be set up in all its
glory. -- So let us rise up, and with the greatest alacrity, contribute our
utmost toward this building, this living temple, this temple all made of
lively stones, of stones alive, in which God is to dwell, and which will
infinitely exceed in glory the Temple of Solomon, that was built of dead timber
and lifeless stones. -- And let this be our daily prayer, an answer to which we
may be assured of, whatever other requests are denied us, Our Father which art
in Heaven, etc. -- for thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, for
ever. AMEN.

AN HUMBLE ATTEMPT TO PROMOTE EXPLICIT AGREEMENT AND VISIBLE UNION OF GOD's
PEOPLE IN EXTRAORDINARY PRAYER. FOR THE REVIVAL OF RELIGION AND THE ADVANCEMENT
OF CHRIST's KINGDOM ON EARTH, PURSUANT TO SCRIPTURE-PROMISES AND PROPHECIES
CONCERNING THE LAST TIME.

BY JONATHAN EDWARDS, A. M. Minister of the Gospel at Northampton.

WITH A PREFACE BY SEVERAL MINISTERS.

Printed at Boston, in New England, 1747. Reprinted at Northampton, in Old
England, 1789.

ELIZABETH TOWN: Printed by SHEPARD KOLLOCK, Printer and Bookseller. 1794.

PREFACE BY THE EDITOR, IN ENGLAND.
OLNEY, May 4, 1789.
IF any enquire why the ensuing work is republished, I would beg leave to lay
before them the following intelligence:

At an association of the ministers and messengers of the Baptist churches in
the counties of Northampton, Leicester, etc. held at Nottingham, in the year
1784, a resolution was formed to establish, through the association, a meeting
of prayer for the GENERAL revival and spread of religion. This was to be
observed the first Monday evening in every calendar month, by all the churches.
It still continues. -- In 1786, another Baptist association, commonly called
the Midland, held that year at Aulcester, in the county of Warwick, entered
into the same resolution. Many other churches, particularly in Yorkshire, have
adopted, and now follow the above practice. -- We have the pleasure also to
find, that several Paedo-Baptist churches statedly meet on those evenings, for
the same purpose.

The re-publication of the following work, is with the avowed design of
promoting the above agreement and practice. Those concerned in its first
institution, never intended it should be confined to any peculiar connection,
or particular denomination. Rather they ardently wished it might become general
among the real friends of truth and holiness. The advocates of error are
indefatigable in their endeavors to overthrow the distinguishing and
interesting doctrines of Christianity; those doctrines which are the grounds of
our hope, and sources of our joy. Surely it becomes the followers of Christ, to
use every effort, in order to strengthen the things which remain.

By re-publishing the following work, I do not consider myself as becoming
answerable for every sentiment it contains. An author and an editor are very
distinct characters. Should any entertain different views respecting some of
the prophecies in the inspired page, from those that are here advanced, yet
such may, and I hope will, approve of the general design.

In the present imperfect stale, we may reasonably expect a diversity of
sentiments upon religious matters. Each ought to think for himself; and every
one has a right, on proper occasions, to show his opinion. Yet all should
remember, that there are but two parties in the world, each engaged in opposite
causes; the cause of God and of Satan; of holiness and of sin; of heaven and
hell. The advancement of the one, and the down fall of the other, must appear
exceedingly desirable to every real friend of God and man. If such, in some
respects entertain different sentiments, and practice distinguishing modes of
worship, surely they may unite in the above business. O for thousands upon
thousands, divided into small bands in their respective cities, towns, villages
and neighborhood, all met at the same time, and in pursuit of one end,
offering up their united prayers, like so many ascending clouds of incense
before the Most High! May he shower down blessings on all the scattered tribes
of Zion! Grace, great grace be with all them that love the Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity! AMEN!

JOHN SUTCLIFF.

THE PREFACE.
THE ruin of Satan's miserable kingdom, and the advancement of the universal
and happy reign of Christ on the earth, were included and hinted in the
sentence denounced on the serpent, that the seed of the woman should bruise his
head. What was a terrible threatening to Satan, in the surprised ears of our
first guilty parents, implied a joyful prophecy, to keep them from despair, and
enliven their hopes for themselves and their descendants, of obtaining by this
seed of here is an eternal triumph over him who had so sadly foiled them. And it
is likely, their hopes and faith immediately arose, laid hold on the reviving
prophecy, earnestly desired its happy accomplishment, and transmitted it to
their posterity.

But though this prophecy was at first only delivered in the form of a
threatening to Satan; it was afterward directly given in the form of a promise
to Abraham, though still in general terms, that in his seed should all the
nations of the earth be blessed. Yet this general promise was more clearly by
degrees explained in the following ages, to mean a Divine King, no other than
the Son of God assuming human nature of the seed of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and
David; that should be born of a virgin in Bethlehem of Judah; and at first
despised, abused, rejected, and put to death; but should rise to immortal life,
ascend to heaven, and thence extend his blessed kingdom over all nations; not
by outward force, but inward overcoming influence, by his word and spirit,
making them his ^illing people in the day of his power; and reigning in
glorious light and holiness, and love and peace for ever; and the advancement
of this universal and happy reign has been the earnest desire and prayer of the
saints in all ages to the present day.

But how great the honor and how lively the encouragement given in scripture
to those their prayers; by representing them as offered by Christ himself with
the fragrant incense of his own merits and intercession, on the golden altar
before the throne, and ascending together in one grateful perfume to God! And
how cheering to every saint is that promise of his -- From the rising of the
sun, even to the going down of the same, my name shall be great among the
Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure
offering! How pleasing to God and the heavenly hosts to see, as the sun goes
round the globe, this grateful incense rising from every part on high! and the
more extensive and incessant are these prayers, ascending from the circle of
the earth, the more does this blessed promise go into its desired fulfillment,
and the holy God is more pleased and glorified.

To promote the increase, concurrency, and constancy of these acceptable
prayers, is the great intention both of the pious memorial of our reverend and
dear brethren in Scotland, and of the worthy author of this exciting essay. And
this design we cannot but recommend to all who desire the coming of this
blissful kingdom in its promised extent and glory, in this wretched world.

As to the author's ingenious observations on the prophecies, we entirely leave
them to the reader's judgment: with only observing, though it is the
apprehension of many learned men, that there is to be a very general slaughter
of the witnesses of Christ about the time of their finishing their testimony to
the pure worship and truths of the gospel, about three or four years before the
seventh angel sounds his trumpet for the ruin of Antichrist; -- yet we cannot
see that this is any just objection against our joint and earnest prayers for
the glorious age succeeding, or for the hastening of it.

For if such a terrible time is coming in Europe, which we in depending America
are likely to share in; the more need we have of joining in earnest and
constant prayers for extraordinary suffering graces for ourselves and others.
And that such a time is coming on the members of Christ, is no more an
objection against their prayers for the hastening of the following glory, than
it was before the incarnation of him their head, that his most bitter
sufferings were to precede the spreading of this joyous kingdom among the
nations. And the nearer the day approaches, the more need we have to be
awakened to continual watchfulness and prayer.

May God pour out on all his people abundantly, the spirit of grace and
supplication, and prepare them for the amazing changes hastening on the earth,
both for previous trials and for following glories!

Ministers in Boston.
Joseph Sewall, Thomas Prince, John Webb, Thomas Foxcroft, Joshua Gee.

BOSTON, N. E. January 12, 1747-8.
An HUMBLE ATTEMPT to promote an explicit AGREEMENT and visible UNION of God's
People through the World, in EXTRAORDINARY PRAYER, for the REVIVAL of RELIGION,
and the Advancement of CHRIST'S KINGDOM on Earth, pursuant to
Scripture-Promises and Prophecies concerning the LAST TIME.
OCCASIONED By a late Memorial published by a Number of Ministers in Scotland,
and sent over to America, giving an Account of a certain Concert for Prayer,
which has already been come into by many Ministers and others in Great Britain
and some other Parts, and in which they desire the general Concurrence of their
Christian Brethren every where.

CONTAINING A Copy of the said Memorial, with a more particular View of the
Affair it relates to: a Variety of Arguments and Persuasives to comply with the
Motion therein made, for united and extraordinary Prayer; and Answers to some
Objections.

TOGETHER WITH Seasonable Considerations on the Aspects of Providence in many
late wonderful Dispensations, and the present State of Things in the Church and
moral World; pointing out the Fulfilling of the Scriptures, and the Voice of
God to his People, in these Events.

BY JONATHAN EDWARDS, A. M. Minister of the Gospel in Northampton, N. E.

PART I. The text opened, and an account given of the affair proposed in the
memorial from Scotland.
ZECHARIAH viii. 20, 21, 22. Thus says the Lord of Hosts -- It shall yet come
to pass, that there shall come people, and the inhabitants of many cities; and
the inhabitants of one city shall go unto another, saying -- Let us go speedily
to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts. I will go also. Yea,
many people and strong nations shall come to seek the Lord of Hosts in
Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord.


IN this chapter we have a prophecy of a future glorious advancement of the
church of God; wherein it is evident, something further is intended than ever
was fulfilled to the nation of the Jews under the Old Testament. For here are
plain prophecies of such things as never were fulfilled before the coming of
the Messiah; partic^^ ^^ly what is said in the two last verses in the chapter,
of many people and strong nations worshipping and seeking the true God, and of
so great an accession of Gentile nations to the church of God, that by far the
greater part of the visible worshippers of God should consist of this new
accession, so that they should be to the other as ten to one -- a certain
number for an uncertain. There never happened any thing, from the time of the
prophet Zechariah to the coming of Christ, to answer this prophecy; and it can
have no fulfillment but either in the calling of the Gentiles, in and after the
days of the apostles, or in the future glorious enlargement of the church of
God in the latter ages of the world, so often foretold by the prophets of the
Old Testament, and by the prophet Zechariah in particular, in the latter part
of his prophecy. It is most probable, that what the spirit of God has chief
respect to, is that last and greatest enlargement and most glorious advancement
of the church of God on earth, in the benefits of which especially the Jewish
nation were to have a share, and a very eminent and distinguishing share. There
is a great agreement between what is here said and other prophecies, that must
manifestly have respect to the church's latter-day-glory; as that in Isaiah lx.
2, 3, 4. The Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee;
and the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy
rising. Last up thine eyes round about, and see; all they gather themselves
together, they come to thee. That whole chapter, beyond all dispute, has
respect to the most glorious state of the church of God on earth. So chap.
lxvi. 8. Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? Shall a nation be
born at once? -- verse 10. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all
ye that love her. -- verse 12. I will extend peace to her like a river, and the
glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream. -- Mich. iv. at the beginning: but
in the last day it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house of the
Lord shall be established in the top of the mountain, and it shall be exalted
above the hills, and people shall flow unto it; and many nations shall come and
say, come, and let us go up unto the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of
the God of Jacob. And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong
nations afar off; and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their
spears into pruning hooks; nation shall not lift up sword against nation,
neither shall they learn war any more. -- See also, Isaiah ii. at the
beginning. There has been nothing yet brought to pass in any measure to answer
these prophecies. And as the prophecy in my text and the following verse does
agree with them, so there is reason to think it has a respect to the same
times. And indeed there is a remarkable agreement in the description given
throughout the chapter, with the representations made of those times elsewhere
in the prophets, as may be seen by comparing ver. 3. with Isaiah lx. 14. --
ver. 4. with Isaiah lxv. 20, 22. and xxxiii. 24. -- ver. 6, 7, 8. with Ezekiel.
xxxvii. 2, 11, 12, 21. -- ver. 7. with Isaiah xliii. 5, 6. and xlix. 12. and
lix. 19. -- ver. 12, 13. with Hosea ii. 21, 22. and Ezekiel. xxxiv. 22 -- 29. --
ver. 8, 12, 13. with Ezekiel. xxxvi. 28 -- 30. -- ver. 13. with Zeph. iii. 20. and
Isaiah xix. 24. -- ver. 19. with Isaiah lxi. 3. and Jer. xxxi. 12, 13, 14.

So that however the prophet, in some things that are said in this chapter, may
have respect to future smiles of heaven on the nation of the Jews, lately
returned from the Babylonish captivity, and resettled in the land of Canaan, in
a great increase of their numbers and wealth, and the return of more captives
from Chaldea and other countries, etc. yet the spirit of God has doubtless
respect to things far greater than these, and of which these were but saint
resemblances. -- We find it common in the prophecies of the Old Testament, that
when the prophets are speaking of the favors and blessings of God on the Jews,
attending or following their return from the Babylonish captivity, the spirit
of God takes occasion from thence to speak of the incomparably greater
blessings on the church, that shall attend and follow her deliverance from the
spiritual or mystical Babylon, of which those were a type; and is, as it were,
led away to speak almost wholly of these latter, and vastly greater things, so
as to seem to forget the former.

And whereas the prophet, in this chapter, speaks of God's bringing his people
again from the east and west to Jerusalem, (ver. 7, 8.) And multitudes of all
nations taking hold of the skirts of the Jews; so far as we may suppose that
this means literally that nation of the posterity of Jacob, it cannot have
chief respect to any return of the Jews from Babylon and other countries in
those ancient times before Christ, for no such things as are here spoken of,
attended any such return; but it must have respect to the great calling and
gathering of the Jews into the fold of Christ, and their being received to the
blessings of his kingdom, after the fall of Antichrist, or the destruction of
mystical Babylon.

In the text we have an account how this future glorious advancement of the
church of God should be brought on, or introduced, viz. By great multitudes in
different towns and countries taking up a joint resolution, and coming into an
express and visible agreement, that they will, by united and extraordinary
prayer, seek to God that he would come and manifest himself, and grant the
tokens and fruits of his gracious presence. -- Particularly we may observe,

1. The duty with the attendance on which the glorious event foretold shall be
brought on, viz. The duty of prayer. -- Prayer, some suppose, is here to be
taken synechdochically, for the whole of the worship of God -- prayer being a
principal part of the worship of the church of God in the days of the gospel,
when sacrifices are abolished; and so, that this is to be understood only as a
prophecy of a great revival of religion, and of the true worship of God among
his visible people, the accession of others to the church, and turning of
multitudes from idolatry to the worship of the true God. But it appears to me
reasonable, to suppose, that something more special is intended, with regard to
the duty of prayer; considering that prayer is here expressly and repeatedly
mentioned; and also considering how parallel this place is with many other
prophecies, that speak of an extraordinary spirit of prayer, as preceding and
introducing that glorious day of revival of religion, and advancement of the
church's peace and prosperity, so often foretold, (which I shall have occasion
to mention hereafter) and particularly the agreeableness of what is here said,
with what is said afterward by the same prophet, of the pouring out of a
spirit of grace and supplications, as that with which this great revival of
religion shall begin, chap. xii. 10.

2. The good, that shall be sought by prayer; which is God himself. -- It is
said once and again, They shall go to pray before the Lord, and to seek the
Lord of Hosts. This is the good they ask for and seek by prayer, The Lord of
Hosts himself. -- To seek God, as the expression may, perhaps, be sometimes
used in scripture, may signify no more than seeking the favor or mercy of God.
And if it be taken so here, praying before the Lord, and seeking the Lord of
Hosts, must be looked upon as synonymous expressions. And it must be confessed
to be a common thing in scripture, to signify the same thing repeatedly, by
various expressions of the same import, for the greater emphasis. -- But
certainly that expression of seeking the Lord, is very commonly used to signify
something more than merely, in general, to seek some mercy of God: It implies
that God himself is the great good desired and sought after; that the blessings
pursued are God's gracious presence, the blessed manifestations of him, union
and intercourse with him; or, in short, God's manifestations and communications
of himself by his Holy Spirit. Thus the psalmist desired God, thirsted after
him, and sought him. O God, thou art my God; ea^ly will I seek thee. My flesh
longs for thee, in a dry and thristy land, were no water is, to see thy power
and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the sanctuary. -- My soul follows
hard after thee. -- Whom have I in heaven but thee? And there is none upon
earth that I desire besides thee. The psalmist earnestly pursued after God, his
soul thirsted after him, he stretched forth his hands unto him, etc. And
therefore it is in scripture the peculiar character of the saints, that they
are those that seek God. This is the generation of them that seek him. Your
heart shall live that seek God. And in many other places. If the expression in
the text be understood agreeably to this sense, then by seeking the Lord of
Hosts, we must understand a seeking that God, who had withdrawn, or as it were
hid himself, for a long time, would return to his church, and grant the tokens
and fruits of his gracious presence, and those blessed communications of his
spirit to his people, and to mankind on the earth, which he had often promised,
and which his church had long waited for.

And it seems reasonable to understand the phrase, seeking the Lord of Hosts,
in this sense here, and not as merely signifying the same thing with praying to
God; not only because the expression is repeatedly added to praying before the
Lord, in the text, as signifying something more; but also because the phrase,
taken in this sense, is exactly agreeable to other parallel prophetic
representations. Thus God's people's seeking, by earnest prayer, the promised
restoration of the church of God, after the Babylonish captivity, and the great
apostasy that occasioned it. is called their seeking God, and searching for
him; and God's granting this promised revival and restoration is called his
being found of them. For thus says the Lord, that after seventy years be
accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my good word toward
you, in causing you to return to this place. For I know the thoughts that I
think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give
you an expected end. Then shall ye go and call upon me, and I will hearken unto
you; and ye shall seek me and find me, when ye shall search for me with all
your heart; and I will be found of you, says the Lord, and I will turn away
your captivity. And the prophets, from time to time, represent God, in a low
and afflicted state of his church, as being withdrawn, and hiding himself.
Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the Savior. I hid
me, and was wroth. And they represent God's people, while his church is in such
a state, before God delivers and restores the same, as seeking him, looking for
him, searching and waiting for him, and calling after him. I will go and return
unto my place, 'till they acknowledge their offense, and seek my face from the
house of Jacob, and I will look for him. And when God, in answer to their
prayers and succeeding their endeavors, delivers, restores, and advances his
church, according to his promise, then he is said to answer, and come, and say,
here am I, and to show himself; and they are said to find him, and see him
plainly. Then shall thou cry, and he shall say, HERE I AM. But Israel shall be
saved in the Lord, with an everlasting salvation. I said not unto the seed of
Jacob, Seek ye me in vain. The Lord will wipe away the tears from off all
faces, and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off the earth. And
it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, and
he will save us: This is the Lord, we have waited for him; we will be glad, and
rejoice in his salvation. We have waited for thee: The desire of our soul is to
thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. With my soul have I desired thee in
the night; yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee early. For when thy
judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness. Therefore my people shall know my name; therefore they shall
know in that day, that I am he that does speak: behold, IT IS I. How beautiful
upon the mountains are the feet of him that brings good tidings, that
publishes peace, that brings good tidings of good, that publishes
salvation, that says unto Zion -- Thy God reigns! Thy watchmen shall lift up
the voice, together shall they sing; for they shall see eye to eye, when the
Lord shall bring again Zion.

3. We may observe who they are, that shall be united in thus seeking the Lord
of Hosts; the inhabitants of many cities, and of many countries, yea, many
people and strong nations; great multitudes in different parts of the world
shall conspire in this business. From the representation made in the prophecy,
it appears rational to suppose, that it will be fulfilled something after this
manner -- First, that there shall be given much of a spirit of prayer to God's
people, in many places, disposing them to come into an express agreement,
unitedly to pray to God in an extraordinary manner, that he would appear for
the help of his church, and in mercy to mankind, and pour out his Spirit,
revive his work, and advance his spiritual kingdom in the world, as he has
promised; and that this disposition to such prayer, and union in it, will
gradually spread more and more, and increase to greater degrees; with which at
length will gradually be introduced a revival of religion, and a disposition to
greater engagedness in the worship and service of God, amongst his professing
people; that this being observed will be the means of awakening others, making
them sensible of the wants of their souls, and exciting in them a great concern
for their spiritual and ever^asting good, and putting them upon earnestly
crying to God for spiritual mercies, and disposing them to join with God's
people in that extraordinary seeking and serving of God, which they shall see
them engaged in; and that in this manner religion shall be propagated, until
the awakening reaches those that are in the highest stations, and until whole
nations be awakened, and there be at length an accession of many of the chief
nations of the world to the church of God. Thus after the inhabitants of many
cities of Israel, or of God's professing people, have taken up, and pursued a
joint resolution, to go and pray before the Lord, and seek the Lord of Hosts,
others shall be drawn to worship and serve him with them; till at length many
people and strong nations shall join themselves to them; and there shall, in
process of time, be a vast accession to the church, so that it shall be ten
times as large as it was before; yea, at length all nations shall be converted
unto God. -- Thus ten men shall take hold, out of all languages of the nations,
of the skirt of him that is a Jew, (in the sense of the Apostle) saying, We
will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you. And thus that shall
be fulfilled, O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.

4. We may observe the mode of their union in this duty. It is a visible union,
an union by explicit agreement, a joint resolution declared by one to another,
come into by being first proposed by some, and readily and expressly fallen in
with by others. -- The inhabitants of one city shall apply themselves to the
inhabitants of another, saying, let us go, etc. Those to whom the m^tion is
made, shall comply with it, the proposal shall take with many, it shall be a
prevailing, spreading thing; one shall follow another's example, one and
another shall say, I will go also. Some suppose, that those words -- I will go
also -- are to be taken as the words of him that makes the proposal; as much as
to say, I do not propose that to you, which I am not willing to do myself, I
desire you to go, and I am ready to go with you. But this is to suppose no more
to be expressed in these latter words, than was expressed before in the
proposal itself; for these words, let us go, signify as much, as that I am
willing to go, and desire you to go with me. It seems to me much more natural,
to understand these latter words as importing the consent of those to whom the
proposal is made, or the reply of one and another that falls in it. This is
much more agreeable to the plain design of the text, which is to represent the
concurrence of great numbers in this affair, and more agreeable to the
representation made in the next verse, of one following another, many taking
hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew. And though if the words are thus
understood, we must suppose an ellipsis in the text, something understood that
is not expressed, as if it had been said -- Those of other cities shall say --
I will go also; -- yet this is not difficult to be supposed, such ellipsis are
very common in scripture. We have one exactly parallel with it in Jer. iii. 22.
Return, ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings: behold, we
come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God, i. e. the backsliding children
shall say -- "Behold we come unto thee," etc. And in Cant. iv. Let my beloved
come ^^to his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits. -- I am come into my garden,
my sister, my spouse, i. e. her beloved shall say -- "I am come into my
garden." We have the like throughout that song. So Psalm. l. 6, 7. The heavens
shall declare his righteousness, for God is judge himself. Hear, O my people,
and I will speak, i. e. the Judge shall say -- "Hear, O my people," etc. The
psalms and prophets abound with such figures of speech.

5. We may observe the manner of prayer agreed on, or the manner in which they
agree, to engage in and perform the duty. Let us go speedily to pray; or as it
in the margin, let us go continually. The words literally translated are, let
us go in going. Such an ingemination or doubling of words, is very common in
the Hebrew language, when it is intended that a thing shall be very strongly
expressed; it generally implies the superlative degree of a thing; as the holy
of holies signifies the most holy; but it commonly denotes, not only the utmost
degree of a thing, but also the utmost certainty; as when God said to Abraham,
in multiplying, I will multiply thy seed. It implies both that God would
certainly multiply his seed, and also multiply it exceedingly. So when God said
to Adam, in the day that thou eatest thereof, in dying thou shall die (as the
words are in the original) it implies, both that he should surely die, and also
that he should die most terribly, should utterly perish, and be destroyed to
the utmost degree. Yea, sometimes it seems to imply something else still; and,
in short, as this ingemination of words in the Hebrew, in general, denotes the
strength of expression, so it is used to signify almost all those things that
are wont to be signified by the various forms of strong speech in other
languages: sometimes it signifies the utmost degree of a thing; sometimes
certainty; sometimes peremptoriness and terribleness of a threatening, or the
greatness and positiveness of a promise, the strictness of a command, and the
earnestness of a request. -- When God says to Adam, dying thou shall die, it is
equivalent to such strong expressions in English, as, thou shall die indeed,
or, thou shall die with a witness. So when it is said in the text, let us go in
going, and pray before the Lord, the strength of the expression represents the
earnestness of those that make the proposal, their great engagedness in the
affair; and with respect to the duty proposed, it may be understood to signify
that they should be speedy, fervent, and constant in it; or, in one ward, that
it should be thoroughly performed.

6. We may learn from the tenor of this prophecy, together with the context,
that this union in such prayer is foretold as a becoming and happy thing, and
that which would be acceptable to God, and attended with glorious success.

From the whole we may infer, that it is a very suitable thing, and well
pleasing to God, for many people, in different parts of the world, by express
agreement, to come into a visible union, in extraordinary, speedy fervent, and
constant prayer, for those great effusions of the Holy Spirit, which shall
bring on that advancement of Christ's church and kingdom, that God has so often
promised shall be in the latter ages of the world.

And so from hence I would infer the duty of God's people, with regard to the
memorial lately sent over into America, from Scotland, by a number of ministers
there, proposing a method for such an union as has been spoken of, in
extraordinary prayer for this great mercy.

And it being the special design of this discourse, to persuade such as are
friends to the interests of Christ's kingdom, to a compliance with the proposal
and request made in that memorial, I shall first give a short historical
account of the affair it relates to, from letters, papers, and pamphlets, that
have come over from Scotland; to which I shall annex the memorial itself; and
then I shall offer some arguments and motives; tending to induce the friends of
religion to fall in with what is proposed; and lastly, make answer to some
objections that may possibly be made against it.

As to the first of these things, viz. an historical account of the concert,
which the memorial relates to, the following observations may give a sufficient
view of that affair.

In October. A. D. 1744, a number of ministers in Scotland, taking into
consideration the state of God's church, and of the world of mankind, judged
that the providence of God, at such a day, did loudly call such as were
concerned for the welfare of Zion, to united extraordinary applications to the
God of all grace, suitably acknowledging Him as the fountain of all the
spiritual benefits and blessings of his church, and earnestly praying to him,
that he would appear in his glory, and favor Zion, and manifest his compassion
to the world of mankind, by an abundant effusion of his Holy Spirit on all the
churches, and the whole habitable earth, to revive true religion in all parts
of Christendom, and to deliver all nations from their great and manifold
spiritual calamities and miseries, and bless them with the unspeakable benefits
of the kingdom of our glorious Redeemer, and fill the whole earth with his
glory. And consulting one another on the subject, they looked on themselves,
for their own part, obliged to engage in this duty; and, as far as in them lay,
to persuade others to the same; and to endeavor to find out, and fix on some
method, that should most effectually tend to promote, and uphold such
extraordinary application to heaven among God's people. And after seeking to
God by prayer for direction, they determined on the following method, as what
they would conform to in their own practice, and propose to be practiced by
others, for the two years next following, viz. To set apart some time on
Saturday evening, and Sabbath morning, every week, for the purpose aforesaid,
as other duties would allow to every one respectively; and more solemnly, the
first Tuesday of each quarter, (beginning with the first Tuesday of November,
then next ensuing) either the whole day, or part of the day, as persons find
themselves disposed, or think their circumstances will allow; the time to be
spent either in private praying societies, or in public meetings, or alone in
secret, as shall be found most practicable, or judged most convenient, by such
as are willing, in some way or other, to join in this affair; but not that any
should make any promises, or be looked upon as under strict bonds in any
respect, constantly and without fail to observe every one of these days,
whatever their circumstances should be, or however other duties and necessary
affairs might interfere; or that persons should look upon themselves bound with
regard to these days in any wise as though the time were holy, or the setting
them a part for religious purposes were established by sacred authority; but
yet, as a proper guard against negligence and unsteadiness, and a prudent
preservative, from yielding to a disposition, which persons might be liable to,
through the prevalence of indolence and listlessness, to excuse themselves on
trivial occasions, it was proposed, that those who unite in this affair should
resolve with themselves, that if, by urgent business, or otherwise, they are
hindered from joining with others, on the very day agreed on, yet they would
not wholly neglect bearing their part in the duty proposed, but would take the
first convenient day following, for that purpose.

The reason why Saturday evening and Lord's Day morning were judged most
convenient for the weekly seasons, was, that these times being so near the time
of dispensing gospel ordinances through the Christian world, which are the
great means, in the use of which God is wont to grant his Spirit to mankind,
and the principal means that the Spirit of God makes use of to carry on his
work of grace, it may be well supposed, that the minds of Christians, in
general, will, at these seasons, be especially disengaged from secular affairs,
and disposed to pious meditations and the duties of devotion, and more
naturally led to seek communications of the Holy Spirit, and success of the
means of grace. And as to the quarterly times, it was thought helpful to
memory, that they should be on one or other of the first days of each quarter;
Tuesday was preferred to Monday, because in some places people might have
public prayers and sermon on the stated day, which might not be so convenient
on Monday, as on some day at a greater distance from the Sabbath.

It was reckoned a chief use of such an agreement and method as this, that it
would be a good expedient for the maintaining and keeping up, amongst the
people of God, that great Christian duty of prayerfulness for the coming of
Christ's kingdom, in general, which Christ has directed his followers to be so
much in, that it may not be out of mind, and in a great measure sunk. Things,
that we are too little inclined to, through sloth, carnality, or a fullness of
our own worldly and private concerns, and that are to be attended at some
seasons or other, but have no special seasons stated for them, are apt to be
forgotten, or put off from time to time, and, as it were, adjourned without
day; and so, if not wholly neglected, yet too little attended. But when we fix
certain seasons, which we resolve, unless extraordinarily hindered, to devote
to the duty, it tends to prevent forgetfulness, and a settled negligence of it.
The certain returns of the season will naturally refresh the memory, will tend
to put us in mind of the precept of Christ, and the obligations that lie on all
his followers, to abound in such a duty, and renewedly engage us to the
consideration of the importance, necessity and unspeakable value of the mercy
sought; and so, by frequent renovation, to keep alive the consideration, and
sense of these things at all times. Thus the first promoters of this agreement
judged that it would be subservient to more abundant prayerfulness for
effusions of the Holy Spirit at all times through the year, both in secret and
social worship; particularly as to this last, in congregations, families, and
other praying societies. And then they also judged, that such an agreed union
would tend to animate and encourage God's people in the duty proposed; and that
particular persons and societies, knowing that great multitudes of their
Fellow Christians, in so many distant places, were, at the same time, (as a
token of the union of their hearts with them in this affair) by agreement,
engaged in the same holy exercise, would naturally be enlivened in the duty by
such a consideration.

It was not thought best to propose at first a longer time for the continuance
of this precise method than two years; it being considered, that it is not
possible, before any trial, so well to judge of the expedience of a particular
method and certain circumstances of the managing and ordering such an affair,
as after some time of experience. And it was not known, but that, after long
consideration, and some trial, it might be thought best to alter some
circumstance; or whether others that had not yet been consulted, might not
propose a better method. The time first agreed on, though but short, was
thought sufficient to give opportunity for judgment and experience, and for
such as were disposed to union in an affair of such a nature, in distant
places, mutually to communicate their sentiments on the subject.

The way, which those that first projected and came into this agreement,
thought best for the giving notice of it and proposing it to others, was not by
any thing published from the press, but by personal conversation with such as
they could conveniently have immediate access to, and by private correspondence
with others at a distance. At first it was intended, that some formal paper
proposing posing the matter, should be sent about for proper amendments and
improvements, and then concurrence; but on more mature deliberation, it was
considered how this might give a handle to objections, (which they though it it
best, to the utmost, to avoid in the infancy of the affair) and how practicable
it was, without any such formality, to spread the substance of the proposal by
private letters, together with a request to their correspondents, mutually to
communicate their tho'ts. Therefore this was fixed on, as the method that was
preferable at the beginning. Accordingly, they proposed and endeavored to
promote the affair in this way, and with such success, that great numbers in
Scotland and England fell in with the proposal, and some in North America. As
to Scotland, it was complied with by numbers, in the four chief towns,
Ed^^burgh, Glasgow, Aberdeen, and Dundee, and many country towns and
congregations in various parts of the land. One of the ministers, that was
primarily concerned in this affair, in a letter to ^ne of his correspondents,
speaks of an exp^icit declaration of the concurrence of the praying societies
in Edinburgh, which they had ^ade in a letter. The number of the praying
societies in that city is very considerable. Mr. Robe, of Kilsyth, (in a letter
to Mr. Prince, of Boston, dated November 3, 1743.) says -- There were then
above thirty societies of young people there, newly erected, some of which
consisted of upwards of thirty members. -- As to Glasgow, this union was
unanimously agreed to by about forty-five praying societies there, as an
eminent minister in that city informs, in a letter.

The two years, first agreed on, ended last November. A little before this time
expired, a number of ministers in Scotland agreed on a memorial, to be printed
and sent abroad to their brethren in various parts, proposing to them, and
requesting of them, to join with them in the continuance of this method of
united prayer, and in endeavors to promote it. Copies of which memorial have
lately been sent over into New England, to the number of near five hundred,
directed to be distributed in almost every county in this province of the
Massachusetts Bay, and also in several parts of Connecticut, New Hampshire,
Rhode Island, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina,
and Georgia. The most, I suppose, of these were sent to one of the
congregational ministers in Boston, with a letter subscribed by twelve
ministers in Scotland, about the affair; many of them to another of the said
ministers of Boston, and some to a minister in Connecticut. It being short, I
shall here insert a copy of it at length -- It is as follows:

A MEMORIAL from several Ministers in Scotland, to their Brethren in different
places, for continuing a CONCERT for PRAYER, first entered into in the Year
1744.
WHEREAS it was the chief scope of this concert, to promote more abundant
application to a duty that is perpetually binding, prayer that our Lord's
kingdom may come, joined with praises; and it contained some circumstantial
expedients, apprehended to be very subservient to that design, relating to
stated times for such exercises, so far as this would not interfere with other
duties; particularly a part of Saturday evening and Sabbath morning, every
week; and more solemnly of some one of the first days of each of the four great
divisions of the year, that is, of each quarter; as the first Tuesday, or first
convenient day after; The meaning is the first Tuesdays of February, May,
August and November, or the first convenient days after these.
and the concert, as to this circumstance, was extended only to two years; it
being intended that, before these expired, persons engaged in the concert
should reciprocally communicate their sentiments and inclinations, as to the
prolonging of the time, with or without alteration, as to the circumstance
mentioned; and it was intended by the first promoters, that others at a
distance should propose such circumstantial amendments or improvements, as they
should find proper; it is hereby earnestly entreated, that such would
communicate their sentiments accordingly, now that the time first proposed is
near expiring.

2. To induce those already engaged to adhere, and others to accede to this
concert, it seems of importance to observe, that declarations of concurrence,
the communicating and spreading of which are so evidently useful, are to be
understood in such a latitude, as to keep at the greatest distance from
entangling mens' minds: not as binding men to set apart any stated days from
secular affairs, or even to fix on any part of such and such precise days,
whether it be convenient or not; nor as absolute promises in any respect, but
as friendly, harmonious resolutions, with liberty to alter circumstances as
shall be found expedient. On account of all which latitude, and that the
circumstantial part extends only to a few years, it is apprehended, the concert
cannot be liable to the objections against periodical religious times of human
appointment.

3. It is also humbly offered to the consideration of ministers, and others
furnished with gifts for the most public instructions, whether it might not be
of great use, by the blessing of God, if short and nervous scripture
persuasives and directions to the duty in view, were composed and published,
(either by particular authors, or several joining together, which last way
might sometimes have peculiar advantages) and that, from time to time, without
too great intervals, the better to keep alive on mens' minds a just sense of
the obligations to a duty so important in itself, and in which many may be in
danger to faint and turn remiss, without such repeated incitements; and whether
it would not also be of great use, if ministers would be pleased to preach
frequently on the importance and necessity of prayer for the coming of our
Lord's kingdom, particularly near the quarterly days, or on these days
themselves, where there is public worship at that time.

4. They who have found it incumbent on them to publish this Memorial at this
time, having peculiar advantages for spreading it, do entreat that the desire
of concurrence and assistance, contained in it, may, by no means, be understood
as restricted to any particular denomination or party, or to those who are of
such or such opinions about any former instances of remarkable religious
concern; but to be extended to all who shall vouchsafe any attention to this
paper, and have at heart the interest of vital christianity, and the power of
godliness; and who, however differing about other things, are convinced of the
importance of fervent prayer, to promote that common interest, and of scripture
persuasives to promote such prayer.

5. As the first printed account of this concert was not a proposal of it, as a
thing then to begin, but a narration of it, as a design already set on soot,
which had been brought about with much harmony, by means of private letters, so
the farther countinuance, and, it is hoped, the farther spreading of it seems
in a promising way of being promoted by the same means, as importunate desires
of the renewing the concert have been transmitted already from a very distant
corner abroad, where the regard to it has of late increased; but,
notwithstanding of what may be done by private letters, it is humbly expected,
that a memorial spread in this manner may, by God's blessing, farther promote
the good ends in view, as it may be usefully referred to in letters, and may
reach where they will not.

6. Whereas in a valuable letter, from the corner just now mentioned, as a
place where regard to the concert has lately increased, it is proposed, that it
should be continued for seven years, or at least for a much longer time than
what was specified in the first agreement; those concerned in this memorial,
who would wish rather to receive and spread directions and proposals on this
head, than to be the first authors of any, apprehend no inconvenience, for
their part, in agreeing to the seven years, with the latitude above described,
which reserves liberty to make such circumstantial alterations, as may be
hereafter found expedient; on the contrary, it seems of importance, that the
labor of spreading a concert, which has already extended to so distant parts,
and may, it is hoped, extend farther, may not need to be renewed sooner, at
least much sooner, as it is uncertain but that may endanger the dropping of it,
and it seems probable, there will be less zeal in spreading of it, if the time
proposed for its continuance be too inconsiderable. Mean time, declarations of
concurrence for a less number of years may greatly promote the good ends in
view, though it seems very expedient, that it should exceed what was first agreed
on, seeing it is found on trial, that that time, instead of being too long, was
much too short.

7. If persons who formerly agreed to this concert, should now discontinue it,
would it not look too like that fainting in prayer, against which we are so
expressly warned in scripture? And would not this be the more unsuitable at
this time, in any within the British dominions, when they have the united calls
of such public chastisements and deliverances, to more concern than ever about
public reformation, and consequently about that which is the source of all
thorough reformation, the regenerating and sanctifying influence of the
almighty Spirit of God?

August 26, 1746.

The minister in Boston aforementioned, (to whom most of the copies of this
memorial were sent) who, I suppose, has had later and more full intelligence
than I have had, says, concerning the proposal, in a letter -- The motion seems
to come from above, and to be wonderfully spreading in Scotland, England,
Wales, Ireland and North America.

PART II. Motives to a Compliance with what is proposed in the Memorial.
I NOW proceed to the second thing intended in this discourse, viz. to offer to
consideration some things, which may tend to induce the people of God to comply
with the proposal and request made to them in the Memorial.

And I desire that the following things may be c^^sidered.

1. It is evident, from the scripture, that there is yet remaining a great
advancement of the interest of religion, and the kingdom of Christ, in this
world, by an abundant outpouring of the Spirit of God, far greater and more
extensive than ever yet has been. It is certain, that many things, which are
spoken concerning a glorious time of the church's enlargement and prosperity,
in the latter days, have never yet been fulfilled. There has never yet been any
propagation and prevailing of religion, in any wise, of that extent and
universality, which the prophecies represent. It is often foretold and
signified, in a great variety of strong expressions, that there should a time
come, when all nations, through the whole habitable world, should embrace the
true religion, and be brought into the church of God. It was often promised to
the patriarchs, that in their seed all the nations, or, (as it is sometimes
expressed) all the families of the earth should be blessed. Agreeably to this,
it is said of the Messiah, That all nations shall serve him, and men shall be
blessed in him, and all nations shall call him blessed. And it is said, that
all nations shall flow unto the mountain of the house of the Lord. And, that
all nations shall be gathered unto the name of the Lord to Jerusalem, and shall
walk no more after the imagination of their evil heart. So it is said, that all
flesh shall come and worship before the Lord. And that all flesh should see the
glory of God together. And that all flesh should come to him that hears prayer.
Christ compares the kingdom of heaven, in this world, to leaven, which a woman
took and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened. It is
natural and reasonable to suppose, that the whole world should finally be given
to Christ, as one whose right it is to reign, as the proper heir of him who is
originally the king of all nations, and the possessor of heaven and earth; and
the scripture teaches us, that God the Father had constituted his Son, as
God-Man, and in his kingdom of grace, or mediatorial kingdom, to be the heir of
the world, that he might in this kingdom have the heathen for his inheritance,
and the utmost ends of the earth for his possession. Thus Abraham is said to be
the heir of the world, not in himself, but in his seed, which is Christ. And
how was this to be fulfilled to Abraham, but by God's fulfilling that great
promise. that in his seed all the nations of the ear^^^ should be blessed? For
that promise is what the apostle is speaking of; which shows, that God has
appointed Christ to be the heir of the world in his kingdom of grace, and to
possess and reign over all nations, through the propagation of his gospel, and
the power of his Spirit communicating the blessings of it. God had appointed
him to this universal dominion by a most solemn oath: I have sworn by myself,
the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, that
unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear. Though this solemn oath
of God the Father is to be understood in so comprehensive a sense, as to extend
to what shall be accomplished at the day of judgment, yet it is evident by the
foregoing and following verses, that the thing most directly intended, is what
shall be fulfilled by the spreading of the gospel of his salvation, and power
of the Spirit of grace, bringing all the ends of the earth to look to him that
they may be saved, and come to him for righteousness and strength that, in him
they might be justified, and might glory. God has suffered many earthly princes
to extend their conquests over a great part of the face of the earth, and to
possess a dominion of a vast extent, and one monarchy to conquer and succeed
another, the latter being still the greater; it is reasonable to suppose that a
much greater glory in this respect should be reserved for Christ, God's own son
and rightful heir, who has purchased the dominion by so great and hard a
service; it is reasonable to suppose, that his dominion should be far the
largest, and his conquests vastly the greatest and most extensive. And thus the
scriptures represent the matter, in Nebuchadnezzar's vision, and the prophet's
interpretation, Dan. ii. There the four great monarchies of the earth, one
succeeding another, are represented by the great image of gold, silver, brass,
iron and clay; but at last a stone, cut out of the mountains without hands,
smites the image upon his feet, which breaks the iron, clay, brass, silver and
gold in pieces, that all becomes as the chaff of the summer threshing floors,
and the wind carries them away, that no place is found for them; but the stone
waxes great, becomes a great mountain, and FILLS THE WHOLE EARTH; signifying
the kingdom which the Lord God of heaven should set up in the world, last of
all, which should break in pieces and consume all other kingdoms. Surely this
representation leads us to suppose, that this last kingdom shall be of vastly
greater extent than any of the preceding. The like representation is made in
the viith chapter of Daniel; there the four monarchies are represented by four
great beasts that arose successively, one conquering and subduing another; the
fourth and last of these is said to be dreadful and terrible, and strong
exceedingly, and to have great iron teeth, and to devour and break in pieces,
and stamp the residue with his feet; yea, it is said, verse 23, that the
kingdom represented by this beast shall devour the whole earth; but last of
all, one like the Son of Man appears, coming to the Ancient of Days, and being
brought near before him, and receiving of him a dominion, and glory, and a
kingdom, THAT ALL PEOPLE, NATIONS AND LANGUAGES should serve him. This last
circumstance, of the vast extent and universality of his dominion, is
manifestly spoken of as one thing greatly distinguishing this holy kingdom from
all the preceding monarchies; although of one of the former it was said, that
it should devour the whole earth, yet we are naturally led, both by the much
greater emphasis and strength of the expressions, as well as by the whole
connection and tenor of the prophecy, to understand the universality here
expressed in a much more extensive and absolute sense; and terms used in the
interpretation of this vision are such, that scarcely any can be devised more
strong, to signify an absolute universality of dominion over the inhabitants of
the face of the earth; ver. 27. And the kingdom, and dominion, and GREATNESS OF
THE KINGDOMUNDER THE WHOLE HEAVEN, shall be given to the people of the most
high God. Agreeably to this, the gospel is represented as preached unto them
that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and^ongue, and kindred, and
people. The universality of the prevalance of true religion in the latter days,
is sometimes expressed by its reaching to the utmost ends of the earth. To all
the ends of the earth, and of the world. All the ends of the earth with those
that are far off upon the sea. From the rising of the sun to the going down of
the same. The outgoings of the morning and of the evening. It seems that all
the most strong expressions, that were in use among the Jews to signify the
habitable world in its utmost extent, are made use of to signify the extent of
the church of God in the latter days, and in many places a variety of these
expressions are used, and there is an accumulation of them, expressed with
great force.

It would be unreasonable to say, these are only bold figures, used after the
manner of the eastern nations, to express the great extent of the Christian
church, at and after the days of Constantine; to say so, would be in effect to
say, that it would have been impossible for God, if he had desired it, plainly
to have foretold any thing that should absolutely have extended to all nations
of the earth. I question whether it be possible to find out a more strong
expression, to signify an absolute universality of the knowledge of the true
religion through the habitable world, than that in Isai. xi. 9. The earth shall
be sull of the knowledge of the Lord, AS THE WATERS COVER THE SEAS. Which is as
much as to say, as there is no place in the vast ocean where there is not
water, so there shall be no part of the world of mankind where there is not the
knowledge of the Lord; as there is no part of the wide bed or cavity possessed
by the sea, but what is covered with water, so there shall be no part of the
habitable world, that shall not be covered by the light of the gospel, and
possessed by the true religion. Waters are often in prophecy put for nations
and multitudes of people; so the waters of the main ocean seem sometimes to be
put for the inhabitants of the earth in general; as in Ezekiel's vision of the
waters of the sanctuary which flowed from the sanctuary, and ran east, till
they came to the ocean, and were at first a small stream, but continually
increased till they became a great river; and when they came to the sea, the
water even of the vast ocean was healed, representing the conversion of the
world to the true religion in the latter days. -- It seems evident, that the
time will come, when there will not be one nation remaining i^^^ he world,
which shall not embrace the true religion, in that God has expressly revealed,
that no one such nation shall be left standing on the earth; The nation and
kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish; yea, those nations shall be
utterly wasted. -- God has declared that heathen idolatry and all the worship
of false gods shall be wholly abolished, in the most universal manner, so that
it shall be continued in no place under the heavens, or upon the face of the
earth; the gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, even they shall
perish from the earth, and from under these heavens. They are vanity, and the
work of errors, in the time of their visitation they shall perish. This must be
understood as what shall be brought to pass while this earth and these heavens
remain, i. e. before the end of the world. Agreeable to this is that in Isaiah.
Sing, O barren, and thou that did not bear; -- for more are the children of
the desolate than the children of the married wife, says the Lord. Enlarge the
place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thy habitation;
spare not; lengthen thy cords, strengthen thy stakes. For thy maker is thy
husband; the Lord of Hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of
Israel; THE GOD OF THE WHOLE EARTH SHALL HE BE CALLED.

The prophecies of the New Testament do no less evidently show, that a time
will come when the gospel shall universally prevail, and the kingdom of Christ
be extended over the whole habitable earth, in the most proper sense. Christ
says, I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me. It is
fit, that when the Son of God becomes man, he should have dominion over all
mankind: it is fit, that since he became an inhabitant of the earth, and shed
his blood on the earth, he should possess the whole earth: it is fit, seeing
here he became a servant, and was subject to men, and was arraigned before
them, and judged, condemned and executed by them, and suffered ignominy and
death in a most public manner, before Jews and Gentiles, being lifted up to
view on the cross upon an hill, near that populous city Jerusalem, at a most
public time, when there were many hundred thousand spectators, from all parts,
that he should be rewarded with an universal dominion over mankind; and it is
here declared he shall be. The apostle, in the with of ^^mans, teaches us to
look on that great outpouring of the Spirit and in-gathering of souls into
Christ's kingdom, that was in those days, first of the Jews, and then of the
Gentiles, to be but as the first fruits of the intended harvest, both with
regard to Jews and Gentiles; and to look on the in-gathering of those first
fruits as a sign that all the remainder both of Jews and Gentiles shall in due
time be gathered in. For if the first-fruit be holy, the lump is also holy: and
if the root be holy, so are the branches. And in that context, the apostle
speaks of the FULLNESS of both Jews and Gentiles, as what shall hereafter be
brought in, as distinct from that in-gathering from among both, which was in
those primitive ages of Christianity; we read of the fullness of the Jews, and
of the fullness of the Gentiles; and the apostle teaches us to look upon that
infidelity and darkness, which first prevailed over all Gentile nations, before
Christ came, and then over the Jews after Christ came, as what was wisely
permitted of God, as a preparation for the manifestation of the glory of God's
mercy, in due time, on the whole world, constituted of Jews and Gentiles. God
has concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all. These
things plainly show, that the time is coming when the whole world of mankind
shall be brought into the church of Christ; and not only a part of the Jews,
and a part of the Gentile world, as the first fruits, as it was in the first
ages of the Christian church; but the fullness of both, the whole lump, all the
nation of the Jews, and all the world of Gentiles.

In the last great conflict between the church of Christ and her enemies,
before the commencement of the glorious time of the church's peace and rest,
the kings of the earth, and the whole world, are represented as gathered
together, and then the seventh angel pours out his vial into the air, which
limits that kingdom that Satan has, as god of this world, in its utmost extent;
-- and that kingdom is represented as utterly overthrown. In another
description of that great battle, Christ is represented as riding forth, having
on his head many crowns, and on his vesture and on his thigh a name written,
KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS. Which we may well suppose signifies, that he
is now going to that conquest, whereby he shall set up a kingdom, in which he
shall be king of kings, in a far more extensive manner than either the
Babylonish, Persian, Grecian, or Roman monarchs were. And an angel appears
standing in the sun, that overlooks the whole world, calling on all the fowls
that fly in the midst of heaven, to come and eat the flesh of kings, etc. And
in consequence of the great victory Christ gains at that time, an angel comes
down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit, and a great ch^in in
his hand, and lays hold on the devil, and binds him, and casts him into the
bottomless pit, and shuts him up, and sets a seal upon him, that he should
deceive the nations no more. Satan's being dispossessed of that highest
monarchy on earth, the Roman empire, and cast out, in the time of Constantine,
is represented by his being cast down from heaven to the earth; but now there
is something far beyond that; he is cast out of the earth, and is shut up in
hell, and confined to that alone, so that he has no place left him in this
world of mankind, high or low.

Now will any be so unreasonable as to say, that all these things do not
signify more than that one third part of the world should be brought into the
church of Christ, beyond which it cannot be pretended that the Christian
religion has ever yet reached, in its greatest extent? Those countries, which
belonged to the Roman empire, that were brought to the profession of
Christianity, after the reign of Constantine, are but a small part of what the
habitable world now is; as to extent of ground, they altogether bear, I
suppose, no greater proportion to it, than the land of Canaan did to the Roman
empire. -- And our Redeemer, in his kingdom of grace, has hitherto possessed
but a little part of the world, in its most flourishing state, since arts are
arisen to their greatest height, and a very great part of the world is but
lately discovered, and much remains undiscovered to this day.

These things make it very evident, that the main fulfillment of those
prophecies that speak of the glorious advancement of Christ's kingdom on earth,
is still to come.

And as there has been nothing as yet, with regard to the flourishing of
religion, and the advancement of Christ's kingdom, of such extent as to answer
the prophecies, so neither has there been any thing of that duration that is
foretold. The prophecies speak of Jerusalem's being made the joy of the whole
earth, and also the joy of many generations. That God's people should long
enjoy the work of their hands. That they should reign with Christ a thousand
years; by which we must at least understand a very long time. But it would be
endless to mention all the places, which signify that the time of the church's
great peace and prosperity should be of long continuance: almost all the
prophecies that speak of her latter-day glory, imply it; and it is implied in
very many of them, that when once this day of the church's advancement and
peace is begun, it shall never end, till the world ends; or, at least, that
there shall be no more a return of her troubles and adversity for any
considerable continuance; that then the days of her mourning shall be ended;
that her tribulations should then be as the waters of Noah unto God; that as he
has so o^^ that the waters of Noah should no more pass over the earth, so he
will swear that he will no more be wroth with his people, or rebuke them; that
God's people should no more walk after the imagination of their evil heart;
that God would hide himself no more from the house of Israel, because he has
poured out his Spirit upon them; that their sun should no more go down, nor the
moon withdraw it self; that the light should not be clear and dark; (i. e.
there should be no more an interchange of light and darkness, as used to be)
but that it should be all one continued day; not day and night, (for so the
words are in the original in Zech. xiv. 7.) alternately, but it shall come to
pass, that at evening-time (i. e. at the time that night and darkness used to
be) it shall be light; and that the nations should beat their swords into
plow-shares, and their spears into pruning hooks; and that nation shall not
lift up sword against nation, nor learn war any more; but that there should be
abundance of peace so long as the moon endures. And innumerable things of this
nature are declared.

But the church of Christ has never yet enjoyed a state of peace and prosperity
for any long time; on the contrary, the times of her rest, and of the
flourishing state of religion, have ever been very short. Hitherto the church
may say, Return, for thy servants sake, the tribes of thine inheritance; the
people of thy holiness have possessed it but a little while. The quietness that
the church of God enjoyed after the beginning of Constantine's reign was very
short; the peace the empire enjoyed, in freedom from war, was not more than
twenty years; no longer nor greater than it had enjoyed under some of the
heathen emperors. After this the empire was rent in pieces by intestine wars,
and wasted almost every where by the invasions and incursions of barbarous
nations, and the Christian world was soon all in contention and confusion, by
heresies and divisions in matters of religion. And the church of Christ has
never as yet bee^ for any long time, free from persecution, ^^pecially when
truth has prevailed, and true religion flourished. It is manifest, that
hitherto the people of God have been kept under, and Zion has been in a low
afflicted state, and her enemies have had the chief sway.

And another thing that makes it exceeding manifest, that that day of the
church's greatest advancement on earth, which is foretold in scripture, has
never yet come, is that, it is so plainly and expressly revealed that this day
should succeed the last of the four monarchies, even the Roman, in its last
state, wherein it is divided into ten kingdoms, and after the destruction of
Antichrist, signified by the little horn, whose reign is contemporary with the
reign of the ten kings. These things are very plain in the second and seventh
chapters of Daniel, and also in the Revelation of St. John. And it is also
plain by the ninth chapter of Romans, that it shall be after the national
conversion of the Jews, which shall be as life from the dead to the Gentiles,
and the fullness of both Jews and Gentiles should be come in, and all the nation
of the Jews, and all other nations, shall obtain mercy, and there shall be that
general in-gathering of the harvest of the whole earth, of which all that had
been converted before, either of Jews or Gentiles, were but the first fruits.
And many other evidences of this point might be mentioned, which for brevity's
sake I omit.

And thus it is meet, that the last kingdom which shall take place on earth,
should be the kingdom of God's own Son and heir, whose right it is to rule and
reign; and that whatever revolutions and confusions there may be in the world,
for a long time, the cause of truth, the righteous cause, should finally
prevail, and God's holy people should at last inherit the earth, and reign on
earth; and that the world should continue in tumults, and great revolutions,
following one another, from age to age, the world being, as it were, in
travail, till truth and holiness are brought forth; that all things should be
shaken, till that comes which is true and right, and agreeable to the mind of
God, which cannot be shaken; and that the wisdom of the ruler of the world
should be manifested in the bringing all things ultimately to so good an issue.
The world is made for the Son of God; his kingdom is the end of all changes
that come to pass in the state of the world of mankind; all are only to prepare
the way for this; it is fit therefore that the last kingdom on earth should be
his. -- It is wisely and mercifully ordered of God that it should be so, on
this account, as well as many others, viz. that the church of God, under all
preceding changes, should have this consideration to encourage her, and
maintain her hope, and animate her faith and prayers, from generation to
generation, that God has promised, her cause should finally be maintained and
prevail in this world.

Let it now be considered,

2. The future promised advancement of the kingdom of Christ is an event
unspeakably happy and glorious. The scriptures speak of that time, as a time
wherein God and his Son Jesus Christ will be most eminently glorified on earth;
a time, wherein God, who till then had dwelt between the cherubims, and
concealed himself in the holy of holies, in the secret of his tabernacle,
behind the veil, in the thick darkness, should openly shine forth, and all
flesh should see his glory, and God's people in general have as great a
privilege as the high priest alone had once a year, or as Moses had in the
mount; a time, wherein the temple of God in heaven should be opened, and there
should be seen the ark of his testament; a time, wherein both God will be
greatly glorified, and his saints made unspeakably happy in the view of his
glory; a time, wherein God's people should not only once see the light of God's
glory, as Moses, or see it once a year with the high priest, but should dwell
and walk continually in it, and it should be their constant daily light,
instead of the light of the sun, which light should be so much more glorious
than the light of the sun or moon, that the moon shall be confounded, and the
sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts should reign in Mount Zion, and in
Jerusalem, before his ancients gloriously.

It is represented as a time of vast increase of knowledge and understanding,
especially in divine things; a time, wherein God would destroy the face of the
covering cast over all people, and the veil spread over all nations; wherein
the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of the
sun sevenfold. And the eyes of them that see shall not be dim, and the heart
of the rash shall understand knowledge. And they shall no more teach every man
his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, because they
shall all know him from the least to the greatest. A time of general holiness.
Thy people shall be all righteous. A time of great prevailing of eminent
holiness, when little children should, in spiritual seize, be as though
they were a hundred years old. Wherein he that is feeble among God's people
should be as David. A time wherein holiness should be, as it were, inscribed on
evething, on all mens' common business and employments, and the common utensils
of life, all shall be dedicated to God, and improved to holy purposes. Her
merchandise and hire shall be holiness to the Lord. In that day shall there be
upon the bells of the horses, HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD; and the pots in the
Lord's house shall be like the bowls before the altar; yea, every pot in
Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holiness unto the Lord of Hosts. A time wherein
religion and true Christianity shall, in every respect, be uppermost in the
world; wherein God will cause his church to arise and shake herself from the
dust, and put on her beautiful garments, and sit down on a throne; and the poor
shall be raised from the dust, and the beggar from the dunghill, and shall be
set among princes, and made to inherit the throne of God's glory. A time
wherein vital piety shall take possession of thrones and palaces, and those
that are in most exalted stations shall be eminent in holiness. And kings shall
be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers. Thou shall suck
the breasts of kings. The daughter of Tire shall be there with a gift, the rich
among the people shall entreat thy favor. A time of wonderful union, and the
most universal peace, love and sweet harmony, wherein the nations shall beat
their swords into plow-shares, etc. and God will cause wars to cease to the
ends of the earth, and break the bow, and cut the spear in sunder, and burn the
chariot in the fire; and the mountains shall bring forth peace to God's people,
and the little hills by righteousness; wherein the wolf should dwell with the
lamb, etc. and wherein God's people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and
in sure dwellings, and quiet resting places. A time wherein all heresies, and
false doctrines shall be exploded, and the church of God shall not be rent with
a variety of jarring opinions. The Lord shall be king over all the earth; in
that day there shall be one Lord and his name one. And all superstitious ways
of worship shall be abolished, and all agree in worshipping God in his own
appointed way, and agreeable to the purity of his institutions. I will give
them one heart and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of
them and their children after them. A time wherein the whole earth shall be
united as one holy city, one heavenly family, men of all nations shall as it
were dwell together, and sweetly correspond one with another as brethren and
children of the same father; as the prophecies often speak of all God's people
at that time as the children of God, and brethren one to another, all
appointing over them one head, gathered to one house of God, to worship the
king, the Lord of Hosts. -- A time wherein this whole great society shall
appear in glorious beauty, in genuine amiable christianity, and excellent
order, as a city compact together, the perfection of beauty, and eternal
excellency, shining with a reflection of the glory of Jehovah risen upon it,
which shall be attractive and ravishing to all kings and nations, and it shall
appear as a bride adorned for her husband. -- A time of great temporal
prosperity; of great health. The inhabitant shall not say, I am sick. As the
days of a tree, are the days of my people. A time wherein the earth shall be
abundantly fruitful. A time wherein the world shall be delivered from that
multitude of sore calamities that before had prevailed, and there shall be an
universal blessing of God upon mankind, in soul and body, and in all their
concerns, and all manner of tokens of God's presence and favor, and God shall
rejoice over them, as the bridegroom rejoiceth over his bride, and the
mountains shall as it were drop down new wine, and the hills shall flow with
milk. A time of great and universal joy throughout the earth, when from the
utmost ends of the earth shall be heard songs, even glory to the righteous, and
God's people shall with joy draw water out of the well of salvation, and God
shall prepare in his holy mountain, a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on
the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined,
which feast is represented, as the marriage supper of the Lamb. Yea, the
scriptures represent it not only as a time of universal joy on earth, but
extraordinary joy in heaven, among the angels and saints, the holy apostles and
prophets there. Yea, the scriptures represent it as a time of extraordinary
rejoicing with Christ himself, the glorious head, in whom all things in heaven
and earth shall then be gathered together in one. The Lord thy God in the midst
of thee is mighty; he will save; he will rejoice over thee with joy; he will
rest in his love; he will joy over thee with singing. And the very fields,
trees and mountains shall then, as it were, rejoice, and break forth into
singing. Ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace; the mountains
and the hills shall break forth before you into singing, and all the trees of
the field shall clap their hands. -- Sing, O heavens, for the Lord has done
it; shout, ye lower parts of the earth; break forth into singing, ye mountains;
O forest, and every tree therein; for the Lord has redeemed Jacob, and
glorified himself in Israel.

Such being the state of things in this future promised glorious day of the
church's prosperity, surely it is worth praying for. Nor is there any one thing
whatsoever, if we viewed things aright, which a regard to the glory of God, a
concern for the kingdom and honor of our Redeemer, a love to his people, pity
to perishing sinners, love to our fellow creatures in general, compassion to
mankind under its various and sore calamities and miseries, a desire of their
temporal and spritual prosperity, love to our country, our neighbors and
friends, yea, and to our own souls, would dispose us to be so much in prayer
for, as for the dawning of this happy day, and the accomplishment of that
glorious event.

It may be worthy to be considered,

3. How much Christ prayed and labored and suffered, in order to the glory and
happiness of that day.

The sum of the blessings Christ sought, by what he did and suffered in the
work of redemption, was the Holy Spirit. So is the affair of our redemption
constituted; the Father provides and gives the Redeemer, and the price of
redemption is offered to him, and he grants the benefit purchased; the Son is
the redeemer who gives the price, and also is the price offered; and the Holy
Spirit is the grand blessing obtained by the price offered, and bestowed on the
redeemed. The Holy Spirit, in his in-dwelling, his influences and fruits, is
the sum of all grace, holiness, comfort and joy; or in one word, of all the
spiritual good Christ purchased for men in this world; and is also the sum of
all perfection, glory and eternal joy, that he purchased for them in another
world. The Holy Spirit is that great benefit, which is the subject matter of
the promises, both of the eternal covenant of redemption, and also of the
covenant of grace; the grand subject of the promises of the Old Testament, in
the prophecies of the blessings of the Messiah's kingdom; and the chief subject
of the promises of the New Testament; and particularly of the covenant of grace
delivered by Jesus Christ (...) his disciples, as his last will and testament,
in the xiv. xv. and xvi. chapters of John; the grand legacy that he bequeathed
to them, in that his last and dying discourse with them. Therefore the Holy
Spirit is so often called the spirit of promise, and emphatically, the promise,
the promise of the Father, etc. This being the great blessing Christ purchased
by his labors and sufferings on earth, it was the blessing he received of the
Father, when he ascended into heaven, and entered into the holy of holies with
his own blood, to communicate to those that he had redeemed. It is expedient
for you, that I go away; for if I go not away, the comforter will not come; but
if I depart, I will send him unto you. Being by the right hand of God exalted,
and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he has shed
forth this which ye now see and hear. This is the sum of those gifts, which
Christ received for men, even for the rebellious, at his ascension. This is the
sum of the benefits Christ obtains for men by his intercession. I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another comforter, that he may abide with you for
ever -- even the spirit of truth. Herein consists Christ's communicative
fullness, even in his being full of the Spirit, and so full of grace and truth,
that we might of this fullness receive, and grace for grace. He is anointed with
the Holy Ghost; and this is the ointment that goes down from the head to the
members. God gives the Spirit not by m^a^^^ unto him, that every one that is
his might receive according to the measure of the gift of Christ. This,
therefore, was the great blessing he prayed for in that wonderful prayer, that
he uttered for his disciples, and all his future church, the evening before he
died. The blessing he prayed for to the Father, in behalf of his disciples, was
the same he had insisted on in his preceding discourse with them; and this,
doubtless, was the blessing he prayed for when, as our High Priest, he offered
up strong crying and tears, with his blood. The same that he shed his blood
for, he also shed tears for, and poured out prayers for.

But the time that we have been speaking of, is the chief time of the
bestowment of this blessing -- the main season of the success of all that
Christ did and suffered in the work of our redemption. Before this the Spirit
of God is given but very sparingly, and but few are saved; but then it will be
far otherwise; wickedness shall be rare then, as virtue and piety had been
before; and, undoubtedly, by far the greatest number of them that ever receive
the benefits of Christ's redemption, from the beginning of the world to the end
of it, will receive it in that (...). The number of the inhabitants of the
earth will, doubtless, then be vastly multiplied, and the number of redeemed
ones much more. If we should suppose that glorious day to last no more than
(literally) a thousand years, and that at the beginning of that thousand years
the world of mankind should be but just as numerous as it is now, and that the
number should be doubled, during that time of great health and peace, and the
universal blessing of heaven, once only in an hundred years, the number at the
end of the thousand years would be more than a thousand times greater than it
is now; and if it should be doubled once in fifty years, (which probably the
number of inhabitants of New England has ordinarily been, in about half that
time) then at the end of the thousand years, there would be more than a million
inhabitants on the face of the earth, where there is one now. And there is
reason to think, that through the greater part of this period, at least, the
number of saints will, in their increase, bear a proportion to the increase of
the number of inhabitants. And it must be considered, that if the number of
mankind at the beginning of this period be no more than equal to the present
number, yet we may doubtless conclude, that the number of true saints will be
immensely greater, when instead of the few true and thorough Christians now in
some few countries, every nation on the ^^ce of the whole earth shall be
converted to Christianity, and every country shall be full of true Christians,
so that the successive multiplication of true saints through the thousand
years, will begin with that vast advantage, beyond the multiplication of
mankind; where the latter is begun from units, the other, doubtless, will begin
with hundreds, if not thousands. How much greater then will be the number of
true converts, that will be brought to a participation of the benefits of
Christ's redemption, during that period, than in all other times put together?
I think, the foregoing things considered, we shall be very moderate in our
conjectures, if we say, it is probable that there will be an hundred thousand
times more, that will actually be redeemed to God by Christ's blood, during
that period of the church's prosperity that we have been speaking of, than ever
had been before, from the beginning of the world to that time.

That time is represented in scripture, as the proper appointed season of
Christ's salvation; eminently the elect season, the accepted time and day of
salvation, the year of Christ's redeemed. This period is spoken of as the
proper time of the dominion of the Redeemer, and reign of his redeeming love,
in the second and seventh chapters of Daniel, and many other places; the proper
time of his harvest, or in-gathering of his fruits from this fallen world; the
appointed day of his triumph over Satan, the great destroyer, and the appointed
day of his marriage with his elect spouse. The time given to the Sun of
Righteousness to rule, as the day is the time God has appointed for the natural
sun to bear rule; therefore the bringing on of this time is called Christ's
coming in his kingdom, wherein he will rent the heavens and come down, and the
Sun of Righteousness shall arise.

The comparatively little saving good ^here is in the world, as the fruit of
Christ's redemption, before that time, is, as it were, granted by way of
anticipation; as we anticipate something of the sun's light by reflection
before the daytime, the proper time of the sun's rule; and as the first fruits
are gathered before the harvest: Then more especially will be the fulfillment of
those great promises, made by God the Father to the Son, for his pouring out
his soul unto death; then shall h^ ^^^e his seed, and the pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hand; then shall he see of the travail of his soul, and be
satisfied, and shall justify many by his knowledge; then will God divide him a
portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; then
shall Christ, in an eminent manner, obtain his chosen spouse, that he loved and
died for, that he might sanctisy and cleanse her, with the washing of water, by
the word, and present her to himself, a glorious church. He will obtain the joy
that was set before him, for which he endured the cross, and despised the
shame, chiefly in the events and consequences of that day: That day, as was
observed before, is often represented as eminently the time of the rejoicing of
the bridegroom. The foreknowledge and consideration of it was what supported
him, and that which his soul exulted in, at a time when his soul had been
troubled at the view of his approaching sufferings; as may be seen in John xii.
23, 24, 27, 31, 32.

Now, therefore, if it be so, that this is what Jesus Christ, our great
Redeemer and the Head of the Church, did so much desire, and set his heart
upon, from all eternity, and which he did and suffered so much for, offering up
strong crying and tears, and his precious blood, to obtain it; surely his
disciples and members should also earnestly seek it, and be much and earnest in
prayer for it.

Let it be considered,

4. The whole creation is, as it were, earnestly waiting for that day, and
constantly groaning and travailing in pain to bring forth the felicity and
glory of it. For that day is above all other times, excepting the day of
judgment, the day of the manifestation of the sons of God, and of their
glorious liberty; and, therefore, that elegant representation the apostle makes
of the earnest expectation and travail of the creation, in Romans viii. 19 -- 22
is applicable to the glorious event of this day. The earnest expectation of the
creature waits for the manifestation of the sons of God. For the creature was
made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who has subjected
the same in hope. Because the creature itself also shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God. For we
know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until
now. -- The visible world has now, for many ages, been subjected to sin, and
made, as it were, a servant to it, through the abusive improvement that man,
who has the dominion over the creatures, puts the creatures to. Thus the sun is
a sort of servant to all manner of wickedness, as its light, and other
beneficial influences are abused by men, and made subservient to their lusts
and sinful purposes. So of the rain, and fruits of the earth, and the brute
animals, and all other parts of the visible creation; they all serve mens'
corruption, and obey their sinful will; and God does, in a sort, subject them
to it, for he continues his influence and power to make them to be obedient,
according to the same law of nature, whereby they yield to mens' command when
used to good purposes. It is by the immediate influence of God upon things,
acting upon them, according to those constant methods which we call the laws of
nature, that they are ever obedient to mens' will, or that we can use them at
all. This influence God continues to make them obedient to mens' will though
wicked; which is a sure sign that the present state of things is not lasting,
it is confusion, and God would not suffer it to be, but that he designs, in a
little time, to put an end to it, when it shall no more be so. Seeing it is to
be but a little while, God chooses rather to subject the creature to man's
wickedness, than to disturb and interrupt the course of nature according to its
stated laws; but it is, as it were, a force upon the creature; for the creature
is abused in it, perverted to far meaner purposes than those for which the
author of its nature made it, and to which he adapted it. The creature,
therefore, is, as it were, unwillingly subject, and would not be subject, but
that it is but for a short time, and it, as it were, hopes for an alteration.
It is a bondage the creature is subject to, from which it was partly delivered
when Christ came, and the gospel was promulgated in the world, and will be more
fully delivered at the commencement of the glorious day we are speaking of, and
perfectly at the day of judgment. This agrees with the context, for the apostle
was speaking of the present fuffering state of the church. The reason why the
church in this world is in a suffering state, is, that the world is subjected
to the sin and corruption of mankind. By vanity, in scripture, is very commonly
meant sin and wickedness, and also by corruption, as might be shown in many
places would my intended brevity allow.

Though the creature is thus subject to vanity, yet it does not rest in this
subjection, but is constantly acting and exerting itself, in order to that
glorious liberty that God has appointed at the time we are speaking of, and, as
it were, reaching forth toward it. All the changes that are brought to pass in
the world, from age to age, are ordered by infinite wisdom, in one respect or
other, to prepare the way for that glorious issue of things, that shall be when
truth and ^ighteousness shall finally prevail, and he, whose right it is, shall
take the kingdom. All the creatures, in all their operations and motions,
continually tend to this; as in a clock, all the motions of the whole system of
wheels and movements, tend to the striking of the hammer at the appointed time.
All the revolutions and restless motions of the sun and and other heavenly
bodies, from day to day, from year to year, and from age to age, are
continually tending thither; as all the many turnings of the wheels of a
chariot, in a journey, tend to the appointed journey's end. -- The mighty
struggles and conflicts of nations, and shakings of kingdoms, and those vast
successive changes that are brought to pass, in the kingdoms and empires of the
world, from one age to another, are, as it were, travail-pangs of the creation,
in order to bring forth this glorious event. And the scriptures represent the
last struggles and changes that shall immediately precede this event, as being
the greatest of all -- as the last pangs of a woman in travail are the most
violent.

The creature thus earnestly expecting this glorious manifestation and liberty
of the children of God, and travailing in pain in order to it, therefore the
scriptures, by a like figure, do very often represent, that when this shall be
accomplished, the whole inanimate creation shall greatly rejoice: That the
heavens shall sing, the earth be glad, the mountains break forth into singing,
the hills be joyful together, the trees clap their hands, the lower parts of
the earth shout, the sea roar and the fullness thereof, and the floods clap
their hands.

All the intelligent elect creation, all God's holy creatures in heaven and
earth, are truly and properly waiting for, and earnestly expecting that event.
It is abundantly represented in scripture as the spirit and character of all
true saints, that they set their hearts upon, love, long, wait and pray for the
promised glory of that day; they are spoken of as those that prefer Jerusalem
to their chief joy; that take pleasure in the stones of Zion, and favor the
dust thereof; that wait for the consolation of Israel. It is the language of
the church of God, and the breathing of the soul of every true saint, that we
have in Psalm. xiv. 7. O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion!
when the Lord brings back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice,
and Israel shall be glad. Agreeably to this was the spirit of old Jacob, which
he expressed when he was dying, in faith in the great promise made to him and
Isaac and Abraham, that in their seed all the families of the earth should be
blessed. I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord. The same is represented as
the spirit of his true children, or the family of Jacob. I will wait upon the
Lord, that hides himself from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him. --
They that love Christ's appearing, is a name that the apostle gives to true
christians.

The glorious inhabitants of the heavenly world, the saints and angels there,
that rejoic^ when one sinner repents, are earnestly waiting, in an assured and
joyful dependence on God's promises of that conversion of the world, and
marriage of the Lamb, which shall be when that glorious day comes; and
therefore they are represented as all with one accord rejoicing and praising
God with such mighty exultation and triumph, when it is accomlished, in Romans
xix.

5. The word of God is full of precepts, encouragements and examples, tending
to excite and induce the people of God to be much in prayer for this mercy.

The spirit of God is the chief of the blessings that are the subject matter of
christian prayer; for it is the sum of all spiritual blessings; which are those
that we need infinitely more than others; and are those wherein our true and
eternal happiness consists. -- That which is the sum of the blessings that
Christ purchased, is the sum of the blessings that Christians have to pray for;
but that, as was observed before, is the Holy Spirit; and therefore when the
disciples came to Christ, and desired him to teach them to pray, Luke xi. he
accordingly gave them particular directions for the performance of this duty;
-- the conclusion of his whole discourse, in the 13th verse, plainly shows that
the Holy Spirit is the sum of the blessings that are the subject matter of that
prayer about which he had instructed them. If ye then, being evil, know how to
give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father
give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? From which words of Christ we may
also observe, that there is no blessing that we have so great encouragement to
pray for, as the Spirit of God; the words imply, that our heavenly Father is
especially ready to bestow his Holy Spirit on them that ask him. Of the more
excellent nature any benefit is, which we stand in need of, the more ready God
is to bestow it in answer to prayer. The infinite goodness of God's nature is
the more gratified, and the grand design and aim of the contrivance and work of
our redemption, is the more answered, and Jesus Christ the Redeemer has the
greater success in his undertaking and labors; and those desires that are
expressed in prayer for the most excellent blessings are the most excellent
desires, and consequently such as God most approves of, and is most ready to
gratify.

The scriptures do not only direct and encourage us in general to pray for the
Holy Spirit above all things else, but it is the expressly pressly revealed
will of God, that his church should be very much in prayer for that glorious
out-pouring of the Spirit that is to be in the latter days, and the things that
shall be accomplished by it. God speaking of that blessed event, Ezekiel. xxxvi.
under the figure of cleansing the house of Israel from all their iniquities,
planting and building their waste and ruined places, and making them to become
like the garden of Eden, and filling them with men like a flock, like the holy
flock, the flock of Jerusalem in her solemn feasts; wherein he, doubtless, has
respect to the same glorious restoration and advancement of his church that is
spoken of in the next chapter, and in all the following chapters to the end of
the book, he says, ver. 37. Thus says the Lord, I will yet for this be
enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them. Which, doubtless,
implies, that it is the will of God that extraordinary prayerfulness in his
people for this mercy should precede the bestowment of it.

I know of no place in the Bible, where so strong an expression is made use of
to signify importunity in prayer, as is used in Isai. lxii. 6, 7. where the
people of God are called upon to be importunate for this mercy: Ye that make
mention of the Lord, keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he establish,
and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. How strong is the phrase? And
how loud is this call to the church of God, to be fervent and incessant in
their cries to him for this great mercy? How wonderful are the words to be
used, concerning the manner in which such worms of the dust should address the
high and lofty One that inhabits eternity? And what encouragement is here, to
approach the mercy-seat with the greatest freedom, boldness, earnestness,
constancy, and full assurance of faith, to seek of God this greatest thing that
can be sought in christian prayer?

It is a just observation of a certain eminent minister of the church of
Scotland, in a discourse of his, on social prayer, in which, speaking of
pleading for the success of the gospel, as required by the Lord's prayer, he
says, That notwithstanding of its being so compendious, yet the one half of it,
that is, three petitions in six, and these the first prescribed, do all relate
to this great case; so that to put up any one of these petitions apart, or all
of them together, is upon the matter, to pray that the dispensation of the
gospel may be blessed with divine power. That glorious day we are speaking of
is the proper and appointed time, above all others, for the bringing to pass
the things requested in each of these petitions; as the prophecies every where
represent that as the time, which God has especially appointed for the
hallowing or glorifying his own great name in this world, causing his glory to
be revealed, that all flesh may see it together, causing it openly to be
manifested in the sight of the heathen, filling the whole world with the light
of his glory to such a degree, that the moon shall be confounded and the sun
ashamed before that brighter glory; the appointed time for the glorifying and
magnifying the name of Jesus Christ, causing every knee to bow, and every
tongue to confess to him. This is the proper time of God's kingdom's coming, or
of Christ's coming in his kingdom: that is the very time foretold in the iid of
Daniel, when the Lord God of heaven shall set up a kingdom, in the latter times
of the last monarchy, when it is divided into ten kingdoms; and that is the
very time foretold in the viith of Daniel, when there should be given to One
like to the Son of Man, dominion, glory, and a kingdom, that all people,
nations, and languages, should serve him; and the kingdom and dominion, and the
greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven shall be given to the people of
the saints of the most high God, after the destruction of the little horn, that
should continue for a time, times, and the dividing of time. And that is the
time wherein God's will shall be done on earth, as it is done in heaven; when
heaven shall, as it were, be bowed, and come down to the earth, as God's people
shall be all righteous, and holiness to the Lord shall be written on the bells
of the horses, etc. So that the three first petitions of the Lord's prayer are,
in effect, no other than requests for the bringing on this glorious day. -- And
as the Lord's prayer begins with asking for this, in the three first petitions,
so it concludes with it, in these words, For thine is the kingdom, and the
power, and the glory for ever. Amen. Which words imply a request, that God
would take to himself his great power, and reign, and manifest his power and
glory in the world. Thus Christ teaches us, that it becomes his disciples to
seek this above all other things, and make it the first and the last in their
prayers, and that every petition should be put up in a subordination to the
advancement of God's kingdom and glory in the world.

Besides what has been observed of the Lord's prayer, if we look through the
whole Bible, and observe all the examples of prayer that we find there
recorded, we shall not find so many prayers for any other mercy, as for the
deliverance, restoration, and prosperity of the church, and the advancement of
God's glory and kingdom of grace in the world. If we well consider the prayers
that we find recorded in the book of Psalms, I believe we shall see reason to
think, that a very great, if not the greater part of them, are prayers uttered,
either in the name of Christ, or in the name of the church, for such a mercy;
and undoubtedly, the greatest part of that book of Psalms, is made up of
prayers for this mercy, prophecies of it, and prophetical praises for it.

The prophets, in their prophecies of the restoration and advancement of the
church, very often speak of it as what shall be done in answer to the prayers
of God's people. Isai: xxv. 9. -- xxvi. 9, 12, 13, 16, 17. to the end. Chap.
xxxiii. 2. Psalm. cii. 13 -- 22. Jer. iii. 21. Isai. lxv. 24. -- xli. 17. Hos.
v. 15. with vi. 1, 2, 3. and xiv. 2. to the end. -- Zech. x. 6. -- xii. x. and
xiii. 9. Isai. lv. 6. with ver. 12, 13. Jer. xxxiii. 3. The prophecies of
future glorious times of the church, are often introduced with a prayer of the
church for her deliverance and advancement, prophetically uttered, as in Isai.
li. 9, etc. Chap. lxiii. 11. to the end, and lxiv. throughout.

In order to Christ's being mystically born into the world, in the advancement
and flourishing of true religion, and great increase of the number of true
converts who are spoken of as having Christ formed in them, the scriptures
represent it as requisite, that the church should first be in travail, crying,
and pained to be delivered. And one thing that we have good reason to
understand by it, is her exercising strong desires, and wrestling and agonizing
with God in prayer for this event; because we find such figures of speech used
in this sense elsewhere. My little children, of whom I travail in birth again,
until Christ be formed in you. Lord, in trouble have they visited thee; they
poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them. Like as a woman with
child, that draws near the time of her delivery, is in pain, and cries out
in her pangs, so have we been in thy sight, O Lord. And certainly it is fit,
that the church of God should be in travail for that, which (as I before
observed) the whole creation travails in pain for.

The scriptures do not only abundantly manifest it to be the duty of God's
people to be much in prayer for this great mercy, but they also abound with
manifold considerations to encourage them in it, and animate them with hopes of
success. There is, perhaps, no one thing that so much of the Bible is taken up
in the promises of, in order to encourage the faith, hope, and prayers of the
saints as this, which at once affords to God's people the clearest evidences
that it is their duty to be much in prayer for this mercy, (for, undoubtedly,
that which God does abundantly make the subject of his promises, God's people
should abundantly make the subject of their prayers) and also affords them the
strongest assurances that their prayers shall be successful. With what
considence may we go before God, and pray for that, of which we have so many
exceeding precious and glorious promises to plead? The very first promise of
God to fallen man, even that it shall bruise thy head, is a promise which is to
have its chief fulfillment at that day; and the whole Bible concludes with a
promise of the glory of that day, and a prayer for its fulfillment. He that
testifies these things, says -- Surely, I come quickly -- Amen. Even so,
come, Lord Jesus.

The scripture gives us great reason to think, that when once there comes to
appear much of a spirit of prayer in the church of God for this mercy, then it
will soon be accomplished. It is evidently with reference to this mercy, that
God makes that promise, When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none,
and their tongue fails for thirst, I, the Lord, will hear them; I, the God of
Israel, will not forsake them; I will open rivers in high places, and fountains
in the midst of the valleys; I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and
the dry land springs of water; I will plant in the wilderness the ^^^dar, the
shittah-tree, and the myrtle, and the oil-tree; I will set in the desert the
fir tree, the pine, and the box-tree together. Spiritual waters and rivers are
explained by the apostle John, to be the Holy Spirit. It is now a time of
scarcity of these spiritual waters; there are, as it were, none: If God's
people, in this time of great drought, were but made duly sensible of this
calamity, and their own emptiness and necessity, and brought earnestly to
thirst and cry for needed supplies, God would, doubtless, soon fulfill this
blessed promise. -- We have another promise much like this, in Psalm. cii. 16,
17. When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory; he will
regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer. And
remarkable are the words that follow in the next verse: This shall be written
for the generation to come; and the people which shall be created shall praise
the Lord. Which seems to signify, that this promise shall be left on record to
encourage some future generation of God's people to pray and cry earnestly for
this mercy, to whom he would fulfill the promise, and thereby give them, and
great multitudes of others, that should be converted through their prayers,
occasion to praise his name. Who knows but that the generation here spoken of,
may be this present generation? One thing mentioned in the character of that
future generation, is certainly true concerning the present, viz. That it is
destitute; the church of God is in very low, sorrowful and needy circumstances;
and if the next thing, there supposed, were also verified in us, viz. That we
were made sensible of our great calamity, and brought to cry earnestly to God
for help, I am persuaded that the third would be also verified, viz. That our
prayers would be turned into joyful praises, for God's gracious answers of our
prayers. It is spoken of as a sign and evidence, that the time to favor Zion
is come, when God's servants are brought, by their prayerfulness for her
restoration, in an eminent manner, to show that they favor her stones and
dust. Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Zion; for the time to favor her,
yea, the set time is come; for thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and
favor the dust thereof.

God has respect to the prayers of his saints in all his government of the
world, as we may observe by the representation made, Revelations viii. at the
beginning. There we read of seven angels standing before the throne of God, and
receiving of him seven trumpets, at the sounding of which great and mighty
changes were to be brought to pass in the world, through many successive ages.
But when these angels had received their trumpets, they must stand still, and
all must be in silence, not one of them must be allowed to sound, until the
prayers of the saints are attended to. The angel of the covenant, as a glorious
High Priest, comes and stands at the altar, with much incense, to offer with
the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar, before the throne; and the
smoke of the incense, with the prayers of the saints, ascends up with
acceptance before God, out of the angel's hand; and then the angels prepare
themselves to sound. -- And God, in the events of every trumpet, remembers
those prayers, as appears at last, by the great and glorious things he
accomplishes for his church, in the issue of all, in answer to these prayers,
in the event of the last trumpet, which brings the glory of the latter days,
when these prayers shall be turned into joyful praises. Rev. xi. 15, 16, 17.
And the seventh angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven, saying --
The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his
Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever. And the four-and-twenty elders,
which sat before God on their seats, fell upon their faces, and worshipped God,
saying, We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art
to come, because thou have taken to thee thy great power, and have reigned.
Since it is thus, that it is the pleasure of God so to honor his people, as to
carry on all the designs of his kingdom in this way, viz. by the prayers of his
saints; this gives us great reason to think, that whenever the time comes that
God gives an extraordinary spirit of prayer for the promised advancement of his
kingdom on earth, (which is God's great aim in all preceding providence, and
which is the main thing that the spirit of prayer in the saints aims at) then
the fulfilling this event is nigh.

God, in wonderful grace, is pleased to represent himself, as it were, at the
command of his people, with regard to mercies of this nature, so as to be ready
to bestow them whenever they shall earnestly pray for them. Thus says the
Lord, the holy O^^ of Israel, and his maker, Ask of me of things to come,
concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands, command ye me. What
God is speaking of in this context, is the restoration of his church; not only
a restoration from temporal calamity, and an outward captivity by Cyrus; but
also a spiritual restoration and advancement, by God's commanding the heavens
to drop down from above, and the skies to pour down righteousness, and causing
the earth to open and bring forth salvation, and righteousness to spring up
together. God would have his people ask of him, or enquire of him by earnest
prayer, to do this for them; and manifests himself as being at the command of
earnest prayers for such a mercy: and a reason why God is so ready to hear such
prayers, is couched in the words, viz. Because it is prayer for his own church,
his chosen and beloved people, his sons and daughters, and the work of his
hands; and he cannot deny any thing that is asked for their comfort and
prosperity.

God speaks of himself as standing ready to be gracious to his church, and to
appear for its restoration, and only waiting for such an opportunity to bestow
this mercy, when he shall hear the cries of his people for it, that he may
bestow it in answer to their prayers. Therefore will the Lord wait, that he may
be gracious to thee; and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy
upon you: For the Lord is a God of judgment; blessed are all they that wait for
him. For the people shall dwell in Zion at Jerusalem. -- Thou shall weep no
more; he will be very gracious unto thee, at the voice of thy cry: -- when he
shall hear it, he shall answer thee. -- The words imply as much as that when
God once sees his people much engaged in praying for this mercy, it shall be no
longer delayed. Christ desires to hear the voice of his spouse, that is in the
clefts of the rock, in the secret places of the stairs; in a low and obscure
state, driven into secret corners: he only waits for this, in order to put an
end to her state of affliction, and cause the day to break, and the shadows to
flee away. If he once heard her voice in earnest prayer, he would come swifty
over the mountains of separation between him and her, as a roe, or young heart.
When his church is in a low state, and oppressed by her enemies, and cries to
him, he will swiftly fly to her relief, as birds fly at the cry of their young.
Yea, when that glorious day comes, that I am speaking of, before they call, he
will answer them, and while they are yet speaking, he will hear; and, in answer
to their prayers, he will make the wolf and the lamb feed together, etc. When
the spouse prays for the effusion of the Holy Spirit, and the coming of Christ,
by granting the tokens of his spiritual presence in the church, saying, Awake,
O north wind, and come, thou south, blow upon my garden, that the spices
thereof may flow out; let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his pleasant
fruits; there seems to be an immediate answer to her prayer, in the next words,
in abundant communications of the Spirit, and bestowment of spiritual
blessings; I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse; I have gathered my
myrrh with my spice; I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey; I have drunk my
wine with my milk. Eat, O friends; drink, yea, drink abundantly, O beloved.

Scripture instances and examples of success in prayer, give great
encouragement to pray for this mercy. Most of the remarkable deliverances and
restorations of the church of God, that we have account of in the scriptures,
were in answer to prayer. So was the redemption of the church of God from the
Egyptian bondage. The great restoration of the church in the latter day, is
spoken of as resembled by this; as in Isai. lxiv. 1 -- 4. xi. 11, 15, 16.
xliii. 2, 3, 16 -- 19. li. 10, 11, 15. lxiii. 11, 12, 13. Zech. x. 10, 11. Hos.
ii. 14, 15. It was in answer to prayer, that the sun stood still over Gibeon,
and the moon in the valley of Ajalon, and God's people obtained that great
victory over their enemies: in which wonderful miracle, God seemed to have some
respect to a future more glorious event to be accomplished for the christian
church, in the day of her victory over her enemies, in the latter days; even
that event foretold, Isai. xl. 20. Thy sun shall no more go down, neither shall
thy moon withdraw itself. It was in answer to prayer, that God delivered his
church from the mighty host of the Assyrians, in Hezekiah's time; which
dispensation is abundantly made use of, as a type of the great things God will
do for the christian church in the latter days, in the prophecies of Isaiah.
The restoration of the church of God from the Babylonish captivity, as
abundantly appears both by scripture-prophecies and histories, was in answer to
extraordinary prayer; see Jer. xxix. 10 -- 14. and l. 4, 5. Dan. ix.
throughout. Ezra viii. 21, etc. Neh. i. 4. to the end. -- iv. 4, 5. and chap.
ix. throughout. This restoration of the Jewish church, after the destruction of
Babylon, is evidently a type of the glorious restoration of the christian
church, after the destruction of the kingdom of Antichrist; which, as all know,
is abundantly spoken of in the revelation of St. John, as the antitype of
Babylon. Sampson, out of weakness, received strength to pull down Dagon's
temple, through prayer. So the people of God, in the latter days, will, out of
weakness, be made strong, and will become the instruments of pulling down the
kingdom of Satan, by prayer.

The Spirit of God was poured out upon Christ himself, in answer to prayer. Now
when all the people were baptized, it came to pass, that Jesus also being
baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened, and the Holy Ghost descended in a
bodily shape like a dove, upon him; and a voice came from heaven, which said,
Thou art my beloved Son, in Thee I am well pleased. The Spirit descendes on the
church of Christ, the same way, in this respect, that it descended on the head
of the church. The greatest effusion of the Spirit that ever yet has been, even
that which was in the primitive times of the christian church, which began in
Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost, was in answer to extraordinary prayer. When
the disciples were gathered together to their Lord, a little before his
ascension, he commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but
wait for the promise of the Father, which, says he, ye have heard of me, i. e.
the promise of the Holy Ghost; Acts. i. 4. What they had their hearts upon was
the restoration of the kingdom of Israel: Lord, say they, will thou, at this
time, restore again the kingdom to Israel, ver. 6. And according to Christ's
direction, after his ascension, they returned to Jerusalem, and continued in
united fervent prayer and supplication. It seems they spent their time in it
from day to day, without ceasing; until the spirit came down in a wonderful
manner upon them, and that work was begun which never ceased, until the world
was turned upside down, and all the chief nations of it were converted to
christianity; and that glorious deliverance and advancement of the christian
church, that was in the days of Constantine the Great, followed the
extraordinary cries of the church to God, as the matter is represented, Rev.
vi. at the opening of the fifth seal. The church, in her suffering state, is
represented crying with a loud voice, How long, Lord, holy and true, do thou
not judge, and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? And the
opening of the next seal brings on that mighty revolution, in the days of
Constantine, compared to those great changes that shall be at the end of the
world.

As there is so great and manifold reason from the word of God, to think that
if a spirit of earnest prayer for that great effusion of the Spirit of God
which I am speaking of, prevailed in the christian church, the mercy would be
soon granted: so those that are engaged in such prayer might well expect the
first benefit. God will come to those that are seeking him and waiting for him;
Isai. xxv. 9. and xxxvi. 8. When Christ came in the flesh, he was first
revealed to them who were waiting for the consolation of Israel, and looking
for redemption in Jerusalem. And in that great out-pouring of the Spirit that
was in the days of the apostles, which was attended with such glorious effects
among the Jews and Gentiles, the Spirit came down first on those that were
engaged in united earnest prayer for it. -- A special blessing is promised to
them that love and pray for the prosperity of the church of God. Pray for the
peace of Jerusalem. They shall prosper, that love thee.

7. We are presented with many motives in the dispensations of Divine
Providence, at this day, to excite us to be much in prayer for this mercy.

There is much in Providence to show us our need of it, and put us on desiring
it. -- The great outward calamities, in which the world is involved, and
particularly the bloody war that embroils and wastes the nations of
Christendom, and in which our nation has so great a share, may well make all
that believe God's word, and love mankind, earnestly long and pray for that
day, when the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the nations shall beat their
swords into plow-shares, etc. But especially do the spiritual calamities, and
miseries of the present time, show our great need of that blessed effusion of
God's Spirit; there having been, for so long a time, so great a withholding of
the Spirit, from the greater part of the Christian world, and such dismal
consequences of it, in the great decay of vital piety, and the exceeding
prevalence of infidelity, heresy, and all manner of vice and wickedness; and
especially in our land and nation; of which a most affecting account has lately
been published in a pamphlet, printed in London, and reprinted in Scotland,
entitled, Britain's Remembrancer; by which it seems that luxury, and wickedness
of almost every kind, is well nigh come to the utmost extremity in the nation;
and if vice should continue to prevail and increase for one generation more, as
it has the generation past, it looks as though the nation could hardly continue
in being, but must sink under the weight of its own corruption and wickedness.
And the state of things in the other parts of the British dominions, besides
England, is very deplorable. The church of Scotland has very much lost her
glory, greatly departing from her ancient purity, and excellent order; and has
of late been bleeding with great and manifold wounds, occasioned by their
divisions and hot contentions. And there are frequent complaints from thence,
by those that lament the corruptions of that land, of fin and wickedness, of
innumerable kinds, abounding and prevailing of late, among all ranks and sorts
of men there. And how lamentable is the moral and religious state of these
American colonies? Of New England in particular! How much is that kind of
religion, that was professed and much experienced and practiced, in the first,
and apparently the best times in New England, grown and growing out of credit?
What fierce and violent contentions have been of late among ministers and
people, about things of a religious nature? How much is the gospel ministry
grown into contempt? and the work of the ministry, in many respects, laid under
uncommon difficulties, and even in danger of linking amongst us?. How many of
our congregations and churches rending in pieces? Church Discipline weakened,
and ordinances less and less regarded. What wild and extravagant notions, gross
delusions of the devil, and strange practices have prevailed, and do still
prevail, in many places, under a pretext of extraordinary purity, spirituality,
liberty, and zeal against formality, usurpation, and conformity to the world?
How strong and deeply rooted and general are the prejudices that prevail
against vital religion, and the power of godliness, and almost every thing that
appertains to it, or tends to it? How apparently are the hearts of people,
every where, uncommonly shut up against all means and endeavors to awaken
sinners and revive religion? Vice and immorality, of all kinds, withal
increasing and unusually prevailing? -- May not an attentive view and
consideration of such a state of things well influence the people that favor
the dust of Zion, to earnestness in their cries to God for a general
out-pouring of his Spirit, which only can be an effectual remedy for these
evils?

Besides the things that have been mentioned, the fresh attempts made by the
Antichristian powers against the Protestant interest, in their late endeavors
to restore a Popish government in Great Britain, the chief bulwark of the
Protestant cause; as also the persecution lately revived against the
Protestants in France, may well give occasion to the people of God, to renewed
and extraordinary earnestness in their prayers to him, for the fulfillment of
the promised downfall of Antichrist, and that liberty and glory of his church
that shall follow.

As there is much in the present state of things to show us our great need of
this mercy, and to cause us to desire it; so there is very much to convince us,
that God alone can bestow it, and show us our entire and absolute dependence on
him for it. The insufficiency of human abilities to bring to pass any such
happy change in the world as is foretold, or to afford any remedy to mankind,
from such miseries as have been mentioned, does now remarkably appear. Those
observations of the apostle, 1 Cor. i. The world by wisdom knows not God, and
God makes foolish the wisdom of this world, never were verified to such a
degree as they are now. Great discoveries have been made in the arts and
sciences, and never was human learning carried to such a height, as in the
present age; and yet never did the cause of religion and virtue run so low, in
nations professing the true religion. Never was an age wherein so many learned
and elaborate treatises have been written, in proof of the truth and divinity
of the Christian religion; yet never were there so many infidels among those
that were brought up under the light of the gospel. It is an age, as is
supposed, of great light, freedom of thought, and discovery of truth in matters
of religion, and detection of the weakness and bigotry of our ancestors, and of
the solly and absurdity of the notions of those that were accounted eminent
divines in former generations; which notions, it is imagined, did destroy the
very foundations of virtue and religion, and enervate all precepts of morality,
and, in effect, annual all difference between virtue and vice; and yet vice and
wickedness did never so prevail, like an overflowing deluge. It is an age
wherein those mean and stingy principles as they are called, of our
forefathers, which, as is supposed, deformed religion, and led to unworthy
thoughts of God, are very much discarded, and grown out of credit, and supposed
more free, noble and generous tho'ts of the nature of religion, and of the
Christian scheme are entertained; but yet never was an age, wherein religion in
general was so much despised and trampled on, and Jesus Christ and God Almighty
so blasphemed and treated with open daring contempt.

The exceeding weakness of mankind, and their insufficiency in themselves for
the bringing to pass any thing great and good in the world, with regard to its
moral and spiritual state, remarkably appears in many things that have attended
and followed the extraordinary religious commotion, that has lately been in
many parts of Great Britain and America. The infirmity of the human nature has
been manifested, in a very affecting manner, in the various passions that men
have been the subjects of, and innumerable ways that they have been moved, as a
reed shaken with the wind, on occasion of the changes and incidents, both
public and private, of such a state of things. How many errors and extremes are
we liable to? How quickly over-topped, blinded, misled, and confounded? And how
easily does Satan make fools of men, if confident in their own wisdom and
strength, and left to themselves? Many, in the late wonderful season, were
ready to admire and trust in men, as if all depended on such and such
instruments, at least did ascribe to much to their skill and zeal, because God
was pleased to improve them a little while to do extraordinary things; but what
great things does the skill and zeal of instruments do now, when the Spirit of
God is withdrawn?

As the present state of things may well excite earnest desires, after the
promised general revival and advancement of true religion, and serve to show
ou^ dependence on God for it, so there are ma^y things in Providence, of late,
that tend to encourage us in prayer for such a mercy. That infidelity, heresy
and vice do so prevail, and that corruption and wickedness are risen to such an
extreme height, is that which is exceeding deplorable; but yet, I think,
considering God's promises to his church and the ordinary method of his
dispensations, hope may justly be gathered from it, that the present state of
things will not last long, but that a happy change is nigh. We know, that God
never will desert the cause of truth and holiness, nor suffer the gates of hell
to prevail against the church; and that it has usually been so from the
beginning of the world, that the state of the church has appeared most dark,
just before some remarkable deliverance and advancement. Many a time may Israel
say -- Had not the Lord been on our s^de, then our enemies would have swallowed
us up quick -- The waters had overwhelmed us. The church's extremity has often
been God's opportunity for the magnifying his power, mercy and faithfulness
toward her. The interest of vital piety has long been in general decaying, and
error and wickedness prevailing; it looks as though the disease were now come
to a crisis, and that things cannot long remain in such a state, but that a
change may be expected in one respect or other. And not only God's manner of
dealing with his church in former ages, and many things in the promises and
prophecies of his word, but also several things appertaining to present and
late aspects of Divine Providence, seem to give reason to hope that the change
will be such, as to magnify God's free grace and sovereign mercy, and not his
revenging justice and wrath. There are certain times, that are days of
vengeance, appointed for the more special displays of God's justice and
indignation; and God has also his days of mercy, accepted times, chosen
seasons, wherein it is his pleasure to show mercy, and nothing shall hinder it;
they are times appointed for the magnifying of the Redeemer and his merits, and
the triumphs of his grace, wherein his grace shall triumph over mens'
unworthiness in its greatest height. And if we consider God's late dealings
with our nation and this land, it appears to me that there is much to make us
think that this day is such a day; particularly God's preserving and delivering
the nation, when in so great danger of ruin by the late rebellion, and his
preserving New England, and the other British colonies in America, in so
remarkable a manner, from the great armament from France, prepared and sent
against us the last year; and the almost miraculous success given to us against
our enemies at Cape-Breton the year before, disappointing their renewed
preparations and (...) against these colonies, this present year 1747, by
delivering up the strength of their fleet into the hands of the English, as
they were in their way hither. And also in protecting 07 us, from time to time,
from armies by land, that have come against us from Canada since the beginning
of the present war with France. Besides many strange instances of protection of
particular forts and settlements, showing a manifest interposition of the hand
of heaven, to the observation of some of our enemies, and even of the savages.
And added to these, the late unexpected restoring of the greater part of our
many captives in Canada, by those that held them prisoners there. It appears to
me, that God has gone much out of his usual way, in his exercises of mercy,
patience and long-suffering in these instances. God's patience was very
wonderful of old, toward the ten tribes, and the people of Judah and
Jerusalem, and afterward to the Jews in Christ's and the apostles times; but
it seems to me, all things considered, not equal to his patience and mercy to
us. God does not only forbear to destroy us, notwithstanding all (...)
provocations and their aggravations, which it would be endless to recount; but
he has, in the forementioned instances, wrought great things for us, wherein
his hand has been most visible, and his arm made bare; especially those two
instances in America, God's succeeding us against Cape-Breton, and confounding
the armada from France the last year; dispensations of Providence which, if
considered in all their circumstances, were so wonderful, and apparently
manifesting an extraordinary divine interposition; that they come, perhaps, the
nearest to a parallel with God's wonderful works of old, in Moses's, Joshua's,
and Hezekiah's time, of any that have been in these latter ages of the world.
And it is to my present purpose to observe, that God was pleased to do great
things for us in both these instances, in answer to extraordinary prayer. Such
remarkable appearances of a spirit of prayer, on any particular public
occasion, have not been in the land, at any time within my observation and
memory, as an occasion of the affair of Cape-Breton. -- And it is worthy to be
noted and remembered, that God sent that great storm on the fleet of our
enemies the last year, that finally dispersed, and utterly confounded them, and
caused them wholly to give over their designs against us, the very night after
our day of public fasting and prayer, for our protection and their confusion.

Thus, although it be a day of great apostasy and provocation, yet it is
apparently a day of the wonderful works of God; wonders of power and mercy,
which may well lead us to think on those two places of scripture, Psalm. cxix.
126. It is time for thee, Lord, to work, for they have made void thy law. --
And Psalm. lxxv. 1. That thy name is near, thy wondrous works declare. -- God
appears, as it were, loath to destroy us, or deal with us according to our
iniquities, as great and aggravated as they are, and shows that mercy pleases
him. As corrupt a time as it is, it is plain, by experience, that it is a time
wherein God may be found, and stands ready to show mercy in answer to prayer.
He that has done such great things, and has so wonderfully and speedily
answered prayer for temporal mercies, will much more give the Holy Spirit if we
ask him. He marvellously preserves us, and waits to be gracious to us, as
though he chose to make us monuments of his grace, and not his vengeance, and
waits only to have us open our mouths wide, that he may fill them.

The late remarkable religious awakenings, that have been in many parts of the
Christian world, are another thing that may justly encourage us in prayer for
the promised glorious and universal out-pouring of the Spirit of God. In or
about the year 1732 or 1733, God was pleased to pour out his Spirit on the
people of Saltzburg, in Germany, who were living under Popish darkness, in a
most uncommon manner; so that above twenty thousand of them, merely by reading
the Bible, which they made a shift to get in their own language, were
determined to throw off Popery, and embrace the reformed Religion; yea, and to
become so very zealous for the truth and gospel of Jesus Christ, as to be
willing to suffer the loss of all things in the world, and actually to forsake
their houses, lands, goods and relations, that they might enjoy the pure
preaching of the gospel; -- with great earnestness, and tears in their eyes,
beseeching Protestant ministers to preach to them, in different places where
they came, when banished from their own country. -- In the year 1734 and 1735,
there appeared a very great and general awakening in the county of Hampshire,
in the province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England, and also in many
parts of Connecticut. Since this, there has been a far more extensive awakening
of many thousands in England, Wales, and Scotland, and almost all the British
provinces in North America. There has also been something remarkable of the
same kind in some places of the United Netherlands; and about two years ago, a
very great awakening and reformation of many of the Indians in the Jerseys and
Pennsylvania, even among such as never embraced Christianity before; and within
these two years, a great awakening in Virginia and Maryland. Notwithstanding
the great diversity of opinions about the issue of some of these awakenings,
yet I know of none that have denied that there have been great awakenings of
late, in these times and places, and that multitudes have been brought to more
than common concern for their salvation, and for a time were made more than
ordinarily afraid of sin, and bro't to reform their former vicious courses, and
take much pains for their salvation. If I should be of the opinion of those
that think these awakenings and strivings of God's Spirit have been generally
not well improved, and so, as to most, have not issued well, but have ended in
enthusiasm and delusion, yet, that the Spirit of God has been of late so
wonderfully awakening and striving with such multitudes, in so many different
parts of the world, and even to this day, in one place or other, continues to
awaken men, is what I should take great encouragement from, that God was about
to do something more glorious, and would, before he finishes, bring things to a
greater ripeness, and not finally suffer this work of his to be frustrated and
rendered abortive by Satan's crafty management; and that these unusual
commotions are the forerunners of something exceedingly glorious approaching;
as the wind, earthquake and fire, at Mount Sinai, were forerunners of that
voice, wherein God was, in a more eminent manner; although they also were
caused by a divine power, as it is represented, that these things were caused
by the Lord passing by. 1 Kings xix. 11, 12.

8. How condecent, how beautiful, and of good tendency would it be, for
multitudes of Christians, in various parts of the world, by explicit agreement,
to unite (...) such prayer as is proposed to us.

Union is one of the most amiable things that p^rtains to human society; yea,
it is one of the most beautiful and happy things on earth, which indeed makes
earth most like heaven. God has made of one blood all nations of men, to dwell
on all the face of the earth; hereby teaching us this moral lesson, that it
becomes mankind all to be united as one family. And this is agreeable to the
nature that God has given men, disposing them to society; and the circumstances
God has placed them in, so many ways obliging and necessitating them to it. A
civil union, or an harmonious agreement among men, in the management of their
secular concerns, is amiable; but much more a pious union, and sweet agreement
in the great business for which man was created, and had powers given him
beyond the brutes; even the business of religion, the life and soul of which is
love. Union is spoken of in scripture as the peculiar beauty of the church of
Christ, Cant. vi. 9. My dove, my undefiled is but one, she is the only one of
her mother, she is the choice one of her that bare her; the daughters saw her
and blessed her, yea, the queens and the concubines, and they praised her.
Psalm. cxxii. 5. Jerusalem is builded as a city that is compact together. Ephesians.
iv. 3 -- 6. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
There is one body and one spirit; even as ye are called in one hope of your
calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God, and Father of all, who is
above all, and through all, and in you all. Ver. 16. The whole body fitly
framed together and compacted, by that which every joint supplieth, according
to the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the
body, unto the edisying itself in love.

As it is the glory of the church of Christ, that she, in all her members,
however dispersed, is thus one, one holy society, one city, one family, one
body; so it is very desirable, that this union should be manifested, and become
visible; and so, that her distant members should act as one, in those things
that concern the common interest of the whole body, and in those duties and
exercises wherein they have to do with their common lord and head, as seeking
of him the common prosperity. It becomes all the members of a particular
family, who are strictly united, and have in so many respects one common
interest, to unite in prayer to God for the things they need; it becomes a
nation, in days of prayer, appointed by national authority, at certain seasons,
visibly to unite in prayer for those public mercies that concern the interest
of the whole nation; so it becomes the church of Christ, which is one holy
nation, a peculiar people, one heavenly family, more strictly united, in many
respects, and having infinitely greater interests that are common to the whole,
than any other society; I say, it especially becomes this society, visibly to
unite, and expressly to agree together in prayer to God for the common
prosperity; and above all, that common prosperity and advancement that is so
unspeakably great and glorious, which God has so abundantly promised to fulfill
in the latter days.

It is becoming of Christians, with whose character a narrow selfish spirit,
above all others, disagrees, to be much in prayer for that public mercy,
wherein consists the welfare and happiness of the whole body of Christ, of
which they are members, and the greatest good of mankind. And union or
agreement in prayer is especially becoming, when Christians pray for that
mercy, which above all other things concerns them unitedly, and tends to the
relief, prosperity and glory of the whole body, as well as of each individual
member.

Such an union in prayer for the general out-pouring of the Spirit of God,
would not only be beautiful, but profitable too. It would tend very much to
promote union and charity between distant members of the church of Christ, to
promote public spirit, love to the church of God, and concern for the interest
of Zion, as well as be an amiable exercise and manifestation of such a spirit.
-- Union in religious duties, especially in the duty of prayer, in praying one
with and for another, and jointly for their common welfare, above almost all
other things, tends to promote mutual affection and endearment. And if
ministers and people should, by particular agreement and joint resolution, set
themselves, in a solemn and extraordinary manner, from time to time, to pray
for the revival of religion in the world, it would naturally tend more to
awaken in them ^^^^^cern about things of this nature, and more of a desire
after such a mercy; it would engage them to more attention to such an affair
make them more inquisitive about it, more ready to use endeavors to promote
that which they, with so many others, spend so much time in praying for, and
more ready to rejoice and praise God when they see or hear of any thing of that
nature or tendency; and in a particular manner, would it naturally tend to
engage ministers (the business of whose life it is, to seek the welfare of the
church of Christ, and the advancement of his kingdom) to greater diligence and
earnestness in their work; and it would have a tendency to the spiritual profit
and advantage of each particular person. For persons to be thus engaged in
extraordinary praying for the revival and flourishing of religion in the world,
will naturally lead each one to reflect on himself, and consider how religion
flourishes in his own heart, and how far his example contributes to the thing
that he is praying for.

9. There is great and particular encouragement given in the word of God, to
express union and agreement in prayer. Daniel, when he had a great thing to
request of God, viz. That God, by his Holy Spirit, would miraculously reveal to
him a great secret, which none of the wise men, astrologers, magicians, or
sooth-say^^^ of Babylon could find out, he goes to (...), Mishael and Azariah,
his companions, and they agree together, that they will unitedly desire mercies
of the God of heaven, concerning this secret; and their joint request was soon
granted; and God put great honor upon them, above all the wise men of Babylon,
to the filling their mouths with praise, and to the admiration and astonishment
of Nebuchadnezzar; insomuch, that that great and haughty monarch, as we are
told, fell upon his face and worshipped Daniel, and owned that his God was of a
truth a God of gods, and greatly promoted Daniel and his praying companions in
the province of Babylon. Esther, when she had a yet more important request to
make, for the saving of the church of God, and whole nation of the Jews,
dispersed through the empire of Persia, when on the brink of ruin, sends to all
the Jews in the city Shushan, to pray and fast with her and her maidens; and
their united prayers prevail, so that the event was wonderful; instead of the
intended destruction of the Jews, the Jews enemies are destroyed every where,
and they are defended, honored and promoted, and their sorrow and distress is
turned into great gladness, feasting, triumph, and mutual joyful
congratulations.

The encouragement to explicit agreement in prayer is great from such instances
as these; but it is yet greater from those wonderful words of our blessed
Redeemer. Mat. xviii. 19. I say unto you, that if any two of you shall agree on
earth touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my
Father which is in heaven. Christ is pleased to give this great encouragement
to the union of his followers in this excellent and holy exercise of seeking
and serving God; an holy union and communion of his people being that which he
greatly desires and delights in, that which he came into the world to bring to
pass, that which he especially prayed for with his dying breath, John xvii.
that which he died for, and which was one chief end of the whole affair of our
redemption by him. Ephesians. i. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace, wherein he has
abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence; having made known to us the
mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure, which he has proposed in
himself; that in the dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather
together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are
on earth, even in him.

PART III. OBJECTIONS ANSWERED.
I COME now, as was proposed, in the third place, to answer and obviate some
objections, which some may be ready to make against the thing that has been
proposed to us.

Object. 1. Some may be ready to say, That for Christians, in such a manner to
set apart certain seasons, every week, and every quarter, to be religiously
observed and kept for the purposes proposed, from year to year, would be, in
effect, to establish certain periodical times of human invention and
appointment, to be kept holy to God, and so to do the very thing, that has ever
been objected against, by a very great part of the most eminent Christians and
Divines among Protestants, as what men have no right to do, it being for them
to add to God's institutions, and introduce their own inventions and
establishments into the stated worship of God, and lay unwarrantable bonds on
mens' consciences, and do what naturally tends to superstition.

Ans. To this I would say, There can be no justice in such an objection against
this proposal, as made to us in the sorementioned memorial. Indeed, that
caution and prudence appears in the projection itself, and in the manner in
which it is proposed to us, that there is not so much as any color for the
objection. The proposal is such, and so well guarded, that there seems to be no
room for the weakest Christian that well observes it, so to mistake it, as to
understand those things to be implied in it, that have, indeed, been objected
against, by many eminent Christians and Divines among Protestanis, as
entangling mens' consciences, and adding to divine institutions, etc. -- Here
is no pretense of establishing any thing by authority; no appearance of any
claim of power in the proposers, or right to have any regard paid to their
determinations or proposals, by virtue of any deference due to them, in any
respect, any more than to every individual person of those that they apply
themselves to. So far from that, that they expressly mention that which they
have thought of, as what they would propose to the thoughts of others, for
their amendments and improvements, declaring that they choose rather to receive
and spread the directions and proposals of others, than to be the first authors
of any. -- No times, not sanctified by God's own institution, are proposed to
be observed more than others, under any notion of such times being, in any
respect, more holy, or more honorable, or worthy of any preference, or
distinguishing regard; either as being sanctified, or made honorable, by
authority, or by any great events of Divine Providence, or any relation to any
holy persons or things; but only as circumstantially convenient, helpful to
memory, especially free from worldly business, near to the times of the
administration of public ordinances, etc. None attempts to lay any bonds on
others, with respect to this matter, or to desire that they should lay any
bonds on themselves, or look on themselves as under any obligations, either by
power or promise; or so much as come into any absolute determination in their
own minds, to set apart any stated days from secular affairs, or even to fix on
any part of such days, without liberty to alter circumstances, as shall be
found expedient, and also liberty left to a future alteration of judgment, as
to expediency, on further trial and consideration. All that is proposed is,
that such as fall in with what is proposed in their judgments and inclinations,
while they do so, shall strengthen, assist and encourage their brethren that
are of the same mind, by visibly consenting and joining with them in the
affair. Is here any thing like making laws in matters of conscience and
religion, or adding mens' institutions to God's, or any show of imposition, or
superstitious esteeming and preferring one day above another, or any possible
ground of entanglement of any one's conscience?

For men to go about by law to establish and limit circumstances of worship,
not established or limited by any law of God, such as precise time, place, and
order, may be in many respects of dangerous tendency. But surely it cannot be
unlawful or improper for Christians to come into some agreement with regard to
these circumstances, for it is impossible to carry on any social worship
without it. There is no institution of scripture requiring any people to meet
together to worship God in such a spot of ground, or at such an hour of the
day; but yet these must be determined by agreement, or else there will be no
social worship, in any place, or any hour. So we are not determined by
institution, what the precise order of the different part^ of worship shall be,
what shall precede, and what shall follow; whether praying or singing shall be
first, and what shall be next, and what shall conclude; but yet some order must
be agreed on by the congregation that unite in worship, otherwise they cannot
jointly carry on divine worship, in any way or method at all. If a congregation
of Christians do agree to begin their public worship with prayer, and next to
sing, and then to attend on the preaching of the word, and to conclude with
prayer; and do by consent carry on their worship in this order from year to
year, though this order is not appointed in scripture, none will call this
superstition. And if a great number of congregations, through a whole land, or
more lands than one do, by common consent, keep the same method of public
worship, none will pretend to find fault with it. But yet for any to go about
to bind all to such a method, would be usurpation and imposition. And if such a
precise order should be regarded as sacred, as though no other could be
acceptable to God, this would be superstition. -- If a particular number of
Christians shall agree, that besides the stated public worship of the sabbath,
they will, when their circumstances allow, meet together to carry on some
religous exercises on a sabbath day night, for their mutual edification; or if
several societies agree to meet together in different places at that time, this
is no superstition, though there be no institution for it. If people in
different congregations voluntarily agree to take turns to meet together in the
house of God, to worship him and hear a public lecture, once a month, or once
in six weeks; it is not unlawful, though there be no institution for it; but
yet to do this as a thing sacred, indispensible, and binding on mens'
consciences, would be superstition. If Christians of several neighboring
congregations, instead of a lecture, agree on some special occasion to keep a
circular fast, each congregation taking its turn in a certain time and order,
fixed on by consent; or instead of keeping fast by turns, on different days,
one on one week, and one on another, they should all agree to keep a fast on
the same day, and to do this either once or frequently, according as they shall
judge their own circumstances, or the dispensations of the Divine Providence,
or the importance of the mercy they seek, do require; neither is there any more
superstition in this than the other.

Object. 2. Some may be ready to say, there seems to be something whimsical in
its being insisted on that God's people, in different places, should put up
their prayers for this mercy at the same time, as though their prayers would be
more forcible on that account, and as if God would not be so likely to hear
prayers offered up by many, tho ^ey happened not to pray at the same time, as
he would if he heard them all at the same moment.

Ans. To this I would say, If such an objection be made, it must be through
misunderstanding. It is not signified or implied in any thing said in the
proposal, of in any arguments made use of to enforce it that (...) have seen,
that the prayers of a great ^^^^ber, in different places, will be more
forcible, merely because of that circumstance, of their being put up at the
same time. It is, indeed, supposed, that it will be very expedient, that
certain times for united prayer should be agreed on; which it may be without
implying the thing supposed in the objection, on the following accounts.

1. This seems to be a proper expedient for the promoting and maintaining an
union among Christians of distant places, in extraordinary prayer for such a
mercy. It appears, from what was before observed, that there ought to be
extraordinary prayers among Christians for this mercy; and that it is sit, that
God's people should agree and unite in it. Though there be no reason to suppose
that prayers will be more prevalent, merely from that circumstance, that
different persons pray exactly at the same time; yet there will be more reason
to hope, that prayers for such mercy will be prevalent, when God's people are
very much in prayer for it, and when many of them are united in it. If
therefore agreeing on certain times for united and extraordinary prayer, be a
likely means to promote an union of many in extraordinary prayer, then there is
more reason to hope that there will be prevalent prayer for such a mercy, for
certain times for extraordinary prayer being agreed on. But, that agreement on
certain times for united extraordinary prayer, is a likely and proper means to
promote and maintain such prayer, I ^hink will be easily evident to any one
that considers the matter. If there should be only a loose agreement or consent
to it as a duty, or a thing sit and proper that Ch^^^tians should be much in
prayer for the revival of religion, and much more in it than they used to be,
without agreeing on particular times, how liable would such a lax agreement be
to be soon forgotten, and that extraordinary prayerfulness, which (...) fixed
to no certain times, to be totally neglected? To be sure, distant parts of the
church of Christ could have no confidence in one another, that this would not
be the case. If these ministers in Scotland, instead of the proposal they have
made, or any other ministers or Christians in any part of the Christian world,
had sent abroad only a general proposal, that God's people should, for the time
to come, be much more in prayer for the advancement of Christ's kingdom, than
had been common among Christians heretofore; and they should hear their
proposal was generally allowed to be good, and that ministers and people, in
one place and another, that had occasion to speak their minds upon it, owned
that it was a very proper thing, that Christians should pray more for this
mercy than they generally used to do; could they, from this only, have, in any
measure, the like grounds of dependence, that God's people, in various parts of
the Christian world, would, indeed, henceforward act unitedly, in maintaining
extraordinary prayer for this mercy, as if they should not only hear that the
duty in general was approved of, but also that particular times were a^ually
fixed on for the purpose, and an agreement and joint resolution was come into,
that they would, unless extraordinarily hindered, set apart such particular
seasons to be spent in this duty, from time to time, maintaining this practice
for a certain number of year?

2. For God's people, in distant places, to agree on certain times for
extraordinary prayer, wherein they will unitedly put up their requests to God,
is a means fit and proper to be used, in order to the visibility of their union
in such prayer. Union among God's people in prayer is truly beautiful, as has
been before observed and shown; it is beautiful in the eyes of Christ, and it
is justly beautiful and amiable in the eyes of Christians. And if so, then it
must needs be desirable to Christians that such union should be visible. If it
would be a lovely sight in the eyes of the church of Christ, and much to their
comfort, to behold various and different parts of the church united in
extraordinary prayer for the general out-pouring of the Spirit, then it must be
desirable to them that such an union should be visible, that they may behold
it; for if it be not visible, it cannot be beheld. But ^^reement and union in a
multitude in their worship becomes visible, by an agreement in some external
visible circumstances. Worship itself becomes visible worship, by something
external and visible belonging to the worship, and no other way; therefore
union and agreement of many in worship becomes visible no other way, but by
union and agreement in the external and visible acts and circumstances of the
worship. Such union and agreement becomes visible, particularly by an agreement
in those two visible circumstances, time and place. When a number of Christians
live near together, and their number and situation is convenient, and they have
a desire visibly to unite in any acts of worship, they are wont to make their
union and agreement visible by an union in both these circumstances. But when a
much greater number of Christians, dwelling in distant places, so that they
cannot unite by worshipping in the same place, yet desire a visible union in
some extraordinary worship, they are wont to make their union and agreement
visible, by agreeing only in the former of those circumstances, viz. that of
time; as is common in the appointment of public fasts and ^^anksgivings; the
same day is appointed, for the performance of that extraordinary worship, by
all those Christians, in different places, that it is intended should be united
therein, as a visible note of their union. This the common light and sense of
God's people leads Christians to in all countries. And the wisdom of God seems
to dictate the same thing, in appointing that his people, through the world, in
all ages, in their stated and ordinary public worship, every week, should
manifest this union and communion one with another, in their worship, as one
holy society, and great congregation of worshippers, and servants of God, by
offering up their worship on the same day, for the greater glory of their
common Lord, and the greater edification and comfort of the whole body.

If any yet find fault with the proposal of certain times to be agreed on by
God's people in different places, in the manner set forth in the memorial, I
would ask whether they object against any such thing, as a visible agreement of
God's people, in different parts of the world, in extraordinary prayer, for the
coming of Christ's kingdom? Whether such a thing, being visible, would not be
much for the public honor of Gods name? And whether it would not tend to
Christians assistance, quickening and encouragement in the duty united in, by
mutual example, and also to their mutual comfort, by a manifestation of that
union which is amiable to Christ and Christians, and to promote a Christian
union among professing Christians in general? And whether we have not reason to
think, from the word of God, that before that great revival of religion
foretold is accomplished, there will be a visible union of the people of God,
in various parts of the world, in extraordinary prayer, for this mercy? If
these things are allowed, I would then ask further, whether any method can be
thought of or devised, whereby an express agreement, and visible union of God's
people, in different parts of the world, can be come into, and maintained, but
this, or some other equivalent to it? If there be any express agreement about
any extraordinary prayer at all, it must first be proposed by some, and others
must fall in, in the manner as is represented in my text. And if extraordinary
prayer be agreed on and maintained by many in different places, visibly one to
another, then it must be agreed in some respect, and with regard to some
circumstances, what extraordinary prayer shall be kept up; and it must be seen
and heard of, from one to another, what extraordinary prayer is kept up. But
how shall this be, when no times are agreed upon, and it is never known nor
heard, by those in different parts, nor is in any respect visible to them,
when, or how often, those in one town or country, and another do attend this
extraordinary prayer? The consequence must necessarily be, that it can never be
known how far, or in what respect others join with them in extraordinary
prayer, or whether they do it at all; and not so much as one circumstance of
extraordinary prayer will be visible; and indeed nothing will be visible about
it. So that I think any body that well considers the matter, will see, that he
who determines to oppose such a method as is proposed to us in the memorial,
and all others equivalent to it is, in effect, determined to oppose there ever
being any such thing at all, as an agreed and visibly united extraordinary
prayer, in the church of God, for a general out-pouring of the Spirit.

3. Though it would not be reasonable to suppose, that merely such a
circumstance of prayer, as many people's praying at the same time will directly
have any influence or prevalence with God, to cause him to be the more ready to
hear prayer; yet such a circumstance may reasonably be supposed to have
influence on the minds of men; as the consideration of it may tend to encourage
and assist those in praying, that are united in prayer. Will any deny, that it
has any reasonable tendency to encourage, animate, or in any respect to help
the mind of a Christian in serving God in any duty of religion, to join with a
Christian congregation, and to see an assembly of his dear brethren around him,
at the same time engaged with him in the same duty? And supposing one in this
assembly of saints is blind, and sees no one there, but has by other means
ground of satisfaction that there is present at that time a multitude of God's
people, that are united with him in the same service, will any deny, that his
supposing this, and being satisfied of it, can have any reasonable influence
upon his mind, to excite and encourage him, or in any respect to assist him in
his worship? The encouragement or help that one that joins with an assembly in
worshipping God, has in his worship, by others being united with him, is not
merely by any thing that he immediately perceives by sight, or any other of the
external senses (for union in worship is not a thing objected to the external
senses;) but by the notice or knowledge the mind has of that union, or the
satisfaction the understanding has that others, at that time, have their minds
engaged with him in the same service; which may be when those unitedly engaged
are at a distance one from another, as well as when they are present. If one be
present in a worshipping assembly, and is not blind, and sees others present,
and sees their external behavior, their union and engagedness with him in
worship is what he does not see, and what he sees encourages and assists him in
his worship, only as; he takes it as an evidence of that union and concurrence
in his worship, that is out of his sight. And persons may have evidence of this
concerning persons that are absent, that may give him as much satisfaction of
their union with him, as if they were present. And therefore the consideration
of others being at the same time engaged with him in worship, that are absent,
may as reasonably animate and encourage him in his worship as if they were
present.

There is no wisdom in finding fault with human nature, as God has made it.
Things that exist now, at this present time, are, in themselves, no more
weighty or important, than like things, and of equal reality, that existed in
time past, or are to exist in time to come; yet it is evident, that the
consideration of things being present (at least in most cases) does especially
affect human nature. As for instance, if a man should be certainly informed,
that his dear child, at a distance, was now under some extreme suffering, or
that an absent most dear friend was at this time thinking of him, and in the
exercise of great affection toward him, or in the performance of some great
deed of friendship; or if a pious parent should know that now his child was in
the act of some enormous wickedness; or that, on the contrary, he was now in
some eminent exercise of grace, and in the performance of an extraordinary deed
of virtue and piety; would not those things be more affecting to the human
nature, for being considered as things that are in existence at the present
time, than if considered as at some distance of time, either past or future?
Hundreds of other instances might be mentioned wherein it is no less plain,
that the consideration of the present existence of things gives them advantage
to affect the minds of men. Yea, it is undoubtedly so with things in general,
that take any hold at all of our affections, and toward which we are not
indifferent. And if the mind of a particular child of God is disposed to be
affected by the consideration of the religion of other saints, and with their
union and concurrence with him in any particular duty or act of religion, I can
see no reason why the human mind should not be more moved by the object of its
affection, when considered as present, as well in this case, as in any other
case; yea, I think, we may on good grounds determine there is none.

Nor may we look upon it as an instance of the peculiar weakness of the human
nature, that men are more affected with things that are considered as present,
than those that are distant; but it seems to be a thing common to finite minds,
and so to all created intelligent beings. Thus, the angels in heaven have
peculiar joy, on occasion of the conversion of a sinner, when recent, beyond
what they have in that which has been long past. If any therefore shall call it
silly and whimsical in any, to value and regard such a circumstance, in things
of religion, as their existing at the present time, so as to be the more
affected wit^ them for that, they must call the host of angels in heaven a
parcel of silly and whimsical beings.

I remember, the Spectator (whom none will call a whimsical author) somewhere
speaking of different ways of dear friends mutually expressing their affection,
and maintaining a kind of intercourse, in absence one from another, mentions
such an instance as this, with much approbation, viz. That two friends, that
were greatly endeared one to another, when about to part, and to be for a
considerable time necessarily absent, that they might have the comfort of the
enjoyment of daily mutual expressions of friendship, in their absence, agreed
that they would, every day, precisely at such an hour, retire from all company
and business, to pray for one another. Which agreement they so valued, and so
strictly observed, that when the hour came, scarce any thing would hinder them.
And rather than miss this opportunity, they would suddenly break off
conversation, and abruptly leave the company they were engaged with. -- If this
be a desirable way of intercourse of particular friends, is it not a desirable
and amiable way of maintaining intercourse and fellowship between brethren in
Christ Jesus, and the various members of the holy family of God, in different
parts of the world, to come into an agreement, that they will set apart certain
times, which they will spend with one accord, in extraordinary prayer to their
heavenly Father, for the advancement of the kingdom, and the glory of their
common dear Lord and Savior, and for each other's prosperity and happiness,
and the greatest good of all their fellow creatures through the world?

Object. 3. Some perhaps may object, That it looks too much like Pharisaism,
when persons engage in any such extraordinary religious exercises, beyond what
is appointed by express institution, for them thus designedly to make it
manifest abroad in the world, and so openly to distinguish themselves from
others.

Ans. 1. All openly engaging in extraordinary exercises of religion, not
expressly enjoined by institution, is not Pharisaism, nor has ever been so
reputed in the Christian church. As when a particular church or congregation of
Christians agree together to keep a day of fasting and prayer, on some special
occasion; or when public days of fasting and thanksgiving are kept, throughout
a Christian province or country; and though it be ordinarily the manner for the
civil magistrate to lead, in the setting apart such days, yet that alters not
the case; if it be Pharisaism in the society openly to agree in such
extraordinary exercises of religion, it is not less Pharisaism for the heads of
the society leading in the affair. And if that were now the case with the
Christian church, that once was, for about three hundred years together, that
the civil magistrate was not of the society of Christians, nor concerned
himself in their affairs; yet this would not render it the less suitable for
Christians, on proper occasions, jointly, and visibly one to another, to engage
in such extraordinary exercises of religion, and to keep days of fasting and
thanksgiving by agreement.

Ans. 2. As to the latter part of the objection, there can be no room for it in
this case. It cannot be objected against what is proposed in the memorial, that
if persons should comply with it, it would look like affecting singularity, and
open distinction from others of God's professing people, in extraordinary
religion, such as was in the Pharisees of old; because it is evident, the very
design of the memorial, is not to promote singularity and distinction, but as
much as possible to avoid and prevent it. The end of the memorial is not to
confine and limit the thing proposed, that it may be practiced only by a few,
in distinction from the generality; but on the contrary to extend it, and make
it as general among professing Christians as possible. Some had complied with
the extraordinary duty proposed, and therein had been distinguished from
others, for two years, before the memorial was published; and they were more
distinguished than they desired, and therefore send abroad this memorial, that
the practice might be more spread, and become more general, that they might be
less distinguished. What they evidently seek, is to bring to pass as general a
compliance as possible of Christians of all denominations, entreating, that the
desire of concurrence and assistance, contained in the memorial, may by no
means be understood, as restricting to any particular denomination or party, or
those who are of such or such opinions about any former instances of remarkable
religious concern; but to be extended to all, who shall vouchsafe any attention
to the proposal, and have at heart the interest of vital Christianity, and the
power of godliness; and who, however differing about other things, are
convinced of the importance of fervent prayer, to promote that common interest,
and of scripture persuasives, to promote such prayer.

Object. 4. Another objection, that is very likely to arise in the minds of
many against such extraordinary prayer as is proposed for the speedy coming of
Christ's kingdom, is that we have no reason to expect it, until there first
come a time of most extreme calamity to the church of God, and prevalence of
her antichristian enemies against her; even that which is represented, Rev.
xi. by the slaying of the witnesses; but have reason to determine the contrary.

Ans. It is an opinion that seems pretty much to have obtained, that before the
fulfillment of the promises relating to the church's latter-day glory, there
must come a most terrible time, a time of extreme suffering, and dreadful
persecution of the church of Christ, wherein Satan and Antichrist are to obtain
their greatest victory over her, and she is to be bro't lower than eve^ by her
enemies. Which opinion has chiefly risen from the manner of interpreting and
applying the forementioned prophecy of the slaying of the witnesses. This
opinion, with such persons as retain it, must needs be a great restraint and
hindrance, with regard to such an affair as is proposed to us in the memorial.
If persons expect no other, than that the more the glorious times of Christ's
kingdom are hastened, the sooner will come this dreadful time, wherein the
generality of God's people must suffer so extremely, and the church of Christ
be almost extinguished, and blotted out from under heaven; how can it be
otherwise, than a great damp to their hope, courage and activity, in praying
for and reaching after the speedy introduction of those glorious promised
times? As long as this opinion is retained, it will undoubtedly ever have this
unhappy influence on the minds of those that wish well to Zion, and favor her
stones and dust. It will tend to damp, deaden, and keep down life, hope, and
joyful expectation in prayer; and even in great measure, to prevent all
earnest, animated and encouraged prayer, in God's people, for this mercy, at
any time before it is actually fulfilled. For they that proceed on this
hypothesis in their prayers, must, at the same time that they pray for this
glorious day, naturally conclude within themselves, that they shall never live
to see on the earth any dawning of it, but only to see the dismal time that
shall precede it, in which the far greater part of God's people, that shall
live until then, shall die under the extreme cruelties of their persecutors.
And the more they expect that God will answer their prayers, by speedy bringing
on the promised glorious day, the more must they withal expect themselves to
have a share in those dreadful things, that nature shrinks at the thoughts of,
and also expect to see things that a renewed nature shrinks at and dreads; even
the prevailing of God's enemies, and the almost total extinguishing the true
religion in the world. And on this hypothesis, these discouragements are like
to attend the prayers of God's people, until that dismal time be actually come;
and when that is come, those that had been prophesying and praying in
sackcloth, shall generally be slain; and after that time is over, then the
glorious day shall immediately commence. So that this notion tends to
discourage and hinder all earnest prayer in the church of God for that glorious
coming of Christ's kingdom, until it be actually come; and that is to hinder
its ever being at all.

It being so, this opinion being of such hurtful tendency, certainly it is a
thousand pities it should prevail and be retained, if truly there be no good
ground for it.

Therefore in answer to this objection, I would, with all humility and modesty,
examine the foundation of that opinion, of such a dreadful time of victory of
Antichrist over the church, yet to be expected: and particularly shall
endeavor to show that the staying of the witnesses, foretold, Rev. xi. 7 --
10. is not an event that remains yet to be fulfilled. -- To this end, I would
^^pose the following things to consideration.

1. The time wherein the witnesses he dead in the streets of the great city,
doubtless, signifies the time wherein the true church of Christ is lowest of
all, most of all prevailed against by Antichrist, and nearest to an utter
extinction; the time wherein there is left the least visibility of the church
of Christ yet subsisting in the world, least remains of any thing appertaining
to true religion, whence a revival of it can be expected, and wherein all means
of it are most abolished, and the state of the church is, in all respects,
furthest from any thing whence any hopes of its ever flourishing again might
arise. For before this the witnesses prophesy in sackcloth. but now they are
dead; before this they were kept low indeed, yet there was life, and power to
bring plagues on their enemies, and so much of true religion lest, as to be a
continual eyesore and torment to them; but now their enemies rejoice and
feast, and have a general public triumph, as having obtained a full victory
over them, and having entirely extirpated them, and being completely delivered
from them, and all that might give them any fear of being troubled with them
any more. This time, wherever it be fixed, doubtless, it the time, not only
wherein fewest professors of the true religion are left in the world, but a
time wherein the truth shall be farthest out of sight, and out of reach, and
most forgotten; wherein there are left fewest beams of light, or traces of
truth, fewest means of information, and opportunities of coming to the
knowledge of the truth; and so a time of the most barbarous ignorance, most
destitute of all history, relics, monuments and memory of things appertaining
to true religion, or things, the knowledge of which has any tendency to bring
truth again to light, and most destitute of learning, study and enquiry.

Now, if we consider the present state of mankind, it is credible that a time
will yet come in the world, that in these respects exceeds all times that were
before the Reformation? And that such a time will come before the fall of
Antichrist, unless we set that at a much greater distance, than the farthest
that any yet have supposed? It is next to impossible, that such a change should
be brought about in so short a time -- it cannot be without a miracle. In order
to it, not only must the Popish nations so prevail, as utterly to extirpate the
Protestant religion through the earth, but must do many other things, far more
impossible for them to effect, in order to cover the world with so gross and
confirmed a darkness, and to bury all light and truth in so deep an oblivion,
and so far out of all means and hopes of a revival. And not only must a vast
change be made in the Protestant world, but the Popish nations must be
strangely metamorphosed, and they themselves must be terribly persecuted by
some other power, in order to bring them to such a change; nor would
persecution without extirpation be sufficient for it. If there should be
another universal deluge, it might be sufficient to bring things in the world
to such a pass, provided a few ignorant barbarous persons only were preserved
in an ark; and it would require some catastrophe, not much short of this, to
effect it.

2. In the Reformation, that was in the days of Luther, Calvin, and others
their contemporaries, the threatened destruction of Antichrist, that dreadful
enemy that had long oppressed and worn out the saints, was begun; nor was it a
small beginning, but Antichrist has fallen, at least, halfway to ^^e ground,
from that height of power and grandeur, that he was in before. Then began the
vials of God's wrath to be poured out on the throne of the beast, to the great
shaking of its foundations, and diminution of its extent; so that the Pope lost
near half of his former dominions, and as to degree of authority and influence
over what is left, he is not possessed of what he had before. God now at
length, in answer to the long continued cries of his people, awaked as one out
of sleep, and began to deliver his church from her exceeding low state, the she
had continued in for many ages, under the great oppression of this grand enemy,
and to restore her from her exile and bondage in the spiritual Babylon and
Egypt. And it is not agreeable to the analogy of God's dispensations, that
after this, God should desert his people, and hide himself from them, even more
than before, and leave them more than ever in the hands of their enemy, and all
this advantage of the church against Antichrist should be entirely given up and
lost, and the power and tyranny of Antichrist be more confirmed, and the church
brought more under, and more entirely subdued than ever before, and further
from all help and means to recover. This is not God's way of dealing with his
people, or with their enemies; his work of salvation is perfect -- when he has
begun such a work he will carry it on -- when he once causes the day of
deliverance to dawn to his people, after such a long night of dismal darkness,
he will not extinguish the light, and cause them to return again to midnight
darkness -- when he has begun to enkindle the blessed fire, he will not quench
the smoking flax, until he had brought forth judgment unto victory. When once
the church, after her long labor and sore travail, has brought forth her
man-child, and wrought some deliverance, her enemies shall never be able to
destroy this child, though an infant, but it shall ascend up to heaven, and be
set on high out of their reach.

The destruction that God often foretold and threatened to ancient Babylon
(which is often referred to in the Revelation, as a great type of the
antichristian church) was gradually accomplished, and fulfilled by various
steps, at a great distance of time one from another; it was begun in the
conquest of Cyrus, and was further accomplished by Darius, about eighteen years
after, by a yet greater destruction, wherein it was brought much nearer to
utter desolation; but it was about two hundred and twenty-three years after
this, before the ruin of it was perfected, and the prophecies against it fully
accomplished, in its being made an utter and perpetual desolation, without any
human inhabitant, becoming the dewlling place for owls, dragons, and other
doleful creatures. But yet when God had once begun to destroy her, he went on
until he finished, and never suffered her any more to recover and establish her
former empire. So the restitution of the Jewish church, after the Babylonish
captivity, was gradual, by various steps; there were several times of return of
the Jews from captivity, and several distinct decrees of the Persian emperors,
for the restoring and rebuilding Jerusalem, and reestablishing the Jewish
church and state; and it was done in turbulent times, there were great
interruptions and checks, and violent oppositions, and times wherein the enemy
did much prevail: But yet, when God had once begun the work he also made an
end; he never suffered the enemies of the Jews to bring Jerusalem to such a
state of desolation as it had been in before, ^ntil the promised restoration
was complete. Again, the deliverance of God's church from the oppression of
Antiochus Epiphanes, (another known type of Antichrist) was gradual; they were
first assisted in a small degree, by the Maccabees, and afterward the promised
deliverance was completed, in the recovery of Jerusalem, the restoration of the
temple, the miserable end of Antiochus, and the consequent more full
deliverance of the whole land. But after God once began to appear for the help
of his church in that instance, after it seemed dead and past all hope, he
never suffered Antiochus to prevail against his people, to that degree, again;
though the utmost strength of this great monarch was used, from time to time,
in order to it, and his vast empire was engaged against an handful that opposed
them: God never forsook the work of his own hands; when he had begun to deliver
his people, he also made an end. And so Haman, that proud and inveterate enemy
of the Jews, that though it to extirpate the whole nation, who also was probably
another type of Antichrist, when he began to fall before Esther and Mordecai,
never stayed, until his ruin, and the church's deliverance was complete.
Haman's wife speaks of it, as an argument of his approaching inevitable full
destruction, that he had begun to fall, Esth. vi. 15.

3. If it should be so, that antichristian tyranny and darkness should
hereafter so prevail against the Protestant church, and the true religion, and
every thing appertaining to it, as to bring things to the pass forementioned,
this would hardly so properly answer the prophecy of slaying the two witnesses;
for, doubtless, one reason why they are called two witnesses is, that the
number of the remaining witnesses for the truth was, though sufficient, yet
very small. Which was remarkably the case, in the dark times of Popery; but
since the Reformation the number of those appearing on the side of true
religion, has been far from being so small. -- The visible church of Christ has
been vastly large, in comparison of what it was before; the number of
Protestants has sometimes been thought nearly equal to that of the Papists;
and, doubtless, the number of true saints has been far greater than before.

4. It seems to be signified in prophecy, that after the Reformation,
Antichrist should never prevail against the church of Christ any more, as he
had done before. I cannot but think, that whoever reads and well considers what
the learned Mr. Lowman has written on the five first vials, Rev. xvi. in his
late Exposition on the Revelation, must think it to be very manifest, that what
is said, verse 10, of the pouring out of the fifth vial on the throne of the
beast, (for so it is in the original) is a prophecy of the Reformation. Then
the vial of God's wrath was poured out on the throne of the beast, i. e.
according to the language of scripture, on his authority and dominion, greatly
to weaken and diminish it, both in extent and degree. But when this is
represented in the prophecy, then it is added, and his kingdom was full of
darkness, and they gnawed their tongues for pain. If we consider what is
commonly intended by such like phrases in the scripture, I think we shall be
naturally, and, as it were, necessarily led to understand those words thus:
Their policy, by which heretofore they have prevailed, shall now fail them;
their authority shall be weakened, and their dominion greatly diminished, and
all their craft and subtilty shall not avail them to maintain and support the
throne of the beast, or even again to extend his authority so far as it had
been before extended, and to recover what it lost; but all their cra^ty devices
to this end shall be attended with vexatious tormenting disappointment; they
that have the management of the affairs of the beast's kingdom, shall
henceforward grope as in the dark, and stumble, and be confounded in their
purposes, plots and enterprises; formerly their policy was greatly successful,
was as a light to guide them to their ends, but now their kingdom shall be full
of darkness, and their wisdom shall fail them in all their devices to subdue,
and again to bring under the church of God. -- The scripture takes notice of
the great policy and subtilty of the powers that support this kingdom, Dan.
vii. 8. And, behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes of a man. So it is
said of Antiochus Epiphanes, that great type of Antichrist, Dan. viii. 23. A
king of fierce countenance, and understanding dark sentences, shall stand up.
Ver. 25. And through his policy also, shall he cause craft to prosper in his
hand. This understanding and policy is the light of this kingdom, as true
wisdom is the light of the spiritual Jerusalem. And, therefore, when the light
fails, then may the kingdom of this spiritual Egypt be said to be full of
darkness. God henceforward will defend his people from these mystical
Egyptians, as he defended Israel of old from Pharaoh and his host, when
pursuing after them, by placing a cloud and darkness in their way, and so not
suffering them to come nigh. So he will protect his church from the men of that
city that is spiritually called Sodom, as Lot's house, wherein were the angels,
was desended from the men of Sodom, by their being smitten with darkness or
blindness, so that they wearied themselves to find the door; and as God
defended the city in which was Elisha the prophet, and witness of the Lord,
from the Syrians, when they compassed it about with horses and chariots, and a
great host to apprehend him, by smiting them with blindness. The scripture
teaches us, that God is wont in this way to defend his church and people from
their crafty and powerful enemies, Job v. 11, etc. To set up on high those that
be low, that those which mourn may be exalted to safety: He disappointeth the
devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise: He
takes the wise in their own crastiness, and the counsel of the forward is
carried headlong: They meet with darkness in the daytime, and grope in the
noonday as in the night; but he saves the poor from the sword, from their
mouth, and from the hand of the mighty. Psalm. xxxv. 4.6. Let them be confounded
and put to shame, that seek after my soul; let them be turned back, and brought
to confusion. that devise my hurt -- Let their way be dark and slippery.

Upon the account of such defense of God's Protestant church, and
disappointment and confusion of all the subtle devices, deeplaid schemes, and
furious attempts of their antichristian enemies, to bring them under, and root
them out, and their seeing them still maintaining their ground, and subsisting
in an independency on them in spi^e of all that they do, it makes them as it
were gnash their teeth, and bite their tongues for mere rage and vexation;
agreeable to Psalm. cxii. 9, 10. His righteousness endures for ever, his horn
shall be exalted with honor: The wicked shall see it and be grieved, and gnash
with his teeth and melt away: The desire of the wicked shall perish.

Hitherto this prophecy has been very signally fulfilled; since the
Reformation, the kingdom of Antichrist has been remarkably filled with darkness
in this respect. Innumerable have been the crafty devices, and great attempts
of the church of Rome, wherein they have exerted their utmost policy and power,
to recover their lost dominions, and again to subjugate the Protestant nations,
and subdue the northern heresy, as they call it. They have wearied themselves
in these endeavors for more than two hundred years past; but have hitherto
been disappointed, and have often been strangely confounded. When their matters
seemed to be brought to a ripeness, and they triumphed as though their point
was gained, their joy and triumph has suddenly turned into vexation and
torment. How many have been their politic and powerful attempts against the
Protestant interest in our nation in particular? And how wonderfully has God
disappointed them from time to time! And as God has hitherto so remarkably
fulfilled his word in defending his Protestant church from Antichrist, so I
think we have ground to trust in him, that he will defend it to the end.

5, The hypothesis of those who suppose the slaying of the witnesses is a thing
that yet remains to be fulfilled, makes the prophecies of the Revelation to be
inconsistent one with another. According to their hypothesis, that battle, Rev.
xi. 7. wherein the beast makes war with the witnesses, and overcomes them, and
kills them, is the last and greatest conflict between Antichrist and the church
of Christ, which is to precede the utter overthrow of the antichristian
kingdom. And they must suppose so, for they suppose, that immediately after the
sufferings the church shall endure in that war, she shall arise, and, as it
were, ascend into heaven; i. e. as they interpret it, the church shall be
directly advanced to her latter-day rest, prosperity and glory. And
consequently, this conflict must be the same with that great battle between
Antichrist and the Church, that is described, chap. xvi. 13. to the end, and
more largely, chap. xix. 11. to the end. For that which is described in these
places, is most evidently and indisputably the greatest and last battle or
conflict that shall be between the church and her antichristian enemies, on
which the utter downfall of Antichrist, and the church's advancement to her
latter-day glory, shall be immediately consequent. And so the earthquake that
attends the resurrection of the witnesses, chap. xi. 13. must be the same with
that great earthquake that is described, chap. xvi. 18. And the falling of the
tenth part of the city must be the same with that terrible and utter
destruction of Antichrist's kingdom, chap. xvi. 17. to the end.

But these things cannot be. The battle. chap. xi. 7. cannot be the same with
that last and great battle between the Church and Antichrist, described, chap
xvi. and xix. -- For the things that are said of one and the other, and their
issue, are in no wise consistent. In that battle, chap. xi. the church of God
conflicts with her enemies in sorrow, sackcloth, and blood; but in the other
the matter is represented exceedingly otherwise -- the church goes forth to
fight with Antichrist, not in sackcloth and blood, but clothed in white
raiment, Christ himself before them, as their captain, going forth in great
pomp and magnificence, upon a white horse, and on his head many crowns, and on
his vesture, and on his thigh; a name written, KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS;
and the saints who follow so glorious a leader to this great battle, follow him
on white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean, in garments of
strength, joy, glory and triumph; in the same kind of raiment, that the saints
appear in, when they are represented as triumphing with Christ, with palms in
their hands, chap. vii. 9. And the issue of the latter of these conflicts, is
quite the reverse of the former. In the battle, chap. xi. 7. The beast makes
war with the witnesses, and OVERCOMES THEM, AND KILLS THEM; the same is
foretold, Dan. vii. 21. I beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints,
and prevailed against them. -- And Rev. xii. 7. And it was given unto him to
make war with the saints, and to overcome them. But in the issue of that last
and great battle, which the church shall have with her antichristian enemies,
the church shall OVERCOME THEM, AND KILL THEM, Rev. xvii. 14. These shall make
war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them; for he is Lord of Lords,
and King of Kings; and they that are with him, are called, and chosen, and
faithful, compared with chapter xix. 16, and following verses, and chapter xvi.
16, 17. In the conflict that the beast shall have with the witnesses, the beast
kills them, and their dead bodies lie unburied; as though they were to be meat
for the beasts of the earth, and fowls of heaven; but in that last battle, it
is represented that Christ and his church shall slay their enemies, and give
their dead bodies to be meat for the fowls of heaven, chap. xix. 17. to the
end. There is no manner of appearance, in the descriptions which are given of
that last great battle, of any advantages gained in it, by the enemies of the
church, before they themselves are overcome, but all appearance of the
contrary. Be sure the descriptions in the xvi. and xix. chapters of the
Revelation will, by no means, allow of such an advantage, as the overcoming
God's people, and slaying them, and their lying dead for some time, and
unburied, that their dead bodies may be for their enemies to abuse, and trample
on, and make sport with. In chap. xvi. we read of their being gathered together
against the church, a mighty host, into the place called Armageddon, and then
the first thing we hear of, is the pouring out the seve^^h vial of God's wrath,
and a voice saying -- It is done. And so in the xix. chap. we have an account
of the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies, being gathered
together to make war against him that sat on the horse, and against his army.
And then the next thing we hear of is, that the beast is taken, and with him
the false prophet; and that these are both cast alive into the lake of fire;
and that the remnant of their vast army are slain, and all the fowls filled
with their flesh. The issue of the conflict of the beast with the witnesses, is
the triumph of the church's enemies over God's people, looking on them as
entirely vanquished, and their interest utterly ruined, past all possibility of
recovery: They that dwell on the earth shall see the dead bodies of the saints
lying in the streets of the great city, and shall rejoice over them, and make
merry, and send gifts one to another. -- But the issue of that great and last
battle is quite the reverse; it is the church's triumph over her enemies, as
being utterly and for over destroyed.

Here, if any one shall say, that the ascension of the witnesses into heaven in
the sight of their enemies, may, as has more generally been supposed, signify
the church's last victory and triumph over her antichristian enemies, and
final deliverance from them, and yet the battle between Antichrist and the
witnesses, spoken of, Rev. xi. 7. wherein the witnesses are slain, may not be
the same with that last and greatest battle between Antichrist and the church,
chap. xvi. and xix. which immediately precedes and issues in the church's final
victory and deliverance; there may be two great battles, soon following one
another, though both are not mentioned in the same place; one a conflict,
wherein Antichrist prevails against the witnesses, and overcomes them, and
kills them, and another that great battle described, chap. xvi. and xix. after
the witnesses resurrection, before their ascension into heaven, wherein they
shall prevail and overcome their enemies, and kill them: I say, if any one
shall say thus, they will say that which the prophecies give no reason, nor
allow any room to suppose. That last battle between the Church and Antichrist,
wherein Christ and his people obtain a complete victory, is evidently one of
the greatest and most remarkable events foretold in all the Apocalypse; and
there is no one thing, unless it be the consummation of all things, in the two
last chapters, that is described in so solemn and august a manner. And the
description shows that it is an event which, with its circumstances, must take
up much time. There is vast preparation made for it by the church's enemies;
the devils, in order to stir men up, and gather them together, to this battle
of that great day of God Almighly, go forth unto the kings of the earth, and of
the whole world, to propagate various kinds of delusions, far and wide, all
over the world; which, undoubtedly, must take up many years time, chap xvi. 13,
14. And then great preparation is made in the church of God, to make
opposition, chap. xix. 11 -- 17. Now can any reasonably suppose, that in what
is represented, chap. xi. of a great conflict between Antichrist and God's
people, wherein the latter are overcome and slain, and lie dead three days (or
three years) and a half, and their enemies triumphing over them, but God's
people rising again from the dead in the midst of this triumph of their
enemies, and ascending into heaven, while the enemies stand astonished and
amazed spectators -- that the manner of the description leaves fair room for us
to suppose, that after this resurrection of God's people, they continue long
before they ascend, to encounter with Antichrist in a new conflict, wherein
their enemies, after long time to prepare, should engage with them with vastly
greater preparations, strength and violence than before, and should wage war
with the mightiest army that ever was gathered against the church, and in the
greatest battle that ever was fought.

And besides, the witnesses ascending into heaven in the sight of their
enemies, spoken of chap. xi. cannot be the same with the church's gaining a
glorious ascendant over her enemies, in her sinal victory over Antichrist,
spoken of chap. xvi. and xix. because the descriptions of the events that
attend the one and the other do by no means answer each other. For, observe, it
is said, that when the witnesses arose, and stood on their feet, and ascended
into heaven, the same hour there was a great earthquake; but this does not seem
to answer to what is described, chap. xvi. 18. And there were voices, and
thunders. and lightnings, and there was a great earthquake, such as was not
since men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so great. -- It is
said, that at the same time of the first earthquake, chap. xi. 13. The tenth
part of the city fell; but how far does this fall short of what is described,
as attending the great earthquake? chap. xv. 19, 20. And the great city was
divided into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell; and great Babylon
came into remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the
fierceness of his wrath; and every island fled away, and the mountains were not
found. It is said of the earthquake, chap. xi. And in the earthquake were slain
of men seven thousand; but how far is this from answering the slaughter
described, chap. xix. 17, etc. Which is represented as a general slaughter of
the kings, captains, mighty men, horses, and armies of the earth, and of the
whole world; so that all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, as far as
the sun shines, are filled with the flesh of the dead carcases, it being the
flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and great, (compare chap. xvi.
14.) who can think, that this great slaughter, that is thus represented,
should, in chap. xi. be only called a slaying of seven thousand men?

If we read this very eleventh chapter through, we shall see that the falling of
the tenth part of the city, and the witnesses rising and ascending into heaven,
are entirely distinct from the final destruction of Antichrist, and that
advancement of the church to her latter-day glory, that is consequent upon it.
-- The judgments here spoken of, as executed on God's enemies, are under
another woe, and the benefits, bestowed on the church, a^^ under another
trumpet. For immediately after the account of the rising and ascending of the
witnesses, and the tenth part of the city's falling, and the slaying of the
seven thousand men, and the affrighting of the rest, and their giving glory to
the God of heaven, follow these words in the 14th and 15th verses, The second
woe is past, and behold the third woe comes quickly. And the seventh angel
sounded, and there were great voices in heaven, saying -- The kingdoms of this
world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall
reign for ever and ever. And in the following verses, we have an account of the
praises sung to God on this occasion. And then in that last verse, we have a
brief hint of that same earthquake, and the great hail, and those thunders, and
lightnings, and voices, that we have an account of in the latter part of chap.
xvi. So that the earthquake mentioned in the last verse of chap. xi. is that
great earthquake that attends the last great conflict of the church and her
enemies, and not that mentioned ver. 13.

The three woes are the woes of God on Antichrist and his subjects; and the
third and last of them evidently signifies the terrible judgments of God on
Antichrist, by which Gods wrath upon him shall be fulfilled in his utter
destruction; but the calamities on Antichrist, spoken of as attending the
rising and ascending of the witnesses, such as the falling of the tenth part of
the city, and slaying seven thousand men, do not belong to this last woe, and
therefore do not signify the final destruction of Antichrist; for the words of
verse 14. will by no means allow of such a supposition; for there, immediately
after giving an account of these calamities, it is added -- The second woe is
past; and, behold, the third woe comes quickly; making a most plain and
express distinction between these calamities that had already been mentioned,
and especially these that were just then mentioned in the very last words, and
the calamities that belong to the third woe, that yet remain to be mentioned;
for by being passed, the prophet is to be understood no otherwise than passed
in the declaration and representation -- it was not past in any other respect;
it is as much as to say, Thus an account has been given of the calamities upon
Antichrist that belong to the second woe; now I proceed to give an account of
those dispensations of Providence (...) belong to the third and last woe, which
(...) prove Antichrist's final destruction, end in the kingdoms of this world
becoming the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ.

What was fulfilled in the Reformation, well answers the representation made
concerning the witnesses, Rev xi. 11.12. Of the spirit of life from God
entering into them, and their standing on their feet, and ascending up to
heaven, in the sight of their enemies. A little before the Reformation, the
state of the church of God, and of true religion was lowest of all, and nearest
to utter extinction. -- Antichrist had, after great and long struggles,
prevailed against the Waldenses, Albigenses, and Bohemians. The war with the
Albigenses seems especially to be intended by the war of the beast with the
witnesses, spoken of verse 7. These were witnesses to the truth that were the
most numerous and considerable, and those that most tormented the church of
Rome. And the war that was maintained against them, was, by far, the greatest
that ever Antichrist had against any of the professors of the truth, before the
Reformation, and was properly the war of the beast; it was the Pope that
proclaimed the war, and that raised the soldiers by his emissaries and priests,
preaching the cross, gathering innumerable multitudes of pilgrims from all
parts of Christendom, and raising one croisade after another, which were
conducted and managed by the Pope's legates; and it was the Pope that paid the
soldiers with pardons, indulgences, promises of Paradise, and such like
trumpery. When Antichrist had gradually prevailed against these witnesses, with
much difficulty, and long continued violent struggling, and after innumerable
vexatious disasters and disappointments, the church of God, in the time of
Luther, and other reformers, on a sudden, in a wonderful manner, revives, when
such an event was least expected, (to the surprise and amazement of their
antichristian enemies) and appears in such strength, that the reformed are
able to stand on their own legs, and to withstand all the power and rage of the
church of Rome. Presently after this revival, the people of God are set on
high, having the civil magistrate in many countries on their side, and
henceforward have the power of many potent princes engaged for their
protection. And this, in sight of their enemies, and greatly to their grief and
vexation; who, though they, from time to time, exert their utmost, never are
able to prevail against them, to bring them under any more, as they had done in
former wars. Oftentimes, in scripture, God's church's dwelling in safety, out
of the reach of their enemies, is represented by their dwelling on high, or
being set on high; as Psalm. lix. 1. lxix. 29. xci. 14. cvii. 41. Prove. xxix.
25. Isai. xx xiii. 16. The children of Israel, in their deliverance out of
Egypt, from their cruel taskmasters, who would fain have brought them into
bondage again, were said to be carried on eagle's wings, which is lofty in its
flight, flies away toward heaven, so that the Egyptians could not come at
them; and they were protected by the cloud that went with them, as the
witnesses are said to be caught up to heaven in a cloud. Compare this with
Isai. iv. 5. And the Lord will create upon every dewlling place of Mount Zion,
and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming
fire by night; for upon all the glory shall be a defense.

I shall not pretend to explain the mystery of the three days and a half of the
witnesses lying dead, or to determine the precise duration signified by that
mystical representation. Possibly no particular measure of time may be intended
by it, and yet it may not be without significancy. Mr. Lowman, in the preface
to his Paraphrase on the Revelation, page 8, observes as follows: Prophetic
number do not always express a determinate duration, or space of time, any more
than they always express a certain number. Prophecy, I acknowledge, uses
numbers sometimes as other exp^^ssions^ in a figurate meaning, as symbols and
hieroglyphics. Thus the number SEVEN sometimes does not denote the precise
number seven; but figuratively denotes perfection, or a full and complete
number; and the number ten sometimes does not mean precisely ten in number, but
many in general, or a considerable number.
As no particular number of persons is intended by the two witnesses, but, in
general, it intends a small number, and yet a sufficient number; and as small
as might be, and yet be sufficient; as less than two witnesses was not
sufficient, so, perhaps, no particular duration of that low state that the
church was in before the Reformation, may be intended by three days and an
half, but, in general, it may be hereby signified, that this time of the
triumphing of the wicked, and extremity of God's church, should be but short.
Possibly three days and an half may be mentioned, because that is the utmost
space of time that a dead body can be ordinarily supposed to lie without
putrefaction, signifying that at this time the church should be brought to the
very brink of utter ruin, and yet should be preserved, and revive again. And
half a day may be mentioned to signify the particular care of Providence in
exactly determining this time of his church's extremity. And probably there may
be some reference to the three times (or three years) and an half of the
witnesses prophesying in sackcloth: the more apparently to show the
disproportion between the time of the church's welfare, and the time of her
enemies victory and triumph; the time of the church's affliction and conflict
may be long, and in the issue she may be overcome; but the time of this victory
shall be but short, in comparison with the other, but as a day to a year; she
may, as it were, be killed, and lie dead, until she comes to the very brink of
utter and hopeless ruin, but yet God will not suffer her to see corruption; but
at that very time, when her enemies expected that she should putrify, she shall
rise, and be set on high, out of their reach, greatly to their astonishment.

The grand objection against all this is, that it is said, that the witnesses
should prophesy twelve hundred and sixty days clothed in sackcloth; and when
they have finished their testimony, the beast should make war against them, and
kill them, etc. and that it seems manifest, that after this, they are no longer
in sackcloth, for henceforward they are in an exalted state in heaven; and
that, therefore, seeing the time of their wearing sackcloth is twelve hundred
and fifty days, which is the time of the continuance of Antichrist; hence their
being slain and rising again, must be at the conclusion of this period, and so
at the end of Antichrist's reign.

In answer to which I would say, that we can justly infer no more from this
prophecy than this, viz. That the twelve hundred and sixty days is the proper
time of the church's trouble and bondage, or being clothed in sackcloth,
because it is the appointed time of the reign of Antichrist. But this does not
hinder but that God, out of his great compassion to his church, should, in some
respect, shorten the days, and grant that she should, in some measure,
anticipate the appointed great deliverance that should be at the end of those
days; as he has, in fact, done in the Resormation, whereby the church has had a
great degree of restoration granted, from the darkness and power of Antichrist,
before her proper time of restoration, which is at the end of the twelve
hundred and sixty days. Thus the church of Christ, through the tender mercies
of her Father and Redeemer, in some respects, anticipates her deliverance from
her sorrows and sackcloth; as many parts of the church are hereby brought from
under the dominion of the antichristian powers, into a state of power and
liberty, though, in other respects, the church may be said to continue in
sackcloth, and in the wilderness, until the end of the days; many parts of it
still remaining under grievous persecution.

What we rende^. When they shall have finished their testimony, Mr. Lowman,
from Mr. Daubuz, renders, While they shall perform their testimony; and
obse^^es, that the original may mean the time of their testimony, as well as
the end of it.

I might here observe, that we have other instances of God's shortening the
days of his church's captivity and bondage, either at the beginning or end,
very parallel with what has been now supposed in the case of the witnesses.
Thus the proper time of the bondage of the posterity of Abraham in Egypt, was
four hundred years, Genesis xv. 13. But yet God in mercy deferred the beginning of
their bondage, whereby the time was much shortened at the beginning. So the
time wherein i^ was foretold, that the whole land of Israel should be a
desolation and an astonishment, and the land should enjoy her sabbaths, by the
Babylonish captivity, was seventy years, Jer. xxv. 11, 12. and these seventy
years are dated in 2d Chro. xxxvi. 20, 21. from Zedekiah's captivity; and yet,
from that captivity to Cyrus's decree, was but fifty-two years; though it was
indeed seventy years before the more full restoration of the Jewish church and
slate by Darius's decree, Ezra vi. So the proper time of the oppression and
bondage of the Jewish church under Antiochus Epiphanes, wherein both the
sanctuary and host should be trodden under foot by him, was two thousand three
hundred days, Dan. viii. 13, 14. The time from Antiochus's taking Jerusalem,
and polluting the sanctuary, to Antiochus's death, seems to have been about so
long; but God shortened the days, by granting remarkable help to his people by
means of the Maccabees, before that time; yea, the temple and sanctuary were
reslored, and the altar rebuilt and dedicated before that time.

Upon the whole, I think there appears to be no reason from the prophecy
concerning the two witnesses, Rev. xi. to expect any such general and terrible
destruction of the church of Christ, before the utter downfall of Antichrist, as
some have supposed, but good reason to determine the contrary. It is true,
there is abundant evidence in scripture, that there is yet remaining a mighty
conflict between the church and her enemies, the most violent struggle of Satan
and his adherents, in opposition to true religion, and the most general
commotion that ever was in the world, since the foundation of it to that time;
and many particular Christians, and some parts of the church of Christ, may
suffer hard things in this conflict; but, in the general, Satan and Antichrist
shall not get the victory, nor greatly prevail, but, on the contrary, be
entirely conquered, and utterly overthrown, in this great battle. So that I
hope this prophecy of the slaying of the witnesses will not stand in the way of
a compliance with the proposal made to us in the memorial, as a prevalent
objection and discouragement.

Object. 5. A late very learned and ingenious Expositor of the Revelation, viz.
Mr. Lowman, sets the fall of Antichrist, and consequently the coming of
Christ's kingdom, at a great distance, supposing that the twelve hundred and
sixty years of Antichrist's reign did not begin till the year seven hundred and
fifty-fix; and consequently, that it will not end until after the year two
thousand, more than two hundred and fifty years hence, and this opinion he
confirms by a great variety of arguments.

Ans. 1. If this objection be allowed to be valid, and that which ought to
determine persons in an affair of this nature, and those things concerning
God's people praying for this glorious event, be also allowed to be true, which
before were shown to be the will of God abundantly revealed in his word, then
the following things must be supposed, viz. That it is the will of God that his
people be much in prayer for this event, and particularly that it is God's
revealed will and purpose, that, a little before the accomplishment of it, his
people be earnestly seeking and waiting, and importunately and incessantly
crying to God for it; but yet that it was God's design, that before this time
comes of extraordinary prayer and importunity of his church, for the bringing
on this glorious event, his church should have it given them to understand
precisely when the appointed time should be, and that accordingly he has now
actually brought the fixed time to light by means of Mr. Lowman. -- But is it
reasonable to suppose, that this should be God's manner of dealing with his
church, first to make known to them the precise time which he has unalterably
sixed for the showing this mercy to Zion, and then make it the duty of his
church, in an extraordinary manner, to be, by prayer, enquiring of him
concerning it, and saying -- How long, Lord! and waiting for it, day and night,
crying to him, with exceeding importunity, that he would bring it on, that he
would come quickly, that he would hide himself no longer, but would arise and
have mercy upon Zion, and awake as one out of sleep, openly manisest himself,
and make bare his holy arm for the salvation of his people? That they that make
mention of the Lord should not keep silence, nor give him any rest, until he
establish and make Jerusalem a praise on the earth? And that the church should
then say to Christ, Make haste, my beloved, and be thou like a roe or a young
heart on the mountain of spices?

It may be many ways for the comfort and benesit of God's church in her
afflicted state, to know that the reign of Antichrist is to be no more than one
thousand two hundred and sixty years; and some things in general may be argued
concerning the approach of it, when it is near; as the Jews could argue the
approach of Christ's first coming, from Daniel's prophecy of the seventy weeks,
though they knew not precisely when that seventy weeks would end. But it is not
reasonable to expect that God should make known to us beforehand, the precise
time of Christ's coming in his kingdom. The disciples desired to know this, and
manifested their desire to their Lord, but he told them plainly, that it was
not for them to know the times and seasons, which the Father has put in his
own power, Acts i. 6, 7. and there is no reason to think that it is any more
for us than for them, or for Christ's disciples in these days, any more than
for his apostles in those days. God makes it the duty of his church to be
importunately praying for it, and praying that it may come speedily; and not
only to be praying for it, but to be seeking for it, in the use of proper
means, endeavoring that religion may now revive every where, and Satan's
kingdom be overthrown; and always to be waiting for it, being in a constant
preparation for it, as servants that wait for the coming of their lord, or
virgins for the coming of the bridegroom, not knowing at what hour he will
come. -- But God's making known beforehand the precise time of his coming, does
not well consist with these things.

It is the revealed will of God, that he should be enquired of by his people,
by extraordinary prayer, concerning this great mercy, to do it for them, before
it be fulfilled. And if any suppose, that it is now found out precisely when
the time is to be, and (the time being at a considerable distance) that now is
not a proper season to begin this extraordinary prayer, I would, on this
supposition, ask -- When we shall begin? How long before the fixed and known
time of the bestowment of this mercy comes, shall we begin to cry earnestly to
God that this mercy n^ come, and that Christ would make haste and be like a
roe, etc. For us to delay, supposing that we know the time to be sar off, is
not agreeable to the language of God's people in my text -- Come, let us go
SPEEDILY, and pray before the Lord, and seek the Lord of Hosts.

Ans. 2. I acknowledge that Mr. Lowman's Exposition of the Revelation is, on
many accounts, excellently written, giving great light into some parts of that
prophecy, and an instance of the fulsillment of that prediction, Dan. xii. 4.
Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased; and especially in
his Interpretation of the Five First Vials, (which he supposes already poured
out) exceedingly satisfying. But yet the opinion of Mr. Lowman, with regard to
the particular time of the beginning and end of the time, times, and an half of
Antichrist's reign, and of all others that pretend to six the time, is the
least to be regarded, because it is clearly revealed, and expressly declared by
God, that that matter shall be sealed up and hid, and not known until the time
of the end of this time, times, and an half. Daniel, in the last chapter of his
prophecy, gives us an account, how the angel told him of a future time of great
trouble and affliction to the church of God, and then said to him, ver. 4. But
thou, O Daniel, SHUT UP THE WORDS, AND SEAL THE BOOK, EVEN TO THE TIME OF THE
END. And then the prophet proceeds to give an account of a vision that he had
of one earneslly enquiring of the angel of the Lord how long it would be to the
end of this remarkable and wonderful time of the church's trouble, saying. How
long shall ^t be to the end of these wonders? ver. 5, 6. The answer was, that
it should be for a time, times, and an half, and that when so long a time was
past, then this wonderful affliction and scattering of the holy people should
be finished, ver. 7. But then Daniel tells us, in the next verse, that he
heard, but he understood not, and said, O, my Lord, what shall be the end of
these things? He did not understand that general and mystical answer, that
those things should have an end at the end of a time, times, and an half; he
did not know by it, when this period would have an end; and therefore he
enquires more particularly what the time of the end was. But the angel replies,
ver. 9. Go thy way, Daniel, the words are closed and sealed up, until the time
of the end. I do not know what could have been more express. The angel gently
rebukes this over inquisitiveness of Daniel, very much as Christ did a like
inquisitiveness of the disciples concerning the same matter, when he said to
them -- It is not for you to know the times and seasons, that the Father has
put in his own power. -- I think there can be no doubt but that this space, of
a time, times, and an half of the church's great trouble, about the end of
which Daniel enquires, is the same with that time, times, and half, that is
spoken of, chap. vii. 25. and Rev. xii. 14. as the time of Antichrist's reign,
and the church's (...) ^n the wilderness, and not merely the time of the
church's troubles by Antiochus Epiphanes. But we see, when Daniel has a mind to
know particularly when this time would come to an end, he is bid to go away,
and rest contented in ignorance of this matter; for, says the man clothed in
linen, THE WORDS ARE CLOSED UP, AND SEALED, UNTIL THE TIME OF THE END. That is,
very plainly, the matter that you enquire about, when the end of this time, and
times, and half shall come, shall not be known, but be kept a great secret,
until the time of the end actually comes, and all attempts to find it out
before that shall be in vain. And therefore when a particular divine appears,
that thinks he has found it out, and has unsealed this matter, and made it
manifest with very manifold and abundant evidence, we may well think he is
mistaken, and doubt whether those supposed evidences are truly solid ones, and
such as are indeed sufficient to make that matter manifest, which God has
declared should be kept hid, and not made manifest before it is accomplished.
Mr. Lowman's own words in his preface, p. 24, 25. are here worthy to be
repeated: It will (says he) ever be a point of wisdom, not to be over busy, or
over confident in any thing, especially in fixing periods of time, or
determining seasons, which it may be are not to be determined, it may be are
not fit to be known. It is a maxim, of greater wisdom than is usually thought,
Seek not to know what should not be revealed. Such are many future events. The
precise time of our Savior's coming to judgment, was not revealed, because not
fit to be revealed. -- The uncertainty of his appearance was of greater service
to preserve a care of religion, than the revelation of it would have been; for
the uncertainty itself gives many useful exhortations -- Watch, for ye know not
what hour the Son of Man comes. Suppose then some of the events described in
this prophecy should be of doubtful application; suppose the precise time of
the downfall of the beast, the slaying and resurrection of the witnesses, and
the beginning of the thousand years happy state of the church, should not be so
determined, but it would admit of different calculations; may it not be wise,
and therefore fit, it should be so? The certainty of those events in a proper
time, though that time should not be precisely determined, will answer the
greater ends of useful instruction. And if the revelation should go no farther
than this, it would yet be a revelation, of great benefit and advantage, as the
certainty of the day of judgment in its proper time surely is, though of that
day and hour knows no man.

Ans. 3. Though it is not for us to know the precise time of the fall of
Antichrist, yet I humbly conceive that we have no reason to suppose the event
principally intended, in the prophecies, of Antichrist's destruction, to be at
so great a distance, as Mr. Lowman places it, but have reason to think it to be
much nearer. Not that I would set up myself as a person of equal judgment with
Mr. Lowman in matters of this nature. As he differs from most others of the
most approved expositors of the Apocalypse, in this matter, so I hope it will
not appear vanity and presumption in me, to differ from this particular
expositor, and to agree with the greater number. And since his opinion stands
so much in the, way of that great and important affair, to promote which is the
very end of this whole discourse, I hope it will not look as though I affected
to appear considerably among the interpreters of prophecy, and as a person of
skill in these mysterious matters, that I offer some reasons against Mr.
Lowman's opinions. It is surely a great pity, that it should be received as a
thing clear and abundantly confirmed, that the glorious day of Antichrist's
fall is at so great a distance, (so directly tending to damp and discourage all
earnest prayers for, or endeavors after its speedy accomplishment) unless
there be good and plain ground for it. I would therefore offer some things to
consideration, which, I think, may justly make us look upon the opinion of this
learned interpreter, of this happy event's being at so great a distance, not so
certain and indubitable, as to hinder our praying and hoping for its being
fulfilled much sooner.

The period of Antichrist's reign, as this author has sixed it, seems to be the
main point insisted on in his Exposition of the Revelation, which he supposes a
great many things in the scheme of prophecies delivered in that book do concur
to establish. And, indeed, it is so, with respect to the scheme of
interpretation of these prophecies, which he goes into, and finds it requisite
to maintain, in order to confirm this point. But there are several things in
that scheme, that appear to me justly liable to exception.

Whereas it is represented, Rev. xvii. 10, 11. that there are seven different
successive heads of the beast; that five were past, and another was to come,
and to continue a short space, that might, on some accounts, be reckoned a
seventh; and that Antichrist was to follow next after this, as the eighth; but
yet the foregoing not being properly one of the heads of the beast, he was
properly the seventh. Mr. Lowman does not think with others, that by the
seventh that was to continue a short space, which would not be properly one of
the heads of the beast, is meant Constantine, and the other Christian emperors;
(for he thinks they are reckoned as properly belonging to the sixth head of the
beast) but that hereby is intended the government that Rome was subject to
under the Gothic princes, and the exarchate of Ravenna, after the imperial form
of government in Rome ceased in Augustulus, until the Pope was invested with
his temporal dominion, called St. Peter's Patrimony, by Pi^i^ king of France,
in the year seven hundred and fifty-six. And he supposes, that that wounding of
one of the heads of the beast with a sword of death, that we read of, chap.
xiii. 3 and 14. was not fulfilled in the destruction of the heathen empire, and
the giving the imperial power unto Christians, but in the destruction of the
imperial form of government, by the sword of the Goths, in the time of
Augustulus. But it seems to me to be very unlikely, that the Spirit of God
should reckon Constantime and the Christian emperors as proper members, and
belonging to one of the heads, of that monstrous wild and cruel beast, that is
compared to a leopard and a bear, and a devouring lion, and that had a mouth
speaking great things and blasphemies, and that rules by the power and
authority of the dragon, or the devil; The word Therion signisies a wild savage
beast, as Mr. Low^^n himself observes, page 127.
which beast is represented in this 17th chapter, as full of names of
blasphemy, and of a bloody color, denoting his exceeding cruelty in
perfecuting the Christian church. For Constantine, instead of this was a member
of the Christian church, and set by God in the most eminent station in his
church, and was honored above all other princes that ever had been in the
world. as the great protector of his church, and her deliverer from the
persecuting power of that cruel scarlet-colored beast. Mr. Lowman himself
styles him a Christian Prince, and Protector of the Christian Religion. God is
very careful not to reckon his own people among the Gentiles, the visible
subjects of Satan, Number. xxiii. 9. The people shall not be reckoned among the
nations. God will not enroll them with them; if they happen to be among them,
he will be careful to set a mark upon them, as a note of distinction, Rev. vii.
3, etc. when God is reckoning up his own people, he leaves out those that have
been noted for idolatry. As among the tribes that were sealed, Rev. viii. those
idolatrous tribes of Ephraim and Dan are left out, and in the genealogy of
Christ, Matthew. i. those princes that were chiefly noted for idolatry, are left
out. Much more would God be careful not to reckon his own people, especially
such Christian princes as have been the most eminent instruments of
overthrowing idolatry, amongst idolaters, and as members and heads of that
kingdom that is noted in scripture as the most notorious and infamous of all,
for abominable idolatry, and opposition and cruelty to the true worshippers of
God. And especially not to reckon them as properly belonging to one of those
seven heads of this monarchy, of which very heads it is particularly noted that
they had on them the names of BLASPHEMY, which Mr. Lowman himself supposes to
signify idolatry. It was therefore worthy of God, agreeable to his manner, and
what might well be expected, that when he was reckoning up the several
successive heads of this beast, and Constantine and his successors came in the
way, and there was occasion to mention them, to set a mark, or note of
distinction on them, signifying that they did not properly belong to the beast,
nor were to be reckoned as belonging to the heads, and therefore are to be
skipped over in the reckoning, and Antichrist, though the eighth head of the
Roman empire, is to be reckoned the seventh head of the beast. This appears to
me abundantly the most just and natural interpretation of Rev. xvii. 10, 11. It
is reasonable to suppose, that God would take care to make such a note in this
prophetical description of this dreadful beast, and not, by any means to reckon
Constantine as belonging properly to him. -- If we reckon Constantine as a
member of this beast having seven heads and ten horns, described chap. xvii.
and as properly one of his heads, then he was also properly a member of the
great red dragon with seven heads and ten horns that warred with the woman,
chap. xii. For the seven heads and ten borns of that dragon, are plainly the
same with the seven heads and ten horns of the beast. So that this makes
Constantine a visible member of the devil; for we are told expressly of that
dragon, ver 9. that he was that old serpent, called the Devil and Satan. And to
suppose that Constantine is reckoned as belonging to one of the heads of that
dragon, is to make these prophecies inconsistent with themselves. For herein
this 12th chapter, we have represented a war between the dragon and the woman
clothed with the sun; which woman, as all agree, is the church; but
Constantine, as all do also agree, belonged to the woman, was a member of the
Christian church, and was on that side in the war against the dragon; yea, was
the main instrument of that great victory that was obtained over the dragon
there spoken of, ver. 9 -- 12. What an inconsistency therefore is it, to
suppose that he was at the same time a member and head of that very dragon,
which fought with the woman, and yet which Constantine himself fought with,
overcame, and gloriously triumphed over! It is not therefore to be wondered at,
that God was careful to distinguish Constantine from the proper heads of the
beast; it would have been a wonder if he had not. God seems to have been
careful to distinguish him, not only in his word, but in his providence, by so
ordering it that this Christian emperor should be removed from Rome, the city
that God had given up to be the seat of the power of the beast, and of its
heads, and that he should have the seat of his empire elsewhere.

Constantine was made the instrument of giving a mortal wound to the heathen
Roman empire, and giving it a mortal wound in its head, viz. the heathen
emperors that were then reigning, Maxentius and Licinius. -- But more eminently
was this glorious change in the empire owing to the power of God's word, the
prevalence of the glorious gospel, by which Constantine himself was converted,
and so became the instrument of the overthrow of the heathen empire in the east
and west. The change that was then bro't to pass, is represented as the
destruction of the heathen empire, or the old heathen world, and therefore
seems to be compared to that dissolution of heaven and earth that shall be at
the day of judgment, Rev. vi. 12. to the end. And therefore well might the
heathen empire, under the head which was then reigning, be represented as
wounded to death, chap. xiii. 3. It is much more likely, that the wound the
beast had by a sword, in his head, spoken of ver. 14. was the wound that the
heathen empire had in its head, by that sword which we read of, chap. i. 16.
and xix. 15. that proceeds out of the mouth of Christ, than the wound that was
given to the Christian empire and emperor by the sword of the heathen Goths. It
is most likely that this deadly wound was by that sword with which Michael made
war with him, and overcame him, and cast him to the earth, chap. xii. 9. and
that the deadly wound which was given him, was given him at that very time. It
is most likely, that the sword that gave him this deadly wound, after which he
strangely revived as though he rose from the dead, was the same sword with that
which is spoken of, as what shall at last utterly destroy him, so that he shall
never rise more, chap. xix. 15, 19, 20, 21. This wounding of the head of the
beast by the destruction of the heathen empire, and conversion of the emperor
to the Christian truth, was a glorious event indeed of Divine Providence,
worthy to be so much spoken of in prophecy. It is natural to suppose, that the
mortal wounding of the head of that savage cruel beast, that is represented as
constantly at war with the woman, and persecuting the church of Christ, should
be some relief to the Christian church; but, on the contrary, that wounding to
death, that Mr. Lowman speaks of, was the victory of the enemies of the
Christian church over her, and the wound received from them.

It is said of that head of the empire that shall be next after the sixth head,
and next before Antichrist, and that is not reckoned as properly one of the
number of the heads of the beast, that when it comes, it shall continue a short
space, chap. xvii. 10. By which we may understand, at least, that it shall be
one of the shortest, in its continuance, of the successive heads. But the
government seated at Ravenna, in the hands of the Goths, or of the deputies of
the Greek emperors, (which Mr. Lowman supposes to be meant by the head)
continued, as Mr. Lowman himself takes notice, very near three hundred years.
And if so, its continuance was one of the longest of the heads mentioned.

And besides, if the government that Rome was under, from the time that
Augustulus abdicated, to the time when the Pope was confirmed in his temporal
dominion, was meant by the seventh head that was to be between the imperial
head and the papal, there would doubtless have been two different heads
mentioned, instead of one, between the Emperor and the Pope, viz. First, the
Gothic princes, which reigned near an hundred years. Secondly, the Exarchs of
Ravenna, which governed for about one hundred and eighty-five years. The Gothic
kingdom was much more properly a distinct government from the Imperial, than
the Exarchate of Ravenna; for during the Exarchate, Rome was under the
government of the emperor, as much as it was in Constantine's time.

In Rev. xvii. 12. it is said, the ten horns are ten kings, which are to
receive power as kings one hour with the beast, or (as Mr. Lowman says, it
ought to have been translated) the same hour, or point of time with the beast.
This will not allow the time when Antichrist first receives power as king, to
be so late as Mr. Lowman supposes. This division of the empire into many
kingdoms, denoted by the number ten, was about the year four hundred and
fifty-six, after Gensericus had taken the city of Rome; but Mr. Lowman places
the beginning of the reign of Antichrist in the year seven hundred and
fifty-six, which is three hundred years later. I know, such an expression as in
one hour, or the same hour, may allow some latitude, but surely not such a
latitude as this. This is a much longer time, than it was from the time of the
vision to Constantine: much longer than the space of all the first six seals,
longer than it was from Christ's ascension to Constantine, and near as long as
the time of all the reigns of the heathen emperors put together, from Augustus
Caefar to Constantine. An hour is every where, in the other places in this book
of Revelation, used to signify a very short time, as may be seen in places
cited in the margin. Rev. xviii. 10, 17, 19. Chap. iii. 3, 10. -- viii. 1. --
ix. 10 -- ^iv. 7.
And the expression, the same hour, every where else in the Bible, intends near
the same point of time. Den. iii 6. -- iv. 3^ -- v. 5. Marth viii 13. -- (...).
19. -- Luke vii. 21. -- (...). 1^. -- xx. 10 -- xxiv. (...). John iv. (...)
Acts xvi. 18, (...) xi. 15.
The phrase one hour is used several times in the next chapter, speaking of the
downsall of Antichrist: Ver. 10, 1^, 19.
and each time, evidently signisies a very short space of time. And there is no
reason why we should not understand the same phrase in the same sense, when it
is used here concerning the rise of Antichrist.

Mr. Lowman greatly insists upon it, that what is spoken as continuing one
thousand two hundred and sixty days, is not so much and spiritual authority or
ecclesiastical power of the Pope, over the nations of Christendom, as his
temporal government and dominion in that individual city of Rome, and therefore
to determine when these one thousand two hundred and sixty days or years began,
and when they will end, we must consider when the Pope first received this his
temporal power over the city of Rome, and the neighboring regions, called St.
Peter's Patrimony. But I can see no good reason for this. Indeed it is strange,
if it be so. -- God has been pleased in these revelations and prophecies, which
he has given for the benefit of his church in general, to speak much concerning
an antichristian power that should arise, that should persecute the saints,
and scatter the power of the holy people, and be an occasion of great
affliction to the church of Christ; and in these revelations, in both Old
Testament and New, has declared, and often repeated it, that his dominion shall
continue so long, and no longer; and for the comfort of his church in general,
Christ hath-sworn with great solemnity, that the continuance of this
persecuting power shall be limited, Dan. xii. 7. Now it would be strange if, in
all this, the thing principally intended is not that dominion of this
antichristian power which chiefly concerns the church of Christ in general,
but merely his temporal dominion over one movince in Italy, called St. Peter's
Patrimony. Doubtless, that dominion of Antichrist, which the prophecies insist
upon and describe, is the dominion whose duration and limits those prophecies
declare. But the dominion of Antichrist which the prophecies insist upon and
describe, is not any dominion over a particular province in Italy, but the
dominion by which he succeeds the four great monarchies of the world, Dan. vii.
The dominion by which he succeeds the dragon in his power, throne and great
authority, Rev. xiii. 2. The dominion in which he has power given him over all
kindreds, tongues and nations, ver. 7. The dominion by which the great whore
sits on many waters, chap. xvii. 1. which the angel explains to be peoples, and
multitudes, and nations, and tongues, ver. 15. and the dominion in which he
reigns over the ten kings, into which the Roman empire is divided, Rev. xiii.
1. and xviii. 3.12, 13. The beast that had ten horns, is not the city of Rome,
and the neighboring region, but the Roman empire; they are the horns or the
kings, not of the city, but of the empire. If we consider what is expressed in
the passages themselves, which speak of the three years and an half of
Antichrist, they will lead us to understand something very diverse from the
duration of his temporal dominion over St. Peter's Patrimony. In Dan vii. 25.
the time, times, and half of the little horn, is expressly the continvance of
time, wherein it shall be given to him to change times and laws, and wear out
the saints of the Most High; and in chap. xii. 7. it is spoken of as the time
of his scattering the power of the holy people; in Rev. xi. 2. the forty and
two months is spoken of as the time of Antichrist's treading under foot the
court of the temple and the holy city; i. e. the external and visible Christian
church abroad in the world, or the nations of Christendom. In ver. 3. the one
thousand two hundred and sixty days of Antichrist are spoken of as the time of
the witnesses prophesying in sackcloth; and in chap. xii. 6. and 14. the time
of the woman's being in the wilderness, which was through the great power that
Antichrist had over the Christian world, and not his small temporal dominion in
Italy.

It is true, some regard is had in the prophecies to the city of Rome, the city
built on seven hills; which being the fountain of all rule and authority in the
Roman monarchy, and the capital city in the empire, from whence the whole
empire was denominated, and the place where the head of the empire usually
resided, was properly made use of by the angel, Rev. xvii. 9, 18. to show what
empire Antichrist should rule over, and what city he should usually reside in.
And this is all that can be meant by the words of the angel; and not that those
streets and walls, and the very ground, were such main and essential things in
what the prophecy intended by the beast; that when Antichrist's dominion ceases
in that place, then the beast ceases. For, if so, then it will sollow, that the
beast had his head wounded to death a second time, and ceased to be, when the
Popes resided at Avignon in France, for the best part of a century; when not
only the Popes did not reside in Rome, nor in any part of St. Peter's
Patrimony, nor any part of Italy, but some of them were neither Romans nor
Italians. Though the angel says of the great whore, Rev. xvii. 18. The woman
which thou saw, is the great city which reigns over the kings of the earth;
yet by the city, in this case, is not meant so much what was contained within
those Roman walls, as the Roman empire, as is evident by chap. xi. 8. And their
dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which is spiritually
called Sodom and Egypt. Here, by that great city, neither Mr. Lowman himself,
nor, I suppose, any other Protestant interpreter, understands the city of Rome,
strictly speaking, but the Roman monarchy.

And though it be true, as Mr. Lowman observes, the Pope's ecclesiastical
monarchy, and power and influence through Christendom, was greatly established
and advanced by Pepin's making him a temporal prince over the Exarchate of
Ravenna; yet, I would ask, whether the Pope's power and influence in the world,
and his ability to disturb the quiet of the nations of Christendom, and (as it
is expressed in Daniel) to change times and laws, and to carry his own designs,
in the various countries and kingdoms of Europe, was not greater before Pepin,
than it is now, and has been for a long time? And yet Mr. Lowman supposes that
now is properly the time of Antichrist's reign, that the one thousand two
hundred and sixty years of his reign continues, and will continue for about two
hundred and seventy years longer; though his power be now so small, and has been
declining ever since the reformation and still declines continually.

One thing that Mr. Lowman supposes confirms his opinion of so late a beginning
of the one thousand two hundred and sixty years of the reign of the beast, is
the order of the several periods of this prophecy, and the manner of their
succeeding one another.

As to his particular scheme of the seven periods, so divided and limited, and
so obviously ranked in such order, and following one another in such direct and
continual succession, and each ending in a state of peace, safety and happiness
to the church of God, it seems to me to be more ingenious than solid, and that
many things might be said to demonstrate it not to be founded in the truth of
things, and the real design of the divine author of this prophecy. But now to
enter into a particular and full examination of it, would be to lengthen out
this discourse far beyond its proper limits. I would only observe, (which
directly concerns my present purpose) that to make out this scheme, Mr. Lowman
supposes that the fifth and sixth trumpets, that bring on the two first woes,
and the whole ninth chapter of the Revelation, altogether respects the
Saracens. But it appears to me not very credible, that the Saracens should have
so much said of them in this prophecy, as to have a whole chapter taken up
about them, and not a word in the prophecy be said about the Turks, who
immediately succeeded them For though it be true, that the reign of Othman, or
Ottoman, who began what they call the Ottoman empire, was a long time after
this; yet the Turks themselves, under other princes, in the government they set
up in territories that had formerly been possessed by Christians, and in their
overrunning and ravaging Christian countries, immediately succeeding the
Saracens; and from thenceforward have been a terrible, and almost continual
scourge to the church.
in the same religion, and proceeding on the same principles, and were so much
more considerable, and brought vastly greater calamities on the Christian
world, and have set up and long maintained one of the greatest, strongest and
most extraordinary empires that ever the world saw, and have been the most
terrible scourge to Christendom, that ever Divine Providence made use of, and
one of the greatest of all God's plagues on the world of mankind.

Mr. Lowman, in pursuance of his scheme, also supposes, (which is yet more
incredible) this period of the trumpets ends in a state of safety, peace and
happiness to the church of God; so that, on that occasion, there are great
voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of
our Lord, and of his Christ. And yet he supposes, that it issues in setting up
the kingdom of Antichrist; and that about that very time, when these heavenly
voices so joyfully proclaimed this, the beast was enthroned, and the time,
times and half, or one thousand two hundred and sixty days of his reign began,
which is spoken of every where, as the time of the church's greatest darkness
and trouble, the time wherein the little horn should wear out the saints of the
Most High. The time appointed for his scattering the power of the holy people.
The time of the woman's being in the wilderness. The time of treading under
foot the court of the temple. And the time of the witnesses prophesying in
sackcloth.

However, I do not deny that the time when Mr. Lowman supposes the reign of the
beast began, even the time when Pepin confirmed to the Pope his temporal
dominions in Italy, was a time of the great increase and advancement of the
power of Antichrist in the world, and a notable epoch. And if I may be allowed
humbly to offer what appears to me to be the truth with relation to the rise
and fall of Antichrist, it is this -- As the power of Antichrist, and the
corruption of the apostate church, rose not at once, but by several notable
steps and degrees, so it will in the like manner fall^ and that diverse steps
and seasons of destruction to the spiritual Babylon, and revival and
advancement of the true c^^rch, are prophesied of under one. Though it be true,
that there is some particular event, that prevails above all others in the
intention of the prophecy, some remarkable season of the destruction of the
church of Rome, and the papal power and corruption, and advancement of true
religion, that the prophecies have a principal respect to.

It was certainly thus with regard to the prophecies of the destruction of old
Babylon, and the church's deliverance from captivity and oppression by that
city and kingdom, which is abundantly alluded to in these prophecies of the
Revelation, as a noted type of the oppression of the church of Christ by the
church of Rome, calling the latter so often by the name of Babylon, and the
church of Christ Jerusalem. The captivity of the Jews by the Babylonians was
not perfected at once, but was brought on by several notable steps. So neither
was the restoration of the Jewish church, after the captivity, perfected at
once. It was several times foretold, that the duration of the captivity should
be seventy years; and also, that after seventy years were accomplished, God
would destroy Babylon. But this period had manifestly several different
beginnings, and several endings. Thus from Jehoiakim's captivity to Cyrus's
decree, for the return of the Jews, and the rebuilding of Jerusalem, was
seventy years. And from Zedekiah's captivity to Darius's decree seventy years.
And from the last carrying away of all, to the finishing and dedication of the
temple, was also seventy years. So also the prophecies of Babylon's destruction
were fulfilled by several steps. These prophecies feem to have a principal
respect to that destruction that was accomplished by Cyrus, at the end of the
first seventy years forementioned; but there were other things in the very
same prophecies, that were not fulfilled until the fourth year of Darius, when
what remained of Babylon was subjected to another dreadful destruction, which,
in a great measure, completed its desolation, which was at the end of the
second seventy years, and at the same time that the restoration of the Jews was
perfected by the decree of Darius. Prideanx's Connection, part I. p. 183, 184,
and 267, 268, 269. Edit. 9, and p. 271 and 272.
-- But yet, there were many other things contained in the fame prophecies of
Babylon's destruction, rendering it thenceforward perfectly and perpetually
desolate, and the haunt of serpents and wild beasts, that were not fulfilled
until more than two hundred years after, in the time of Seleucus king of Syria.
Pride. Connect. Part I. p. 808 -- 812.
So also it was with respect to the prophecies of the destruction of Tire, in
the xxvith, xxviith and xxviiith chapters of Ezekiel. from which many of the
expressions used in the Revelation, concerning the destruction of the kingdom
of Antichrist, are taken, and which is evidently made use of in scripture as a
type of the latter. These prophecies of the destruction of Tire were fulfilled
by various steps. Many things were fulfilled in the destruction of the old city
by Nebuchadnezzar, Ibid. 128, 129, 1^0.
and yet other parts of the same prophecies were fulfilled by Alexander, Ibid.
p. 693.
which was about two hundred and forty years afterward. And yet both these
desolations are prophesied of under one.

And thus it seems to me very probable, that it will prove, with respect to the
prophecies of the destruction of mystical Babylon. It is, I think, pretty
manifest by the prophecies, that this antichristian hierarchy and apostate
church will at last be so destroyed, that there shall be no remainders of it
left, and shall have as perfect a desolation, before God has done with her, as
old Babylon had; there shall be no such thing as Pope or church of Rome in the
world. See Rev. xviii. 21 -- 23. and xix. 20, 21. Dan. vii. 26, 27.
It seems also pretty manifest, that after that event that is chiefly intended
in the prophecies of Antichrist's destruction, there will be some remains of
the Romish church. This appears by that most particular and large description
of that destruction, Rev. xviii. There it seems to be implied, not only that
many shall yet remain of the church of Rome, that shall bewail her overthrow,
of her people and clergy, but that there should be some princes among them,
Kings of the earth, that have committed fornication, and lived deliciously with
her. And it is exceeding improbable in itself, that every Papist, in each
quarter of the world, should be destroyed, or cease from the world, at one
blow. And as long as so considerable a number remains, as may be gathered from
the prophecy, they will doubtless have an hierarchy, and there will be one
among them that will bear the name of a Pope, although the church of Rome shall
be mainly destroyed, and the interest of Popery shall be sunk very low in the
world, so that there will yet remain such a thing as a papal church and
hierarchy in the world, to be wholly extirpated at another period, At the
pouring out of the seventh vial upon the air, th^^^ incipalities and powers of
Satan.
sometime after that great overthrow principally insisted on in the prophecies.
And this second destruction of Antichrist, or rather extirpation of his
remains, together with the complete extirpation of all remains of mahometanism,
heathenism and heresy through the world, and the finishing stroke toward the
overthrow of Satan's visible kingdom on earth, and so the beginning of the
Millennium, or spiritual rest of the world, may, for ought I know, be about the
time Mr. Lowman speaks of; agreeable to the opinion of the ancient Jews, and
many Christian divines that have followed them, that the world would stand six
thousand years, and then, the seventh thousand years should be the world's rest
or sabbath. The ruin of the Popish interest is but a small part of what is
requisite, in order to introduce and settle such a state of things, as the
world is represented as being in, in that Millennium that is described, Rev.
xx. wherein Satan's visible kingdom is every where totally extirpated, and a
perfect end put to all heresie^, delusions, and false religions whatsoever,
through the whole earth, and Satan henceforward deceives the nations no more,
and has no place any where but in hell. This is the sabbatism of the world,
when all shall be in a holy rest; when the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and
there shall be nothing to hurt or offend, and there shall be abundance of
peace, and the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters
cover the seas, and God's people shall dwell in quiet resting-places. There is
not the least reason to think, that all this will be brought to pass as it were
at one stroke, or that from the present lamentable state of things, there
should be brought about and completed the destruction of the church of Rome,
the entire extirpation of all infidelity, heresies superstitions and schisms,
through all Christendom, and the conversion of all the Jews, and the full
enlightening and conversion of all Mohammedan and heathen nations, through the
whole earth, on every side of the globe, and from the north to the south pole,
and the full settlement of all in the pure Christian faith and order, all as it
were in the issue of one battle, and by means of the victory of the church in
one great conflict with her enemies. This would contradict many things in
scripture, which represent this great event to be brought to pass by a gradual
progress of religion; as leaven that gradually spreads, until it has diffused
itself, through the whole lump, and a plant of mustard, which from a very small
seed, gradually becomes a great tree. And like seed which a man casts upon the
ground, that springs and grows up, night and day; and first brings forth the
blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear. And especially would this
contradict the prophetical representation in Ezekiel. xlvii. where the progress of
religion is represented by the gradual increase of the waters of the fanctuary;
being first a small spring issuing out from under the threshold of the temple,
and then after they had run a thousand cubits, being up to the ankles; and at
the end of another thousand cubits, up to the knees; and at the end of another
thousand, up to the loins; and afterward a great river, that could not be
passed over; and being finally brought into the sea, and healing the waters
even of the vast ocean. If the Spirit of God should be immediately poured out,
and that work of God's power and grace should now begin, which, in its progress
and issue, should complete this glorious effect; there must be an amazing and
unparalleled progress of the work and manifestation of divine power to bring so
much to pass, by the year two thousand. Would it not be a great thing, to be
accomplished in one half century, that religion, in the power and purity of it,
should so prevail, as to gain the conquest over all those many things that
stand in opposition to it among Protestants, and gain the upper hand through
the Protestant world? And if in another, it should go on so to prevail, as to
get the victory over all the opposition and strength of the kingdom of
Antichrist, so as to gain the ascendancy in that which is now the Popish world?
And if in a third half century, it should prevail and subdue the greater part
of the Mohammedan world, and bring in the Jewish nation, in all their
dispersions? And when in the next whole century, the whole heathen world should
be enlightened and converted to the Christian says, throughout all parts of
Africa, Asia, America and Terra Australis, and be thoroughly settled in
Christian says and order, without any remainders of their old delusions and
superstitions, and this attended with an utter extirpation of the remnant of
the church of Rome, and all the relicts of mahometanism, heresy, schism and
enthusiasm, and a suppression of all remains of open vice and immorality, and
every sort of visible enemy to true religion, through the whole earth, and
bring to an end all the unhappy commotions, tumults, and calamities occasioned
by such great changes, and all things be so adjusted and settled through the
world, that the world henceforward should enjoy an holy rest or sabbatism.

I have thus distinguished what belongs to a bringing of the world from its
present state, to the happy state of the Millennium, the better to give a view
of the greatness of the work; and not, that I pretend so much as to conjecture,
that things will be accomplished just in this order. The whole work is not the
less great and wonderful, to be accomplished in such a space of time, in
whatever order the different parts of it succeed each other. They that think
that what has been mentioned would not be swift progress, yea, amazingly swift,
do not consider how great the work is, and the vast and innumerable obstacles
that are in the way. It was a wonderful thing, when the Christian religion,
after Christ's ascension, so prevailed, as to get the ascendancy in the Roman
empire in about three hundred years, but that was nothing to this.

Ans. 4. There are, as I apprehend, good reasons to hope, that that work of
God's Spirit will begin in a little time, which in the progress of it will
overthrow the kingdom of Antichrist, and, in its issue, destroy Satan's visible
kingdom on earth.

The prophecy of the sixth Vial, Rev. xvi. 12 -- 16. if we take it in its
connection with the other Vials, and consider those providential events, by
which the preceding Vials have manifestly been fulfilled, I humbly conceive,
affords just ground for such a hope.

It is very plain, from this whole chapter, as also the preceding and
following, that all these seven Vials are Vials of God's wrath on Antichrist;
one is not poured out on the Jews, another on the Turks, another on Pagans.
another on the church of Rome; but they all signify God's successive judgments
or plagues on the beast and his kingdom, which is in this chapter and almost
every where in this book, called GREAT BABYLON. And therefore undoubtedly, when
it is said, The sixth angel poured out his Vial on the river Euphrates, and the
water thereof was dried up, that the way of the kings of the east might be
prepared. By the river Euphrates is meant something some way appertaining to
this mystical Babylon, as that river that ran through Chaldea, called Euphrates,
was something appertaining to the literal Babylon. And it is very manifest,
that here is in the prophecy of this Vial an allusion to that by which the way
was prepared for the destruction of Babylon by Cyrus, which was by turning the
channel of the river Euphrates, which ran through the midst of the city,
whereby the way of the kings of the east, the princes of Media and Persia, was
prepared to come in under the walls of the city, at each end, where the waters
used to run, and destroy it; as they did that night wherein Daniel interpreted
the handwriting on the wall, against Belshazzar, Dan. v. 30. The prophecies of
Babylon's destruction do, from time to time, take notice of this way of
destroying her, by drying up the waters of the river Euphrates, to prepare the
way for her enemies, Isai. xliv. 27, 28. That says to the deep -- Be dry --
and I will dry up thy rivers; that says of Cyrus -- He is my servant, and
shall perform all my pleasure. Jer. li. 31, 32. One post shall run to meet
another, to show the king of Babylon that his city is taken at one end, and
that the passages are stopped, and the reeds they have burnt with fire, and the
men of war are affrighted. And ver. 36. I will dry up her sea, and make her
springs dry. -- The Medes and Persians, the people that destroyed Babylon,
dwelt to the eastward of Babylon, and are spoken of as coming from the east to
her destruction, Isai. xlvi. 11. Calling a ravenous bird from the EAST, the man
that executes my counsel, from a far country. And the princes that joined with
this ravenous bird from the east, in this affair of destroying Babylon, are
called kings, Jer. li. 11. The Lord has raised up the spirit of the KINGS of
the Medes; for his device is against Babylon to destroy it. Ver. 28. Prepare
against her the nations, with the KINGS of the Medes, the captains thereof, and
the rulers thereof. -- The drying the channel of the river Euphrates, to
prepare the way for these kings and captains of the east, to enter into that
city, under its high walls, was the last thing done by the besiegers of
Babylon, before her actual destruction; as this sixth Vial is the last Vial of
God's wrath but one, on the mystical Babylon, and the effect of it, the drying
up the channel of the river Euphrates, is the last thing done against it,
before its actual destruction by the seventh Vial, and opens the way for those
that fight in a spiritual war against it, speedily to bring on its ruin.

Hence I think it may, without dispute, be determined, that by the river
Euphrates in the prophecy of this Vial, is meant something appertaining or
relating to the mystical Babylon, or the antichristian church and kingdom,
that serves that, or is a benefit to it, in a way answerable to that in which
the river Euphrates served old Babylon, and the removal of which will in like
manner prepare the way for her enemies to destroy her. And therefore what we
have to do in the first place, in order to find out what is intended by the
river Euphrates, in this prophecy, is to consider how the literal Euphrates
served old Babylon. And it may be noted that Euphrates was of remarkable
benefit to that great city in two respects; it served the city as a supply --
it was let through the midst of the city by an artificial canal, and ran through
the midst of the palace of the king of Babylon; that part of his palace called
the Old Palace, standing on one side, and the other part called the New Palace,
on the other; with communications from one part to another, above the waters,
by a bridge, and under the waters, by a vaulted or arched passage, that the
city, and especially the palace, might have the convenience of its waters, and
be plentifully supplied with water. And another way that the waters of
Euphrates served Babylon, was as an impediment and obstacle in the way of its
enemies, to hinder their access to it to destroy it; for there was a vast moat
round the city, without the walls, of prodigious width and depth, filled with
the water of the river, to hinder the access of her besiegers; and at each end
of the city, the river served instead of walls. And therefore when Cyrus had
dried up the river, the moat was emptied, and the channel of the river under
the walls left dry, and so his way was prepared.

And therefore it is natural to suppose, that by drying up the waters of the
river Euphrates, in the prophecy of the destruction of the new Babylon, to
prepare the way of her enemies, is meant the drying up her incomes and
supplies, and the removal of those things that hitherto have been the chief
obstacles in the way of those that, in this book, are represented as at war
with her, and seeking her destruction, (spoken of Rev. xix. 11. to the end, and
chap. xii. 7.) that have hindered their progress and success, or that have been
the chief impediments in the way of the Protestant religion. The first thing is
the drying the streams of the wealth of the new Babylon, the temporal supplies,
revenues, and vast incomes of the Romish church, and the riches of the Popish
dominions. Waters in scripture language very often signify provision and
supplies, both temporal and spiritual, as in Prove. ix. 17. Isai. xxxiii. 16. --
xliii. 20. -- lv. 1. and lviii. 11. Jer. ii. 13 and 18. -- xvii. 8 and 13. and
in other places innumerable. The temporal supplies of a people are very often
in scripture called waters, as Isai. v. 13. Therefore my people is gone into
captivity, and their honorable men are famished, and their multitude dried up
with thirst, i. e. deprived of the supports and supplies of life. And the
drying up the waters of a city or kingdom, is often used in scripture prophecy,
for the depriving them of their wealth, as the scripture explains itself, Hos.
xiii. 15. His springs shall become dry, and his fountain shall be dried up: He
shall spoil the treasure of all pleasant vessels. Isai. xv. 6, 7. The waters of
Nimrim shall be desolate, for the hay is withered, the grass fails, there is
no green thing. -- Therefore the abundance they have gotten, and that which
they have laid up, shall they carry away to the brook of the willows. By the
brook of the willows there seems to be a reference to the waters of Assyria or
Chaldea, whose streams abounded with willows. So that the carrying away the
treasures of Moab, and adding of them to the treasures of Assyria, is here
represented by the figure of turning away the waters of Nimrim from the country
of Moab, and adding them to the waters of Assyria, as the prophecy explains
itself. Yea, even in the prophecies of the destruction of Babylon itself, the
depriving her of her treasures, seems to be one thing intended by the drying up
of her waters. -- This seems manifest by the words of the prophecy in Jer. l.
37, 38. A sword is upon her treasures, and they shall be robbed; a drought is
upon her waters, and they shall be dried up. Compared with chap. li. 15. O thou
that dwell upon many waters, abundant in treasures; with ver. 36. I will dry
up her sea, and make her springs dry. The wealth, revenues, and vast incomes of
the church of Rome, are the waters by which that Babylon has been nourished and
supported; these are the waters which the Popish clergy and members of the
Romish hierarchy thirst after, and are continually drinking down, with
insatiable appetite; and they are waters that have been flowing into that
spiritual city like a great river; ecclesiastical persons possessing a very
great part of the Popish dominions; as this Babylon is represented as vastly
rich, in the prophecy of the Apocalypse, especially in the 17th and 18th
chapters. These are especially the waters that supply the palace of the king of
this new Babylon, viz. the Pope, as the river Euphrates ran through the midst
of the palace of the king of old Babylon. The revenues of the Pope have been
like waters of a great river, coming into his palace, from innumerable
fountains, and by innumerable branches and lesser streams, coming from many
various and distant countries.

This prophecy represents to us two cities very contrary the one to the other
-- viz. New Babylon and the New Jerusalem, and a river running through the
midst of each. -- The New Jerusalem, which signifies the church of Christ,
especially in her best estate, is described as having a river running through the
midst of it, Rev. xxii. 1, 2. This river, as might easily be made most evident,
by comparing this with abundance of other scriptures, undoubtedly signifies the
divine supplies, and rich and abundant spiritual incomes and provision of that
holy city. Mr. Lowman, in his late Exposition, says, It represents a constant
provision for the comfortable and happy life of all the inhabitants of this
city of God. And in his notes on the same place, observes as follows: Water,
(says he), as necessary to the support of life, and as it contributes in great
cities, especially in hot eastern countries, to the ornament of the place, and
delight of the inhabitants, is a very proper representation of the enjoyment of
all things, both for the support and pleasure of life. As the river that runs
through the new Jerusalem, the church of Christ, that refreshes that holy
spiritual society, signifies their spiritual supplies, to satisfy their
spiritual thirst, so the river that runs through the new Babylon, the
antichristian church, that wicked carnal society, signifies, according to the
opposite character of the city, her worldly, carnal supplies, to satisfy their
carnal desires and thirstings.

This new Jerusalem is called in this book the Paradise of God, and therefore
is represented as having the tree of life growing in it. And it being
described, as though a river ran through the midst of it, there seems to be
some allusion to the ancient paradise in Eden, of which we are told that there
ran a river through the midst of it to water it; i. e. to supply the plants of
it with nourishment. And this river was this very same river Euphrates, that
afterward ran through Babylon. And in one and the other, it represented the
diverse supplies of two opposite cities; in Eden, it represented the spiritual
supplies and wealth of the true Christian church, in her sp^^^^al advancement
and glory, and seems to be so made use of, Rev. xxii. 1, 2. In the other it
represented the outward carnal supplies of the false antichristian church, in
her worldly pomp and vain glory, chap. xvi. 12.

When the waters, that supply this mystical Babylon, come to be dried up in
this sense, it will prepare the way for the enemies of antichristian
corruption, that seek her overthrow. The wealth of the church of Rome, and of
the powers that support it, is very much its defense. After the streams of her
revenues and riches are dried up, or very greatly diminished, her walls will be
as it were broken down, and she will become weak and defenseless, and exposed
to easy ruin.

When Joab had taken that part of the city of Rabbah, that was called the City
of Waters, whence the city had its supply of water, the fountains of the brook
Jabbok being probably there, and which was also called the royal city, probably
because there the king had his palace and gardens, on the account of its
peculiar pleasantness; I say, when he had taken this, the conquest of the rest
of the city was easy; his message to David implies, that the city now might be
taken at pleasure, 2 Samuel xii. 27, 28. It is possible th^^ by the pouring out
of the sixth Vial to dry up the river of the mystical Babylon, there might be
something like the taking the City of Waters in Rabbah; some one of the chief
of the Popish powers, that has been the main strength and support of the Popish
cause, or from whence that church has its chief supplies, may be destroyed, or
converted, or greatly reduced. But this events must determine.

In the prophecies of Egypt's destruction, it is signified, that when their
rivers and waters should be dried up, in that sense, that the streams of their
temporal supplies should be averted from them, their defense would be gone,
Isai. xix. 4, etc. The Egyptians will I give over into the hand of a cruel
lord, and the waters shall fail from the sea, and the river shall be wasted and
dried up, and the brooks of DEFENSE shall be emptied and dried up, and the
reeds and flags shall wither -- Every thing sown by the brooks shall wither:
The fishers also shall mourn --

Those whose way was prepared to come in and destroy Babylon, by the drying up
the river of Euphrates, were the army that was at war with Babylon, Cyrus the
king, and his host, that sought her overthrow; so there seems to be all reason
to suppose, that those whose way will be prepared to come in and destroy
mystical Babylon, by drying up the mystical Euphrates, are that king and army
that are, in this book of Revelation, represented as at war with Antichrist.
And what king and army that is, we may see in chap. xii. 7. and xix. 11. to the
end -- Michael the king of angels, and his angels; he whose name is called the
Word of God, and that has on his vesture, and on his thigh, a name written,
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and the heavenly armies that follow him,
clothed in fine linen, white and clean. Cyrus, the chief of the kings of the
east, that destroyed Babylon, and redeemed God's church from thence, and
restored Jerusalem, seems, in that particular affair, very manifestly to be
spoken of as a type of Christ: God calls him his shepherd, to perform his
pleasure, to say to Jerusalem -- Thou shall be built, and to the temple -- Thy
foundation shall be laid. God calls him his Messiah. Thus says the Lord to his
anointed, (in the original to his Messiah) to Cyrus. He is spoken of as one
that God had raised up in righteousness, that he might build his city, and
freely redeem his captives, or let them go without price or reward. He is said
to be one whom God had loved; in like manner as the Messiah is said to be God's
elect, in whom his soul delights. As by Babylon, in the Revelation, is meant
that antichristian society that is typisied by old Babylon; so by the kings of
the east, that should destroy this and christian church, must be meant those
enemies of it that were typisied by Cyrus, and other chieftians of the east,
that destroyed old Babylon; viz. Christ, who was born, lived, died, and rose in
the east, together with those spiritual princes that follow him, the
principalities and powers in heavenly places, and those ministers and saints
that are kings and priests, and shall reign on earth; especially those leaders
and heads of God's people -- those Christian ministers and magistrates, that
shall be distinguished as public blessings to his church, and chief instruments
of the overthrow of Antichrist.

As the river Euphrates served the city of Babylon as a supply, so it also was
before observed, it served as an impediment or obstacle to hinder the access of
its enemies; as there was a vast moat round the city, filled with the water of
the river, which was lest empty when Euphrates was dried up. And therefore we
may suppose, that another thing meant by the effect of the sixth Vial, is the
removal of those things which hitherto have been the chief obstacles in the way
of the progress of the true religion, and the victory of the church of Christ
over-her enemies; which have been the corrupt doctrines and practices that have
prevailed in Protestant countries, and the doubts and dissiculties that attend
many doctrines of the true religion, and the many divisions and contentions
that subsist among Protestants. The removal of those would wonderfully prepare
the way for Christ and his armies, to go forward and prevail against their
enemies, in a glorious propagation of true religion. So that this Vial, which
is to prepare the way for Christ and his people, seems to have respect to that
remarkable preparing the way for Christ, by levelling mountains, exalting
valleys, drying up rivers, and removing stumbling blocks, which is often spoken
of in the prophecies, as what shall next precede the church's latter-day glory,
as Isai. xlii. 13, etc. The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man; he shall stir
up jealousy as a man of war; he shall prevail against his enemies. -- I will
make waste mountains and hills, and dryup all their herbs; and I will make the
rivers islands, and I will dry up the pools; and I will bring the blind by a
way that they know not, and I will lend them in paths that they have not known;
I will make darkness light before them, and crooked things straight: these
things will I do unto them, and not forsake them. Chap. xl. 3, 4, 5. Prepare ye
the way of the Lord; make straight in the desert an highway for our God: every
valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low, and the
crooked shall be made straight, and rough places plain; and the glory of the
Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together. Chap. xi. 15, 16.
And the Lord shall destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea, and with his mighty
wind shall he shake his hand over the river, and shall smite it in the seven
streams thereof, and make men go over dry shod; and there shall be an highway
for the remnant of his people which shall be left, from Assyria, like as it was
to Israel, in the day that he came out of the land of Egypt. Chap. lvii. 14.
Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumbling block out of the
way of my people. And chap. lxii. 10. Go through, go through the gates; prepare
ye the way of the people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather out the stones;
lift up a standard for the people. Zech. x. 10, 11, 12. I will bring them again
also out of the land of Egypt, and gather them out of Assyria; and I will bring
them into the land of Gilead and Lebanon; and place shall not be found for
them. And he shall pass through the sea with affliction, and shall smite the
waves of the sea; and all the deeps of the river shall day up; and the pride of
Assyria shall be brought down, and the scepter of Egypt shall depart away: And
I will strengthen them in the Lord, and they shell walk up and down in his
name, says the Lord. And it is worthy to be remarked, that as Cyrus's
destroying Babylon, and letting go God's captives from thence, and restoring
Jerusalem, is certainly typical of Christ's destroying mystical Babylon, and
delivering his people from her tyranny, and gloriously building up the
spiritual Jerusalem in the latter days; so God's preparing Cyrus's way, by
drying up the river Euphrates, is spoken of in terms like those that are used
in those prophecies that have been mentioned, to signify the preparing Christ's
way, when he shall come to accomplish the latter event. Thus God says
concerning Cyrus, Isai. xlv. 2. I will go before thee, and MAKE CROOKED PLACES
STRAIGHT. And ver. 13. I will direct, or make straight (as it is in the margin)
all his ways. This is like chap. xl. 2, 4. Prepare ye the way of the Lord; make
straight in the desar! an highway for our God. -- The crooked things shall be
made straight. Chap. xlii. 16. I will make darkness light before them, and
crooked things straight.

If any should object against understanding the river Euphrates, in Rev. xvi.
12. as signifying what has been supposed, that when mention is made of the
river Euphrates, in another place in this prophecy, it is manifestly not so to
be understood, viz. in chap. ix. 14. Saying to the sixth angel which had the
trumpet -- Loose the four angels which are bound in the great river Euphrates:
and that there is no reason to understand the river Euphrates in the vision of
the sixth Vial, as signifying something diverse from what is meant by the same
river in the vision of the sixth trumpet.

I answer, That there appears to me to be good reason for a diverse
understanding of the river Euphrates in these two different places; the
diversity of the scence of the vision, and of the kind of representation, in
those two diverse parts of this prophecy, naturally leads to it, and requires
it. It is in this book as in the Old Testament; when the river Euphrates is
spoken of in the Old Testament, both in the histories and prophecies, it is
mentioned, with respect to the twofold relation of that river, viz. 1st, with
regard to its relation to Babylon. And as it was related to that, it was
something belonging to that city, as its defense and supply, as has been
represented. Thus the river Euphrates is spoken of in many places that have
been already observed, and others that might be mentioned. 2dly. This river is
spoken of with regard to its relation to the land of Israel, God's visible
people; and as it was related to that, it was its eastern boundary. It is so
spoken of, Genesis xv. 18. Exodus xxiii. 31. Deuteronomy. i. 7. and xi. 24. Josh. i. 4.2
Sam. viii. 3.1 Chron. xviii. 3.1 King iv. 21. Ezra iv. 20. Agreeable to this
diverse respect or relation of this river, under which it is mentioned in the
Old Testament, so must we understand it differently in different parts of the
prophecy of this book of Revelation, according as the nature and subject of the
vision requires. In the xvth chapter, where the prophecy is about Babylon, and
the vision is of God's plagues on Babylon, preparing the way for her
destruction, there, when the river Euphrates is mentioned, we are naturally and
necessarily led to consider it as something belonging to Babylon, appertaining
to the mystical Babylon, as Euphrates did to old Babylon. But we cannot
understand it so in the ixth chapter, for there the prophecy is not about
Babylon. To mention Euphrates there, as something belonging to Babylon, would
have been improper; for the nature of the vision, and prophetical
representation, did not lead to it, nor allow it. John had had no vision of
Babylon; that kind of representation had not been made to him; there is not a
word said about Babylon till we come to the second part of this prophecy, after
John had the vision of the second book, and Christ had said to him -- Thou must
prophecy again before peoples, and nations, and kings, chap. xi. The scene of
the vision, in the former part of the prophecy, had been more especially the
land of Israel, and the vision is concerning two sorts of persons there, viz.
those of the tribes of Israel that had the seal of God in their foreheads, and
those wicked apostate Israelites that had not this mark. Compare chap. vii. 3
-- 8. and chap. ix. 4. The vision in this ixth chapter, is of God's jndgments
on those of the tribes of Israel, or in the land of Israel, which had not the
seal of God in their foreheads; and therefore when mention is made, ver. 14. of
a judgment coming on them from the river Euphrates, this river is here spoken
of in the former respect, viz. with regard to its relation to the land of
Israel, as its eastern border; and thereby we must understand that God would
bring some terrible calamity on Christendom from its eastern border, as he did
when the Turks were let loose upon Christendom.

If these things that have been spoken of, are intended in the prophecy of the
sixth Vial, it affords, as I conceive, great reason to hope that the beginning
of that glorious work of God's Spirit, which, in the progress and issue of it,
will overthrow Antichrist, and introduce the glory of the latter days, is not
very far off.

Mr. Lowman has, I think, put it beyond all reasonable doubt, that the fifth
Vial was poured out in the time of the Reformation. It also appears
satisfyingly, by his late Exposition, that take one Vial with another, it has
not been two hundred years from the beginning of one Vial to the beginning of
another, but about one hundred and eighty years. But it is now two hundred and
twenty years since the fifth Vial began to be poured, and it is a long time
since the main effects of it have been sinished. And therefore if the sixth
Vial has not already began to be poured out, it may well be speedily expected.

But with regard to the first thing that I have supposed to be signified by the
effect of this Vial, viz. The drying up the fountains and streams of the wealth
and temporal incomes and supplies of the antichristian church and territories,
I would propose it to consideration, whether (...) no many things that have
come to pass within these twenty years past, may not be looked upon as probable
beginnings of a fulfillment of this prophecy; particularly what the kings of
Spain and Portugal did some years since, when displeased with the Pope,
forbidding any thenceforward going to Rome for investitures, etc. thereby
cutting off two great streams of the Pope's wealth, from so great and rich a
part of the Popish world; and its becoming so frequent a thing of late for
Popish princes, in their wars, to make bold with the treasure of the church,
and to tax the clergy within their dominions, as well as laity; or which is
equivalent, to oblige them to contribute great sums, under the name of a free
gift; and also the late peeling and impoverishing the Pope's temporal dominions
in Italy, by the armies of the Austrians, Neapolitans and Spaniards, passing
and repassing through them, and living so much at discretion in them, of which
the Pope has so loudly complained, and in vain; receiving nothing but menaces,
when he has objected against giving liberty for the like passage for the
future. These things make it hopeful that the time is coming when the princes
of Europe, the ten horns, shall hate the whore, and make her desolate and
naked, and eat her flesh, as Rev. xvii. 16. which will prepare the way for what
next follows, her being burnt with fire; even as the sixth Vial poured out, to
consume the supplies of Antichrist, and strip him naked of his wealth, and, as
it were, to pick his flesh off from his bones, will make way for what next
follows, the seventh Vial, that will consume Antichrist, by the sierceness of
God's wrath.

These things duly considered, I imagine, afford us ground to suppose, not only
that the effect of this sixth Vial is already begun, but that some progress is
already made in it, and that this Vial is now running apace. And when it shall
be finished, there is all reason to suppose that the destruction of Antichrist
will very speedily follow, and that the two last Vials will succeed one another
more closely than the other Vials. When once the river Euphrates was dried up,
and Cyrus's way was prepared, he delayed not, but immediately entered into the
city to destroy it. Nor is it God's manner, when once his way is prepared, to
delay to deliver his church, and show mercy to Zion. When once impediments are
removed, Christ will no longer remain at a distance, but will be like a roe or
a young heart, coming swiftly to the help of his people. When that cry is made,
Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, etc. The high and lofty One that
inhabits eternity, is represented as very near to revive the spirit of the
contrite, and deliver his people with whom he had been wroth. When that cry is
made, Isai. xl. Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert an
highway for our God; every valley shall be exalted, etc. God tells his church,
that her warfare is accomplished, and the time to comfort her is come, and that
the glory of the Lord n^^ shall be revealed, and all flesh see it together. And
agreeably to these things, Christ, on the pouring out the sixth Vial, says,
Behold I come. The sixth Vial is the forerunner of the seventh or last, to
prepare its way. The angel that pours out this Vial is the harbinger of Christ,
and when the harbinger is come, the king is at hand. John the Baptist, that was
Christ's harbinger, who came to level mountains and fill up valleys,
proclaimed, The kingdom of heaven is at hand; and when he had prepared Christ's
way, then the Lord suddenly came into his temple, even the messenger of the
covenant. Mal. iii. 1.

It is true, that we do not know how long this Vial may continue running, and
so Christ's way preparing, before it is fully prepared; but yet if there be
reason to think the effect of this Vial is begun, or is near, then there is
reason also to think that the beginning of that great work of God's Spirit, in
reviving of religion, which, before it is finished, will issue in Antichrist's
ruin, is not far off. For it is pretty manifest, that the beginning of this
work will accompany the sixth Vial; for the gathering together of the armies on
both sides, on the side of Christ and Antichrist, to that great battle that
shall issue in the overthrow of the latter, will be under this Vial; (compare
Rev. xvi. 12, 13, 14. with chap. xix. 11. to the end.) And it is plain, that
Christ's manifesting himself, and wonderfully appearing after long hiding
himself, to plead his own and his people's cause, and riding forth against his
enemies in a glorious manner, and his people's following him in pure linen, or
the practice of righteousness and pure religion, will be the thing that will
give the alarm to Antichrist, and cause him to gather that vast host to make
the utmost opposition. But this alarm and gathering together is represented as
being under the sixth Vial; so that it will be a great revival, and mighty
progress of true religion under the sixth Vial, eminently threatening the
speedy and utter overthrow of Satan's kingdom on earth, that will so mightily
rouse the old serpent; to exert himself with such exceeding violence, in that
greatest conflict and struggle that ever he had with Christ and the church,
since the world stood. If there be any mistake here, it is an anticipation of
the destruction of Antichrist, through the prevalence of vital religion,
instead of the present rod of the divine indignation; but, it may be, there is
a warfare between truth and error yet to come, toward which our author's views
might be directed, and for which it becomes us all to be prepared. EDITOR.




All the seven Vials bring terrible judgments upon Antichrist; but there seems
to be something distinguishing of the three last, the fifth, sixth and seventh,
viz. That they more directly tend to the overthrow of his kingdom, and
accordingly each of them is attended with a great reviving of religion. The
fifth Vial was attended with such a revival and reformation, that greatly
weakened and diminished the throne or kingdom of the beast, and went far
toward its ruin. It seems as though the sixth Vial should be much more so, for
it is the distinguishing note of this Vial, that it is the preparatory Vial,
which more than any other Vial prepares the way for Christ's coming to destroy
the kingdom of Antichrist, and to set up his own kingdom in the world. A great
outpouring of the Spirit accompanied that dispensation which was preparatory to
Christ's coming in his public ministry, in the days of his flesh; so, much
more, will a great outpouring of the Spirit accompany the dispensation that
will be preparatory to Christ's coming in his kingdom.

And besides those things which belong to the preparation of Christ's way,
which are so often represented by levelling mountains, drying up rivers, etc.
viz. The unravelling intricacies, and removing difficulties attending Christian
doctrines, the distinguishing between true religion and its false appearances,
the detecting and exploding errors and corrupt principles, and the reforming
the wicked lives of professors, which have been the chief stumbling blocks and
obstacles that have hitherto hindered the progress of true religion; I say,
these things, which seem to belong to this preparatory Vial, are the proper
work of the Spirit of God, promoting and advancing divine light and true piety,
and can be the effect of nothing else.

Agreeably to what has been supposed, that an extraordinary out-pouring of the
Spirit of God is to accompany this sixth Vial; so the beginning of a work of
extraordinary awakening has already attended the probable beginning of this
Vial; and has been continued in one place or other, for many years past;
although it has been, in some places, mingled with much enthusiasm, after the
manner of things in their first beginnings, unripe, and mixed with much
crudity. But it is to be hoped, a far more pure, extensive and glorious revival
of religion is not far off, which will more properly be the beginning of that
work, which, in its issue, shall overthrow the kingdom of Antichrist, and of
Satan through the world. But God will be enquired of for this, by the house of
Israel to do it for them.

Ans. 5. If, notwithstanding all that I have said, it be still judged that
there is sufficient reason to determine that the ruin of Antichrist is at a
very great distance, and if all that I have said, as arguing that there is
reason to hope the beginning of that glorious revival of religion, which, in
its continuance and progress, will destroy the kingdom of Antichrist, is not
very far off, be judged to be of no force; yet it will not follow, that our
complying with what is proposed to us in the late memorial from Scotland, will
be in vain, or not followed with such spiritual blessings, as will richly
recompense the pains of such extraordinary prayer for the Holy Spirit, and the
revival of religion. If God does not grant that greatest of all effusions of
his Spirit, so soon as we desire, yet we shall have the satisfaction of a
consciousness of our having employed ourselves in a manner that is certainly
agreeable to Christ's will and frequent commands, in being much in prayer for
this mercy, and much more in it than has heretofore been common with
Christians; and there will be all reason to hope, that we shall receive some
blesse^ ^^ken of his acceptance. If the fall of mystical Babylon, and the work
of God's Spirit that shall bring it to pass, be at several hundred years
distance, yet it follows not that there will be no happy revivals of religion
before that time, which shall be richly worth the most diligent, earnest and
constant praying for.

I would say something to one objection more, and then hasten to a conclusion
of this discourse.

Object. 6. Some may be ready to object, that what is proposed in this memorial
is a new thing, such as never was put in practice in the church of God before.

Ans. 1. If there be something circumstantially new in it, this cannot be a
sufficient objection. The duty of prayer is no new duty; for many of God's
people expressly to agree, as touching something they shall ask in prayer, is
no new thing; for God's people to agree on circumstances of time and place for
united prayer, according to their own discretion, is no new thing; for many, in
different places, to agree to offer up extraordinary prayers to God, at the
same time, as a token of their union, is no new thing, but has been commonly
practiced in the appointment of days of fasting and prayer for special mercies.
And if the people of God should engage in the duty of prayer, for the coming of
Christ's kingdom, in a new manner, in that respect, that they resolve they will
not be so negligent of this duty, as has been common with professors of
religion heretofore, but will be more frequent and fervent in it; this would be
such a new thing as ought to be, and would be only to reform a former
negligence. And for the people of God, in various parts of the world, visibly,
and by express agreement, to unite for this extraordinary prayer, is no more
than their duty, and no more than what it is foretold the people of God should
actually do, before the time comes of the church's promised glory on earth. And
if this be a duty, then it is a duty to come into some method to render this
practicable; but it is not practicable (as was shown before) but by this
method, or some other equivalent.

Ans. 2. As to this particular method, proposed to promote union in
extraordinary prayer, viz. God's people, in various parts, setting apart fixed
seasons, to return at certain periods, wherein they agree to offer up their
prayers at the same time, it is not so new as some may possibly imagine. This
may appear by what follows, which is part of a paper, dispersed abroad in Great
Britain and Ireland, from London, in the year 1712, being the lat^er end of
queen Anne's reign, and very extensively complied with, entitled, A serious
Call from the City to the Country, to join with them in setting apart some
time, viz. from seven to eight, every Tuesday morning, for solemn seeking of
God, each one in his closet, now in this so critical a juncture.

Jonah i. 6. Call upon God, if so be that God will think upon us, that we
perish not. -- What follows is an extract from it.

You have formerly been called upon to the like duty, and have complied with
it, and that not without success. It is now thought highly seasonable to renew
the call. It is hoped that you will not be more backward, when it is so
apparent that there is even greater need. It is scarce imaginable how a
prosessing people should stand in greater need of prayer, than we do at this
day. You were formerly bespoke from that very pertinent text, Zech. viii. 21.
(...) inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily
to pray before the Lord, or, (as the marginal reading, more expressive of the
original reading, is,) continually, from day to day, to entreat the face of the
Lord. According to this excellent pattern, we of this city, the metropolis of
our land, think ourselves obliged to call upon our brethren in Great Britain
and Ireland, at a time when our hearts cannot but meditate terror, and our
flesh tremble for fear of God, and are afraid of his righteous judgments; those
past being for the most part forgotten, and the signs of the times foreboding
evil to come, being by the generality little, if at all, regarded; we cannot
therefore but renew our earnest request, that all who make conscience of
praying for the peace of Jerusalem, who wish well to Zion, who would have us
and our posterity a nation of British Protestants, and not of Popish bigots and
French slaves, would give us (as far as real and not pretended necessity will
give leave) a meeting at the throne of grace, at the hour mentioned, there to
wrestle with God for the turning away his anger from us, for our deliverance
from the hands of his and our enemies, for the turning the councils of all
Ahitophels, at home and abroad, into foolishness, for mercy to the queen and
kingdom, for a happy peace or successful war, so long as the matter shall
continue undetermined; for securing the Protestant succession in the
illustrious house of Hanover, (by good and evil wishes to which, the friends
and enemies of our religion and civil rights, are so essentially
distinguished,) and especially for the influences of divine grace upon the
rising generation, particularly the seed of the righteous, that the offspring
of our Christian heroes may never be the plague of our church and country. And
we desire that this solemn prayer be begun the first Tuesday after sight, and
continued at least the summer of this present year 1712. And we think, every
modest, reasonable and just request, such as this, should not on any account be
denied us, since we are not laying a burden on others, to which we will not
most willingly put our own shoulders; nay, indeed, count it much more a
blessing than a burden. We hope this will not be esteemed, by serious
Protestants, of any denomination, a needless step; much less do we fear being
censured by any such, as fanciful and melancholy, on account of such a
proposal. We, with them, believe a providence, know and acknowledge that our
God is a God hearing prayer. Scripture records, and our age is not barren of
instances of God's working mavelous deliverances for his people in answer to
humble, believing and importunate prayer, especially when prayer and
reformation go together, which is what we desire. Let this counsel be
acceptable to us, in this day of the church's calamity, and our common fears.
Let us seek the Lord white he may be found, and call upon him while be is near.
Let us humble ourselves under the mighty hand of God. Let us go and pray unto
our God, and he will hearken unto us. We shall seek him and find him, when we
search for him with all our hearts. Pray for the peace of Jurusalem; they shall
prosper that love her. And may Zion's friends and enemies both cry out with
wonder, when they see the work of God -- Behold they pray! -- What has God
wrought! Verily there is a God that judges in the earth.

Postscript. It is desired and hoped, that if any are hindered from attending
this work at the abovementioned hour, they will nevertheless set apart an hour
weekly for it.

God speedily and wonderfully heard and answered those who were united in that
extraordinary prayer, proposed in the abovementioned paper, in suddenly
scattering those black clouds which threatened the nation and the Protestant
interest with ruin, at that time; in bringing about, in so remarkable a manner,
that happy change in the state of affairs in the nation, which was after the
queen's death, by the bringing in king George the First. just at the time when
the enemies of the religion and liberties of the nation had ripened their
designs to be put in speedy execution. And we see in the beginning of this
extract, this which is proposed, is mentioned as being no new thing, but that
God's people in Great Britain had formerly been called upon to the like duty,
and had complied, and that not without success. Such like concerts or
agreements have several times been proposed in Scotland, before this which is
now proposed to us, particularly there was a proposal published for this very
practice, in the year 1732, and another in 1735; so that it appears that this
objection of novelty is built on a mistake.

THE CONCLUSION.
And now, upon the whole, I desire every serious Christian, that may read this
discourse, calmly and deliberately to consider whether he can excuse himself
from complying with what has been proposed to us and requested of us, by those
ministers of Christ in Scotland, who are the authors of the late memorial. God
has stirred up a part of his church, in a distant part of the world, to be in
an extraordinary manner seeking and crying to him, that he would appear to
favor Zion, as he has promised. And they are applying themselves to us, to
join with them, and make that very proposal to us which is spoken of in my
text, and in like manner and circumstances. The members of one church, in one
country, are coming to others, in other distant countries, saying Let us go
speedily and constantly to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts.
Will it not become us readily to say, I will go also? What these servants of
Christ ask of us, is not silver or gold, or any of our outward substance, or
that we would put ourselves to any cost, or do any thing that will be likely to
expose us to any remarkable trouble, difficulty or suffering in our outward
interest, but only that we would, help together with them, by our prayers to
God, for the greatest mercy in the world, and that a mercy which as much
concerns us as them, for the glory of their Lord and ours, for the great
advancement of our common interest and happiness, and the happiness of our
fellow creatures through all nations; a mercy, which, at this day especially,
there is great need of; a mercy, which we, in this land, do stand in p^^^cular
need of; a mercy, which the word of God requires us to make the subject matter
of our prayers, above all other mercies, and gives us more encouragement to
pray earnestly and unitedly to him for, than any other mercy; and a mercy,
which the providence of God toward the world of mankind, at this day, does
loudly call the people of God to pray for. I think we cannot reasonably doubt
but that these ministers have acted a part becoming disciples of the great
Messiah, and ministers of his kingdom, and have done the will of God, and
according to his word, in setting forward such an affair at this day, and in
proposing it to us; and therefore I desire it may be considered, whether we
shall not really sin against God, in refusing to comply with their proposal and
request, or in neglecting it, and turning it by, with but little notice and
attention, therein disregarding that which is truly a call of God to us.

The ministers that make this proposal to us, are no separatists or
schismatics, promoters of no public disorders, nor of any wildness or
extravagance in matters of religion, but are quiet and peaceable members and
ministers of the church of Scotland, that have lamented the late divisions and
breaches of that church. If any shall say, that they are under no advantage to
judge of their character, but must take it on trust from others, because they
conceal their names; in answer to this, I would say, That I presume no sober
person will say that he has any reason to suspect them, to be any other than
gentlemen of honest intention. Besure there is no appearance of any thing else,
but an upright design in their proposal, and that they have not mentioned their
names, is an argument of it. It may well be presumed, from the manner of their
expressing themselves, in the memorial itself, they concealed their names from
that, which, perhaps, may be called an excess of modesty, choosing to be at the
greatest distance from appearing to set forth themselves to the view of the
world, as the heads of a great affair, and the first projectors and movers of
something extraordinary, that they desire should become general, and that God's
people, in various distant parts of the world, should agree in. And therefore,
they are moreover careful to tell us, that they do not propose the affair, as
now setting it on foot, but as a thing already set on foot, and do not tell us
who first projected and moved it. The proposal is made to us in a very proper
and prudent manner, with all appearance of Christian modesty and sincerity, and
with a very prudent guard against and thing that looks like superstition, or
whatsoever might entangle a tender conscience, and far from any appearance of a
design to promote any particular party or denomination of Christians, in
opposition to others, but with all appearance to the contrary, in their
charitable request, that none would, by any means, conceive of any such thing
to be in their view, and that all, of every denomination and opinion concerning
the late religious commotions, would join with them, in seeking the common
interest of the kingdom of Christ; and, therefore, I think, none can be in the
way of their duty, in neglecting a proposal in itself excellent, and that which
they have reason to think is made with upright intentions, merely because the
proposers modestly conceal their names. I do not see how any serious person,
that has an ill opinion of late religious stirs, can have any color of reason
to refuse a compliance with this proposal, on that account; the more disorders,
extravagancies and delusions of the devil have lately prevailed, the more need
have we to pray earnestly to God, for his Holy Spirit, to promote true
religion, in opposition to the grand deceiver, and all his works; and the more
such prayer, as is proposed, is answered, the more effectually will all that is
contrary to sober and pure religion be extirpated and exploded

One would think that every one who favors the dust of Zion, when he hears
that God is stirring up a considerable number of his ministers and people, to
unite in extraordinary prayer, for the revival of religion and advancement of
his kingdom, should greatly rejoice on this occasion. If we lay to heart the
present calamities of the church of Christ, and long for that blessed
alteration which God has promised, one would think it should be natural to
rejoice at the appearance of something in so dark a day, which is so promising
a token. Would not our friends that were lately in captivity in Canada, who
earnestly longed for deliverance, have rejoiced to have heard of any thing that
seemed to forebode the approach of their redemption? And particularly may we
not suppose such of them as were religious persons, would greatly have rejoiced
to have understood that there was stirred up in God's people an extraordinary
spirit of prayer for their redemption? And I do not know why it would not be as
natural for us to rejoice at the like hopeful token of the redemption of Zion,
if we made her interest our own, and preferred Jerusalem above our chief joy.

If we are indeed called of God to comply with the proposal now made to us,
then let me beseech all that do sincerely love the interest of real
Christianity, not withstanding any diversity of opinion, and former disputes,
now to unite in this affair, with one heart and voice -- and let us go speedily
to pray before the Lord. There is no need that one should wait for another. If
we can get others, that are our neighbors, to join with us, and so can
conveniently spend the quarterly seasons with praying societies, this is
desirable; but if not, why should we wholly neglect the duty proposed? Why
should not we perform it by ourselves, uniting in heart and practice, as far as
we are able, with those who, in distant places, are engaged in that duty at
that time?

If it be agreeable to the mind and will of God, that we should comply with the
memorial, by praying for the coming of Christ's kingdom, in the manner therein
proposed, then doubtless it is the duty of all to comply with the memorial, in
that respect also, viz. in endeavoring, as far as in us lies, to promote
others joining in such prayer, and to render this union and agreement as
extensive as may be. Private Christians may have many advantages and
opportunities for this; but especially ministers, inasmuch as they not only are
by office overseers of whole congregations of God's people, and their guides in
matters of religion, but ordinarily have a far more extensive acquaintance and
influence abroad, than private Christians in common have.

And I hope that such as are convinced it is their duty to comply with and
encourage this de^^gn, will remember we ought not only to go speedily to pray
before the Lord, and to seek his mercy, but also to go constantly. We should
unite in our practice these two things, which our Savior unites in his
precept, praying and not fainting. If we should continue some years, and
nothing remarkable in Providence should appear, as though God heard and
answered, we should act very unbecoming believers, if we should therefore begin
to be disheartened, and grow dull and slack, in our seeking of God so great a
mercy. It is very apparent from the word of God, that God is wont often to try
the faith and patience of his people, when crying to him for some great and
important mercy, by withholding the mercy sought, for a season, and not only
so, but at first to cause an increase of dark appearances, and yet, without
fail, at last, to succeed those who continue instant in prayer with all
perseverance, and will not let God go except he blesses. It is now proposed
that this extraordinary united prayer should continue for seven years, from
November, 1746. Perhaps some that appear forward to engage, may begin to think
the time long, before the seven years are out, and may account it a dull story,
to go on, for so long a time, praying in this extraordinary method, while all
yet continues dark and dead, without any dawnings of the wished-for light, or
new promising appearance in Providence of the ne^r approach of the desired
mercy. But let it be considered, whether it will not be a poor business, if our
faith and patience is so shortwinded, that we cannot be willing to wait upon
God one seven years, in a way of taking this little pains, in seeking a mercy
so infinitely vast. For my part, I sincerely wish and hope, that there may not
be an end of extraodinary united prayer, among God's people, for the effusions
of the blessed Spirit, when the seven years are ended, but that it will be
continued, either in this method, or some other, by a new agreement, that will
be entered into, with greater engagedness, and more abundant alacrity, than
this is; and that extraordinary united prayer for such a mercy will be further
propagated and extended, than it can be expected to be in one seven years. But
yet, at the same time, I hope, God's people, that unite in this agreement, will
see some tokens for good, before these seven years are out, that shall give
them to see, that God has not said to the seed of Jacob -- Seek ye me in vain;
and shall serve greatly to animate and encourage them to go on in united
prayers for the advancement of Christ's kingdom, with increasing fervency. But
whatever our hopes may be in this respect, we must be content to be ignorant of
the times and seasons, which the Father has put in his own power; and must be
willing that God should answer prayer, and fulfill his own glorious promises, in
his own time; remembering such instructions, counsels and promises of the word
of God as these -- Wait on the Lord, be of Good courage, and he shall
strengthen thine heart; wait, I say, on the Lord. For the vision is yet for an
appointed time; but in the end it will speak, and not lie: though it tarry,
wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry. I will look unto
the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvat (...); my God will hear me. God
will wipe away tears from off all faces, and the rebuke of his people shall he
take away from off all the earth; for the Lord has spoken it. And it shall be
said in that day, Lo, this is our God! we have waited for him, and he will save
us: This is JEHOVAH! we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his
salvation. Amen.

THE DOWNFALL OF MYSTICAL BABYLON; OR, A KEY TO THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD, IN THE
POLITICAL OPERATIONS OF 1793-4.

BEING THE SUBSTANCE OF A DISCOURSE, PREACHED, FIRST, AT ELIZABETH TOWN, AND
AFTERWARD AT NEW YORK, ON THE EVENING OF THE LORD'S DAY, APRIL 7, 1793, AND
NOW OFFERED, WITH NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS, IN EVIDENCE OF THE SENTIMENTS THEN
DELIVERED.

By DAVID AUSTIN, A.M. Minister of the First Presbyterian Church at Elizabeth
Town.

APOLOGY.
AS the following discourse was delivered from short notes, it is hoped that
any little difference in arrangement, or any additional proofs or
illustrations, now observed, will be readily excused by any who heard the
discourse preached; especially, whilst it is remembered, that in a printed
discourse much higher authorities are expected, than what is necessary in the
common course of parochial preaching.

For any sentiments observed to be omitted, the reader is referred to the tenor
of the preceding discourses; and if any should be ready to say, that proofs and
illustrations are needlessly multiplied, it may not be improper to answer, that
on the subject of prophecy, as well as in respect to every other, the truth
gains in proportion to the evidence by which it is attested; and shines much
brighter whilst supported by a cloud of approved witnesses, than whilst resting
on the opinion of any single interpreter.

THE DOWNFALL OF MYSTICAL BABYLON.
REVELATION xviii. 20. Rejoice over her thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and
prophets, for God has avenged you on her.


IN all the calamities which it pleases God to bring upon his enemies, or upon
the enemies of his church, all holy beings have cause to rejoice. The ground of
their joy, in such events, however awful to the sufferers, is founded in the
reason and nature of things as well as in the express appointment and call of
God.

The cause of God in heaven, and the cause of Christ and of his church on the
earth are one and the same: and so far as either the former or the latter, or
both unitedly, may be employed, in their usual methods of ex^^tion, in
counteracting, and in overturning the purposes of the Grand Adversary or of his
instruments; in the same degree may the struggle be styled a common cause, or a
general war. The enemies of God are the enemies of his church, and they who
seek the overthrow of the latter, would, if possible, dethrone the former. On
this account, therefore, it is, that all holy beings, whether in the heaven of
heavens, on high, or whether in the heavens of the Christian church, (for so,
in prophetic style, the word sometimes signifies,) are called upon to rejoice
at the calamities which God, in judgment for their sins, brings on his enemies,
and on the enemies of his Zion.

All holy beings have cause to rejoice in the downfall of the wicked, as such a
disaster, under the management of heaven, may tend to the upbuilding of the
kingdom of Christ, and of the truth in the world. By such events victory is,
renewedly, ascribed to God. The faith and hope of the pious are revived and
confirmed. -- That such effects, by such disasters upon the wicked, have been
produced, the scriptures plainly teach. The dr^wning of the old world, and the
destruction of Pharaoh and his host are instances in point. In view of the
latter, sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the Lord, and
spoke, saying -- I will sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously:
the horse and his rider has he thrown into the sea. The Lord is my strength
and song, and he is become my salvation: he is my God, and I will prepare him
an habitation; my father's God, and I will exalt him. The Lord is a man of war:
the Lord is his name.

Not only is the confidence of the righteous maintained by such displays of
vindictive power, but the same events load, with increasing danger, the
interests of Satan and of the wicked in general.

To revive the interests of truth and of grace -- to support the cause of God
in the bosoms of the righteous, and to accumulate the degrees of danger,
apprehension and final destruction, on the part of the wicked, have no doubt
been important, if not leading objects to be accomplished, in all the
denunciations and executions which, in all ages, have been, in a higher or less
degree, emptied forth upon the wicked, from the vials of the divine indignation.

In pursuance of the same important objects, a call is issued, on a mighty and
solemn occasion, to all friends to God, and to his government to rejoice.
Rejoice over her thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets, for God has
avenged you on her.

Unfolding this passage I propose to show, I. Who it is over whose destruction
holy beings are called upon to rejoice. II. The cause of this disaster. III.
Notice the means employed to bring this event to pass. And, IV. Show the
foundation the event lays for universal joy; concluding with some reflections
from the whole.


And will a very gracious God so enlighten the mind, both of the speaker and of
the hearers, that truths may be opened, impressions made, and effects wrought
answerable to the nature and import of so solemn and momentous a subject. -- I
am,

I. To show who it is over whose destruction, or downfall, all holy beings are
called upon to rejoice.

For his knowledge we must repair to the first and second verses of the
context. And after these things, says the inspired apostle, I saw another
angel come down from heaven, having great power, and the earth was lightened
with his glory. And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, BABYLON THE
GREAT IS FALLEN, IS FALLEN.

It is very generally, if not unanimously, agreed by Protestant writers, that
by Babylon, as used in this place, you are to understand the extensive, once
triumphant, and persecuting power of antichristian Papal Rome, styled BABYLON,
because there are so many appendages to this idolatrous power, which so nearly
resemble, and so exactly answer the prophetic description of Babylon, of the
Chaldees -- the inveterate the powerful, and, for a season, the successful
enemy of the people of God, in ancient time.

Figures of speech, especially in the prophetic parts, are very frequent in the
scriptures. Indeed, almost the whole of this book of the Revelation of Jesus
Christ which God gave unto him, to show unto his servants things which must
shortly come to pass, is made up of figures. Sometimes, lest the figure should
be unintelligible, the angel sent to communicate the very interesting
intelligence of this invaluable book, explains the figure. -- And sometimes the
prophetic herald gives a different view of the same object in different
figures. Of this method we have an example in the subject before us.

Papal Rome, here styled BABYLON THE GREAT, in the chapter preceding is called,
because of her idolatrous practices, and because of her forsaking her original
faithful Lord and Husband -- the GREAT WHORE: And that it might be known to be
the same power, as is here described, the word Babylon is annexed or interwoven
with the other characters of this mystical harlot. This fact will be yet more
clear if you listen to the testimony itself. So he carried me away in the
spirit into the wilderness: and I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet-colored
beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns. And the
woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet-colour, and decked with gold, and
precious stones, and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand, full of
abominations and silthiness of her fornication. And upon her forehead was a
name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND
ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.

In supporting the allusion, or in running the parallel between ancient
heathenish and modern antichristian Papal Babylon, you will permit, that I but
touch upon the different branches of similarity, leaving the more full
illustration to be supplied by your own recollection and study.

As in the prophetic writings the words Jerusalem, Zion, the Temple of the
living God, etc. are used to express the state of the church under the Jewish,
so the same words are sometimes applied to express the state and character of
the church under the Christian dispensation. On the other hand, as Sodom, Egypt
and Babylon were names given to the enemies of God, and of his church, in
ancient time, so, under the same names, their successors are set forth and
described as to exist in later times.

All these dark shades of national character, and many more, did time allow,
might be proved to be, with justice, applicable to this antichristian power of
Papal Rome. -- To Sodom this power may be likened for her sin, and to Egypt for
her darkness, idolatry and oppression. And, without doubt, by the angel of God,
in his address to St. John on the subject of the slaughter of the witnesses,
these dark shades are applied to this tyrannical dominion. And their dead
bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which spiritually is called
Sodom and Egypt, where, also, our Lord was crucified. On these words, says an
approved commentator But kit in loco.
-- The place where this was done is styled Sodom and Egypt, and the great city
where our Lord was crucified; which, if literally understood, signifies
Jerusalem, but if mystically understood, ROME, or the Roman empire. -- And no
one, I may add, will suppose it is perverting the prophetic emblem, if it be
applied, solely, to Rome; especially, if it be recollected, that as Jerusalem
was the head of the Jewish, so Rome professes to be the head of the Christian
empire; and also, that the once crucifying of our Lord at Jerusalem, is but a
faint emblem of the thousand crucifixions he has since undergone in the
multiplied persecutions and tortures of the members of his mystical body; and,
I may add, which he still undergoes in the daily offerings, the mystical
services, the superstitious masses of the church of Rome.

Hear, also, to this point, the testimony of a late very respectable writer on
the subject of prophecy. Langdon in loco.
As to the great city, mentioned under the figurative names of Sodom and Egypt,
and compared also to Jesalem, where our Lord was crucified, we shall find by
following visions that Rome, with its empire, is meant. It is called Sodom, on
account of the abominable crimes committed in it, Egypt, on account of
abounding superstition and idolatry, and the cruel bon^^ge in which it holds
the people of God: And it is compared to Jerusalem, being said to be the city
where our Lord was crucified; because while it pretended to be an holy city, it
had killed the prophets and saints, and crucified Christ afresh in his members.
Here it may be more especially observed, that as in the beginning of the
chapter the temple is the emblem of the Christian church, that city, with its
empire, in which the church is comprehended, may very properly be compared to
Jerusalem, the city in which the Jewish temple stood: And as our Lord was
crucified within the jurisdiction of the Roman empire, and by the Roman
authority, and the Papal empire has succeeded to the other, and claims an equal
extent, there is a propriety in saying that our Lord was crucified in the great
city Rome, considered in connection with the empire of which it is the capital.

Having laid this foundation as to the use and application of prophetic
figures, to which much might be added, were it necessary, the way is plain to
proceed with my subject, in an attempt to show, that by BABYLON THE GREAT,
whose fall is predicted in the text, is meant the present antichristian power
of Papal Rome.

This fact will, at once, appear most palpably evident, if, with attention, you
are pleased to follow me in a consideration of the several articles of analogy,
between ancient and modern Babylon, designed to justify the prophetic allusion.

1. Did Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, set up an image, and call upon the
subjects of his empire to fall down and worship it, so has the Nebuchadnezzar
of the Church of Rome, supported by the magi of his kingdom, set up, and
continued to set up images innumerable, to which the homage of bowing and
kneeling is continually paid in churches, in many public places, and even on
the common country roads, by the subjects of this mystical empire, as is well
known to those who have passed through this idolatrous country.

2. Did the decree of the king of Babylon enjoin homage to this image on pain
of being cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace; so does the church of
Rome enjoin homage to her idols on pain of exclusion from her communion, with
the tortures of the inquisition in this world, and the pains of purgatory and
damnation in the next. The Author once had his own hat knocked off by the
bayonet of a soldier, belonging to a party who escorted and protected a Bishop
and his confederates, during a very thronged procession, at Nantes, because he
would not do customary homage at the presence of the Host, which was carried
along the streets, claiming religious homage, during the farcical exhibitions
on the celebration of the Fete de Dieu.


3. Did Nebuchadnezzar actually inflict, or attempt to inflict, the pains of
the fiery furnace on some who refused to bow down to his image; so has the
church of Rome actually inflicted, on thousands of innocent Protestants,
refusing to partake in her idolatries, all the tortures which imagination could
invent.

Let the history of her persecutions, massacres, slaughters and burnings
testify to this fact. "Satan has opposed the Reformation with cruel
persecutions. The persecutions with which the Protestants, in one kingdom and
another, have been tormented, by the church of Rome, have been, in many
respects, beyond any that were before. So that Antichrist has proved the
greatest and most cruel enemy the church of Christ ever had; agreeable to the
description given of the church of Rome. And I saw the woman drunken with the
blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus. -- And in her
was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all them that were slain
upon the earth.

The heathen persecutions had been very dreadful; but now persecution, by the
church of Rome, was improved, and studied, and cultivated as an art or science.
Such methods of tormenting were found out, that were beyond the invention of
former ages. And, that cersecution might be managed more effectually, there
were certain societies established in various parts of the Popish dominions,
whose business it should be to study, improve, and practice persecution in its
highest perfection, which are called the courts of inquisition. These infernal
tribunals were first erected in the twelfth century by the infamous Father
Dominic, under the patronage of Pope Innocent III. in order more completely to
extirpate the Waldenses, and other pretended heretics. It is difficult to
conceive, that if God had delivered the world entirely into the Devil's hands,
(as Satan once pretended) that his ingenuity and malice could have invented any
thing more detestable and shocking. In fact, there is scarcely a method that
could delayer pervert justice, but they have adopted it in their forms; nor
does there seem a possible method of torture but they have invented and
repeatedly exercised. The reader, whose nerves can bear such r^^terated scenes
of cruelty, may read Baker's History of the Inquisition -- the History of the
Inquisition at Goa, written by a Papist, and similar works. But to show how far
it is possible for human nature to go, let him read the following extract from
a sermon preached at Evora, on occasion of one of the most horrid scenes the
sun ever beheld, an auto de fo, when they born or rather roast heretics (as
they call them) alive, from a principle of religion. "Beloved Portuguese," said
the inhuman wretch, "let us return thanks to Heaven, for his great goodness in
giving us this holy tribunal (the Inquisition.) Had it not been for this
tribunal our kingdom would have become a tree without slowers or fruits, sit
only to be committed to the flames. What progress has heresy made, for want of
an Inquisition, in England, France, Germany, and the Netherlands! It is
evident, had it not been for so great a blessing, our country would have been
like to those abovementioned."

When the Reformation began, the beast with seven heads and ten horns began to
rage in a dreadful manner. After the Reformation, the church of Rome renewed
its persecution of the poor Waldenses, and great multitudes of them were
cruelly tortured and put to death. Soon after the Reformation, there were also
terrible persecutions in various parts of Germany, and especially in Bohemia,
which lasted for thirty years together, in which so much blood was shed for the
sake of religion, that a certain writer compares it to the plenty of waters of
the great rivers of Germany. The countries of Poland, Lithuania, and Hungary
were, in like manner, deluged with Protestant blood. If Rome Pagan has slain
her thousands of innocent Christians, Rome Christian has slain her ten
thousands. For, not to mention other outrageous slaughters and barbarities, the
croisades against the Waldenses and Albigenses, the murders committed by the
Duke of Alva in the Netherlands, the massacres in France and Ireland, will
probably amount to above ten times the number of all the Christians slain in
all the ten persecutions of the Roman emperors put together."

"By means of these and other cruel persecutions, the Protestant religion was
in a great measure suppressed in Bohemia, and the Palatinate, and Hungary,
which before were Protestant countries. Thus was fulfilled what was foretold of
the little horn." And of the ten horns that were in his head, and of the other
which came up, and before whom three sell, even of that horn that had eyes, and
a mouth that spoke great things, whose look was more stout than his fellows: I
behold and the same horn made war with the saints, and prevailed against them.
And what was foretold of the beast having seven heads and ten horns. And it was
given unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them; and power was
given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations.

Also Holland, and the other low countries, were, for many years, a scene of
nothing but the most affecting and amazing cruelties, being deluged with the
blood of Protestants, under the merciless hands of the Spaniards, to whom they
were then in subjection. -- But in this persecution the Devil in a great
measure failed of his purpose, as it issued in a great part of the Netherlands
casting off the Spanish yoke, and setting up a wealthy and powerful Protestant
state, to the great defense of the Protestant cause ever since.

France also is another country which, since the Reformation, in some respects,
perhaps, more than any other, has been a scene of dreadful cruelties suffered
by the Protestants there. After many cruelties had been exercised toward the
Protestants in that kingdom, there was begun a persecution of them in the year
1571, in the reign of Charles the IX. king of France.

It began with a cruel massacre, wherein seventy thousand Protestants were
slain in a few days time, as the king boasted; and in all this persecution, he
slew, as is supposed, three hundred thousand martyrs. And it is reckoned, that
about this time, within thirty years, there were martyred in this kingdom, for
the Protestant religion, thirty-nine princes, one hundred and forty-eight
counts, two hundred and thirty-four barons, one hundred and forty-seven
thousand five hundred and eighteen gentlemen, and seven hundred and sixty
thousand of the common people.

The Parisian massacre was aggravated with several circumstances of wantonness
and treachery; but we hope that the above numbers are exaggerated. Thuanus,
their own historian, reckons thirty thousand lives destroyed in this slaughter;
but Protestant anthors seem to have reason for supposing them not less than one
hundred thousand in the whole. But the most horrid circumstance in the history
is, that when the news of this event reached Rome, Pope Gregory XIII.
instituted the most solemn rejoicings, giving thanks to Almighty God for this
glorious victory!!! -- An instance that has no parallel, even in hell.

But all these persecutions were, for exquisite cruelty, far exceeded by those
which followed in the reign of Lewis XIV. which, indeed, are supposed to exceed
all others that ever have been; and being long continued by reason of the long
reign of that king, almost wholly extirpated the Protestant religion out of
that kingdom, where had been before a multitude of famous Protestant churches
all over the country. The Persecution under Lewis XIV. -- This followed the
revocation of the Edict of Nantes, A. D. 1685. The following extract is taken
from a French work of reputation.

"The troopers, soldiers and dragoons went into the Protestants' houses, where
they marred and defaced their household stuff, broke their looking-glasses, and
other utensils and ornaments, let their wine run about their cellars, and threw
about their corn, and spoilet it. And as to those things which they could not
destroy in this manner, such as furniture of beds, linen, wearing apparel,
plate, etc. they carried them to the market place, and sold them to the Jesuits
and other Roman Catholics. By these means the Protestants in Montaubon alone
were, in four or five days, stripped of above a million of money. But this was
not the worst.

"They turned the dining-rooms of gentlemen into stables for their horses, and
treated the owners of the houses where they quartered with the highest
indignity and cruelty, lashing them about from one to another, day and night,
without intermission, not suffering them to eat or drink; and when they began
to sink under the fatigue and pains they had undergone, they laid them on a
bed, and when they thought them somewhat recovered, made them rise, and
repeated the same tortures. When they saw the blood and sweat run down their
faces and other parts of their bodies, they sluiced them with water; and
putting over their heads kettle-drums, turned upside down, they made a
continual din upon them till those unhappy creatures lost their senses. When
one party of these tormentors were weary they were relieved by another, who
practiced the same cruelties with fresh vigor.

At Negreplisse, a town near Montaubon, they hung up Isaac Favin, a Protestant
citizen of that place, by his armpits, and tormented him a whole night by
pinching and tearing off his flesh with pincers. They made a great fire round a
boy about twelve years old, who, with hands and eyes lifted up to heaven, cried
out -- "My God, help me!" -- And when they found the youth resolved to die
rather than renounce his religion, they snatched him from the sire just as he
was on the point of being burnt.

"In several places the soldiers applied red hot irons to the hands and feet of
men, and the breasts of women. At Nantes they hung up several women and maids
by their feet, and others by their armpits, and thus exposed them to public
view stark-naked. They bound mothers that gave suck to posts, and let their
sucking infants lie languishing in their sight for several days and nights,
crying, mourning and gasping for life. Some they bound before a great sire,
and, being half roasted, let them go -- a punishment worse than death. Amidst a
thousand hideous cries, and a thousand blasphemies, they hung up men and women
by the hair, and some by their feet, on hooks in chimneys, and smoaked them
with wisps of wet hay till they were suffocated. They tied some under the arms
with ropes, and plunged them again and again into wells. They bound others like
criminals, put them to the torture, and with a funnel filled them with wine,
till the fumes of it took away their reason, when they made them say they
consented to be Catholics. They stripped them naked, and, after a thousand
indignities, stuck them with pins and needles from bead to foot. They cut and
slashed them with knives, and sometimes with red-hot pincers took hold of them
by the nose and other parts of the body, and dragged them about the rooms till
they made them promise to be Catholics, or till the cries of these miserable
wretches, calling upon God for help, forced them to let them go. They beat them
with staves, and thus bruised, and with broken bones, dragged them to church,
where their forced presence was taken for an abjuration. In some places they
tied fathers and husbands to their bed-posts, and, before their eyes, ravaged
their wives and daughters with impunity. They blew up men and women with
bellows till they burst them. If any, to escape these barbarities, endeavored
to save themselves by flight, they pursued them into the fields and woods,
where they shot them like wild beasts, and prohibited them from departing the
kingdom, (a cruelty never practiced by Nero or Dioclesian) upon pain of
confiscation of effects, the galleys, the lash, and perpetual imprisonment;
insomuch that the prisons of the sea port towns were crammed with men, women
and children, who endeavored to save themselves by flight from this dreadful
persecution. With these scenes of desolation and horror, the popish clergy
feasted their eyes, and made only a matter of laughter and sport of them."

Other cruelties. -- Beside the Protestant blood shed in these persecutions,
Popery has to answer for the lives of millions of Jews, Mahometans, and
barbarians. When the Moors conquered Spain in the eighth century, they allowed
the Christians the free exercise of their religion. But in the fifteenth
century, when the tables were turned, and Ferdinand subdued the Moriscoes, (the
descendants of the above Moors) many hundred thousands of them were forced to
be baptized, or burnt, massacred, or banished, and their children sold for
slaves; besides an innumerable multitude of Jews, who shared the same
cruelties, chiefly by means of the infernal Inquisition. A worse slaughter, if
possible, was made among the natives of Spanish America, where fifteen millions
are said to have been sacrificed to the genius of Popery in the course of about
forty years. Well, therefore, might the inspired apostle say, that at mystic
Babylon's destruction -- In her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints,
and of all that were slain upon the earth! Rev. xviii. 24 -- [See Edwards's
History of Redemption, with notes, page 452, 459, of the London, or new
American edition.]


Thus it was given to the beast to make war with the saints, and to overcome
them.





A perusal of the histories of the Romish persecution, and their courts of
inquisition, will give that idea, which a few words cannot express.




4. Was ancient Babylon the seat and source of idolatry in the Pagan; so is
Rome in the Christian world.

Did her kings rule over many kingdoms and provinces; so this antichristian
idolatrous harlot is said to sit upon many waters; with whom the kings of the
earth have committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth have been
made drunk with the wine of her fornication.

5. Was ancient Babylon a scourge to the people of God, and did she bring them
into a seventy years captivity? so this antichristian power has been a
scourge to the true worshippers of God in modern times, and has had a great
part of the Christian church in more than Egyptian bondage for twelve hundred
years.

During this bondage it is that the TWO WITNESSES -- the few faithful, who, in
every age, have testified to the truth; (as some have supposed) but if so,
there may be also an allusion, and perhaps a primary one, to the TWO OLIVE
TREES of the prophet's vision, the anointed ones that stand by the Lord of the
whole earth.

The olive tree afforded light from its fatness, and nourishment from its
fruit. Understanding, therefore, the purport of the TWO WITNESSES, as explained
by the angel, to be the two OLIVE TREES, and the TWO CANDLESTICKS, standing
before the God of the earth, I am rather inclined to think, that they have a
more extensive, mystical, and important meaning than what they have been
generally understood to imply. If the olive trees and candlesticks were an
emblem of spiritual and divine communications during their standing in the
Jewish, what should hinder the same application whilst they stand in the
Christian church?

As the gifts and graces shed down upon the ministers of our blessed Lord, and
upon his churches, after his ascension, were supposed to have been typified or
presigured by the anointing and common oil of the sanctuary; so the olive tree
as giving light and heat, and, I may add, nourishment too, was found in the
usage and appointment of heaven, no unbecoming representation or emblem of
those spiritual communications which were then shed upon the true worshippers,
and which will ever be continued as long as Christ is the vine, or true olive,
and his people the needy branches.

May we not then suppose, that by these TWO OLIVE TREES and the TWO
CANDLESTICKS, standing before the God of the earth, is meant the sources of
divine and spiritual supplies to his church, the medium of communication, or
methods of outward and open exhibition; or shall we say, that the emblem may
partake a little of each, and stand a lively figure of them all?

If you ask how this interpretation can consist with the epithet, with their
being called witnesses, it may be answered, they are justly and literally so to
be styled. Are not the word of God preached, and his ordinances administered,
by his faithful ministers, properly to be styled WITNESSES for God? -- And if
you choose to retain the number two, may we not say the spirit and the word,
with their usual and outward methods of administration, are signified; or say
the word, and the ordinances of God in general, or the whole exhibition of the
testimony of God, whether in things inward and spiritual, or in things outward
and visible?

With this interpretation agrees well the idea of their prophesying in
sackcloth; for no one can pretend, but the administration of the word and
worship of God, in the Romish church, is so beclouded by ignorance, styled
darkness; by superstition and error, and by the ministry of a corrupt
priesthood, as to lay just foundation to say, that the witnesses, with this
interpretation, are emphatically prophesying in sackcloth.

With the same idea consists, very exactly, the term of time in which these
witnesses are appointed to prophesy: -- It is during the whole reign of
Antichrist, the forty-two months, or twelve hundred and sixty years. And I will
give, or appoint, unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a thousand two
hundred and three score days, clothed in sackcloth.

With the same interpretation agrees the declaration or exposition of the angel
in the next verse. These are the TWO OLIVE TREES and the TWO CANDLESTICKS
standing before the God of the earth. And, in fact, there seems nothing in the
chapter but what may, with as great apparent truth; be reconciled to this
interpretation, as to any other; and there are some things in it which cannot,
with ease, be interpreted as applicable to the witnesses, in any other sense,
understood or explained.

And if any should be disposed to believe, that the present reigning
persecuting infidel power, now waging war against all revealed religion, in
France, is likely to be the death of these same witnesses, who, for a long
time, have already been made to prophesy in sackcloth, perhaps the opinion may
find support from the declaration of the angel: And when they shall have
finished their testimony, the beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit,
shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them. If this
interpretation be true, the mourning witnesses are now suffering death in those
parts of mystical Babylon, where the existing exterminating power has prevailed.

Did time allow, and was the present a proper place in the order of my
discourse, I might expound upon the whole chapter, and easily reconcile any
expressions which, at first view, might appear intricate, or doubtful, to the
spirit of this interpretation. Suffice it, for the present, to say, that with
this interpretation agrees well the declaration made respecting the injury
these witnesses are able to do their enemies. And if any man will hurt them,
fire proceeds out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies. And of nothing
short of the administration of Heaven can it be said: These have power to shut
heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy. And of nothing short of
this can it be said -- They have power over waters to turn them to blood, and
to smite the earth with all plagues as often as they will. And very
correspondent to the death of the witnesses, and to the lying of their dead
bodies in the street of the great city, is the death, the broken and demolished
state of external religion in those parts of Papal Rome, in which the present
exterminating power has prevailed. And equally correspondent is the
declaration, that they of the people, and tongues, and nations; probably those
nations and churches out of the communion of the church of Rome, shall see
their dead bodies three days and an half, and, by a more lively administration
of the word and ordinances of God, shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put
in graves.

And over the death of these witnesses it is, that the men of this world shall
rejoice, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another; because these two
prophets tormented them that dwelt on the earth.

To the resurrection and final exaltation of these witnesses well applies the
verses succeeding. And after three days and an half, the spirit of life from
God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon
them that saw them. And they heard a great voice from heaven, saying unto them
-- Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies
beheld them. During these events it is said -- And the same hour was there an
earthquake. May it not mean the earthquake now begun -- the present convulsions
amongst the nations, (for so in prophetic style the word signifies) which are
to be succeeded by the opening of the temple of God in heaven. And the temple
of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen, in his temple, the ark of his
testament; and there were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an
earthquake, and great hail!

And to conclude the argument, we are always to remember, that no
interpretation of this mystical passage can be allowed, which does not grant to
the witnesses an existence, and a testimony during the whole term of the
antichristian dominion. And I will give, or appoint, unto my two witnesses,
and they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in
sackcloth. If any should be disposed to say, this interpretation does not
altogether accord with what the Editor has suffered to be published in a
preceding part of this volume; and that he is chargeable with inaccuracy, in
this particular; it may suffice to answer, that the present being an
interpretation so far new, (though already two years in manuscript) that the
Editor could not, until within a few days, warrant himself in preaching, or in
publishing the sentiment; therefore permitted the former interpretation to
pass, -- which, however, with some abatement for the time in which it was
written, must be allowed to be of no small testimony to the truth, taken in a
general and extensive point of view.


If the foregoing interpretation be true, have we not a ready answer to the
question, "How is it that there is so great dearth of religion in our churches,
in our land, and in the world at the present time?" -- May we not answer -- Is
not the present the dark period, toward which our forefathers have been
looking, and which they have been expecting to take place, during the period of
the slaying of the witnesses? -- And if total darkness prevails where the
witnesses lie slain, is it surprising that the darkening rays of the same
chaotic scene should, in a higher or less degree, penetrate the regions of the
truth all around? -- Nay, my brethren, men, even in our enlightened day, and in
some Protestant countries, are not wanting, who, with equal power, and equal
opportunity, would not be far behind the example of the present executioners of
this dark decree. And, under this idea, may we not call upon our ministers and
churches, in every place, to arouse to action, to fan the flame of spiritual
life and zeal, that the light of the truth may not be wholly put out? -- In a
word, that the bodies, the external signs and figures of these slaughtered
witnesses, may not be put in their graves -- agreeably to the declaration to
this point. And they of the people, and kindred, and tongues, and nations,
shall see their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their
dead bodies to be put in graves.

And what encouragement have we to this, whilst we contemplate the animating
promise of verse 11. And after three days and an half, the spirit of life from
God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon
them which saw them.

And is it at all admirable, that since this antichristian power has had the
strength of the secular arm in support of her tyranny, that some few of the
chosen of God, faithful witnesses, who were once her glory, and that even the
ordinances, the spirit and the word, the worship, and the whole sanctuary with
them, should be made to prophesy in mourning; especially whilst you attend to
the description of this apostate church, in her wilderness, forsaken state?

Alas! "how changed from what she was before! Her glorious robe of light, and
all her ornaments of apostolic truth and purity are gone, and she appears
dressed in the pomp and splendour of worldly grandeur! -- And instead of
depending on the wings of the civil powers to bear her up, with tender concern
for her danger and weakness, she is now boldly mounted on their backs, and
compels them to carry her which way soever she pleases! Behold a church riding
an empire! She has cast off her fidelity to Christ, and played the harlot with
a multitude of lovers, and therefore Christ has cast her off, and doomed her to
destruction." Langdon on Revelation, page 243 -- 4.


I proceed, then, to execute what was proposed, in running the parallel between
ancient heathenish and modern antichristian Babylon, and say,

6. Is the king of Babylon described as one who, in the days of his power, did
shake kingdoms, so may his successors, in this mystical kingdom, the popes and
their councils, be described as shaking the nations, kingdoms, and provinces
within the reach of their pretended thunders, to their very centhe.

What wars, insurrections and assassinations has this power stirred up! What
humiliations from the kings and princes of the earth, as well as from their
subjects, has she demanded and obtained during the series of her ungodly reign!

7. Is Nebuchadnezzar described as one that made the world as a wilderness; so
has Rome made the world a wilderness by her bloody persecutions; but much more
has she made the Christian church a wilderness, by withholding from it the
spiritual nourishment of sound doctrine, the ministration of the word and the
ordinances of God, in their purity, spirituality and power.

8. Is this mighty king described as one that opened not the house of his
prisoners; neither does the church of Rome permit any one even to think of
breaking from her communion, and of asserting the liberty of conscience, in
matters of religion, on pain of threatened exclusion from her favors here, and
from the favor of God hereafter.

9. Did ancient Babylon bring the riches of foreign countries to adorn and
enrich herself; so has Rome adorned herself, and lived deliciously upon the
spoils which she has drawn, by her mystical forceries, from the princes and
subjects of foreign nations.

10. Was ancient Babylon taken by the drying up, or by diverting the waters of
the river Euphrates; so shall Rome be taken by the drying up of the EUPHRATES,
the power and the wealth, the riches; even the whole revenues of the Romish
church. See an Exposition of the EUPHRATES in President Edwards' "Humble
Attempt," page 277 to 287 of this work.


11. As ancient Babylon, by her towers and her walls, was so fortified as to
fear no enemy; so has mystical Babylon said -- I sit a queen, and shall see no
sorrow: -- therefore shall her plagues come in one day; death and mourning, and
famine.

12. As Babylon of old was taken according to the appointment of Heaven by
Cyrus; so mystical Babylon shall be taken by means appointed of God; -- for
strong is the Lord God who judges her.

13. As Babylon was destroyed by the Medes and Persians, who, in time past, had
been subject to her, or in alliance with her; so shall mystical Babylon be
destroyed by means, or through the instrumentality of the ten kings, or
kingdoms, who, at first, agreed together to give their power and strength unto
her. And the ten horns which thou saw upon the beast, these shall hate the
whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn
her with fire; for God has put into their hearts to fulfill his will.

14. Was there rejoicing at the downfall of ancient Babylon, among the nations,
by all who had been plagued by her pride and power; so at the downfall of
mystical Babylon, shall there be equal joy.

In respect to the people of God, when delivered from the oppression of ancient
Babylon it is said: And it shall come to pass in the day that the Lord shall
give thee rest from thy sorrows, and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage
wherein thou wast made to serve, that thou shall take up this proverb against
the king of Babylon, and say -- How has the oppressor ceased! The golden city
ceased! -- The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet; they break forth into
singing: Yea, the fir-trees rejoice at thou art laid down, no seller has come
up against us. Hell from beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming:
it stirs up the dead for thee.

Thy pomp is brought down to the grave, and the noise of thy viols; the worm is
spread under thee, and the worms cover thee.

How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer! Son of the Morning, how art thou
cut down to the ground, which did weaken the nations!

They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee and consider thee, saying --
Is this the man that made the earth to tremble? that did shake kingdoms? that
made the world as a wilderness? and destroyed the cities thereof? that opened
not the house of the prisoners?

For I will arise up against them says the Lord of Hosts, and cut off from
Babylon the name and remnant, the son and nephew says the Lord. I will also
make it a possession for the bittern, and pools of water; and I will sweep it
with the besom of destruction says the Lord of Hosts.

Having thus taken but a very brief survey of the joyful, though awful
expressions of exultation at the destruction of ancient Babylon, let us, for a
moment, examine what there is, upon sacred record, to answer this emblem in
respect to the downfall of mystical Babylon -- And after these things I saw
another angel come down from heaven, having great power; and the earth was
lightened with his glory. And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying,
Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils,
and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful
bird. For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication,
and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the
merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies.
And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my people, that
ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues: For
her sins have reached unto heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities.
Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double, according to
her works: in the cup which she has filled, fill to her double. How much she
has glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give
her: for she says in her heart, I sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see
no sorrow. Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning,
and famine; and she shall be utterly burnt with fire: for strong is the Lord
God who judges her. And the kings of the earth, who have committed fornication
and lived, deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and lament for her, when
they shall see the smoke of her burning. Standing afar off for the fear of her
torment, saying, Alas, alas! that great city Babylon, that mighty city! for in
one hour is thy judgment come. And the merchants of the earth shall weep and
mourn over her: for no man buyeth their merchandise any more: The merchandise
of gold, and silver, and precious stones, and of pearls, and fine linen, and
purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all thyme wood, and all manner vessels of
ivory, and all manner vessels of most precious wood, and of brass, and iron,
and marble, and cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, and frankincense, and
wine, and oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses,
and chariots, and slaves, and souls of men. -- And the fruits that thy soul
lusts after are departed from thee, and all things which were dainty and
goodly are departed from thee, and thou shall find them no more at all. The
merchants of these things, which were made rich by her, shall stand afar off,
for the fear of her torment weeping and wailing. And saying, Alas, alas! that
great city, that was clothed in fine linen, and purple, and so^rlet, and decked
with gold, and precious stones, and pearls! For in one hour so great riches is
come to naught. And every ship-master, and all the company in ships, and
sailors, and as many as made by sea, stood afar off, and cried, when they saw
the smoke of her burning, saying -- What city is like unto this great city! And
they cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas,
alas! that great city, wherein were made rich all that had ships in the sea by
reason of her costliness! for in one hour she is made desolate. Rejoice over
her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God has avenged you
on her. And a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it
into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be
thrown down, and shall be found no more at all. And the voice of harpers, and
musicians, and of pipers, and trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in
thee; and no craftsman, of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in
thee; and the sound of a millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee; and
the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee; and the voice of the
bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more at all in thee: for thy
merchants were the great men of the earth; for by the sorceries were all
nations deceived, And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints,
and of all that were stain upon the earth.

And after these things I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying,
Alleluia! Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power, unto the Lord our God:
For true and righteous are his judgments; for he has judged the great whore,
which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and has avenged the blood of
his servants at her hand. And again they said, Alleluia! And her smoke rose up
for ever and ever. And the four and twenty elders, and the four beasts, fell
down and worshipped God that sat on the throne saying, Amen; Alleluia! -- And a
voice came out of the throne, saying, Praise our God, all ye his servants, and
ye that fear him, both small and great. And I heard as it were the voice of a
great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty
thunderings, saying, Alleluia! for the Lord God omnipotent reigns.

Did time allow, I might follow several other prophecies in their application
to this same antichristian church, and show the evidence they all carry of a
threatened overthrow; but I shall wave this for the present, expressing all
necessary to be expressed in this place, in the words of an eminent English
writer on this subject. See Hallifax's Sermons, page 328.


The prophecies of Daniel, St. Paul, and St. John, though singly of great
weight, receive additional force if brought near and illustrated by each other.
Having already examined them separately, and apart, let us now consider them
together, and collect the evidence that arises when they are taken in one view,
and form an entire and perfect whole.

From the most cursory view of the three predictions it is evident, that the
same scheme and constitution of things, the same events, persons and times, the
origin, continuance and destruction of the same tyrannical power, (which power,
by Daniel, is noted by the appellation of the little horn, by St. Paul is
denominated the man of sin, and by St. John is branded with the titles of the
beast, and the false prophet:) are distinctly foretold in all.

If Daniel describes the kingdom in which the little horn was to arise, by such
emblems as can belong to none but the Roman, the same emblems, to pre-figure
the kingdom of the beast and the false prophet, are also employed by St. John,
from whom we farther learn, that his appropriated place of residence is the
city of Rome.

If Daniel restrains the sovereignty of this Roman power to the European or
western part of the empire, after it was divided into ten shares, the same
restriction is intimated in one of the epistles of St. Paul, and is more
explicitly declared by the beloved disciple in the Apocalypse. If Daniel
represents the nature of this usurped dominion as different from any other, St.
Paul and St. John instruct us, that this diversity consists in its being
spiritual, not a civil dominion, which is therefore to be sought for, not in
the Heathen, but in Christian Rome. If the instances in which this spiritual
dominion is exerted, according to Daniel, be chiefly these -- aspiring to
supreme and uncontrollable authority over the inhabitants of the earth --
affecting divine titles and honors -- enjoining the worship of demons and
departed saints -- prohibiting marriage -- working false miracles -- and
persecuting and killing those who oppose its claims; the same particulars are
related, and with new additions and explications in the writings of St. Paul
and St. John. If the duration of this ecclesiastical polity be limited by
Daniel to a time, and times, and the dividing of time, the same duration is
expressed, and, in a variety of phrases, by St. John, by whom the reign of the
beast is fixed to a time, and times, and half a time, or to three years and an
half, or forty-two months, or twelve hundred and sixty days.

And lastly, if the demolition of this extraordinary polity be denounced by the
prophet of the Old Testament, the same interesting event is promised by the two
apostles of the New. Such a number of coincidencies, all so strange and unusual
in their kinds, to be found in the compositions of three persons, living in
different, and one in a very remote period, cannot fairly be ascribed to any
other cause than to the impulse of the self-same spirit, who taught them all
things, which it was necessary should be communicated for the admonition of the
church of Christ upon whom the ends of the world should come.

Now of the characters recorded in scripture, as the undoubted marks of
Antichrist, many, at least, have been shown to belong, exclusively, to the
tyranny now existing in Papal Rome. For, first of all, this power is certainly
a Roman one: Secondly, it is confined to the limits of the Latin, or western
empire: Thirdly, it arose among the ten kingdoms into which that empire was
parted by the northern barbarians: Fourthly, its throne or seat is in the city
of Rome: Fifthly, it is a Christian power; and, sixthly, it is discriminated
from all others, by being of the spiritual or ecclesiastic kind. These are
circumstances so plainly realized in that part of Christendom which is subject
to the Roman Pontiff, that it is not possible, by any art or subtilty of our
adversaries, they can be evaded or denied." See the eleventh of Bishop Hurd's
Sermons on the Prophecies, where the prophetic characters of Antichrist, above
described, are shown, and in a very satisfactory way, to be, fairly, applicable
to the church of Rome.


After such testimony and volumes to the same effect which might be produced,
if necessary, you will not deem it harsh, uncharitable, or unfair, if I say,
the object pointed at in these prophecies, must infallibly be the present
tyrannical, though, blessed be God! the tottering church of Papal Rome. This is
the haughty Babylon, and this is the woman arrayed in purple and
scarlet-colour, and decked with gold and precious stones, and pearls, having a
golden cup in her hand, full of abominations, and filthiness of her
fornication. And this is the woman, upon whose forehead was a name written,
MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, and ABOMINATIONS OF THE
EARTH. And this is the woman that was seen drunken with the blood of the
saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus. And this is the woman that
is denominated by the great city which reigns over the kings of the earth.

If, in this place, you think proper to ask any thing respecting the rise,
continuance, and final destruction of this multi-formed devouring monster, I
answer, briesly, that according to the present most approved calculations we
are authorized to say, that the origin of this antichristian power was
gradual, though its actual continuance is several times plainly expressed by
the prophets to be twelve hundred and sixty years.

"Sometime between A. D. 500, and the end of the reign of the Goths, which was
A. D. 553, when Narses took Rome and their dominions in Italy from them, and
began the exarchate of Ravenna, the reckoning of twelve hundred and sixty years
must begin. But Antichrist cannot be supposed to start up into view at once, in
a sudden manner, as he will not fall without many preparatory circumstances. He
became, by degrees, distinguishable, and doubtless his ruin will be brought on
by several steps in Providence.

Therefore, if we begin at the earliest da^^, when we may suppose he first
presented himself to view, the end of the period will bring us to the first
steps toward his fall; but if we begin at the latest time; twelve hundred and
sixty years, will bring us to the complete ruin of his power.

The first open breach between the western and eastern churches was, as we have
said, about the year 500. To reckon twelve hundred and sixty years from that
time brings us to A. D. 1760. And it is remarkable that from that very year,
when the Jesuits had excited the resentments of the kings of Europe, which
finally brought on the dissolution of that order, the power of the church of
Rome has been very apparently declining, and several plain steps have been
taken by the providence of God toward her utter destruction. Convents have been
suppressed, and their revenues seized in kingdoms where superstition had long
reigned without control.

The infernal Courts of Inquisition have received severe checks, by which they
are likely to be soon annihilated, in countries most noted for Romish bigotry.

Liberty of conscience has been given to Protestants in nations which had long
been devoted to the papacy.

Roman Catholic princes begin to withhold from Rome the customary revenues.
Even a late Pope, by his liberal writings, has lent his help to render Romish
superstition ridiculous. And appearances are still proceeding." Langdon on
Revelation, page 266 -- 7


If, on the ground of the calculation just now mentioned, we proceed, the
conclusion obviously is, that the destruction of Babylon is very near at hand.
If to 1760, the date of the commencement of her fall, be added fifty years, the
term in which she is supposed to be falling, the sum will be the period of her
expected overthrow. And from appearances, now before us, we have good ground to
conclude, that, if the decree of Heaven goes on for sixteen years to come,
until 1810, as it has for four years past, the denunciation for the destruction
of Babylon will be fully accomplished.

As to times and seasons, it is not for us exactly to know; and whatever
mistakes we make in our calculation of numbers, it does not however, at all
alter the decree, or postpone the effect.

Hear the testimony of an eminent divine on this subject. Doctor Bellamy's
discourse on the Millennium, published in 1738, -- page 34 of this work.


Whatever mistakes the Jewish Rabbis might fall into in their interpretation
of Daniel's seventy weeks, and in their attempts to fix the precise time of the
Messiah's coming; and whatever mistaken notions any of them had about the
nature of his kingdom, as though it was to be of this world, and he to appear
in all earthly grandeur, and although his coming, to some, might seem to be so
long delayed, that they began to give up all hopes of it, and to contrive some
other meaning to the ancient prophecies, or even to call in question the
inspiration of the prophets; yet neither the mistakes of some, nor the
infidelity of others, at all, altered the case. Days, and months, and years
hastened along, and one revolution, among the kingdoms of the earth, followed
upon another, till the fullness of time was come, till all things were ripe, and
then, behold, the Messiah was born! Even so it shall be now.

Whatever mistakes Christian Divines may fall into, in their interpretation of
six hundred and sixty-six, the number of the beast, or in their endeavors to
six the procise time when the twelve hundred and sixty years of Antichrist's
reign shall begin and end; or whatever wrong notions some may have had, or may
have about the nature of the Millennium, as though Christ was to reign,
personally, on earth; and if some, mean while, begin to think that all things
will go on as they have done, and to conclude, that the expectation of these
glorious days which has prevailed in the Christian church, from the beginning,
is merely a groundless fancy; yet none of these things will at all alter the
case. Days, and months, and years, will hasten along, and one revolution, among
the kingdoms of the earth, follow upon another, until the fullness of time is
come; till all things are ripe for the event; and then the ministers of Christ
will accomplish, in reality, what St. John saw in his visions: I saw an angel
fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them
that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, ^^nd kindred, and tongue, and
people. And then shall it come to pass, that the veil of ignorance which has
so long spread over all nations shall be destroyed, and knowledge shall so
greatly increase, that it shall be as though the light of the moon were as the
light of the sun; and the light of the sun sevenfold, until the knowledge of
the Lord cover the earth as the waters do the sea. And then there shall be
nothing to hurt or offend in all God's holy mountain. For Babylon shall fall,
Satan be bound, and Christ will reign, and truth and righteousness universally
prevail a thousand years.

Having, thus, considered who it is over whose destruction all holy beings are
called to rejoice, and said something of the origin, continuance, and expected
downfall of this power, I proceed,

II. To consider the cause of this awful disaster.

Rejoice over her thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God has
avenged you on her.

If we confine our researches after the procuring cause of this disaster to the
appendages of Babylon, we shall find it in her own guilt.

Permit me to point out her guilt as hinted at in the chapter from which my
text is taken.

1. Babylon is charged with the extent of her idolatry.

The kings of the earth have committed fornication with her; that is, have been
embraced by her idolatrous communion -- united with her in a general apostasy
from God.

2. She is charged with a selfish, mercenary spirit in the concerns of her
administration. The merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance
of her delicacies. "By the merchants understand all such as trade in Babylon's
wares; her pleasing and cos^ly wares of pardons, masses and indulgencies, by
which so many are enriched; as well as those who trade in images, and in all
the costly trappings of their idolatrous worship, and especially in the souls
of men."

3. She is spoken of as contaminating and endangering those who ^arried within
her limits, exposing the people of God to be bewitched by her sorceries. And I
heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her my people, that ye be
not partakers of her s^ns, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

My brethren, does not this solemn decree, for the separation of God's people
from the sins and abominations of Babylon, preach to us in these United States,
even to us, who inhabit this asylum of the distressed, to beware of the habits,
customs, influence and enchanting prerogatives of those who are sleeing before
the vengeance of an incensed God? Be not partakers of her sins, that ye receive
not of her plagues.

This caution is supported by the annunciation of the angel of God. And there
followed another angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great city,
because she made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication.
And the third angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, If any man worship
the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand,
the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out
without mixture into the cup of his indignation: and he shall be tormented with
fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of
the Lamb.

4. The guilt of Babylon is spoken of as sending forth a cry: For her sins have
reached unto heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities. Either a cry of
the persecuted and suffering church, or a cry for vengeance. And when he had
opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain
for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held. And they cried with
a loud voice, saying, How long, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge
our blood on them that dwell on the earth? And white robes were given unto
every one of them; and it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a
little season, until their fellow servants also, and their brethren, that
should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled.

5. A remembrance of the persecuting spirit of this antichristian power is
spoken of as warranting a decree for vengeance from the Court of Heaven. Reward
her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double, according to her
work; in the cup which she has filled, fill to her double.

It is probable this injunction or command is given to the ministers -- to the
ministering angels of God's judgments, in behalf of his church, and though it
does not call for the peaceful followers of the Lamb to wage a carnal warfare
with this intolerant power, yet it doubtless authorizes our prayers that her
destruction may be speedy and inevitable.

6. The last inherent cause of this awful calamity I shall mention, is found in
the pride and haughtiness, luxury and voluptuousness of this self exalted
antichristian power. -- How much she has glorified herself and lived
deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her. For she says in her heart --
I sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. Therefore shall her
plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be
utterly burned with fire: for strong is the Lord God who judges her.

I am led to conclude this branch of my discourse, by adding, that the final
cause of the destruction of Babylon is the sentence of God against her. This
sentence is pronounced by an angel from the court, from the tribunal of heaven.
And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen,
is fallen. And a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast
it into the sea, saying. Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be
thrown down, and shall be found no more at all. If you ask the reason of this
judicial sentence from the tribunal of heaven, it is said -- For by thy
sorceries were all nations deceived. And in her was found the blood of
prophets, and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.

Having pointed out who it is over whose destruction holy angels and men are
called upon to rejoice, and considered the cause of this awful catastrophe, my
subject leads,

III. To consider the means by which this event shall be brought about.

And what means, my audience, should you suppose might be adequate to such a
task? to the task of overturning a power which has subsisted more than twelve
hundred years, supported by the kings of the earth, who drink of her cup, and
delight in her sorceries -- who have long since lent their aid for her support
against the voice of reason -- the demands of Heaven, and the cries of
perishing thousands? -- What power is equal to the task of accomplishing even
the decree of Heaven against such might, such united force as Babylon is able
to bring into the field? more especially, when you consider that for the terror
of her enemies, and for the comfort of her friends, this intolerant power
professes to have in possession the keys of heaven and of hell?

Retreat you will be ready to say from such a task! Let no one be so
presumptuous as to provoke her to anger, as to stir up her fury! -- Many have
been devoured by this leviathan, by this multi-formed, insatiable monster; and
God forbid that any more should be swallowed up, whilst they are able to make
but a feeble, though honest attempt!

Our fears, my friends, are relieved whilst I read to you, from the inspiration
of God, that the angel that pronounces the decree of destruction is
commissioned from the Court of Heaven; has great power, and that the earth is
lightened with his glory. And to support the executioner of the sentence it is
added, for strong is the Lord God who judges her.

As then the decree has its origin in heaven, and the promulgation of it is by
a messenger from Heaven, we are authorized to look to Heaven for MEANS to
accomplish what its decree has ordained.

Did it please the Lord of Hosts, in ancient time, to promise deliverance to
the Hebrews in Egyptian bondage; and did he not graciously provide the means of
deliverance? -- Was it in after times threatened against this rebellious people
that, for their hypocrisy and sins, they should go into captivity; and did not
a righteous God provide the means to execute the sentence? -- Hear the
appointment of heaven to this task. O Assyrian! the rod of mine anger, and the
staff in their hand is mine indignation! I will send him against an
hypocritical nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a
charge to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the
mire in the streets. Howbeit he means not so, neither does his heart think
so; but it is in his heart to destroy, and out off nations not a few.

Wherefore it shall come to pass, that, when the Lord has performed his whole
work upon Mount Zion, and on Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the stout
heart of the king of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks; for he says, by
the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my wisdom; for I am prudent: and
I have removed the bounds of the people, and have robbed their treasures, and I
have put down the inhabitants like a valiant man.

I cite this passage at length, not only that the sentiments under
consideration may be supported, as to means of execution, appointed by the
decree of Heaven; but to teach that means may be appointed, and may even
execute the will of Heaven, and yet be themselves wholly ignorant of the God
they are serving -- be vastly sinful in what they do, and be, finally, sorely
punished for the ungodly deed.

Again, did it please God to promise deliverance to the captive Jews from
Babylon; and did he not gird his man for the purpose? Thus says the Lord to
his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations
before him; and I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the
two-leaved gates, and the gates shall not be shut: I will go before thee, and
make the crooked places straight: I will break in pieces the gates of brass,
and out in sunder the bars of iron. For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel
mine elect, I have even called thee by thy name: I have surnamed thee though
thou have not known me. I am the Lord, and there is none else, there is no God
besides me: I girded thee, though thou have not known me.

These examples of means provided for the accomplishment of mercies promised or
for the execution of judgments denounced, in the wisdom of God, lay good
foundation for as to proceed, and afford unerring direction to us in our
enquries after the means or methods which God will provide and use, for the
execution of the awful sentence of which our subject treats.

Babylon is fallen, is fallen! But by what means is she to be brought down?

The state of this antichristian church is spoken of under several figures or
emblems, all of which are to have their end in some method suited to the
destruction of the original figure.

If we ask after the destruction of this church under the figure of Babylon, we
shall find the means pre-figured under the pouring out of the sixth vial -- the
vial which all present expositors allow to be now running.

And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river Euphrates; and
the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the kings of the east might be
prepared.

I need not detain you here to say that the river Euphrates signifies the
wealth, the revenues, the strength and support of whatever kind, by which Papal
Babylon has, in time past, been upheld: -- And if you wish to know whether
this river has been, or is now drying up, you may be informed by asking those
who can tell to what end the revenues of the church of Rome have lately come.
You may ask where are her privileges and prerogatives, her churches, her
church lands, her wonted revenues from princes and from subjects, especially,
in respect to those parts of the empire on which the contents of this vial have
already been poured? -- You may ask, where is that faith, that implicit faith
which was once put in her? -- that domination which she maintained over the
consciences of men? -- Where are her idols -- her masses -- her superstitions
-- her ministers? -- As to her revenues, it will be answered, they have ceased;
-- as to faith, confidence and trust in this once reputed fountain of truth and
infallibility, it will be said, it is departed; her subjects have thrown off
the mask, and refuse to be hoodwinked any longer. As to her idols, so far as
there was any value in them, they are now passing in coin; and as to her
ministers, they are executed and dispersed. Even the college of Sorbonne A
celebrated institution, or college, for the residence of doctors, professors,
and students in divinity, at Paris, who suffered in the general calamity.
is obliged to yield up her magi, and give them, to her foes, a prey.

If you ask why the drying up of the river Euphrates is spoken of, that the way
of the kings of the east may be prepared? I answer, in a word, that as ancient
Euphrates was dried up, that the way of her enemies, who came from the east,
might be prepared, in their approach to her destruction; so this mystical river
is dried up, that the city itself may become an easy prey.

On this passage hear the language of a judicious divine. Burkit in loco.


"In the drying up of the river Euphrates, manifest allusion is had to the
manner of old Babylon's destruction. The river Euphrates ran through old
Babylon, and was a greater defense to it than its celebrated walls, which, for
thickness and height, were the wonder of the world. Cyrus, "the leader of the
Kings of the East," when he took Babylon, cut many ditches, and let the river
Euphrates run out, and so he and his soldiers entered the city, and took it. As
the drying up of Euphrates, then, was an immediate forerunner of the
destruction of Babylon; in like manner, the drying up of Euphrates, signify it
what it will, shall be the immediate forerunner of the destruction of
antichristian Babylon, whenever it shall be. The Romish Euphrates being dried
up, the Romish Babylon will hasten, amain, toward its final ruin."

Whether the Euphrates of the Romish Babylon is not already so far dried up, as
that the Kings of the East have made a breach upon her, let facts and daily
intelligence determine.

What though you call the instruments of this successful attack upon Rome a
lawless banditti -- a race of infidels -- men, who profess to "know no God but
Liberty, and no Gospel but their Constitution." -- What then! are they not, in
the hand of God, as well chosen instruments for the execution of threatened
vengeance upon mystical Babylon, as the heathenish kings of the east were, for
the same design, upon Babylon of the Chaldees?

Those who look through the great plan, viewing the purposes of Heaven upon a
broad scale, believe and know that Kings and Captains, in all ages; nay, that
even wicked men and devils, in the fullness of their rage, are yet under the
divine control; that the wrath of the whole, in the end, shall praise him, and
the remainder he is able to restrain.

In running through with the destruction of Babylon, the prophet notices a
movement of a very extraordinary nature; an exertion made to oppose the deluge
which Almighty God is causing to overspread the antichristian world. But,
alas! a feeble exertion, and, in the end, does but expedite the overthrow
denounced.

And I saw three unclean spirits, like frogs, come out of the mouth of the
dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false
prophet. The ap^^^^^ proceeds to interpret the objects prese^^^d. For they are
the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the
earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day
of God Almighty.

"In the foregoing verses," says the author just now cited, an account was
given of the subject upon which the sixth vial was poured out, namely, upon the
river Euphrates. Here we have an effect that followed thereupon; a warlike
expedition, or gathering to battle. Where, note 1. The principal commanders, in
this battle, the Dragon, the Beast, and the False Prophet.

2. The instruments employed and made use of by them who are said to be, for
their nature, spirits; for their quality, unclean; for their number, three; for
their similitude and resemblance like frogs; namely, with respect to their
corrupt origin, and their numbers -- they swarm and croak in all places, and
live both in the water and upon the earth: -- by all which, many interpreters
understand emissaries, missionaries, negociators, solicitors and legates, sent
forth, and employed by Antichrist for the support and strengthening of him and
his kingdom, by soliciting the kings of the earth to join together in battle
against his enemies.

We need no testimony to support the opinion that the nuncios, legates, bishops
and monks of the church of Rome have been industriously, and, speaking after
the manner of men, but too successfully employed in ranging the present
combination of kings against the progress of the divine decree. -- But Babylon
is fallen, is fallen in the councils of heaven, and no popish emissaries shall
prevail to parry the fatal blow. True, they have boasted their art and success
in parrying the arguments, and the appeals of Protestants in time past, but
they cannot parry the judgments of God.

And ^e gathered them together into a place, called in the Hebrew tongue
Armageddon.

He, that is Almighty God, by his permissive providence, suffered the kings of
the earth to hearken to Antichrist's missionaries, and to assemble and gather
together, as Jabin and Sisera gathered together against Israel to their own
destruction: And whereas the place of their gathering together and destruction
is called ARMAGEDDON, that is so named from the event of the battle, signifying
such a place where the enemies of the Lord shall be destroyed

If any are disposed to enquire after this place of destruction, let them
peruse the accounts of the many bloody battles which have been fought since
resistance has been made to the purposes of heaven in the existing decree, and
anticipate the destruction yet to follow. -- One hundred and fifty, if not two
hundred thousand, are supposed to have perished in all the conflicts, battles,
sieges, assasinations and executions which have taken place since the present
vial has begun to run. Witness, especially, the late very serious rencounters
between the forces of France and the allied armies, in and about the Austrian
Netherlands, as well as upon all their frontiers, and we may add also the
massacres of internal commotion. -- Must not such torrents of blood be placed
to the account of the battle of the great day of God Almighty?

If this antichristian power, for her apostasy from God, and for her idolatry,
be figured forth to us under the degrading and abominable idea of a prostitute,
her destruction is said to come from the hatred of the ten kings or kingdoms
heretofore in her idolatrous communion.

And the ten horns which thou saw are ten kings, which have received no
kingdom as yet; but receive power as kings one hour, or at the same time, with
the beast. These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto
the beast.

But, in the day of God's wrath, whilst the sixth vial continues to deliver its
mysterious, but avenging contents, the ten kings shall hate the whore, and
shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with
fire.

If it please God to set forth this antichristian power under the denomination
of a beast, his destruction, with his adherents, is threatened by an angel of
God, not only as to this life, but as to the life to come.

And the third angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, If any man
worship the beast, and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in
his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured
out without mixture into the cup of his indignation: and he shall be tormented
with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence
of the Lamb.

If it please God to speak of this idolatrous and intolerant power under the
character of the man of sin, whose coming is after the working of Satan, with
all power, and signs, and lying wonders: his destruction is denounced as being
brought about by the vindictive justice of God: -- Whom the Lord shall consume
with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his
coming.

If this power is represented as interwoven with the civil power of the fourth
great kingdom of the world; if the civil and ecclesiastical power of Rome forms
the iron and the clay, well may its destruction be predicted by the rolling of
the stone (cut out, not with human hands, but by the providence of God,)
against the legs, or rather the feet and toes of this kingdom, which is founded
of iron and clay -- partly strong and partly weak -- partly true and partly
false: well, I say, may destruction come from the stone prepared of God with
this design. Thou saw, says Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar, till that a stone was
cut out without hands, which smote the image upon his feet that were of iron
and clay, and brake them to pieces: And the stone that smote the image became a
great mountain, and filled the whole earth.

Can I better set before you the interpretation of this portion of prophecy,
than in the words of Bishop Newton, supported by the celebrated Mr. Mede?
Newton on the Prophecies, vol. ii. page 244.
"As the fourth kingdom, or the Roman empire, was represented in a twofold
state; first, strong and flourishing, with legs of iron, and then weakened and
divided, with feet and toes, part of iron and part of clay; so this fifth
kingdom, or the kingdom of Christ, is described likewise in two states, which
Mr. Mede rightly distinguishes by the names of regnum lapidis, the kingdom of
the stone, and regnum montis, the kingdom of the mountain; the first, when the
stone was cut out of the mountain without hands; the second, when it became
itself a mountain, and filled the whole earth.

"The stone was cut out of the mountain without hands. The kingdom of Christ
was first set up while the Roman empire was in its full strength, with legs of
iron. The Roman empire was afterward divided into ten lesser kingdoms, the
remains of which are subsisting at present. The image is still standing upon
his feet and toes of iron and clay. The kingdom of Christ is yet a stone of
stumbling, and a rock of offense. But the stone will, one day, smite the image
upon the feet and toes, and destroy it utterly, and will itself become a great
mountain, and fill the whole earth: or, in other words, the kingdoms of this
world shall become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall
reign for ever and ever.

"We have, therefore seen the kingdom of the stone, but we have not yet seen
the KINGDOM OF THE MOUNTAIN. Some parts of this prophecy still remain to be
fulfilled; but the exact completion of the other parts will not suffer us to
doubt of the accomplishment of the rest also, in due season."

And what period of time, my brethren, has ever looked so likely to be
introductory to the regnum montis, to the kingdom of the mountain, as the
present? Is not the stone now rolling against the feet and toes of the mighty
image? And when it shall have split in sunder the heterogeneous and unnatural
mixture, of which the empire of Rome is now composed; when the civil and
ecclesiastical authority (which has so long composed what, in the dignity and
pride of antichristian glory, has been styled THE HOLY ROMAN EMPIRE,) shall
be separated or dissolved, there will be good ground to believe, that the
empire of Jesus Christ -- the regnum montis, will begin.

The rolling of the stone, then, and the increase of it to the size of a
mountain, may justly be placed to the account of means ordained of God for the
destruction of mystical Babylon -- the empire of the church of Rome.

And if it may not be presuming too far, I would venture to assert, that
appearances are not only now favoring the introduction of the REGNUM MONTIS,
but that it has already begun, and is considerably advanced in its progress.
But,

How shall the little stone become a mountain, and how shall it destroy this
mighty image, this antichristian colossus, which has stood so many a storm?

Must it not acquire a power -- gain a momentum equal to the task?

Must there not be some power applied beside reason and argument; the force of
which this power has found means so long to withstand? -- Undoubtedly, you
will say, there must be such a power -- but where is it to be found, and from
what quarter must it come?

Behold, my brethren, behold in the scenes now passing in the drama of Europe
-- another Assyrian and his host! -- another ax in the hand of him that heweth
therewith, and another saw in the hand of him that shakes it! --

In the same group behold another Cyrus, whose right hand the Lord has holden
to subdue nations before him -- before whom the Lord loosened the loins of
kings, and opened before him the two-leaved gates. Before whom the Lord went to
make crooked places straight; to break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in
sunder the bars of iron: -- Whom the Lord surnamed, and whom he girded with
power, though the Assyrian knew him not.

If this language seem too mysterious to any, let them receive a familiar
style, and behold the regnum montis, the kingdom of the mountain, begun on the
Fourth of July, 1776, when the birth of the MAN-CHILD -- the hero of civil and
religious liberty took place in these United States. Let them read the
predictions of heaven respecting the increase of his dominion -- that he was to
rule all nations with a rod of iron; that is, bring them into complete and
absolute subjection; and that the young hero might be equal to this mighty
conquest, he is supported by an omnipotent arm; he is caught up unto God, and
to his throne. Behold, then, this hero of America wielding the standard of
civil and religious liberty over these United States! -- Follow him, in his
strides, across the Atlantic! -- See him, with his spear already in the heart
of the beast! -- See tyranny, civil a^^ ecclesiastical, bleeding at every pore!
-- See the votaries of the tyrants; of the beasts; of the false prophets, and
serpents of the earth, ranged in battle array, to withstand the progress and
dominion of him, who has commission to break down the usurpations of tyranny
-- to let the prisoner out of the prisonhouse; and to set the vassal in
bondage free from his chains -- to level the mountains -- to raise the valleys,
and to prepare an high way for the Lord!

Against all opposition to the execution of this decree, the Lord, from the
heavens, will laugh. He that sits in the heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall
have them in derision. -- Thou shall break them with a rod of iron; thou shall
dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel. Be wise now, therefore, O ye kings,
be instructed ye judges of the earth.

It seems no unnatural conclusion from ancient prophecy, and from present
appearances, that in order to usher in the dominion of our glorious Immanuel,
as predicted to take place, and usually called the latter-day-glory, TWO GREAT
REVOLUTIONS are to take place; the first outward and political; the second
inward and spiritual. -- The first is now taking place; its happy effects we,
in this country, already enjoy; and O that the Lord would graciously put it
into the hearts of his ministers and churches, nay, of all now under the
dominion of civil and religious liberty, to begin the second revolution, that
which is inward and spiritual, even the revolution of the heart. Come forth
then, may we not pray, all ye votaries of truth! ye advocates for the spiritual
empire of the LATTER DAY, come forth! --

Let the standard of truth and of duty, the standard of allegiance to God,
through faith in his beloved Son, be set up! Let us preach, let us pray, let us
fight, manfully, the warfare of faith -- not doubting, but in God's own time,
the glorious things, of which the prophets have spoken, shall be fulfilled!

Behold the first revolution, (through the agency of the hero of America) in
this country, already begun, nay, already accomplished! -- why not then NOW
begin the second?

What encouragement is there to proceed, whilst we see some of the last events
taking place, under the sixth vial, which are to precede the glory of the
latter day, to be ushered in immediately on the pouring out of the seventh!

I have now gone through with a consideration of the means appointed of God for
the overthrow of mystical Babylon. These means, I make no doubt, you will
believe fully adequate to the execution of the decree. It now only remains that
I consider,

Lastly, The foundation which the execution of this decree lays for universal
joy.

Rejoice over her thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God has
avenged you on her.

If there was no other cause of rejoicing on this mighty occasion, but the
invitation of heaven to the general concert, sufficient cause might be found
for the emotion the event demands.

But we are not called to rejoice without sufficient light afforded, to guide
us in this rational and Christian exercise.

1. There is cause of universal joy on this occasion, because by the
destruction of mystical Babylon, the great Michael of the church has gained a
very important victory over the principalities and powers of hell. The placing
of one, bearing horns like a lamb, and speaking with the mouth of a dragon, in
highest authority in the church of Christ, is allowed, on all hands, to be a
masterpiece among all the devices of Satan; the highest, the most crafty and
successful effort which the wicked one has ever played off against the
interests of Christ in any age of the world. -- Well then may the detection and
overthrow of Satan, in this scheme of ruling the church, in the garb of an
angel of light, demand the liveliest acclamations of general joy.

2. A participation in this general anthem of praise, at the downfall of
Babylon, is demanded, as matter of exultation on the part of the holy prophets,
apostles and martyrs, whose blood she had formerly shed. Rejoice over her thou
heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God has avenged you on her.

And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that
were slain upon the earth.

3. There is cause of joy, at this event, on the part of the church, as in her
advancings to her promised perfection and glory, she shall not be obstructed by
the persecutions, massacres, inquisitions, tortures, and thunders of this
apostate church of Rome.

4. On the part of all who have received, and now maintain the testimony of
God, as recorded in his holy word, there is cause of joy, that the fulfillment
of the many prophecies respecting Antichrist, the man of sin, etc. are
fulfilled, and thereby an accumulation of evidence is obtained of the
authenticity of the scriptures, as being in deed and in truth the LIVELY
ORACLES OF GOD.

5. There is cause of joy, in this solemn and affecting event, because it is
one of the last things to take place, before it shall be proclaimed -- The
kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ,
and he shall reign for ever and ever.

And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and
strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ; for the
accuser of our brethren is cast out, which accused them before God day and
night.

This subject being a leading object, in this work, you will permit me to
present, in a very brief manner, the several denunciations of wrath against
mystical Babylon, and show the acclamations of joy that immediately follow, on
account of the important and interesting events which follow.

Is the antichristian power of Rome set forth by the iron and clay of the
great image? and is it to be dashed in pieces by the stone cut out without
hands? immediately it is predicted, that the stone that smote the image became
a great mountain and filled the whole earth.

Is this intolerant power represented by the horn which came up among the ten
horns; -- by the horn which had eyes like the eyes of a man, and a mouth
speaking great things. I beheld, then, says the prophet, because of the great
words which the horn spoke: I beheld even till the beast was slain, and his
body destroyed, and given to the burning flame. I saw in the night visions, and
behold, one like the Son of Man came in the clouds of heaven, and came to the
Ancient of Days, and they brought him near before him. And there was given him
dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, and nations, and languages
should serve him. His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass
away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.

Is this power spoken of as to rise, after the falling away, in the character
of the MAN OF SIN -- the son of perdition, who opposes and exalts himself
above all that is called God, or worshipped; so that he as God, sits in the
temple of God, showing himself that he is God -- it is the same whom the Lord
shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the
BRIGHTNESS OF HIS COMING.

And after the destruction of Babylon, as recorded in this ninteenth chapter, I
heard, says the apostle, a great voice of much people in heaven, saying,
Alleluia: Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power, unto the Lord our God:
for true and righteous are his judgments; for he has judged the great whore,
which did corrupt the earth with her fornication; and has avenged the blood of
his servants at her hand.

In the conclusion of the whole scene of distress, of which the ninteenth
chapter of this book is a lively picture, the twentieth chapter begins with the
introduction of the Millennial-day.

And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless
pit, and a great chain in his hand. And he laid hold on the dragon, that old
serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him a THOUSAND YEARS.

After such descriptions of success, and joy to follow, in favor of the church
of Christ, after the downfall of Babylon, you will not wonder that the church
should be called, nor that she should be disposed to rejoice at the overthrow.

I have now gone through with the doctrinal part of my discourse: I have
considered who it is, over whose destruction holy beings are called upon to
rejoice -- the cause of this disaster -- the means employed to bring it about,
and the foundation it lays for universal joy.

If, after such lengthy illustrations, any reflections might be admitted, may
they not, briefly, in view of the objects of this work, be such as follow?

1. If the general scope of our subject is allowed to be consonant to the word
of God, and be truly applicable to those objects toward which it has been
directed; no one can be at a loss for a key to the providence of God in the
national, civil, and ecclesiastical convulsions which are now shaking, to the
foundation, some of the most potent powers in Europe.

Is not the day of the divine vengeance come? -- Are not the vials of the
divine indignation now pouring out? -- Is not Babylon like a ^^illstone,
sinking into the sea? -- (...) not th^^ the time of the falling of the stars.
-- the dethroning, in church and state, of those who, by their iniquities and
tyrannies, have outrun the compassion of their God? And the stars of heaven
fell unto the earth, even as a fig tree casts her untimely figs, when she is
shaken of a mighty wind.

Is not this the time of the rise of the beast from the bottomless pit, who
shall make war against the witnesses, and shall overcome them, and kill them?

Is not the time now introducing, in which it shall be said by the angel --
Thrust in thy sickle, and reap; for the time is come for thee to reap; for the
harvest of the earth is ripe?

And the angel thrust in his sickle into the earth, and gathered the vine of
the earth, and cast it into the great wine press of the wrath of God.

And have we not cause to fear, that after the finishing of the present sixth
vial, which dries up the mystical Euphrates, the order will be issued to pour
out the seventh into the air -- as some suppose, upon all the subjects of the
Prince of the Power of the Air, throughout the world? And the seventh angel
poured out his vial into the air; and there came a great voice out of the
temple of heaven, from the throne, saying -- It is done. And there were voices,
and thunders, and lightnings; and there was a great earthquake, such as was not
since men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so great.

And do we not begin to see the characters and proceedings opening to view,
which fulfill the prophetic declaration, immediately on the fall of Babylon? --
And is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and
a cage of every unclean and hateful bird?

Is not the time now come, in which, from the many slaughters which are
continually taking place, the scene may be supposed to be begun, in view of
which says St. John, And I saw an angel standing in the sun; and he cried with
a loud voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, Come and
gather yourselves together unto the supper of the great God; that ye may eat
the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and
the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all men,
both free and bond, both small and great.

To what height of distress the world may yet, in judgment for their
disobedience to God, be allowed to come, God only knows; But in view of the
awful, judicial prospect, well may we cry out, O Lord rebuke me not in thine
anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure! Cover us, O thou gracious and
compassionate Redeemer, by the broad hand of thy protecting providence, until
the indignation be over-past!

But from these solemn scenes we are all, but especially as many as have good
hope in God, allowed to turn off our eye, whilst, on equally sure ground, we
are called to contemplate the blessedness which shall speedily follow. -- To
support your confidence on this subject, I need but refer you to the general
annunciation of praise from the choirs of heaven, which our subject has noted,
as immediately to follow the destruction of the enemies of God, and of his
people. We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art
to come, because thou have taken to thee thy great power, and have reigned! --

2. In view of our subject may we not reflect, that, however the doctrine of
the Millennium -- the doctrine of the thousand years of prosperity, promised to
the church of Christ, may have been neglected, decried or misunderstood, yet it
is a doctrine plainly contained, and solidly established in the word of God --
and as such is entitled to the credit, the study and embrace of all who believe
the scriptures to be the unchanging oracles of God.

3. If this doctrine be true, we justly conclude, that those ministers of
Christ, who, in the several ages of the church, have been pursuing and
enquiring after the glorious Millennial-day, have not been pursuing a shadow,
nor following a phantom.

4. If they are to be justified in their researches, and if, whilst under the
clouds of antiquity, they rejoiced in view of the distant, yet assuredly
approaching scene, how much more may we be justified in such pursuit, and in
increasing joy, whilst the "reddening streaks of the morning betoken to the
weary traveller, that the day is at hand?"

5. If the great Michael of the church intends to usher in his glorious
dominion by the previous accomplishing of TWO GREAT REVOLUTIONS -- the first
outward and political -- the second inward and spiritual; and if he has
already advanced so far in the majesty of his power, as to have completed the
first revolution in this country, through the instrumentality of the sons of
men, how necessary and proper, that the second should now be undertaken, and
carried on through the instrumentality of the sons of God?

Can we, who are ministers of Christ -- can the churches of our Lord,
throughout this our delightful land -- can we unitedly or severally be willing
to suffer, that the civil and military exertions of our country should
contribute more to the prosperity of the Zion of God, than the sons of Zion
themselves? -- Can we be willing that, with the prowess and dignity of men,
these should so worthily and valiantly have discharged the duties allotted
them, whilst we, loitering upon our posts, refuse to hear the voice of our
illustrious Leader, in his word and providence, commanding us to imitate his
example, and to press forward to exertion, to victory, and to renown?

For a moment let us cast our eye upon the vision of St. John respecting this
matter. And I saw heaven opened -- that is the ordinances of heaven, or the
scenes displaye^ (...) the church of Christ, by the ministers and churches of
Christ, which, in the language of prophecy, signify heaven; as a people of a
contrary spirit and character are set forth by the earth, or nations of the
earth: And behold a white horse, and he that sat upon him was called Faithful
and True; and in righteousness he does judge and make war. And the armies which
were in heaven, that is, in the church militant, and, it may be, triumphant,
followed him upon white horses -- emblems of valor, of victory, and of triumph
-- clothed in fine linen, white and clean. -- And out of his mouth goes a
sharp sword, that with it should smite the nations; and he shall rule them with
a rod of iron: and he treads the wine press of the fierceness and wrath of
Almighty God. And he has on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, KING
OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS. For an exposition of this passage, see Lowman,
Burkit, or Langdon in loco.


If, my Christian Brethren, we profess to belong to the armies of the living
God -- to be in the train of the great Michael of the church, why not press on?
-- Why not keep close to our Leader, that we may be within the hearing of his
orders -- may imitate his example -- may perform exploits before him -- may
prove ourselves worthy to hold rank in such an heavenly train?

But how, in what manner follow on, you may be ready to say? -- Must we take
arms? -- Must we go to war? -- Must we commence hostilities against the
empires, the kings, the tyrants, the civil and ecclesiastical establishments of
the world? -- Yes, my brethren, this is our duty, and here is our employment:
But always remember, with our valiant fileleader, that, in the accomplishment
of this second revolution, the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
mighty, through God, to the pulling down of strong holds; casting down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts itself against the knowledge
of God, and bringing into captivity every thought into the obedience of Christ.

Such, my brethren, are our weapons, and such is our warfare. Happy for the
true servants of Christ, that, as yet, they are not called, in this present
conflict, to engage in the bloody contests of ungodly men -- not to welter in
the scenes of war, where the battle of the warrior is, (...) garments rolled in
blood. It may be in the accomplishment of the first great political revolution,
something like this may be necessary; but, in this land, at present, we have
little to do, but with an armor of truth, of righteousness, and of peace.

But if in the general conflict, it should happen that the once vanquished Lion
-- the political and, I may add too, the Protestant Dragon, should return to
persecute the woman which brought forth the MAN-CHILD -- the warrior of the
world -- the pionier of the church; we need not a spirit of prophecy to say,
that the jaws of this insatiable leviathan shall again be broken, in a manner
answerable to the spirit -- to the redoubled fury and reiterated strokes of
those who, under God, at first gave the promised here of civil and religious
liberty birth.

If any should ask on what authority we ground an allusion to the Protestant
persecuting power under the idea or sigure of a dragon -- I answer, That the
chapter from whence this language is taken is of a very extensive and momentous
signification.

It truly is enveloped in some degree of mystery, as it was undoubtedly
designed to be, especially, under the characters of the woman -- the eagle's
wings -- the wilderness -- the man-child, and the dragon, who seeks to devour
the struggler as soon as he shall be born.

But as a key to this chapter, I would humbly, and in the fear of God, presume
to say, that, under the character of the woman and her sorrows, we have
exhibited the state and strugglings of the true church of Christ, in every age
of the world, in which she ha^^, or may be called to suffer, from the Christ an
era until the consummation of all thing. That under the general sigure of the
dragon we have exhibited the most considerable enemies and persecutors of the
church of Christ in every age; Satan himself, that old serpent, the Devil,
being the prime instrument, and first mover of the whole. That by the
wilderness, we are to understand a state of spiritual dearth and barrenness, or
those leaves, shades, and darkening boughs of superstition, which have been as
the shades of a wilderness to hinder the spiritual growth; or, lastly, a
wilderness in the literal and common acceptance of the word. And, by the
general figure of a MAN-CHILD, you are to understand the particular and several
deliances, which the church of Christ, in any, and in every age of the world,
has enjoyed, from its first institution until the present moment. And, by the
two wings of the great eagle, may we not understand the special providence and
agency of Almighty God in these several very interesting events? In this sense,
denoting the power of God in conquering the enemies of his people, and in
securing them under the banner of his own protection -- the phrase is used in
Exodus xix. 4. Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you
on EAGLE'S WINGS, and brought you unto myself. And after a long course of
protection afforded to the people of God, through the wilderness of Sinai, and
their settlement in the promised land, it is again said, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 9 -- 12.
For the Lord's portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance. He
found him in a desert land, and in the waste howling wilderness: he led him
about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his eye. As an eagle
stirs up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her wings,
takes them, bears them on her wings; so the Lord alone did lead him, and
there was no strange god with him.

Under the same idea of the divine agency and protection afforded, says the
Psalmist -- Because thou have been my help, therefore, in the shadow of thy
wings, will I rejoice.

This foundation being laid as a key to the chapter, may we not proceed, and
say, that the woman denotes the state of the church in its first institution?
And there appeared a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the sun; it
may be with the vestments of the sun of righteousness; and the moon under her
feet; the earth and other sublunary things in their proper place; and upon her
head a crown of twelve stars; guided and governed by the unadulterated
doctrines of the twelve apostles. In this character, the church of Christ at
first stood forth; but so soon was the truth beclouded -- her privileges
restrained, and her members persecuted, that she, struggling for civil and
religious liberty, is denominated as being with child, as travailing in birth,
and pained to be delivered. The character of a woman the church is supposed to
take, as denoting her delicacy -- her fruitfulness, and her need of protection.

But under the lashes of paganism and heathenish tyranny, she was obliged to
groan out the ten persecutions, until, in the person of Constantine the Great,
the first Christian emperor, she brought forth her firstborn, and lived, for a
while, under the happy dominion of civil and religious liberty.

And who would have thought that, in process of time, prosperity would have
produced such pride, dominion and tyranny in spiritual, and in earthly things;
even in those who have but just now emerged from a suffering and persecuted
state?

But, alas! behold the Pagan Dragon restored to life, in the papal,
antichristian image! And under this papal, persecuting power behold the series
of heathenish persecution again renewed!

How did the woman again labor to be delivered, and what were the effects of
her labor, under papal tyranny, but the glorious reformation which took place
in the sixteenth century, under the preaching of Wick liff. John Huss, and
Jerome; and afterward carried on by Luther, Calvin, and others?

And shall it, may it now be said, that the spirit of protestantism -- the hero
of deliverance from the thraldom of Popery, ever become so degenerated as, in
the smallest degree, to act over the part of its Papal and Pagan predecessors?
Let the persecutions of civil and ecclesiastical power, under Mary, James,
Laud, and others, whilst they struggled for uncontrouled dominion in church and
state, "in things civil and ecclesiastical," answer to this point!

The sufferings of the Protestants, under this new formed intolerant power, do
well answer to the character of the church -- of the woman in her suffering and
persecuted state.

But, behold! how soon does the persecuted woman receive an answer to her
solemn appeals, and reiterated cries? See, on the wings of a bounteous
providence, how she is wafted across the Atlantic, and settled in these
peaceful American abodes! -- Happy, that as the time of general redemption
comes, her enemies are held in partial restraint. -- Here she is pursued and
persecuted only in outward and civil things; though what designs might have
been formed against her religious freedom we cannot say.

In a word, behold the hero of civil and religious liberty born in these
western climes! And see him already on his way back ^o demolish the proud and
haughty establishments of civil and ecclesiastical tyranny, which have in these
several forms, persecuted his mother, whilst she labored to give him birth!

And is it too much to suppose, that, in his progress back, he will demolish
all that is contrary to the spirit of the truth -- to the intent and design of
that power, under whose auspices he now proceeds, conquering and to conquer;
whether such counterseits of truth be found in Protestant, in Papal, or in
Pagan Rome? Especially, whilst you read, that this hero is to rule all nations
with a rod of iron, and is caught up to God and to his throne? -- If you
request any further illustrations to authenticate this interpretation, attend
to the declaration, that when the Dragon, in his multi-formed character, was
cast out, was conquered, disappointed, or disgraced, he persecuted the woman
that bro't forth the man-child. And thus, my audience did the Pagan Dragon, in
the person and persecutions of Julian the Apostate; and thus did the Papal
Dragon, in all the persecutions, thunders, and councils, by which he has vexed
and destroyed the Protestants; and thus has the Protestant Dragon done, not
only in heavy persecutions for conscience sake, but, especially, in the slood
of troops, armies and fleets -- Britons and Irish, Brunswickers and Waldeckers,
Hessians and Anspachers, which this red dragon vomited forth for the
destruction of the woman in the American wilderness, during the late unprovoked
and cruel war; and thus is this Protestant Dragon, even now, but too ready to
express of his persecuting temper, in opening upon these defenseless states the
Algerine Corsairs -- in committing depredations upon our commerce, and in
letting loose, or in countenancing their savage allies, in making war upon our
western frontiers. But we believe in God, our hope and confidence is in him,
and to his protecting power and providence do we, therefore, humbly appeal.

You will not now doubt of the propriety of the allusion, just now hinted at,
respecting ing the persecuting power of the Protestant Dragon -- nor at all
deny the propriety of our holding ourselves in lively and animated readiness to
break the jaws of this leviathan, as God may give us power, should he attempt
again to break our peace.

And if any should be disposed to ask what has become of the eagle, on whose
wings the persecuted woman was born into the American wilderness, may it not be
answered, that she has taken her station upon the broad seal of the United
States; and from thence has perched upon the pediment of the first
government-house, dedicated to the dominion of civil and religious liberty,
where she is still to be seen, an emblem of the protection of Providence
toward our present government, and toward this our happy land.

If any should be disposed, further, to ask whether the dragon of the regions
below, even that old serpent called the Devil, and Satan, is to be seen in any
other form than as animating the dragons -- the combinations of civil and
ecclesiastical power, in the many external injuries they have wrought against
the church of God on the earth? I answer, yes, in every age of the church,
whether her external state has been peaceful or troublesome: The errors in
doctrine -- the breaches upon the purity of Christian practice -- the scisms,
divisions and discord in churches -- the prejudice, hatred and malice which
have, ^^ times, prevailed in the church, have been, for the most part, but the
ebullitions of Satan, the great dragon of dragons, who continually goes about,
as a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour; and hapless state the church,
too frequently, has been in, that even within her own bosom, the Devil himself
should find so many willing instruments of his pleasure, agents of his infernal
craft. Look abroad upon our churches, and behold the dearth of religion -- the
want of unity, animation and zeal amongst both ministers and people; and pray,
oh fervently pray, that when, as at the present time, the enemy shall come in
like a flood, the spirit of the Lord, in his word, in his ministers and
churches, may lift up a standard against him.

But returning to the important subject of the second great revolution, after
which it is our duty constantly to labor, may we not add, in view of the
example of our late political struggle --

If, then, noble exertions for the first revolution have been made by our
brethren, guided by heaven in the field, and in the cabinet; are not we now, as
Christians, and as ministers, to be guided? -- Is it not full time, that we
should be led, by the zeal of their noble example, whilst we fight the battles
of the Lord of Hosts, in our closets and in our families -- in our churches and
in our pulpits?

Pursuing this object, let us reason the point, for a moment, with yonder
infidel -- Let us ask what more evidence he needs of the truth of the
scriptures, than to see the events, long since predicted, daily fulfilling
before his eyes? -- Let us ask him to read a page or two in a late publication,
on the subject of prophecy, as the testimony of Jesus. See Hinsdale's Disco. A.
P. vok iv. page 128.


"Where are now those renounced cities, Nineveh, Baylon and Tire, whose
desolation was so often denounced by the prophets? -- What is now the condition
of Jerusalem and Judea? -- Are they not trodden down of the Gentiles, and
likely to be still trodden down, until the times that the Gentiles shall be
fulfilled? How remarkably do the actions and state of the Turks, who have so
long trodden them down, agree to what was predicted to them? He shall come with
horsemen, and many ships, and shall overflow and pass over. He shall enter into
the glorious land, and many countries shall be overthrown. Do you not find it
even so? And that he has stretched out his hand over the land of Egypt, with
the Lybian at his steps, whilst the Arabians still escape out of his hand.

Has not the state of Egypt, for many past ages, been just as was foretold? a
base, and the hasest of kingdoms, without a ruler of her own, and wasted by
strangers?

Observe the fourth kingdom of Daniel's vision broken into ten. Behold that
wonderful power, diverse from the first, which has arisen up among them, with
a look more stout than his fellows, and a mouth speaking great things, even
great words against the MOST HIGH: that power which wears out the saints of
the MOST HIGH, and changes times and laws. Behold him casting down the truth
to the ground; forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats: Yea,
behold him sitting in the temple, in the church of God, and showing himself
that he is God, whose coming is with signs and lying wonders. And remember that
the seat of this horrid tyrannical power is that great city which stands on
seven mountains, and which, in the days of the prophecy, reigned over all the
kings of the earth. -- In fine,

"You see the church of God subsisting, at this day, in the world -- the same
church which, before Christ, was continued in the seed of Abraham, and which,
at and after his coming, took that new form which Daniel saw under the name of
the KINGDOM OF HEAVEN; and has ever since subsisted among the Gentiles. You
know the preservation and final prevalence of this society, together with the
hostile attempts, and final ruin of all her enemies, have been predicted by all
the prophets from Moses to St. John.

"Now, when ye see this very church present in existence and enlargement, after
all the attempts which have been made, in all manner of ways, and through a
long succession of ages, for her destruction; and notwithstanding she has all
the seeds of desolation in herself, has often been extremely feeble, and in the
hand of her enemies, and at the point of death: When you see this, you behold
an event, which, though perfectly corresponding to hundreds of
scripture-prophecies and promises, is yet UNPARALLELED IN THE HISTORY OF THE
WORLD. Suffer me to repeat, IT IS UNPARALLELED IN THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD. The
most unlikely event, when it was foretold, ever to have existed, and which
indeed never could have existed, but by the mavelous providence of God,
defeating the influence of natural causes, that he might fulfill the designs of
his mercy -- that he might confirm the words of his servants, and perform the
counsel of his messengers; and, at the same time, that he might frustrate the
tokens of the liars, and make diviners mad, and close the mouth of infidels in
perpetual silence.

"Thus is the spirit of prophecy the testimony of Jehovah to the sacred
scriptures as his OWN ORACLES, and to Jesus as the Christ, and of consequence
to the Christian Religion as DIVINE."

And where shall the ministers of Christ next turn their attention, in order
successfully to carry on the purposes of this second, this inward and spiritual
revolution of the heart?

Unless the great Michael of the church should aid, our hopes of success would
be lost; but so long as we have his promise -- Lo, I am with you always, even
to the end of the world -- we are encouraged to go on.

Let us, then, make our addresses to men of understanding -- to men of sound
judgment, and rectitude of heart, and solicit the force of their interest and
example.

Let us even attempt to touch the ambition of the ambitious, by pointing them
to the robes of distinction, and inconceivable marks of favor in the regions of
glory, which await the man whom the king delights to honor.

Let us assail the castle of the miser, and tell him, that in the regions of
glory are rivers of treasure, floods of salvation, a thousand sold more
regaling to the appetites of the soul, than earthly substance can be to the
body.

Let us guide the wandering views of the man of business, by setting before him
the necessity of seeking first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, that
all these things may be added.

May we not arouse the attention of the stupid, the obstinate, and sensual, by
painting to them, in lively colors, the danger to which they are exposed, as
well as the baseness of earthly and sensual gratifications, in comparison with
those which are intellectual and heavenly?

May we not solicit the aid of the improved, the elevated, and the polite, by
assuring them that a field of improvement, prospects of elevation, and the most
finished examples of heavenly grace, are all presented to their embrace, in the
pursuit of the rewards promised by our exalted king?

And, last of all, may we not, with high prospects of success, humbly suggest,
that by the example and influence of the female world, even of the most
delicate and refined, much might be done to further the purposes of heaven? --
If any of our fair audience should say, "We have not yet learned the paths of
piety ourselves: we are, alas! but too far from hope of setting good example to
others, or of aiding the interests of virtue, by the feeble efforts of what, at
best, can be only styled the improvements of nature, destitute of the
refinements of heavenly grace:" -- Let us pray them to lend their hand to some
guardian angel, who may lead them, perhaps, abroad to view the wondrous traces
of wisdom, and of power, in all creation's handy works; and when, from the
oracles of truth, they become farther convinced of the being of a God -- of his
equitable, holy, just and good laws -- of their own imperfections of heart and
life -- of their final accountableness at the bar of an impartial judge; they
may be willing to follow their heavenly guide into the retirements of secret
devotion, and there unbosom the soul to God, imploring the pardon and ablution
of sin, through the blood of the Lamb. What though a tear of contrition find
its way, evincing the deep woundings of the heart, pursued by an upbraiding
conscience, for time and talents misimproved -- for neglect of God, the
universal Creator -- for neglect of the overtures of proffered mercy -- for the
grievings of the holy spirit of God, occasioned by the pride of the heart,
refusing to bow to the scepter of sovereign grace? What though, from causes
like these, a tear of contrition might fall, and the bosom heave in sighs of
penitence and prayer? If pardon for the soul, and acceptance with God should be
the happy fruit, and a life of unexampled piety the permanent effects -- how
interesting the change -- how promising the prospect!

With support of numbers, and example of graces such as these, with what
success might the advocates of truth plead the cause of heaven, and how soon
might we expect that in the place of unbelief, stupor, insensibility and
hardness of heart; we should discover the seeds of the happy wished-for
revolution already to be sown, and the effects to appear in full and abundant
sheaves of heavenly grace!

But -- whither do I run, leading my audience -- fathers and brethren, it may
be, into paths less promising than those in which they have been accustomed,
successfully to tread! -- I pause, then; nay, I draw to a conclusion by saying,
in the words of a respected father in the church of God, on the subject of
Ministerial Character and Duty, Witherspoon, vol. i. A. P. page 19.
-- "It requires no small attention and labor to seek out fit and acceptable
words, as the preacher expresses it, to stir, up the attention of the
inconsiderate -- to awaken, secure, and convince obstinate sinners -- to unmask
the covered hearts of hypocrites -- to set right the erring, and encourage the
fearful."

Notwithstanding this, may we not all, animated by the prospects of promised
aid, go forth manfully, to fight the battles of the Lord -- to play the man for
God, and for the cities of our God; knowing that in our faithful exertions the
name of the Lord is honored, though Israel be not gathered.

Finally, my brethren, "Have we seen the scriptures sealed by past events; let
it exalt our faith into a full assurance, that all the prophecies which remain,
and especially those which speak of JESUS' FUTURE GLORY, shall receive, in due
time, their perfect accomplishment.

"This GRAND ERA is approaching with a speed rapid as the flight of time. The
night is far spent, the day is at hand. In this prospect, with what ardour
should we pray -- THY KINGDOM COME;" Hinsdale, A. P. vol. iv. p. 1335134.
and in the fervency of our united devotions, may we not add -- thy will be
done on earth, as it is done in heaven; for thine, gracious God! is the
kingdom, and thine is the power, and thine shall be the glory, world without
end. AMEN.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
THE subscribing EDITOR to the AMERICAN PREACHER presents his most
affectionate, and Christian regards to all his Fathers and Brethren in the
Ministry; and, especially, to those who have aided in contributing Materials
for the Execution of the Plan of that Work thus far; and is happy in being able
to assure them, that their Labors have been, to such a degree, acceptable to
the found for Sale; and repeated applications are made to the Printer for
further supplies. The Fourth Volume is now circulating, and promises fair to
secure, and to increase the Reputation of this, generally, interesting Work.

As the present is a Day full of great Events, and a general attention to the
dictates of Prophecy seems to be gone forth, it is proposed, that a Volume of
Discourses, on the Subject of Prophecy, with particular application to
Predictions now fulfilling, or yet to be fulfilled, shall be prepared, and
issued, perhaps, at the close of the present Year.

Any of our Christian Brethren, who would contribute to the Execution of such a
Plan, might be instrumental in reviving the Cause of Truth -- in animating
their Brethren, and of comforting the Church of God; and would receive the most
grateful Acknowledgments from the Friends and Promoters of the proposed Volume.

Shortly will be put to Press a Volume of Discourses, preached on occasion of
the late Visitation of the City of Philadelphia by the Yellow Fever, entitled,
"A Comment on the Providence of God, in the late Visitation of the City of
Philadelphia, by the Yellow Fever: or, Instructive Lessons to the People of the
United States, on the Subject of that solemn Event, comprised, in a Number of
Discourses, preached by several Ministers of Christ, on that Occasion, who are
willing to leave this Testimony as a Memorial of the tragical Scene which gave
it Birth."

Any of our Christian Ministers, who are willing to aid in the furtherance of
either of the foregoing Designs, may be assured that their Contributions will
meet a most friendly welcome, and be du^y noticed in View of forwarding the
Design for which they may be sent.

ELIZABETH TOWN, May 1, 1794.

