CALVINISM AND UNIVERSALISM CONTRASTED.

CALVINISM AND UNIVERSALISM CONTRASTED; IN A SERIES OF LETTERS TO A FRIEND;

BY JOSEPH YOUNG, M.D.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY SAMUEL CAMPBELL, No. 37, HANOVER-SQUARE. M, DCC, XCIII.

PREFACE.
CANDID READER,
IT was with much reluctance, that the author of the following pages permitted
them to be published; as he has still entertained an aversion to religious
controversies, which often are productive of discord and animosity: he has no
ambition to be known as an author, as he has never made composition his study:
-- his sole motive in writing, is to vindicate the ways of God to man, whose
moral government has been grossly misrepresented, by many pious, wellmeaning
men, who have imbibed opinions and principles that are contrary to both
scripture and reason, while they were young, and have omitted to give them a
candid and critical examination at a more mature age. Some, most probably, are
prevented by prejudice, from reading what has been written by other
denominations of christians -- and more by their constant application to their
respective professions and callings: probably a short tract, such as the
following, may be better suited to both descriptions, than a more lengthy
treatise; as curiosity may excite, even a bigot to read a few pages, who could
not be prevailed upon to buy, or read a large volume: and if it be found to
contain even a clue, that may lead to a further investigation of important
truths, and the detection of error -- it will suit the man of business best; as
it is only necessary to set the human mind in action, and furnish it with a few
self-evident principles, to enable it to proceed in the investigation of the
benevolent designs of the Deity, in the creation of mankind, which must have
been to make them eternally happy, in glorifying and enjoying him; and if it be
granted, that God created them for this end; he certainly has a sufficient
degree of wisdom and power to accomplish his design, and cannot be frustrated
in the fulfillment of his gracious purpose.

As the future salvation of mankind depends entirely on the benevolence, wisdom
and power of God, they are in safe hands: his infinite benevolence inspired
him, to create them; his infinite wisdom laid the plan for their redemption:
and his infinite power must, and will accomplish all that he has planned;
although earth and hell should arise in opposition against him. How irrational,
how unscriptural is it to suppose, that God made any number of the human race,
on purpose to make them eternally miserable?

Be candid, gentle reader; lay the prejudice of education aside, and examine
the evidences for, and against the doctrine of eternal, never ending
punishment, with freedom -- the subject is certainly weighty and important, and
claims your serious attention and diligent enquiry. The honor of God and the
good of mankind, are involved in its discussion and decision. If it is of
importance for us to love God, it is certainly necessary for us to know his
true character; which is all glorious -- when stripped of the monstrous
imputations of cruelty, attributed to him, by too many men, who are influenced
more by custom and tradition, than by scripture and reason. It is a melancholy
truth, that there are many absurd doctrines, founded upon a partial knowledge,
and erroneous construction of the scriptures; this circumstance alone should
induce us to examine for ourselves, and not conside, too far, in the assumed
infallibility of any set, or sect of men; and above all, should we suspect the
tenets of those, who attribute to the Deity, acts of injustice and cruelty,
that would scandalize and blacken the character of a Nero or an Herod! The
doctrine of predestination, as taught by Calvin, is clearly of this kind: see
his definition or predestination, in the 21st chapter of the third book of his
institution of the christian religion, 440th page, in the words following; to
wit, Predestination we call the eternal decree of God, whereby he had it
determined with himself, what he willed to become of every man: for all are not
created to like estate; but some to eternal life, and some to eternal
damnation, is fore-appointed. Therefore, as every man is created to the one or
other end; so we say, that he is predestinate, either to life or death. Page
443, This council, as touching the elect, we say, is grounded upon his free
mercy, without any respect to the worthiness of man; but whom he appoints to
damnation, to them, by his just indeed, and irreprehensible, but also
incomprehensible judgment -- the entry of life is blocked up. Now in the elect,
we set vocation to be the testimony of election; and then justification to be
another sign, on the manifest showing of it, till they come to glory, wherein
is the fulfilling of it. But, as by vocation and election, God makes his
elect; so, by shutting out the reprobate, either from the knowledge of his
name, or from the sanctification of his Spirit, he does, as it were, by these
marks, open what judgment abides for them: which, according to his creed, is
eternal, never ending damnation, without any regard either to his merit or
demerit. The Westminster assembly of divines, proceeding upon the same grounds,
in their answer to the question, "What are the decrees of God;" affirm, that he
has foreordained, whatsoever comes to pass; so that every event that ever has,
or ever will come to pass, are all immutably established, by a decree of the
Deity, and consequently are unavoidable by men; who are, nevertheless, to be
punished to the endless ages of eternity, for acting as the Deity had decreed
they should do; they being reduced to the shocking dilemma of acting, either
contrary to the decrees or commands of their maker. When we contemplate this
doctrine of the decrees, and compare (...) with their opinion of the fall of
Adam, and its fatal consequences, with respect to his posterity, who are
supposed to have lost communion with God, to be under his wrath and curse, made
liable to all the miseries of this life, to death (...), and to the pains of
hell forever -- it should admonish us to embrace the opinions of the best of
men, with caution, and to make use of our own reason, in examining the
scriptures, on every important subject. The Deity has been pleased to make his
attributes known to us; therefore, whatever conduct may be ascribed to the
Deity, that is incompatible with the perfections of these glorious attributes,
must be a groundless and false imputation, tending to injure the moral
character of the supreme ruler of the universe, and should be rejected. If we
proceed agreeably to this rule, can we possibly believe, with Calvin, "That
infants bring their damnation out of their mother's bellies?" And many others;
who have taken Calvin for their spiritual guide, affirm, that there are
millions of infants now in hell, who died before they were capable of
distinguishing between good and evil, there to be punished to the endless ages
(...) eternity: because, as they affirm, these infants were born sinners, and
had never repented for Adam's transgression, and the corruption of their own
natures -- which they term original sin; which they assert, renders them justly
liable to the wrath and curse of God, both in this life, and that which is to
come. This certainly cannot be the doctrine of the benevolent Jesus, who said,
"Suffer little children to come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of heaven."
And again, except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall in
no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven. Surely if little children were in
such a corrupt and damnable state, as Calvin and his followers have represented
them to be, Christ, who was, undoubtedly, a very competent judge, would never
have set them up, as fit patterns and subjects for the kingdom of heaven,
without intimating the necessity of any change being wrought in them; the
presumption, therefore, is, that they are perfectly innocent.

Whoever will be at the pains to contrast the declarations of the Deity,
Ezekiel.xviii.
contained in Ezekiel, with the doctrines of Calvin and his adherents, will
soon be convinced that they are as opposite to each other as light is to
darkness.

Ezekiel begins the chapter, by the command of God, saying, "What mean ye, that
ye use this proverb concerning the land of Israel, saying, the father's have
eaten four grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge?"

He swears, Ezekiel xviii. 3.
"That they shall not have occasion any more, to use this proverb in Israel:"
however, the Calvinists have had great occasion to make frequent use of it,
since Ezekiel's time.

He says, 4.
"Behold, all souls are mine, as the soul of the Father, so also the soul of
the son, is mine, the soul that sins it shall die."

"Yet say ye, 19.
why does not the son bear the iniquity of the father, when the son has done
that which is lawful and right, and has kept all my statutes, and has done
them, he shall surely live."

"The soul that sins, 20.
it shall die: the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall
the father bear the iniquity of the son, the righteousness of the righteous
shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him."

That is to say, that every individual shall suffer sor their own
transgression, and not for that of any other person whatever.

The Deity asserts, Ezekiel xxviii. iv.
that all souls, without exception, are his property; if so, they cannot belong
to him and the Devil in common. However widely they may stray from the
sheepfold for a time, the good shepherd will, in due time, bring them home
rejoicing, saying, I have found that which was lost. And it will puzzle the
Devil and all his advocates, to find and produce that eternal decree, by which
they pretend, that millions of infants were consigned to him, to be and remain
in the prison of hell, to the endless ages of eternity:

Or to prove from any thing contained in the scriptures of the Old or New
Testaments, that God ever threatened to punish any infant in hell, for the sins
of their parents, or those of any other person: and, as it is impossible, that
those who die in infancy, could ever offend him, in thought, word or deed; it
is irrational to suppose he will punish them, for any supposed want of
conformity in their natures to his divine law. Would not the man be stigmatized
as a most merciless tyrant, who should beget a vast number of children, and
deliver the greatest number of them, while infants, into the hands of the most
merciless savages, to be tormented by them, in the manner usually practiced
amongst them, such as roasting them before slow fires, drawing out their nails,
with red hot pincers, causing them to run barefooted on hot embers, then to
break the blisters open, and rub in salt, to increase the anguish to the most
extreme degree, while the father's stood by to approve and sanction their
proceedings?

I acknowledge that this character is drawn in very black and dismal colors;
and I confess that I do not believe that the prince of Devils would act
agreeable to it, were it in his power: but monstrous and incredible as it may
appear; such is the character, and such the conduct attributed to the merciful
and infinitely benevolent parent of mankind; with this additional aggravating
circumstance, that the punishment, in the first supposed case, could be only of
short duration; while that supposed to be inflicted by the appointment of the
Deity, is affirmed to be an eternal, never ending torture, of the most dreadful
kind, in the regions of darkness and despair.

This is the horrid form in which these shocking doctrines have always
presented, themselves to the mind of the author: how they may appear to those
who embrace them, he cannot tell; or how they can reconcile them, to the ideas
that are generally conceived of the glorious attributes of the Deity, or what
is generally reckoned just and merciful, among men in civil Society. A person
would be naturally led to conceive, that the moral government of the Deity,
would be the most perfect model to imitate, in framing ours; but if the
Calvinistic plan is to be adopted, the only imitations of it appears to be the
inquisitions of Spain and Portugal; but it is very questionable, whether they
ever proceeded so far, as to burn infants for the crimes of their parents. If
any person should conceive that the author of this little tract, has shown too
great a degree of warmth, or made use of any expressions calculated to give
offense, it will give him sensible concern; but if this should be the case, he
assures the reader, that it never was his intention to offend the people of any
denomination: his sole motive being to vindicate the moral character of the
Deity; which, as he humbly conceives, has been grossly misrepresented, to the
dishonor of God, and the unspeakable detriment of mankind -- who should be
taught to copy after the Deity, in all his immitable perfections: if,
therefore, we form erroneous conceptions of the character and conduct of the
Deity, with respect to his disposition and government of the children of men,
it is almost morally certain, that our conduct, to each other, will be
influenced by our opinions. If a bigot conceives that God hates any
denomination of Christians, or even the Heathen, it is highly improbable that
he should love them, or treat them with kindness -- as he will think himself
justifiable in hating whom God hates: and it is unlikely that Calvin would have
burned Servetus for heresy, if he had not persuaded himself, that God hated him
from all eternity, and would punish him in hell, throughout eternal ages.

Jeremiah has predicted, Jer. xxxi. 29.
"That the days will come, in which the Lord will make a new covenant with the
house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: not according to the covenant he
made with their fathers, when he brought them out of the land of Egypt." Jer.
xxxi. 29.
"But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel,
after those days, says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people:
and they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, know the Lord: for they shall know me, from the least of them,
unto the greatest of them, says the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity,
and I will remember their sin no more."

God's government of the Jews, appears to be an epitome of his universal
government: we have reason, therefore, to expect, that the time is fast
approaching, when we shall all know the Lord, from the least to the greatest;
and when he will forgive our iniquities, and remember our transgressions no
more.

That this may be the case, with every creature which God has made, is the
sincere with of

THE AUTHOR.

LETTER I. TO A FRIEND.
MY DEAR SIR,
WHEN I had the pleasure of conversing with you, a few evenings ago, I stated a
few propositions, tending to analize the doctrine of the eternal duration of
hell torments; so as to have the subject comprised in a small compass, on a few
self evident principles. -- But as the subject is of great importance,
involving in its discussion and decision, the just or erroneous opinion we are
to form of the moral character of the Deity; that is, whether we shall believe
that the Deity has created millions of human beings, knowing with certainty,
before he brought them into existence, that they would prove incorrigible
sinners, incur his divine displeasure, and that he, in consequence, should
consign them to eternal punishment in the regions of misery and woe:

Or, whether he created them with the benevolent design or wish that they might
all be eventually happy, knowing that he had sufficient abilities to fulfill his
gracious intention. I would beg leave to state the following queries: viz.

Query I. When the Deity conceived the design of creating, or causing so many
millions of human beings to exist; did he wish or design that they should all
be eventually happy? Or did he not wish them final happiness?

Query II. Did he know what their future conduct in this life would be?

Query III. Was he possessed of a sufficient degree of wisdom to form a plan
whereby the whole human race might be rescued from eternal misery?

Query IV. Had he a sufficient degree of power to execute his plan, and save
the whole human race from eternal perdition?

If it be granted, as I conclude it must be; that the Deity was so benevolent
as to wish that the whole human race might be eventually happy;

That he knew before hand what the conduct of each individual would be;

That he had wisdom enough to form a plan to effect his gracious design;

And a sufficient degree of power to execute his plan and save the whole human
race from eternal perdition;

Query V. What power, or combination of powers can frustrate the designs of the
Omnipotent Jehovab, and drag these beings to endless perdition, which he
intended should be eventually happy?

Query VI. What degree of credit are we to give to the opinion of those who
tell us, that notwithstanding the infinite goodness, wisdom, and Almighty
power, of the Deity are engaged to save the whole race, vast numbers of them
must, nevertheless, be irrecoverably consinged to the Devil, to be tormented by
him to the endless ages of eternity? Nay, there are many who allege that the
posterity of Adam are brought into being, with a natural and moral incapacity
of doing any good; but with a strong propensity, and infinite power to do evil.
In consequence of which disposition and power, every sin which they commit is
an infinite evil, and every subsequent transgression which they commit, being
also an infinite evil, the sum total becomes infinitely infinite; rendering the
miserable culprit justly liable to eternal punishment, for acting agreeably to
the constitution and propensities of his nature, with which the Deity impelled
him into existence.

Query VII. Is it not impious to suppose, that an infinitely good and merciful
God, should bring into existence millions of human beings, under a moral
incapacity of doing good; but with the strongest inherent propensities and
powers to commit crimes (...) are infinitely evil; thereby to furnish a
plausible pretext to justify the measure of punishing them eternally?

If this doctrine be well founded, the Devil could not have wished for a plan
more, or better calculated to people his dominions.

The Calvinists suppose the direful reverse of our fortune, with respect to the
benevolent disposition of the Deity toward us, to have been caused by the
transgression and fall of Adam: for, say they, "Mankind by their fall lost
communion with God, are under his wrath and curse, and so made liable to all
the miseries of this life, to death itself, and to the pains of hell forever!"

Query VIII. What a shocking idea do they entertain of the moral character of
the Deity, and his divine government! Who can suppose a human being justly
liable to God's wrath and curse in this life, and to the pain of hell forever,
for a crime committed by another person five or six thousand years before the
imputed culprit had an existence?

Query IX. Was Adam's future conduct and fall, a matter of contingency with the
Deity? Nay, he certainly knew that he would eat the forbidden fruit; why then
should his wrath and indignation rise to such a tremendous pitch, against
millions of unborn, innocent beings, whose possible future existence depended
entirely on his own agency; which is as necessary in the production of a human
being at this time, as in producing Adam out of the dust of the earth?

Query X. Is it not more rational, more agreeable to scripture, and more
consistent with the ideas we ought to entertain of the kind parent of the human
race, to believe, with the Universalists, that he created the whole human race,
with the benevolent design of making them all eventually happy; that he had
wisdom enough to form his plan; and power enough to execute it; that he has
made them moral, accountable agents: for which purpose, he has endued them with
knowledge to distinguish between good and evil; a free will to choose, and a
power to act agreeably to their choice? Where either of these three powers or
faculties are withheld, or are imperfect, the duties expected of the agent,
will be proportionally diminished; an idiot not being in any degree accountable
for his actions.

If, therefore, we make an improper use of our free agency, and are led or
impelled by our appetites or passions, or any kind of temptation, to do any
action which we know to be wrong or criminal, whether we gain our knowledge
from revelation or reason, we are equally criminal. If we neglect to perform
any known duty, we are also criminal. If we neglect to improve the means of
gaining knowledge respecting our duties toward God and man, our ignorance
cannot be plead in mitigation of our crimes, as our ignorance is not
inevitable; but caused by neglect. The Deity, in all such cases, will correct,
and sometimes punish sinners with severity; probably he may punish some
refractory sinners for ages; but still, like a kind parent, for the sole
purpose of reclaiming them.

The only valuable end or design of punishment, is the reformation of the being
punished. But in all cases where this end cannot be attained, and the offender
can be prevented from injuring other beings; the farther infliction of
punishment can have no other motive than revenge, which can answer no valuable
purpose. It would be better after having punished them to a degree adequate to
their crimes, to suffer them to drop into a state of nonexistence, than to
keep them sinning and suffering eternally.

If sin is displeasing to the Deity, the sins and blasphemies committed in
hell, must also displease him; -- but it seems he is willing to dispense with
this inconvenience, for the pleasure of punishing them to eternity.

If it be said, that the eternal punishment of the wicked may be designed as an
example to others, to deter them from acting as they had done. I ask, to whom
can their punishment be a necessary example? Surely not to the wicked in this
life, who neither hear their groans, nor see their sufferings -- Certainly not
to the blessed in heaven, who can neither be benefited, nor gratified by such
an horrid spectacle. It certainly must be to gratify the Devil, as it affords
him the pleasure of triumphing over the Savior of mankind. Here, may he say,
are the millions you fondly imagined you could rescue from my power; for them
you left the bosom of your father; for them you assumed the human form; for
them you suffered many hardships and indignities; for them you shed your blood
on the cross; but after all this parade, behold, they are mine eternally; you
tried to save them, but you could not! Is this the triumphant victory the
Savior of mankind was to gain over the powers of darkness? Is it all to
terminate in peopling the infernal regions, with those very beings, who the
eternal Father of mercies wished and intended should be eternally happy, in
singing his praises world without end? Is it not more consistent with the ideas
we ought to entertain of the infinite goodness, wisdom and power of God, to
suppose that the Savior of mankind will go on conquering (...) to conquer,
until he has released every human being, who had been held in captivity by the
enemy of mankind; correcting them for their transgressions, with the rod of
benevolence, and alluring them by his tender mercies and loving kindness, until
they become willing in the day of his power, to enlist under him, as the
Captain of their salvation, that after he has gained this complete victory over
the powers of darkness; he will deliver up the kingdom entire to his Father,
that God may be all in all?

But on the other hand, should we suppose the Savior, when he comes to give an
account of the success of his mission, and deliver up the kingdom to his
Father; to tell him, I have done my best to save the whole human race; but I
found their natures so completely deranged and corrupted by Adam's fall, and
their appetites and passions so though vitiated, and the Devil so amazingly
artful and cunning in suiting his temptations to their corrupt appetites and
passions; that I was at length obliged to come to a compromise with him, and
give him up nine-tenths of the human race to recover one tenth? This would
afford but small grounds for a triumph.

I remain, with the most sincere esteem, your friend, etc.

LETTER II. TO THE SAME.
MY DEAR SIR,
WHEN I presumed some time ago to trouble you with my sentiments concerning the
final restoration of the human race; I considered the subject, as it respected
our ideas of the unlimited prescience, goodness, wisdom, and almighty power of
God. And I am still persuaded that this is the most rational method of
investigating this important subject: for if the Deity be omniscient, he must
have known what would eventually be the fate of every individual created being.
If he is infinitely good and merciful, he must undoubtedly wish to make them
eventually happy. If he be infinitely wise, he must have laid his plan, so as
to prevent being frustrated in the accomplishment of his gracious design. And
if infinitely powerful, all the obstructions or obstacles that the united
powers of all created beings could oppose to the operations of his almighty
will, would be in vain; nay, worse than in vain.

If, therefore, any number of the human race, are to be consigned to the Devil,
to be tormented in the regions of darkness and despair, to the endless ages of
eternity, it must happen in consequence of some defect in the prescience,
goodness, wisdom, or power of the Deity. To suppose the infinitely merciful and
good God, capable of forcing any number of human beings into existence, without
wishing to make the condition into which he brought them equal, if not
preferable, to a state of nonexistence, is shocking, (and I presume there are
but few, if any, who will assert, that a state of eternal punishment, is either
equal or preferable to nonexistence.)

But, supposing him to have known, from all eternity, that they would be most
exquisitely miserable throughout eternal ages, without any possibility of
relief; is to suppose the ever merciful Jehovah guilty of an unprovoked act of
cruelty: for it is certain non-entities could not offend him. It is, therefore,
dealing unfairly with the character of the Deity, to charge him with an act of
cruelty of which no human being would be guilty. -- What man would beget a
child, provided he knew with certainty before band, that it would be eternally
miserable? I presume there is not one to be found, that would not shudder at
the thought of being instrumental in producing a being, knowing it should
inevitably bear the most excrutiating torments in the regions of darkness,
despair, and woe, as long as God himself existed! But shocking as it is, this
is the character that has been given to the beneficient parent of mankind, who
is the supreme fountain of love and mercy. 1 1 Timothy II. 3, and 4.
John iv. 8 "He that loves not, knows not God; for God is love." Ver. 14
"And we have seen, and do testify, that the Father sent the Son to be the
Savior of the world."

"For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who will
have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth." Ver.32 "For
he has concluded all in unbelief, that he might save all." Ver.5 "For there is
one God, and one Mediator between God and men; the man Jesus Christ;" Ver.6
"Who gave himself a ransom for all to be testified in due time." Romans xi. 26
"And so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written, there shall come out of
Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob."

"For as in Adam all die 1 Cor. XV. 22. Romans V. 18.
, even so in Christ shall all be made alive."

"Therefore, as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation, even so, by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
men unto the justification of life." 1 III John. 35.
John ii. 1 and 2 "If any man sin we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous; and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours
only, but also for the sins of the whole world."

"The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hands."

"All that the Father gives me shall come to me, VI. 37.
and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out." If then the Father
has given all things into the hands of the Son, and all shall come unto him
that the Father has given him; then the whole human race must come, and he
declares he will not cast them out.

He here speaks in the imperative mood, saying, they shall come, he will make
them willing in the day of his power: for he tells us, Ver. 39 "And this is the
Father's will who has sent me, (to seek and to save that which was lost, Luke
xix. 10,) that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing; but should
raise it up at the last day."

How extremely discordant is the will of the advocates for eternal damnation,
with the divine will of the Father of mercies, who wills that none should be
lost; but will have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the
truth, 1 1 These V. 9 and 10.
Tim. i. and 4.

"For God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Who died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with
him."

"But we see Jesus, Heb. II. 9,
who was made a little lower than the angels, for the suffering of death,
crowned with glory and honor; that he, by the grace of God, should taste death
for every man." These, sir, are a few of the many hundred texts, that plainly
show the gracious designs of the Deity in bringing so many millions of human
beings into existence: and I should think them abundantly sufficient to
vindicate the moral character of the Deity, who has been, and still is
represented, to be an inexorable tyrant, punishing infants, (not above a span
long,) in hell flames to the endless ages of eternity, for Adam's
transgression. And nothing enrages these pious christians so much, as to hint,
that Christ has either inclination or power to redeem them from their
captivity. But God has declared that this shall be done, and thanks be to God
they cannot prevent it.

"And they shall be gathered together, Is. XXIV. 22.
as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and
after many days they shall be visited." How? In mercy.

"As for thee, also, Zech. IX. 11.
by the blood of thy covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit
wherein is no water; at least poor Divus could find none to cool his tongue."

"For Christ also has once suffered for sins, 1 Pet. III. 18.
the just for the unjust, (that he might bring us to God,) being put to death
in the flesh; but quickened by the Spirit:"

"By which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison." 19.


"Which sometime were disobedient, when, once the long suffering of God waited,
in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing." 2.
What did Christ, after his crucifixion, go down to hell to preach to the
spirits of the inhabitants of the old world, who for their disobedience
perished in the deluge? What could he have preached to them? Surely not the
doctrine of Calvin: Nay; he preached the gospel; i. e. "Glad tidings of great
joy." Peter explains the matter farther.

"For, Chap. IV. 6.
for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they
might be judged according to men in the flesh; but live according to God in the
Spirit."

These poor miserable beings had remained captives and close prisoners, in the
pit, wherein is no water, near two thousand four hundred years, when the
merciful Savior of all mankind entered the dreary mansions of misery and woe,
and preached to them glad tidings of great joy. He probably told them that he
was the high priest of the new covenant, who had lately offered up himself a
ransom for all, and had made an ample atonement for the sins of the whole
world; that as they had not the offers of salvation on the terms of the gospel
made known to them, while living on earth, he had now come to offer them terms
of reconciliation and pardon; that having now heard the gospel, they should be
judged according to the same rule, by which they were to be judged, who had the
gospel preached to them in the flesh, that they might thereafter live according
to the will of God in the Spirit: that the Father had given unto him all power
in heaven, and on earth; that he was in possession of the keys of hell and of
death; that he came to break the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron in
sunder; to open the prison doors, and proclaim liberty. to the captives: for
thus says the Lord, "Even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and
the prey of the terrible shall be delivered, etc."

"For this purpose the Son of God was manifested; 1 John III. 8.
that he might destroy the works of the Devil;" whose constant employment has
been to deceive the children of men, by inducing them to transgress God's holy
laws, whereby they become sinful, and consequently miserable; for the Deity
will correct them with the rod of benevolence, in order to reform them; but he
will undoubtedly cause the means which he employs, to answer the end, in due
time. Lam. III. 31.


"For the Lord will not cast off forever;" Ver.32 But though he cause grief,
yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies:" Ver.33
"For he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men."

"For I am merciful, Jer. III. 12.
says the Lord, and I will not keep anger forever."

"For I will not contend forever, Is. LVII. 16.
neither will I be always wroth: for the spirit should fail before me, and the
souls which I have made." If the above recited texts of scripture be true: then
must the doctrine of eternal punishment be false: for both cannot be true, as
they are in diametrical opposition to each other; for the latter affirms that
the Lord will cast off forever; that though he causes grief, yet will he have
no compassion; that his mercies are limited to a very short space; and that he
afflicts and grieves the children of men willingly, and that forever! That the
Lord is unmerciful to great numbers, against whom his anger will last forever;
and that he will contend forever, and be always wroth, and will render the
spirits and souls which he has made immortal, in order to wreck his vengeance
upon them, to the endless ages of eternity: for when sin, death and the Devil
are destroyed, which certainly will be done, if the scriptures are true, then
the Deity, (according to the doctrine of the advocates of eternal punishment)
will be the only tormentor. Heb. II. 14 "For as much as the children are made
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same,
that through death, he might destroy him that had the power of death;" -- that
is, the Devil. Whether the Devil be destroyed by annihilation, or by having his
nature changed, it does not alter the case; for at any rate, there will be no
Devil. And the last enemy to be destroyed is death, which must mean the second
death. 1 Cor. xxv. 25, and 26 "Previous to which Christ will ask this grand
question, O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? The sting
of death is sin, and if sin remained in being, death might exultingly answer;
here is my sting, tormenting millions which you made, and could not redeem.
When the Father delivered all things into your hands, his will was, that you
should lose nothing; but should raise it up at the last day. What apology will
you make for the irrecoverable loss of millions? Are you the almighty Savior
of mankind, who was made manifest to destroy the works of the Devil? Nay; that
boasted that he would destroy sin, death, and even the Devil himself, with all
his works; behold, here are sin, death and the Devil triumphant, with all their
works unimpaired.

If you created these millions, knowing and designing that they should be
eternally miserable; then are we completely out D -- d indeed, and we yield to
you the palm: but if you wished or intended that they should be eventually
happy, you have been trying a blind experiment, in which you have succeeded so
illy, that modesty should have restrained you from asking these insulting
questions; a discussion of them must naturally lead, to an investigation of
your character and conduct in this business, which can only have a tendency to
show the malevolence of your disposition; or to betray the weakness of your
judgment, and imbecility of your power.

In sincere hopes that the inhabitants of the whole world, will soon conceive a
better opinion of the character and conduct of God, the Father of mercies, and
the benevolent Jesus, who has made an atonement for the sins of the whole world;

(...) remain, with the most sincere esteem, your friend, etc.

LETTER III. To A FRIEND.
My DEAR SIR,
THE trade of idol-making is a very ancient business; and has been practiced,
with very little interruption, since the days of Serah. The first step taken by
almost every system-builder is, to fabricate a deity: but it sometimes happens,
that he finds one ready made to his hand; in which case, he has only to furnish
him with a set of attributes to suit his purpose; and the temper and
disposition of the workman, may be infalibly known by the attributes with which
he equips his deity. -- Calvin was a tyrant; he caused poor Servetus to be
burned, because he had the audacity to differ from him in opinion; being bred a
Papist, he had contracted a fondness for the deity who presided over the
inquisition, because he was supposed to burn all those in hell to all eternity,
who they burned here on earth for heresy; -- not because they had sinned
against him, and had provoked him to bring them into existence; -- but because
he foreknew and decreed they should become sinners, that he might thereby have
an opportunity of displaying his Almighty power, and gratifying his vindictive
justice, by punishing them to the endless ages of eternity, for acting
agreeably to the nature and dispositions with which he brought them into being;
-- for the Calvinists assert, that the posterity of Adam, are born with the
most invincible propensity to do evil, and as entirely incapable either to will
or to do any good, as a dead man is to raise himself up, and perform the
actions and functions of a living person, without the special aid and
assistance of the Spirit of God, which he has a free sovereign right, either to
grant or with hold, which he exercises without any refference to the good or
bad disposition, or conduct of either those whom he has elected from all
eternity to everlasting life; or those consigned to eternal punishment by an
arbitrary decree; as he is supposed to be under no kind of obligation to the
creatures he has made, and to have a free sovereign right to do, as he pleases
with them, as a potter has with an insensible lump of clay.

I readily grant that Christ has a sovereign right, and am persuaded that he
has a disposition to pardon Judas who betrayed him, and the Jews who murdered
him, together with the whole of the inhabitants of Sodom, Samaria, and
Jerusalem: But I positively deny that he has either a sovereign right, or a
disposition so devoid of mercy; as to create an immortal rattle-snake, on
purpose to make it eternally miserable, for acting agreeable to the nature and
disposition, with which he brought it into being. Would it not be a more safe
and certain method of gaining (...) knowledge of the moral character of the
Deity, and his disposition to wards the children of Men, to collect it from the
divine precepts, and example of Christ, than to search for it in the works of
Calvin, Edwards, Toplady, etc.

Christ tells his hearers in his sermon on the Mount.

"Ye have heard that it has been said, (...). V. 13.
thou shall love thy neighbor and hate thine enemy. 44 But I say unto you,
love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you." He inculcates
these principles as corresponding with the true moral character of the Father
of mercies; for he subjoins in the 45 "that ye may be the children of your
Father which is in heaven: for he makes his sun to shine on the evil and on
the good, etc." He further encourages them in the 48th verse, to proceed in the
practice of these godlike virtues, that they might imitate the Deity in his
moral perfections; saying, "Be ye perfect, even as your Father which is in
heaven is perfect."

This is, undoubtedly, a true description of the disposition and moral
character of the greatest and best of (...) which Christ wished his hearers to
imitate, and certainly he could not have given us a better pattern.

And these divine precepts he sanctioned and confirmed by his own example. When
suffering the most excrutiating torments on the cross, he prayed for his most
bitter enemies and murderers, saying, "Father, forgive them, for they know not
what they do." If, therefore, Christ prayed to his Father, and made
intercession for those who were murdering him, while, in the most bitter
agonies; who can reasonably doubt that he will not be disposed to intercede for
the less criminal part of mankind; or that his intercession will not prevail
with the Father of mercies to forgive them. Christ prayed for the whole
promiscuous group; if they were not, nor will not be eventually pardoned; then
Christ's intercession for them is unavailing. If they are forgiven, it is very
remarkable that none except Calvin's elected, predestined saints, should be
the only persons concerned in crucifying the Savior of the world.

The above principles and facts, does not evince the Deity to be such an
inexorable, cruel being, as many well-meaning people have conceived him to be.
They should, therefore, be cautious, and not charge the Deity with partiality
and cruelty in the dispensations of his providence, with the children of men.
Christ assures us, in the 22d Verse, of the aforementioned Chapter; "That
whoever shall call his brother a fool, shall be in danger of hell fire." what
then must the danger of that person be, who calls his maker a tyrant? -- God
forbid, says the Calvinist, that I should call God a tyrant! I only affirm that
he has brought millions of human beings into existence, out of a state of
nonexistence, in which condition they were incapable of either offending him,
or suffering any inconvenience, whatever, knowing, and having predetermined
that they should be punished in bell flames, to the endless ages of eternity!
Although I must confess it cannot be called a very merciful dispensation of
Providence, I dare not call it tyranny. We are taught to believe that God knows
every event that shall ever come to pass, he having established and fixed,
every possible event by irrevocable decrees; so that nothing can happen
contrary to his sovereign appointments, as will fully appear by perusing our
Westminster confession of faith, and catechism, respecting the above tenets,
viz.

Question. What are the decrees of God?

Answer. The decrees of God are his eternal purpse, according to the council of
his own will, whereby, for his own glory, he has foreordained whatsoever comes
to pass. He decreed that he would, in time, create a man and woman, by the
names of Adam and Eve, and constitute Adam the head and representative of all
his posterity; that he would enter into a covenant with him, on condition, that
if he abstained from eating the fruit of a certain tree, himself and all his
posterity should be happy; but if he tasted the forbidden fruit, himself and
all his posterity should lose communion with God, be under his wrath and curse,
and so made liable to all the miseries of this life, to death itself, and to
the pains of hell forever! And that in consequence of Adam's transgression all
his posterity should be born with the most invincible propensities to do evil,
and both a natural and moral incapacity of doing any good, or even to will to
do a good action, and least their natural propensities to do evil, aided by the
temptations of the Devil, should not instigate them sufficiently to fill up the
measure of their iniquity, the Deity is supposed to have decreed every evil
action which they should commit; such as thefts, robberies, rapes, murders,
etc. For all which crimes and abominations, he has also decreed to punish the
greatest number of the souls which he has made in hell, to the endless ages of
eternity: for if the Deity has decreed whatsoever comes to pass, all these
crimes and abominations have come to pass, and therefore must have been
included; for, say they, since God is omniscient, it is evident that he foresaw
from everlasting, whatever should come to pass; but there can be no prescience
for future contingents: for what is certainly foreseen, must infallibly come to
pass; consequently, the prescience of the Deity cannot be antecedent to his
decrees. They suppose that the Deity, by a free sovereign act of partiality,
(he not being under the smallest obligation imaginable to regard the well being
of the creatures he has made,) had chosen a certain number in Christ, unto
everlasting glory, before the foundation of the world, according to his
immutable purpose, and of his free grace and love, without the least reference
to faith, good works, or any conditions to be performed by the creature: and as
he loved those he elected without any rational motive, so he also hated those
he reprobated on the same ground, and left the poor wretched beings, which he
dragged into existence under his unprovoked displeasure, not to be governed by
the freedom of their own will, like moral accountable agents but pushed on to
the greatest degree of guilt and wretchedness, by acting as the Deity had
foreknown and decreed they should do! And the Deity is supposed never to have
altered any of his decrees, except one, that would have operated mercifully in
their favor: to wit, "In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die:"
for surely nonexistence would have been, at least a negative blessing, to all
those who are supposed to be eternally damned! But they must again be rendered
immortal, that they might be punished eternally for acting agreeably to the
will of the Deity, by doing those things, and behaving in all respects, as he
had decreed they should do: for it is absurd to suppose that the Deity would
decree any thing contrary to his own will. If these doctrines be true, the
Deity must certainly take great pleasure in the death and eternal damnation of
sinners, otherwise he never would have constituted Adam their head and
representative, and made their fate depend so entirely on his conduct, when he
infallibly knew that he would eat the forbiden fruit, whereby his posterity
were to lose communion with God, to remain under his wrath and curse, be made
liable to all the miseries of this life, to death itself, and to the pains of
hell forever; for a crime committed by a person of his own appointment, some
thousands of years before many of them were in existence; and in this
deplorable condition are they supposed to be passed by, and neglected by the
God that made them, with their natures so completely polluted and contaminated,
and divested of all moral power of doing any thing to extricate themselves out
of this deplorable condition, and God is supposed to have determined, previous
to their existence, to do nothing for them; but to restore their immortality,
to render them capable of enduring eternal misery: and I have possitively been
told by a person of this persuasion, that should it please God to damn his wife
and children eternally, he was sure he should rejoice in their misery!

If the tenets of Calvinism are true, then are all the invitations and promises
in the Old and New Testaments, to be considered to be delivered ironically,
with an intention to tantalize those poor miserable beings who were brought
into this helpless condition by the appointment and decrees of the Deity.

God directs Ezekiel to say unto the children of Israel; Ezekiel. XXXIII. 11.
"As I live says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked;
but that the wicked turn from his way and live." -- This is Plain, unequivocal
language confirmed by an oath; which ought we to believe, God or Calvin?

"Look unto me and be ye saved, Isai. XLV. 22.
all the ends of the earth, for I am God, and there is none else."

"For I will not contend forever; LVII. 16.
neither will I be always wroth, for the spirit should fail before me, and the
souls which I have made;" Query, does God ever make polluted souls?

"For the Lord will not cast off forever; Lam. I. 3.
32 But though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion, according to the
multitude of his mercies. 33 For he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the
children of men." He afflicts and chastises, only to reform. Jer. III. 12.
"For I am merciful, says the Lord, and I will not keep anger forever." "And
so all Israel shall be saved, Romans XI. 26.
as it is written; there shall come out of Sion, a deliverer, and shall turn
away ungodliness from Jacob. For God has concluded them all in unbelief, 32.
that he might have mercy upon all. "For this is good and acceptable in the
sight of God our Savior, 1 Timothy II. 3.
who will have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth; 5.
for there is one God, and one Mediator, between God and men; the man Jesus
Christ, who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time." Has
Christ ransomed all mankind, and yet left millions to perish eternally? 1 John
IV. 8.
"He that loves not, knows not God; for God is love."

"And we have seen, and dotestify, 1 John IV. 14.
that the Father sent the Son to be the savior of the world; and not of the
self elected only."

"And if anyman sin, 1 John II. 1.
we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. 2 And he is
the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of
the whole world." Query; If Christ be the propitiation for the sins of the
whole world, for whose sins are so many millions supposed to be eternally
damned?

"Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet:" Heb. II. 8.
for in that he put all things in subjection under him, he left nothing that is
not put under him; but now we see not yet all things put under him. 9th "But we
see Jesus who was made a little lower than the angels, for the suffering of
death crowned with glory and honor; that he by the grace of God, should taste
death for every man. How then can it be affirmed, Romans V. 18.
that millions must perish eternally? "Therefore, by the offense of one,
judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so, by the righteousness of
one, the free gift came upon all men, to the justification of life. Query: If
God justifies all men, who shall condemn any of them to eternal punishment?

"For the love of Christ constrains us, 2 Cor. V. 14.
because we thus judge, that if one died for all then were all dead. 15 And
that he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him who died for them, and rose again." Here St. Paul and
Calvin differ in judgment again; one believes that Christ died for all, and
Calvin that he died for the elect only: for those must be saved, for whom
Christ died; otherwise, he shed his blood in vain. Query; 1 These. V. 9.
which shall we believe. "For God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain
salivation by our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us, that whether we sleep or
wake, we should live together with him."

"The Father loves the Son, John III. 35.
and has given all things into his hand. All that the Father gives me, shall
come to me, VI. 37.
and him that comes, I will in no wise cast out." If the Father has given all
things into the hands of the Son, and all shall come to him, that the Father
has given him; then must all come to him; because he says they shall come, and
he declares he will in no wise cast them out.

"And this is the Father's will which sent me, that of all which he has given
me, I should lose nothing; but should raise it up at the last day. It is
therefore, plainly contrary to the will of the Father of mercies, that any of
the human race should be lost: for he gave them into the hands of him who came
to seek and to save that which was lost, that he should raise them up at the
last day, and not leave them captives and prisoners to the Devil, in the pit
wherein is no water.

"As for thee also, Zech. IX. II.
by the blood of thy covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit,
wherein is no water.

"And they shall be gathered together, Isaiah. XXIV. 22.
as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison: and
after many days they shall be visited;" but least some should imagine they were
to be visited in wrath, St. Peter informs us for what purpose, they were to be
visited in mercy.

"Who shall give account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead.
1 Pet. IV. 5. 6.
For, for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that
they might be judged according to men in the flesh; but live according to God
in the spirit."

"For Christ also has once suffered for sins, 1 Pet. iii. 18.
the just for the unjust, (that he might bring us to God) being put to death in
the flesh; but quickened by the Spirit." -- Ver. 19 "By which he also went and
preached to the spirits in prison." 20 "Which sometime were disobedient, when
once the long suffering of God (...) in the days of Noah, while the ark was a
preparing; wherein few, that is, eight souls, were saved by water." The
Calvinists, who make it an essential article in their creed, that the Devil has
an absolute right to all the captives he has taken, they being made on purpose
for him, deny that Christ descended into hell to preach the gospel to the
spirits of the inhabitants of the old world; who, for their enormous
transgressions, had been drowned by the universal deluge: for if this should
once be allowed, the soul-reviving doctrine of eternal infinite punishment,
must, alas, be given up! They believe that all the gracious promises, made by
God to mankind, are made to themselves only; that is, to the elect: and only
held out to the reprobates, in a general way, to aggravate their eternal
punishment, and keep up an appearance of strict justice and impartiality; for,
although they were destined to eternal perdition, by a secret decree, by which
their fate was irrevocably fixed; they may, nevertheless, be told, ye have had
the gospel preached to you, with frequent offers of pardon and reconciliation;
but ye would not accept of the terms of salvation, when, agrecably to their
tenets, it never was intended that they should ever come into the kingdom of
heaven; the doors of mercy being shut against them, by an eternal decree, prior
to their existence. Therefore, when the Deity appears to be earnestly pleading
with the house of Israel, to forsake the evil of their ways and live, he must
have only intended to insult and tantalize them, by requesting them to do that
which, he knew to be impossible.

"Cast away from you all your transgressions, Ezekiel. xviii. 31.
whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart and a new spirit; for
why will ye die, O house of Israel?" -- 32 "For I have no pleasure in the death
of him that dies, says the Lord God; wherefore, turn yourselves and live:" so
says Ezekiel; but Calvin says he is mistaken: for the Deity is supposed, by
his system, to take great pleasure in the death and eternal misery of sinners;
else, why should he have doomed so many millions to eternal misery, many ages
before they existed, and fixed their fate by an immutable decree? If the Deity
be a free agent, he certainly would not decree any thing contrary to his own
good will and pleasure.

If it be said that God did not absolutely decree that any individual should be
eternally miserable; but only foreknew, and permitted it to be so, to his own
displeasure: I query; was he compelled to bring beings into existence, which he
certainly foreknew would sin and suffer a few years on earth, and then be
miserable to the endless ages of eternity in hell torments? If he was not
obliged to create them; why did he not suffer them to sleep in a state of
nonexistence, where non-entities can suffer no inconvenience, and cannot
offend the Deity? By this means two great evils would have been avoided; to
wit, the infinite torment of created beings, and the great displeasure of the
Creator.

But, say they, he has permitted all this evil and misery to make his almighty
power known in the punishment of sinners. An astonishing contrivance indeed,
that the Deity should introduce into the system an infinity of sin and misery,
to give him an opportunity of displaying his almighty power, in crushing a few
reptiles -- mortals whose existence, even for a moment, depends entirely on the
sustaining power of the Deity.

It is also supposed, that he rendered finite beings incapable of doing good,
and capable of doing infinite evil, to afford him an opportunity of showing his
infinite aversion to sin and sinners, and to gratify his vindictive justice in
punishing them eternally. But why would not his numerous declarations in
scripture; his punishing whole nations in this life, in the most awful manner;
and an additional punishment in hell flames, for two, three, or four thousand
years, answer every valuable purpose, that chastisement can be rationally
expected to answer, whether inflictive, exemplary, or emmendatory. And whenever
punishment is inflicted, that cannot be vindicated on the abovegrounds, it must
be inflicted in open violation of the eternal laws of nature, and of nature's
God whose severest judgments are inflicted, with the merciful design of
reforming the offender.

"Every man's work shall be made manifest: 1 Cor.iii. 13.
for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire, and the
fire shall try every man's work, of what sort it is."

"If any man's work abide which he has built thereupon, 14.
he shall receive a reward." 15 "If any man's work shall be burned, he shall
suffer loss: but he himself shall be saved; yet so, as by fire."

By the above texts we are informed, that even the most severe afflictive
dispensations of God's providence, are inflicted with the merciful design of
purifying us from all dross and corruption; that is, to destroy sin in us; but
ultimately to save the sinner.

How vastly different is the real character of the Deity, from that given him
by those who represent him as an Almighty Tyrant, forcing millions of human
beings into existence, with the most invincible propensities, inherent in their
natures, to do all manner of evil; and precluded from the possibility of doing
any good without his divine assistance, which aid he decreed never to afford
them; but having determined, many ages prior to their existence, to punish them
in hell to the endless ages of eternity, for acting agreeably to the nature and
disposition with which he brought them into being. But to give their hypothesis
the semblance of justice they say, that God created Adam both innocent and
holy, and constituted him our head and representative; and entered into a
covenant with him, that upon the simple condition of his abstaining from eating
the forbidden fruit, both himself and all his posterity should be happy this
condition, they affirm, gave us all an extremely promising chance of securing
eternal happiness at an easy rate: -- but unfortunately Adam, being seduced by
the serpent, did eat the forbidden fruit; which is the cause, or, as some very
nice metaphysicians term it, the occasion, that all his posterity are born with
such evil dispositions as to render us justly obnoxious to God's wrath and
curse, to the endless ages of eternity. Of which, they say, we have no just
cause to complain, as the Deity had given us such a fair chance for eternal
happiness in the choice which he made for us. But in this part of their
discordant hypothesis they appear to have forgotten both the prescience, and
eternal decrees of the Deity, or wish to have this part of the transaction
considered as contingent, when they say if Adam had stood we should have been
happy, etc. whereas, they affirm the Deity not only infallibly knew, but had
also positively decreed, that Adam should fall; for they admit of no
contingents, that is, things which either may or may not happen; as such a
disposition of affairs would admit of free agency, which might render the
decrees of the Deity uncertain, and liable to be frustrated. For if it be once
granted, that mankind have it in their power, either by their says and good
works, or their unbelief and wickedness, to alter the fate to which they were
predestined; then it might happen, that the elected might go to hell, and the
reprobated to heaven: which would overturn their whole chaotic system -- In
which they impute to the Deity many unprovoked acts of cruelty, viz.

I. In forcing many millions into existence, out of a state of nonexistence,
wherein they could have suffered no inconvenience; without having had the least
inclination or disposition to make the condition into which he brought them,
equal to a state of nonexistence, but to make it infinitely worse. II. In
constituting Adam our representative, when he infallibly knew that he would
transgress and render millions of his posterity infinitely sinful and eternally
miserable: for nothing short of infinite guilt can merit eternal punishment.
III. In denying millions of the fallen race of Adam of the benefits of Christ's
death and sufferings, who tasted death for every man, and gave his life a
ransom for all. -- Which will undoubtedly be testified in due time. IV. In
affirming that the Deity will punish human beings eternally for the misfortunes
which they have suffered, in consequence of the choice he made for them, by
constituting Adam their head and representative. To punish a person for a
wilful fault, in a degree proportioned to the magnitude of the crime, is
undoubtedly just; but to punish a person for an unavoidable misfortune is both
unjust and cruel, especially when the being said to inflict the punishment, has
either by mistake, or wilfully through design, been the sole cause of the
misfortune. If God wished well to the whole human race, and the merits of
Christ's death and sufferings was only sufficient to save but a few, then it
was a cruel oversight to create any greater number than it was in the power of
Christ to ransom and redeem from the pit in which there is no water. To say
that God did not wish or intend that the whole of the human race should be
eventually happy; but that he made them to sin and suffer a few years in this
world, and then to suffer in hell eternally -- is blasphemy.
To say he wished that they might all be eventually happy, but knew infallibly
before he created them, that great numbers would be eternally and irrecoverably
miserable -- is an absurdity too great to be inserted in the religious code of
any denomination of christians: that is, God is supposed to bring into
existence millions of unoffending beings, wishing and designing that they
should be eventually happy, but knowing infallibly, long before he caused them
to exist, that they should be eternally and irrecoverably miserable; it not
being in the power of the greatest number to avoid it, and the Deity had
predetermined never to use any effectual means to prevent it, although his
infinite wisdom and power could have easily effected it.

The scriptures inform us, that God made all things for himself; but our most
orthodox teachers, assure us, that this is a grand mistake, he having made by
far the greatest number of the posterity of Adam for the Devil, knowing and
intending that they should be his slaves and captives eternally, they being
consigned to him by an eternal decree. It is therefore evident, say they, that
Christ is the propitiation for the sins of the elect only, and not as John
erroneously imagined, for the sins of the whole world. I John ii. 2.
That he did not taste death for every man, but for a few self-chosen saints,
who fancy themselves in possession of the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and
whose constant practice, from the earliest ages of the christian church, has
been to endeavor to shut the door of mercy against every denomination and
individual that were not as holy as themselves, saying, Stand off, I am more
holy than thou. Heb. ii. 9.


Christ cannot reconcile, or be reconciled to those we call reprobates. Coloss.
i. 19 and 20.


He did not preach the gospel to the spirits in prison, that they should be
judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit.
I Peter iv. 5 and 6.


Why should Christ preach to the spirits of the inhabitants of the old world,
who were drowned, all but eight persons, for their rebellion? He surely will
never have mercy on the damned. I Peter iii. 18.
.

God will never bring again the captivity of Sodom, Samaria, an Jerusalem, as
predicted by Ezekiel: Ezekiel. xvi. 53.
neither will he establish again an everlasting covenant with them, 60 -- 62.
Neither will he ever be pacified toward them, 63. For if the inhabitants of
Sodom, Samaria, and Jerusalem are to be restored to God's favor, who were cut
off and destroyed for their horrid sins and abominations, then all the human
race may be restored, the kingdom of Satan depopulated, and the soulreviving
doctrine of eternal misery be for ever silenced. And many a pious Jonah, who
had taken great delight in preaching it, be exceedingly displeased, and very,
very angry. But every benevolent being will rejoice, when God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes. -- And there shall be no more death, neither sorrow,
nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain; for the former things are
passed away. Amen. Ezekiel. xvi.


Having contrasted the tenets and doctrines of these two different
dedominations of christians, let us also contrast the obvious tendencies of
their respective tenets, on the lives and morals of their disciples.

When the young Calvinistic pupil begins to learn his catechism, and is there
told; "That me decrees of God are his eternal purpose, according to the council
of his own will; whereby, for his own glory, he has foreordained whatsoever
comes to pass." That the Deity had, from all eternity, elected a few
individuals, to everlasting life and glory; and sentenced by far the greatest
number of the souls which he determined to create, by a decree of reprobation,
to eternal wretchedness, and never ending misery -- for his own glory, without
any reference or respect, to what the disposition or conduct of the beings to
be created might be: which predestined fates, it is impossible for any of
them to alter, reverse or avoid, whether it be to eternal happiness or endless
misery, by any thing that they can will or perform.

It is impossible that the unprejudiced mind can view this character in any
other light, than that of an arbitrary, cruel, merciless tyrant, forcing
unoffending millions into existence, on purpose to make them eternally
miserable -- for his own glory.

But to silence all enquiry and cavalling, they are told that this is an holy
mystery; that it is dangerous to reply against God, or dispute the decrees of
his sovereign will, who has the same right and power to create one soul, on
purpose to make it everlastingly happy, and another to be eternally miserable,
as a potter has to make one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor; out of
the same insensible lump of clay.

Their weak judgments being rather stunned and confounded, than convinced and
enlightened by such dogmatical stuff, (for it cannot be called reasoning) they
continue to contemplate the Deity, as a tremendously powerful, partial tyrant,
the common enemy of mankind, who had, most probably, brought them into
existence, to make them eternally miserable, and sometimes pray to him, as the
Indians pray to the Devil, not out of love -- for that is impossible; but out
of fear, least they are of the number appointed to be eternally damned, for the
honor and glory of this inexorable being: and although they are unwilling to be
sacrificed to the honor and glory of the Deity themselves, they have no
material objection to his dealing, as he pleases, with the rest of the human
race, provided they escape themselves: for as it is impossible for them to love
God, as long as they conceive him to be a partial tyrant, it cannot be expected
that they should love his creatures.

In this condition they generally remain some time, until many that I have
known, begin to reason thus: If I am elected to eternal life, by an absolute
decree of the Deity, my salvation is certain, let me do or act is I please; but
if I have been reprobated by an eternal decree, before I existed, all I can do
by prayer, fasting, tears and penitence, will never influence the Deity to
reverse his decrees; and as he doomed me to everlasting misery long before I
had offended him, I certainly cannot be under any obligation to him on the
score of gratitude, for forcing me into existence, on purpose to make me
eternally miserable: and as I am to be precluded from even the shadow of
happiness hereafter, I am resolved to gratify every sensual appetite and
passion, and enjoy all the happiness I can in this life.

If God has foreordained whatsoever comes to pass, I cannot act contrary to his
decrees, let me do as I will; but why his decrees should be contrary to his
laws, I cannot tell; or why he should approve and disapprove the same action,
my teachers have not explained; they only affirm it to be for God's glory, that
it should be so; but surely there must be some mistake in this doctrine. We are
told, at one time, that the Deity is, of all beings, the most wise, just and
benevolent; that mercy is his darling attribute; and that he is no partial
respecter of persons: and at another, that he is partial, cruel, revengeful and
unjust -- both these cannot be true.

How can God be glorified in the eternal damnation of a being which he created
for that very purpose? Can God be a merciful being, and yet take delight in
creating souls which he foreknew would be eternally miserable? If the real
character of the Deity is discoverable, it certainly is not to be found in this
incoherent chaos of contradictions.

Thus reason and common sense conspire to combat the horrid idea which he had
conceived of the adorable Jehovah, until he meets with a Deist, who had been
persuaded while young, that Calvinism was the doctrine taught by the apostles;
but finding it an incoherent collection of self-evident contradictions, had too
hastily rejected the scriptures, without comparing them with the doctrines,
said to be taught in the sacred pages. The Deist explains to him the nature and
adorable perfections of God, as far as they have been discovered by man; aided
by both reason and revelation, which he finds to be so vastly discordant, with
what he has been taught to believe, concerning the designs of the Deity, in
creating the human species, and his disposition toward them; that he reject,
the scriptures also; as teaching doctrines unworthy of God, and dishonorable to
his holy name: and so, by relinquishing one egregious error, he embraces
another, and turns Deist.

Others, again, who have been taught this doctrine, see no necessity, for
either praying or preaching, as they are persuaded, that if all the angels in
heaven, and all the saints on earth, were to intercede with the Deity -- to
take one single soul into heaven, which he had not elected to everlasting life,
from all eternity, he would not do it. Those who were made for the Devil, must
go to the Devil, and be tormented by him to the endless ages of eternity; for
the honor and glory of God.

Thus are numbers taught from infancy, to hate the God that made them, on
purpose to make them happy; and to live under the most dreadful apprehensions
of his power and wrath on the one hand, and that of the Devil, on the other. --
In this dilemma, they sometimes fly to the priests, and enquire what they shall
do to be saved; the good man examines them, with respect to the state of their
feelings and dispositions, and generally finds them extremely afraid of being
eternally damned, for the glory of God; this is called spiritual concern, and
is esteemed a favorable symptom. They are directed to pray; but they cannot
address the Deity, as the benevolent parent of mankind, the God of infinite
love and mercy. The prejudices of an early education, are not easily
eradicated. They have been used to look upon God as their natural enemy, and
cannot confide in him, as a friend; until they can be persuaded, by some means,
that they are of the elected number: and then they begin to love God, in some
degree, which they found, by experience, to be impossible, while they conceived
him to be their enemy; but now, since they conceive themselves to be of the
number of the chosen few, they cheerfully acquiesce in the dispensations of
Providence, and extol the disinterested generosity of the Deity, in creating
more souls for the Devil, than for himself: thus they make friends of two
dreadful powerful beings, whose enmity they dreaded. They imagine that they
flatter the Deity, by affirming, that he had an undoubted right to create
millions, on purpose to damn them eternally, for his own glory. They also
gratify the Devil, by endeavoring to prove his absolute indefeasible right to,
and property in, all the souls he may once get into his possession, on
pretense, that they were consigned to him by the Deity, by a sovereign decree,
before they were created.

The Universaiist is taught to believe, that God is the most pure, holy, wise,
benevolent, merciful, just and powerful being, in existence;

That he created every subordinate intelligent being, for his own glory; but
that his glory is displayed to the greatest possible advantage, in the final
salvation and everlasting happiness of every being, which he has or may create;

That God never did; nor ever will, create any being which he did not wish to
establish in a state of permanent happiness;

That he had wisdom enough to form a plan, in which his designs cannot be
frustrated, and power sufficient to enable him to accomplish all his purposes;
which are equitable, just and merciful. They love God, being firmly persuaded
that God first loved them, and brought them into existence, on purpose to make
them eternally happy: but foreseeing that mankind would make an improper use of
their free agency, and become sinners, he sent his only begotten Son, to be the
propitiation for the sins of the whole world, and to taste death for every man.

The law was broken by man, and the man Christ, as our great high priest, has
made an ample atonement for the breach of the law. Whatever demands justice
might have had against human nature, for a breach of the divine law, they were
paid to the last farthing, by Christ, as our representative, in our stead: and
if justice has been once satisfied -- from whence does this new claim arise?
Does justice require that Christ should be crucified a second time? For he is
our Surety, and the demand must be against him. He is our prophet, priest and
king; and we are his subjects; he has redeemed us with his precious blood; and
we are confident he never will relinquish one soul to the Devil, which he has
made.

It is our duty, as well as our interest to serve God, and obey the commands
and precepts of Christ, to whom we are answerable at present; for the Father
has delivered every thing appertaining to our salvation, into the hands of the
Son: and we are confident that he will be faithful to his trust, and lose
nothing that has been committed to his charge, but raise it up at the last day;
"for this is the will of the Father, who has sent him, to seek and to save
that which was lost. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he
might destroy the works of the Devil: and not his works only, but the Devil
himself. And to deliver them who through fear of death, were all their life
time subject to bondage. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the
uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives, to make
intercession for them."

When the children of men transgress, they believe the Lord will chasten and
correct them, when he finds it necessary, to reform or reclaim them; but never
out of revenge, or any delight he takes in the misery of his creatures. -- "For
the Lord will not cast off forever: but though he cause grief, yet will he have
compassion, according to the multitude of his mercies. Lam. iii. 31-33.
For he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men." "For I
will not contend forever, Isaiah lviii. 16.
neither will I be always wroth; for the spirit should fail before me, and the
souls which I have made.

"For I am merciful, Jer. iii. 12.
says the Lord, and I will not keep anger forever." "O Israel, thou have
destroyed thyself; but in me is thine help. Hos. xiii. 9. 14.
I will ransom them from the power of the grave; I will redeem them from death:
O death, I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction, etc."

"Who is a God like unto thee, that pardeneth iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage? Micah vii. 18, 19.
He retains not his anger forever, because he delights in mercy. He will
turn again, he will have compassion upon us; he will subdue our iniquities; and
thou will cast all their sins into the depths of the sea."

"And it shall come to pass in that day, Isa. xxiv. 21, 22.
that the Lord shall punish the host of the high ones, that are on high, and
the kings of the earth upon the earth. And they shall be gathered together, as
prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and
after many days shall they be visited."

"I will also give thee as a light to the Gentiles, Isa. xlix. 6.
that thou may be my salvation unto the end of the earth."

"That thou may say to the prisoners, Go forth; to them that are in
darkness, 9.
Show yourselves."

"Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive delivered? 24.
But thus says the Lord, even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away,
25.
and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered."

"As for thee also, Zech. ix. II.
by the blood of thy covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit
wherein is no water."

"Every man's work shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it, I Cor.
iii. 13.
because it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man's work,
of what sort it is."

"If any man's work abide, I Cor iii. 14.
which he has built thereupon, he shall receive a reward. 15.
If any man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss: but he himself shall
be saved; yet so, as by fire."

"To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery
among the Gentiles; which is Christ in you, Coloss. i. 27.
the hope of glory."

"Whom we preach, warning every man, 28.
and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus." These are a few of the many passages in scripture, which declare
the benevolent disposition of the Deity toward every soul which he has created.

But it requires no scripture to prove, that if any of the human species are to
be miserable to the endless ages of eternity, they must belong to one of the
following descriptions, viz. Such as God could have saved, but would not: or
such as he would have saved, but could not. As the first denies his infinite
goodness, it must be false; and as the second denies his infinite power, it
cannot be true. Nor is there any possible method, of rendering the doctrine of
never-ending misery compatible with the attributes of the Deity. For to say,
that he has brought any beings into existence, knowing that they would
inevitably be eternally miserable -- is charging him with inflicting the
greatest curse possible, prior to the possibility of any offense given, or
transgression committed, by the beings on whom this dreadful punishment is to
be inflicted. But this horrid doctrine, so dishonorable to the moral character
of the Deity, is the last hold, or death-gripe, which the Devil has on the
christian world; and it cannot be expected, that he will quit it without a
severe struggle. He has many artful able champions on his side, who endeavor
to prove logically and metaphysically, that the Deity has created millions of
souls, which he did not elect to eternal life and glory, but left them an
helpless prey to the Devil: while others, more hardy, affirm, that he consigned
them to the Devil, by an absolute decree of reprobation. And as this doctrine
has a natural tendency to cause people to dread and hate God, as a cruel and
partial being; it is impossible that they should love him: without which
disposition they are more apt to fly from him as an enemy, than to supplicate
him as the benevolent merciful parent of the whole human race.

I remain, with the most sincere esteem, your friend, etc.

LETTER IV. TO A FRIEND.
MY DEAR SIR,
AS the christian world has been greatly divided in opinion, respecting the
motives which induced the Deity to create the human species, and his designs
and intentions, with respect to their future face; as they are questions of
great importance to human beings, both with respect to the ideas they are to
form of the moral character of the Deity, and their own moral conduct, which
should be conformable to his.

It is natural for you to enquire; whether it is not possible to gain a
satisfactory knowledge of a subject, which so nearly concerns us, and yet
appears so vastly intricate, that notwithstanding the numerous volumes that
have been wrote upon the subject no rational conclusion, founded upon
self-evident principles, has ever been made by the advocates for the eternal
duration of hell torments; and yet they are ready to anathematize every person
who cannot believe all the selfcontradictory opinions, in which they cannot
agree themselves: -- some asserting that God wished to convert and save the
whole human race, but could not; others, that he could convert and save them
all, but will not; he having doomed great numbers of them to eternal perdition,
by an arbitrary decree, long before they existed, and that he had created them
for this very purpose. While others deny that God decreed that any person
should inevitably be miserable to the endless ages of eternity; but most
certainly and infallibly knew, that they would be so, even before he created
them. While a few other persons believe, that God created every human being,
with an express and positive design, to make them all eventually happy; and
affirm that he is possessed of a sufficient degree of wisdom and power, to
enable him to accomplish his benevolent design. As you appear to be so
benevolent as to wish every individual of the human race might be happy: I will
endeavor to convince you that the doctrine is founded on the glorious
attributes of God; on the scriptures, and the self-evident principles of reason
and common sense.

Let us proceed then to the important investigation, and enquire;

Question I. What motive induced the Deity to create such an immense number of
human beings?

Answer. To gratify his infinite beneficence, in conferring on them blessings,
both temporal and eternal, and the universal display of his glorious attributes
and perfections in the manifestations of providence, in their government.

Question II. Is it certain, that he wished or intended, that all the human
beings which he created might be happy?

Answer. He certainly did; -- otherwise he would not be as benevolent as our
common parents. And to suppose the Deity capable of sorcing any number of human
beings into existence, without wishing to make the condition into which he
brought them, equal, if not preferable to a state of nonexistence -- would be
charging him with an unprovoked act of cruelty: for it is certain that
non-entities could not have offended him; it is therefore evident, that he
never intended any of them should be eventually miserable, when he created
them: but, on the contrary, it is declared, 1 Timothy ii. 4.
"That God will have all men to be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the
truth."

Question III. If God willed that all men should be saved; had he wisdom
sufficient to enable him to form a plan, to accomplish his benevolent design?

Answer. His wisdom is infinite, and his goodness unlimitted, and the love of
Christ unbounded, "Who gave himself a ransom for all, 2 Timothy vi.
to be testified in due time." --

Question IV. Has he a sufficient degree of power to execute his plan?

Answer. A union of the power of all created beings, would still be finite; and
therefore, fail in an attempt to oppose or counteract the designs and
operations of the omnipotent Jehovah. If then it has been proved, that the
Deity is so benevolent as to wish all men to be saved; that he had wisdom
enough to form a plan to effect his gracious design; and a sufficient degree of
power to execute his plan, and accomplish his design.

Question V. What power, or combination of powers, terrestrial and infernal,
shall prevail against Jehovah, and frustrate his designs? So that if any of the
human race are to be eternally lost, it must be such as God never wished to
save; which impeaches his infinite goodness.

That the Deity did, and still does intend, to save the whole human race, is
abundantly evident, from the whole tenor of the scriptures; if they are
examined without prejudice. Romans V. 13.
"Therefore, as by the offense of one judgment came upon all men to
condemnation, even so, by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
men unto the justification of life. If God justifies all men by the merits and
righteousness of Christ. Who shall presume to condemn them?

"For the love of Christ constrains us, 2 Cor. v. 14.
because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead."

"And that he died for all, 15.
that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves; but unto him
who died for them, and rose again."

"The next day John sees Jesus coming unto him, John i. 29.
and says, Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world."

"If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father; Jesus Christ the
righteous. 1 John ii, 1.
And he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only; but also for
the sins of the whole world."

"But we see Jesus who was made a little lower than the angels; for the
suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor, Heb. ii. 9.
that he, by the grace of God, should taste death for every man."

"For it pleased the Father. Col. i. 19.
that in him should all fullness dwell." And having made peace through the blood
of his cross, by him to reconcile all things unto himself; by him, I say,
whether they be things on earth, or things in heaven. "If ye continue in the
faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the gospel,
which ye have heard, and which was preached to every creature, which is under
heaven; whereof, I Paul, am made a minister." 23.

This last text strongly corroborates, what St. Peter affirms, that the gospel
was preached to the dead, or spirits in prison. 1 Pet. iv. 5, 6.


"Who shall give account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead:
for, for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that
they might be judged according to men in the flesh, 1. Pet. iv. 5.
but live according to God in the spirit." We are told in the preceding
chapter; when, and by whom the gospel was preached to the dead: "For Christ
also has once suffered for sins; the just for the unjust, that he might bring
us to God, being put to death in the flesh but quickened by the spirit;" By
which also, he, to wit, Christ, went and preached unto the spirits in prison:
which, sometime, (or formerly) were disobedient, when once the long suffering
of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few;
that is, eight souls, iii. 18, 19, 20.
were saved by water."From what has been observed, it is apparent, from
scripture, and also supported by reason; that God willed that all men should be
saved; that Christ gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time,
although it be esteemed criminal by many to mention it, least it should induce
people to sin! That by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation, even so, by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
men, unto the justification of life; that Christ is the propitiation for the
sins of the whole world; that he tasted death for every man; that it pleased
God that in Christ should all fullness dwell; thereby to enable him to reconcile
all things unto himself, both in earth and heaven. Nor was this power given to
Christ in vain; for we find him, both before and after his crucifixion,
exerting these powers in the most diligent and indefatigable manner, for the
restoration and salvation of all mankind; first preaching the gospel to the
living, until the time of his crucifixion: and immediately afterward, to those
who died above two thousand years before he appeared in the flesh: for St. Paul
informs the Colossians, that the gospel had been preached to every creature
which is under heaven, which would have appeared very improbable, if St. Peter
had not explained the matter, by informing us -- when, by whom, and to whom the
gospel was preached; to wit, by Christ after his crucifixion, to the dead --
the inhabitants of the old world, who had formerly been disobedient in the days
of Noah; that they might have the same advantages, and be judged according to
the same rule or law, by which they were to be judged, who had heard the gospel
in the flesh and might thereafter live according to the will of God in the
Spirit. These poor meserable beings had remained captives and those prisoners
in the pit, wherein is no water, near two thousand four hundred years, when the
Savior of mankind entered the dreary mansions of misery and woe, and preached
to them the gospel, or tidings of great joy. -- He probably told them that he
was the high priest of the new covenant, who had lately made an ample atonement
for the sins of the whole world; that he was in possession of the keys of hell
and of death; that he came to break the gates of brass, and cut the bars of
iron asunder; to open the prison doors, and proclaim liberty to the captives:
for thus says the Lord, even the captives of the mighty, shall be taken away,
and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered. In what a glorious light does
the Savior of all mankind appear, when his conduct and character is properly
delineated, and well understood. In the hour of his crucifixion, when laboring
under, the pressure of the most agonizing (...), he prayed for his murderers,
saying, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. Actuated by the
same benevolent disposition, he had no sooner finished the glorious work of
redemption, than he flew, an unembodied spirit, to proclaim liberty to the
captives, and release a world from misery and woe; who had remained prisoners
in the regions of darkness, for near two thousand four hundred years. Whoever
deems this a slight punishment, and affirms that the doctrine of the universal
restoration, affords great encouragement to continue in sin, when they can
escape so easily -- would probably alter their mind, before they had lain half
that time in the pit, wherein is no water, and deem a never ending punishment
rather too severe, and continued something too long.

Were the zealous John Lucius Calvinus himself to lay 200 years in a fire but
half as hot as that in which he caused poor Servetus to be burned; and then be
told, that vindictive justice could not be satisfied with any term short of
eternal never ending punishment: for such measure as he dealt out to others,
such he should receive himself -- he would most probably conclude, that David
was mistaken, when he penned psalm CXLV; where he says, "The Lord is good to
all; and his tender mercies are over all his other works." And again, "Let
Israel hope in the Lord: for with the Lord there is mercy, Psalm cxxx. 7.
and with him is plenteous redemption."

"And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities." "O give thanks unto the
Lord, 8.
for he is good: for his mercy endures forever." Calvin would probably comment
upon these passages of scripture, Ps. cvii. 1.
and say, How can it be affirmed, that God is good to all? and that his tender
mercies are over all his other works? Am I not an individual, brought out of a
state of nonexistence, by the agency of the Deity? Am I not the workmanship of
his hands, who has declared that he has made all things for himself? Am I now
to consider my living a few years on earth as a blessing, where I sinned and
suffered many hardships? But is sinning and suffering a few years on earth,
such a mighty privilege, as to be an ample compensation for the endurance of
never ending misery? Are these conditions so, much preferable to a state of
nonexistence, that I am bound to acknowledge it as a blessing, and return
sincere thanks to the Deity for his goodness to me, in forcing me into
existence, knowing infallibly that I would be a sinner, which he made use of no
effectual means to prevent, although it was in his power; but rather chose to
leave me unassisted; to the machinations of the Devil a few years; and then
send (...) hell, to be tormented to the endless ages of eternity!

If this be the case, -- that the reign of mercy is to last 80 or 100 years,
and the raging reign of vindictive justice to last throughout the endless ages
of eternity, -- how can it be said with truth, that "the tender mercies of the
Lord are over all his other works?" Should it not rather be reversed, and say,
The mercies of the Lord are exercised toward the children of men a few days,
months, or years; and the reign of vindictive justice to be continued
throughout the endless ages of eternity? If this be true, then revenge must be
the darling attribute of the Deity, and preside over all his other works.
Expressly contrary to what he has declared, by the mouth of the prophet. "For I
will not contend forever, neither will I be always wroth; for the spirit should
fail before me, Isaiah lvii. 16.
and the souls which I have made."

"O thou that hear prayer, Psalm IXV 2.
unto thee shall all flesh come."

"The Lord is merciful and gracious, ps. ciii.8.
slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy."

"He will not always ehide; 9.
neither will he keep anger forever."

"He will swallow up death in victory; Isaiah xxv.8.
and the Lord God will wipe away tears from all faces."

"Fury is not in me." Is. xxvii. 4.


"For the Lord will not cast off for ever." Lam. iii.
31.


"But though he cause grief, 32.
yet will he have compassion, according to the multitude of his mercies."

"For he does not afflict willingly, 33.
nor grieve the children of men."

"Oh Israel, Hosea xiii.
thou have destroyed thyself; 9.
but in me is thine help."

"I will ransom them from the power of the grave; I will redeem them from
death: O death, 14.
I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction, etc."

"Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgressions of the remnant of his heritage? He retains not his anger
forever, because he delights in mercy. He will turn again, he will have
compassion upon us; Micah vii, 18, 19.
he will subdue our iniquities: and thou will cast all their sins into the
depths of the sea."

"As for thee also, by the blood of thy covenant I have sent forth thy
prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water:" i. e. that pit where Dives could
not find as much as to cool the tip of his tongue. Zech. ix. 11.
In hopes that the above quotations and arguments may give you entire
satisfaction, respecting the benevolence of the Deity toward the whole human
race, and his ability to reinstate them all in permanent happiness -- to his
own glory and the consolation of every good being. I beg leave to assure you,
that I am

Your sincere friend and servant, etc.

LETTER V. To A RIGID CALVINIST.
DEAR SIR,
WHEN, in conversation with you, I affirmed that St. Paul was an Universalist,
I promised to quote some of the most pointed texts by which he inculcates the
doctrine in the most clear and positive terms.

"Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one, Romans v. 18.
the (...) gift: came upon all men unto justification of life."

"He that spared not his own Son; Romans viii. 32.
but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not, with him also, freely give
us all things."

"For God has concluded them all in unbelief, Romans xi. 32.
that he might have mercy upon all."

By the first of these texts, it plainly appears; that Adam was the
representative of all his posterity, or of human nature in general, in as much
as judgment unto condemnation came upon all men for his offense; that Jesus
Christ, by assuming the human nature, became as fully and completely the
representative of all mankind, as Adam was, or had been; and therefore, by his
righteousness, the free gift came upon all men, unto justification of life.

So you see, that St. Paul considers Christ as the complete representative and
Savior of all mankind; who, by his righteousness, had wrought out a complete
salvation for the whole human race, unto the justification of life; and if God
justifies, who is he that condemns?

And further to establish them in the belief of this glorious doctrine, he
argues, that as God spared not his own Son; but delivered him up for us all --
he will, with him also, (...) give us all things. And to convince them that
Christ was not that partial Savior, which many conceive him to be, who would
sit down contentedly, with as many souls as the Devil pleased to give him. Romans
xi. 32.
He tells the Romans, "That God had concluded them all in unbelief, that he
might have mercy upon all."

"For as in Adam all die, 1 Cor. xxv. 22.
even so in Christ shall all be made alive."

"For the love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one
died for all, then were all dead: And that he died for all, that they which
live, should not henceforth, 2 Cor. 5. 14.
live unto themselves, 15.
but unto him who died for them, and rose again."

"For to this end Christ both died, Romans xiv. 9.
and rose and revived, that he might be Lord of both the dead and living." If
so, he must be Lord of all.

Saint Paul calls Christ "The image of the invisible God, Col. i. 15.
the first born of every creature."

"For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, Col. i. 16.
and that are in earth, visible and invible; whether they be thrones or
dominions, or principalities or powers; all things were created by him and for
him."

If therefore Christ made all things for himself, he must deviate greatly from
his original intention, before he gives up any thing to the Devil, especially
the souls which he has made for himself.

"I exhort, 1 Timothy ii. 1
therefore, that first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and
giving of thanks be made for all men."

"For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior." 3,


"Who will have all men to be saved, 4,
and come unto the knowledge of the truth."

"For there is one God, 5,
and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus."

"Who gave himself a ransom for all, 6.
to be testified in due time." -- St. Paul exhorts Timothy, first of all, to
make supplication, etc. for all men, as being acceptable to God our Savior,
who is a being of such universal benevolence, as to will that all men should be
saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. And whatever the omnipotent
Jehovah wills to be done, he will certainly accomplish. But the apostle, to
show that the salvation of all men, was not only possible; but easily
practicable -- he observes, that there is one God to be appeased, who is a God
of infinite goodness and mercy, who wills that all men may be saved, and one
mediator between this gracious God and men; to wit, the man Christ Jesus, who
is the advocate and friend of mankind universally, as he has already given
himself a ransom; not for a few individuals, but for all mankind. And although
this great and important truth, may not be generally known to the chief priests
and Pharisees of our day, it shall nevertheless be testified in due time; to
the honor of God, and the unspeakable consolation of every good being.

If, therefore, the supreme God is so benevolent, as to will that all mankind
should be saved, and has sent his Son, on purpose to be the Savior of the
world: and Christ has, on his part, given himself a ransom for all -- then all
must be saved.

He who redeems or ransoms captives, claims them as his own, and never leaves
them in the possession of the enemy.

Can there be any thing more absurd, than to suppose, that after Christ had
given his life a ransom for the whole world of mankind -- that he should,
nevertheless, leave vast numbers of those very beings, for whom he shed his
precious blood, in the possession of the Devil eternally?

Christ is neither a partial Savior, nor a partial conqueror; he will never
submit to the Devil, and permit him to retain one human soul in captivity,
which he made for himself: for certainly he was not so complaisant as to make
any souls, on purpose for the Devil; and if the Devil should eventually retain
in captivity, any of the souls which Christ had made for himself, then is
Christ defeated; and his designs frustrated. And to say, that Christ has made
souls, which he neither wished to be happy, nor intended to save from endless
perdition, is blasphemy.

And I believe it would be thought much less derogatory to the character of the
Deity, by every unprejudiced person, to suppose that he abandoned the creatures
which he had made, to the permanent dominion of the Devil, through a want of
wisdom and power to rescue them; than to affirm that he had a sufficient degree
of wisdom and power to save them; but that it was more agreeable to his divine
will, that they should be eternally and irrecoverably miserable. If we suppose
him to be infinitely benevolent, but deficient in wisdom and power, this would
be a great misfortune, which every good being would deplore, and would wish to
assist him: but, if on the contrary, he is supposed to be infinitely wise and
powerful; but so malevolent, as to speak unoffending, inconscious matter into
existence, infallibly knowing, that the condition into which he brought it, was
as much worse than that in which he found it, as a state of the most severe,
eternal, never ending punishment, is worse than a state of nonexistence, is
horrid beyond description -- but so it is. The Calvinists having determined,
that vast numbers of the human race must be eternally damned, rather than give
up this darling tenet, they blaspheme the moral character of the Deity, by
affirming that he forces into existence millions of human beings, morally
incapable of doing any good; but replete with the strongest propensities to do
evil, which can neither be restrained or eradicated, by any thing which they
can do. In which condition they are excluded from the benefit of Christ's death
and sufferings, and left to sin and suffer a few years on earth, and then
sentenced, by the judge of the whole earth, to suffer the most exquisite
torment, in hell flames, as long as God himself exists.

When all this mischief and misery might have been avoided, by omitting to
create all such beings, as the Deity foreknew would be infinitely sinful, and
eternally miserable; for nothing short of infinite guilt, can render any being
justly obnoxious to a never ending or infinite punishment.

"He that loves not, 1 John iv. 8.
knows not God, for God is love."

"Herein is love, 10.
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins."

"And we have seen, and do testify, that the Father sent the Son to be the
Savior of the world. 14.


"For God sent not his Son into the world, John iii. 17.
to condemn the world; but that the world, through him might be saved." In the
above cited texts, it appears, that God is the most benevolent of all beings,
his very essence is love; his benevolence inspired him to create us; he so
loved the world, as to send his dearly beloved Son, to be a propitiation for
our sins, and the Savior of the world. It should be the business of our
teachers to exhibit the Deity in his true character, which is that of infinite
love, and unbounded benevolence to all created beings; he hates sin, because it
has a natural and necessary tendency to create confusion, misery and disorder;
but Christ loved mankind and died for them, while they were yet in a state of
rebellion against him. Romans v. 6, 8.


We should, therefore, love the Lord our God, with all our heart, soul,
strength, and mind. 18.
"There is no fear in love; but perfect love casts out fear, because fear
has torment. He that fears is not made perfect in love." If perfect love
casts out fear, it is as certain, that the perfect fear and dread of a
tyrant, must and will cast out love.

Therefore, people should never be taught to believe that God is as much
glorified and pleased with the death and eternal damnation of a sinner, as in
the salvation and eternal felicity of a saint. As it is not in the powers of
imagination, to paint a tyrant in more infernal colors; it is a character
which no being, except the prince of Devils, can possibly either love or
imitate. And there can be no doubt, that the Devil is highly pleased with
those, who endeavor to persuade their fellow beings, that partiality, cruelty
and revenge, are the genuine attributes of the Deity: because it is impossible,
in the nature of things, that any wise and good being, should serve a God,
possessing such attributes, through love; which is the only motive that can
render our services acceptable to a God, whose very essence is love.

And as to the worship extorted, and rendered, through a slavish fear, it can
only debase the mind and derange the understanding; but can never mend the
heart. -- And therefore, can never be acceptable to that God, who requires us
to love the Lord our God, with all our heart, soul, strength and mind, and our
neighbors as ourselves. We are also commanded to love, our enemies, and
forgive those that trespass against us. Now if God neither loved his enemies;
nor ever forgave all those that trespassed against him; but will torment
millions of them, in everlasting burnings, as long as he himself exists. Can it
be possible that he expected, that we should be more merciful and benevolent
than himself, or recommended to us a line of conduct, more virtuous and
godlike, than that which he practiced himself? But thanks be to God, the
fetters of ignorance and superstition are wearing out very fast, and prejudice,
that bitter enemy to free enquiry, and the investigation of truth, has lost
much of its power over the minds of great numbers of very sensible people; who
begin to view the Deity, as a God of strict impartial justice, divine love,
infinite goodness, benevolence, truth and mercy, that has no pleasure in the
death and eternal damnation of a sinner; but would rather that he should turn
from the evil of his ways and live.

If sin and its consequences be displeasing to a God of infinite goodness,
wisdom, and power -- is it not absurd to suppose, that he will permit them to
remain in being, to the endless ages of eternity? Are they of that
indestructable nature, that the Deity cannot eradicate and destroy them? If he
can destroy them, why should he permit them always to remain in being, to
displease him eternally?

Are there some men, who are, by nature, unconvertable; that infinite wisdom
and power are incapable of reforming? Does the Deity doom any souls to eternal
misery, but such as he cannot save? Or, does he doom to eternal misery, any
souls, which he could, but would not save?

If any souls are to be miserable to the endless ages of eternity, I affirm,
that they must belong to one of the above classes; to wit,

Such as God could have saved, but would not: or such as he would have saved,
but could not. The first of these propositions denies God's infinite goodness,
and therefore cannot be true.

The second denies his infinite power, which must be false.

It is, therefore, false to say, that any of the souls which God has made, will
be eternally and irrecoverably miserable; because Christ is both able and
willing to save them all -- who tells us, "And I, if I be lifted up from the
earth, I will draw all men unto me." John xii. 32.


Now as Christ has been lifted up from the earth, on the cross, and from thence
to the heavens; I make no doubt that he will fulfill his promise; even to those
who believe that hell lies beyond the reach of almighty power; he will convince
them that the keys of hell and of death are not useless in his hand; he will
break the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron in sunder: "For thus says
the Lord, even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey, of
the terrible shall be delivered. Is. xlix. 25.


I remain, with the most sincere esteem, your friend, etc.

LETTER VI. TO A FRIEND.
MY DEAR SIR,
WHEN we had the last conversation, respecting the motives which induced the
infinitely good and merciful God to create the human species: you alleged that
he had done it to display the glory of his divine attributes, to which opinion
I cheerfully agree. But the point in dispute between us, is,

Whether these divine attributes are not displayed, in a more glorious, just
and merciful manner, in the final salvation, and everlasting happiness of every
human being, which God has created; than in the eternal damnation, and
everlasting misery of any number of them? Therefore, to assist us in the
investigation of this important subject; we must have recourse to the
scriptures, and such self-evident principles and axioms, as the light of
reason, and the nature of the subject will furnish.

The proper steps to be taken in this case is, to enquire,

I. What is God? II. What are his attributes? III. For whom, and for what end
did he create us?
And, in the first place, I shall define God; whose very essence is love, "To
be a spirit, infinite, eternal, and unchangeable in his being;" whose
attributes are infinite mercy, wisdom, power, holiness, justice, goodness and
truth. The first proposition to be proved, is, that God is love; which is
sufficiently apparent in his works of creation and providence; but pointedly
proved in John, "He that loves not, knows not God, for God is love" I John
iv, 8, 16.
I John iv. 8.


"And we have known and believed the love that God has to us. 16.
God is love; and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. 1
John 9. 10.


In this was manifested the love of God, toward us, because that God has sent
his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. 1 John
ii. 1.
Herein is love, not that we loved God; but that he loved us, and sent his Son
to be the propitiation for our sins: but least it should be said, that he is
the propitiation, for the sins of the few that are supposed to be elected only;
I shall quote, "And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous."

"And he is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also for
the sins of the whole world."

Presuming that enough has been said on this head, to prove the impartial love
of the Deity to all mankind: and also, that the enumeration of the attributes
of the Deity, will not be disputed. I shall proceed, in the third place, to
prove, that God made all the souls of mankind for himself; with the most
express and benevolent design, to make them all eventually happy, in praising
and glorifying his holy name, for his infinite love and kindness toward them,
and to enjoy the manifestations of his unbounded goodness forever.

Every soul, created by the Deity, must be pure and innocent, and as such, he
must love it, and wish a continuation of its happiness: but if he foreknew, (as
the Calvinists suppose) that it would be eternally miserable, if it remained in
existence, he, as a merciful being, would blot it out of existence again, while
in a state of innocence. But as it is universally allowed amongst christians,
that there are but two places of permanent residence, for departed souls after
this life; to wit, heaven and hell; and but two beings who are to divide the
souls of the human species between them; to wit, God and the Devil: we must
endeavor, by a careful investigation of their different powers and attributes,
to judge of their final success, with respect to their efforts to gain
subjects, and depopulate each others kingdoms; and to enable us to do this, let
us establish a few self-evident propositions, as axioms.

It is the exclusive prerogative of the Deity to create souls.

No other being can create them.

Therefore he has created all the souls that ever have existed.

I. When, he created them, he either intended that they should be eternally
miserable: Or, II He did not care what became of them: Or, III. He wished, and
designed, that they should be eventually happy.
To affirm the first, is blasphemous.

The second, impiously absurd.

Therefore, the third must be true.

God is infinitely benevolent, wise and powerful: therefore, being infinitely
benevolent, he wished and designed, that all the souls which he made, might be
eventually happy.

Being infinitely wise, he has certainly concerted his plan, so as not to be
frustrated, in the accomplishment of his gracious design.

And being infinitely powerful, no combination of finite powers, can ever
amount to infinite; and if still finite, they must ultimately fail in the
attempt, to counteract and frustrate the operations and designs of an
omnipotent God; who will make a most glorious display of his divine attributes,
in vanquishing the powers of death and hell, and releasing every captive and
prisoner out of the pit, wherein is no water.

Is it not amazingly absurd, to suppose, that a God of infinite goodness,
justice and mercy, has created millions of human beings, on purpose for the
Devil, to be his captives and prisoners, to the endless ages of eternity? But
is it not more absurd, if possible, to suppose, that the Deity made them for
himself, with the benevolent design of rendering them eternally happy, in
praising and adoring his holy name, for his infinite love and goodness toward
them; but contrary to his gracious designs, that millions of these very beings,
are to be, and remain in the possession and under the powers of the Devil, to
be tormented by him, to the endless ages of eternity?

If such an event should finally take place, then it is certain, that finite
folly, weakness, and wickedness, can overpower, baffle, frustrate and defeat,
the benevolent designs and operations, of infinite goodness, wisdom, and
almighty power, and triumph over omnipotence.

If any individual of the human race is to be miserable, as long as God himself
exists; it must happen through a defeat of benevolence, wisdom or power in the
Deity.

Therefore, the predestinarians deny God's infinite goodness, when they
maintain, that God could, but would not convert all his creatures. The
Socinians deny his infinite power, when they maintain, that he would but cannot
convert them; and will be obliged one day to annihilate all reprobate spirits!
The premises being absurd, an absurd conclusion is to be expected.

The Universalists affirm, that it is incompatible with the divine love,
infinite justice and mercy of the Deity, to create human beings, knowing that
the condition into which he brought them, would be as much worse than that in
which they were -- as a state of eternal, never ending misery, under the
infinite displeasure of an offended God, is worse than a state of nonexistence,
in which condition they could neither offend the Deity, nor suffer any
inconvenience whatever.

They, therefore, believe that the Deity created the whole human race, with a
positive determination to make the condition, into which he brought them,
vastly preferable to a state of nonexistence: and that it would be an
unprovoked act of cruelty to make it worse; because the materials of which the
future being was to consist, could not offend him, before it existed as a moral
accountable agent, capable of distinguishing between good and evil, with a free
will to choose, and a power of action, to do either good or evil, agreeable to
the free choice of the will. If, therefore, the Deity foreknew, that any being,
which he might create, would, by making an improper use of its free agency,
become eternally and irrecoverably miserable, he certainly never would force it
into existence, which would be a severe unmerited punishment inflicted, prior
to the possibility of offense, or transgression on the part of the being
punished.

To say, that the infinitely gracious and merciful Deity's foreknowledge, that
a certain individual nonentity, would, if created, make an improper use of its
free agency, and become an incorrigible sinner, had provoked him to drag it
into existence, to punish it eternally; not for any evil it had done -- but for
what he foreknew it would do -- is charging him with making an extremely cruel,
and improper use of his own free agency: not only to do evil, that good might
come, but doing evil of the most barbarous kind, for the sake of evil, from
which no good could possibly result -- which is impossible.

This is not only charging God foolishly; but wickedly. If the Devil is not
extremely ungrateful indeed, he must have precious rewards in store, for those
who use, every possible means in their power, to persuade people that the Deity
is the the greatest tyrant of the two. But the God of justice, love, and mercy,
knowing what pains would be taken to traduce his moral character, directed the
prophet Ezekiel to record the following oath; to wit, "As I live, says the
Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked
turn from his way, and live." If we believe what the Deity has sworn in this
case; we must disbelieve that he has ever created one soul, knowing that it
would be so obstinately and perseveringly wicked; that infinite wisdom goodness
and almighty power could not reform and reclaim it. If it be said, that the
Deity could not save it, consistently with the plan he had chosen: I answer;
that the plan could not have been the production of infinite wisdom, which
prevented the Deity from accomplishing his original design; which must have
been to make every being which he created, eventually happy.

To affirm that an human being, in a state of extreme, eternal, never ending
misery, is as happy as the Deity intended or designed he should ever be, at the
time he created him -- is blasphemy. If God intended that all the souls which
he created, should be eventually happy, and gave them existence, as a positive
blessing, and not as a curse: and not with standing many millions are supposed
to resist the benevolent designs of the Deity, and bassle all the means that
could be employed by the Deity, for their conversion. The question naturally
recurs;

How can it be possible, that finite folly, weakness and wickedness, should
eternally overpower, baffle, frustrate and defeat the designs and operations of
the divine love, infinite wisdom, goodness and almighty power? But the
Calvinists, to justify the measure of inflicting an infinite, eternal, never
ending punishment, for temporary crimes, committed, in time, by finite beings,
have labored to persuade us, that every sin is an infinite evil, because it is
committed against an infinite being: thence it follows, that if one sin be an
infinite evil, two sins are doubly infinite, and three, trebly infinite --
which, at best, is egregious nonsense, as infinity admits of no addition: and
therefore, if any one sin be an infinite evil, it destroys all degrees of
comparison between crimes, and renders the boy, who takes an apple out of his
neighbor's orchard, as criminal as the Jews, who murdered the Savior of the
world. As there can be no difference, in degree, between things that are
infinite; it is, therefore, demonstrably evident. that no being, who is not
possessed of infinite power, can do or perform, any infinite action, either
good or bad; therefore, the plea, in justification of inflicting infinite
punishments on human beings, to satisfy divine justice, for the commission of
crimes, supposed to be infinite -- must fall to the ground. A person would
naturally conclude, on being told, that sinners were to be punished in hell, to
satisfy divine justice, that there might be a time, at some future period, when
justice might be satisfied, and the sinners released: but they tell us, that
justice is vindictive; that is, so revengeful, malicious and spiteful, that it
never can be satisfied: and therefore, in this undertaking, as in all the rest,
the means are still inadequate to the end; and although good might have been
intended, the final consequence is always evil. Yet the Calvinists tell us, it
is by this incoherent system of their own fabrication, that the Deity is to
display the glory of his divine attributes to all intelligent beings.

The chief objection which the calvinists oppose, to the doctrine of the
universal restoration, is, that it has a tendency to make people remiss in
making their calling and election sure, in this life: in which case, they may
be eternally miserable hereafter -- owing to their own neglect: but how
inconsistent this objection is, with the doctrine of election and reprobation,
any person of common understanding may very easily perceive. For a Calvinist to
admonish a reprobate, to work out his own salvation, with fear and trembling;
to make his calling and election sure -- and to make his peace with that God,
who had consigned him to endless perdition, by an unchangeable decree, many
ages prior to his existence; is, of all things, the most absurd. But others
being shocked at the horrid imputation, that God should create human beings,
having consigned them to eternal punishment, by an unalterable decree, prior to
a possibility of their having offended him -- deny that he decreed their
eternal misery; but still affirm that the Deity infallibly knew, that they
would be so, to the endless ages of eternity. -- Whatever God infallibly
foreknew, must as certainly come to pass, as if he had decreed it: so that this
miserable shift will neither vindicate the character of the Deity, from being
guilty of an unprovoked act of cruelty, in creating beings, who had never
offended him, infallibly knowing that they would be eternally miserable:
neither does it alter the fate of the poor unhappy creature.

For if God infallibly knew, that any individual would be eternally miserable;
it is clearly impossible that he should escape. And the conclusion, from these
premises, must be, that the Deity has dragged him into existence, before he had
offended, on purpose that he should be eternally damned: for it is absurd to
suppose, that God would seriously use any means to save a being, whom he
infallibly knew would be eternally miserable. So that the unhappy creature is
supposed to be deserted by the God that made him; and abandoned to the entire
conduct of the Devil. Therefore, if we admit that the Deity is either just or
merciful, we must, in consequence, disbelieve, that he ever either decreed or
foreknew, that any soul, which he created, would be misereble to the endless
ages of eternity, and believe that he has benevolence, wisdom and power
sufficient to save them all, otherwise he never would have created them. "The
Father loves the Son, and bath given all things into his hand." "All that the
Father gives me, John iii. 35. vi 37.
shall come to me; and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out."

"And this is the Father's will, 39.
who has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing,
but should raise it up again at the last day."

If the Father has given all things into the bands of the Son; and all which
the Father has given him, shall come to him -- then all must come; and he
declares he will in no wise cast them out.

"And I, xii. 32.
if I be lifted up from the earth, I will draw all men unto me."

Christ has been lifted up from the earth, first on the cross, and then to
heaven; and as I repose entire confidence in what Christ has promised in such
plain terms; I sincerely believe, that he will finally draw all men unto him;
even those who have made it the business of their whole lives; to traduce his
moral character: for if he forgave the Jews who murdered him, Romans xi. 26.
he will doubtless pray for his defamers, saying "Father forgive them: for they
know not what they do." "And so all Israel shall be saved; as it is written,
there shall come out of Sion, the deliverer, and turn away ungodliness from
Jacob."

I remain, with the most sincere esteem, your friend, etc.

FINIS.

