REPORT OF THE TRIAL OF HENRY BEDLOW, FOR COMMITTING A RAPE ON LANAH SAWYER.

(...) ARGUMENTS OF THE COUN^^^ ON EA^^ (...).

a Court of (...) and Terminer, and Gaol Delivery (...) the (...) and County of
New York, held 8th October, 1793.

^^QUE LOQUOR

Impartially taken by a GENTLEMAN of the Profession.

NEW YORK: PRINTED ACCORDING TO ACT OF CONGRESS. ^^^XCI^^^ 17^3.

TRIAL, etc.
ON Tuesday, the 8th of October, 1793, at the court of Oyer and Terminer, and
Gaol delivery for the County of New York, came on the trial of Henry Bedlow,
for committing a rape on the body of Lanah Sawyer, spinster, a young girl of
about 17 years of age. The counsel for the prosecution, were, The Attorney
General, Messrs Hoffman and Kent; for the prisoner, Messrs. Thompson, Hughes,
B. Livingston, Troup, Cozine and Harrison.

After the usual preliminaries were over, the Attorney General opened the
prosecution with a few general observations on the nature of the evidence in an
affair of this kind; and remarked that it must always be drawn from the party
herself, whose testimony, if clear and positive, and not impeached, was deemed
in law, suffici^^t to ground a conviction. He (...) called the Prosecutrix.

LANAH SAWYER, who, being sworn, testified, That "on a Sunday evening, the
latter end of August, she was going through Br^^dway, and received several
insults from some Frenchmen, whose language she could not understand; and that
the Prisoner came up -- rescued her, and then attended her home to her father's
house in Gold-Street --. That he told her his name was lawyer Smith. On the
Sunday following, she met him again -- he accosted her -- they entered into
conversation; in the course of which, he asked her if she would take a walk
with him on the battery the following evening; she replied, she was engaged; he
then mentioned Tuesday evening; she told him she (...) also engaged; he said,
surely you are not engaged on every evening -- you can certainly go on,
Wednesday; to which she told him she was not then engaged. He conveyed her
home, and departed. In the morning, a Mr. Hone, who lived opposite to her,
observed what a smart Beau she had got. She told him it was a lawyer Smith; but
Mr. Hone said it was not, for it was Harry Bedlow, a very great rake; she said
it could not be, as he had said his name was lawyer Smith. On the Wednesday
evening following, being the 4th of September, she was sitting on her father's
stoop, and the Prisoner came up to her, asked her to take a walk, and told her
that Miss Steddiford (whom she had before mentioned to him to be a young lady
of her acquaintance) would, with another gentleman, accompany them. That she
went with the prisoner to the house of Mr. Steddiford, but found his daughter
out; that Bedlow suggested they had gone to the battery. She accordingly went
with him toward that place, down Broadway. They stopped at Corre's, and took
some ice cream, and afterward proceeded to the Battery, round which they
walked twice. During this time she heard the clo^^ strike, and counted twelve;
this alarmed her, she mentioned her fears to the Prisoner, but he quieted them
by telling her it was only ten. They then returned, and going into Broadway,
met three watchmen, who, upon being asked by Bedlow, told them it was one
o'clock. They then went on to John-Street, where she was going to turn down,
but the Prisoner would not let her. He kept his arm around her, and brought her
on to Ann-Street, which he wanted her to turn down, but she would not, as she
knew there were vacant lots there -- had heard the street was filled with bad
people, and thought it improper for a young girl to go down there. He kept
tight hold of her; -- she screamed, and he stopped her mouth. She then, for the
first time, began to suspect his intentions. He then dragged her along to
opposite the Brick-Meeting-house, with-one arm round her, the other having both
her hands; he then knocked with his stick at the door of M^^. Carry. Mrs. Carry
opened the window; he defered; admittance; she refused, saying, that her doors
were locked -- that her husband was out of town, and she could not open them.
The Prosecutrix, during this, escaped from the Prisoner, and run near to the
corner of Nassau-Street; Bedlow dragged her back again; she again escaped, and
fled quite to the corner; he forcibly made her return, she again ran away,
almost exhausted, and not knowing, what she did, run upwards; the Prisoner
followed her; told her she should not go back again, and keeping tight hold of
her, bro't her to Ann-Street, she resisting; he carried her down there, took
her through a vacant lot, keeping fast hold of her arms, and going backwards
himself, drew her through a passage, pushed open a gate, led her through a
garden, where they were obstructed by bushes -- then came to a back door, at
which he knocked and demanded admittance; the door was opened by Mrs. Carry, who
said, "there is a room;" the Prisoner dragged her into it; she screamed; he
called for a ^^^dle, which was afterward put in at the door by Mrs. Carry, and
the door was then shut. Bedlow then pulled off his coat and waistcoat, during
which, the Prosecutrix screamed and endeavored to escape, that he then seized
her, stopped, her mouth, and laughed loud to prevent her screams from being
heard; he then threw off her hat, tore the pins out of her gown, and placing
her before him, drew it off her shoulders; he asked her consent three or four
times, which she refused, calling him a brute, a dog, and a villain; he next
asked her consent to put out the candle, which she likewise refused, and he put
it out without; afterward he tore the strings of her petticoats, and kicked
them off with his feet; upon t^is he throw her down on the bed, and pulled off
his own clothes, during which, she tried to (...) to an escape, but was
prevented by him. He then throw himself upon her, laid his left arm (...) her
throat, so that she was almost choked; and did not suppose she could live many
minutes, and had his ends of her. These words were explained by leading
questions, (the answers to which (...) delicacy we omit; but they announced to
proof of the fact^). She did not feel his right (...), nor knew what he did
with it; afterward he ^^^ed his back and went to sleep; she then arose to look
for the door, but came across the window, tried to open it, but could not; she
next found the door, felt (...) but could not open it; felt all over for bo^ts
and found none; Bedlow hearing her, got up and forced her to b^^^ again, but
did not offer any new vio^^^^e. He (...) to sleep again; she again get up and
^ried at the window; but ^ot (...) able to get out, set down in a chair, the
room being ^^ry dark and impossible to distinguish any day light, that Bedlow
again got up and made her lie down; after some time he arose, opened the
shutter, and she discovered it to be broad day; he dressed himself, told her to
do the same, and to make haste, as he supposed Mrs. Carry wished them to be
gone; that he went away; she said, dressed herself, and coming out into the
passage, was met by Mrs. Carry, who said, "^^ary, you may go out at the back or
the front door, as I have looked out and there is nobody in the street"; the
prosecutrix replied she would go out at the front door, and did not care if the
first man she met was her father, or some relation or acquaintance. About (...)
in the morning she went out, turned up near Broadway, and as she came near
Ann-Street, she saw Bedlow puss her. Being much distressed and fearful left her
father should ^eat her before he heard her story, and being desirous of
acquainting her mother with it first, she went to the bathing-house near the
north river, and sat down by the river side; a gentleman came up with two
little boys, spoke to her, ^^ked her w^y she looked so dejected, she refused to
tell him; ^he again importuned her and not with a like refusal (...) h^s then
asked her if she had left her lover; if he had gone to sea, and whether she
intended to thrown (...); he then wrote something on paper, and told her ^he
would show it her, if she would disclose the cause of her grief; at last he
went away, and the Prosecutrix walked to a Mrs. Bruce's near the battery, where
an aged aunt of hers lived; here she stayed the afternoon, drank tea, and went
away about seven o'clock. She then went round to a Mr. Jones's in Dock Street,
on an errand, but seeing the door shut, and some Frenchmen on the stoop, was
afraid to go in; she missed her glove and returned to Mrs. Bruce's to find it,
but could not; she then proceeded to the house of a Miss Pine, in George
Street, in order to get her to go home with her; she saw her standing over her
door, and Miss Pine called to her, upon which the Prosecutrix asked her or her
sister to go come with her; Miss Pine told her she would, and a Mrs. Towt said
her husband should go with them, but the Prosecutrix refused; but Mrs. Towt
apprehensive they would not go home; sent her husband with them, on the other
side, to see them home: that they went home, but her father and mother were
both out; she went over the way to a Mrs. Hone's and stayed a long time there;
(...) her mother came and was in a great passion, and a Mrs. Harper, a cousin
of hers, said she should go home and stay the night with her, which she
accordingly did, and went immediately to bed. In the morning her mother came,
to whom for the first time, she related the whole affair. Afterward her father
came, and the story was told to him; that he then made her go with him to Mrs.
Cary's. When they came to the house, he desired her to go in first, which she
did; that on seeing Mrs. Carry, her father asked her if she knew that young
woman, pointing to the Witness; Mrs. Carry, to repeated questions of this kind,
replied she had never seen her before in her life. The father asked the Witness
if that was not the house; she told him before Mrs. Carry, it was the house she
was dragged into the night-before-last; that Mrs. Carry refused her father a
fight of the back room.

In the course of the testimony, the gown of the Witness was produced, (a
calico, made with a drawn frill round the neck;) two or three strings were torn
off -- a few, places were torn in the gown, but mended, which the Prosecutrix
did the next day, to walk in the streets decently.

On a cross examination, she said she did not know that lawyer Smith was
Bedlow, till they got to the corner of Ann-Street, when, from his behavior,
suspecting his intentions, she thought she had been deceived, and that he was
really Harry Bedlow. She denied being influenced by her ^^ther, or any other
friends, to bring on this prosecution. It came out, likewise, that there was a
child who slept in the corner of the room, boarded off, where they were; and
that no noise had awakened him; this child was fetched away by Mrs. Carry, in
the morning. She de^^^^ being at Mrs. Cary's the next night, or at Mr. Bedlow's
house, and did not even know where the latter was. She heard nobody move in the
house in the morning. The first light she saw in the room, was from the
Prisoner's opening the window; she did not stamp in the room with her feet; she
saw nobody in the street, after passing the three watchmen.

The Attorney General then rested the prosecution, for the present, and the
nature of the Defense was opened by

MR. THOMPSON.
Gentlemen of the Jury,
IT is now my duty, as the youngest counsel for the Prisoner, to open the
nature of his de^ence, and to state to you the substance of the most material
evidence, that will be offered in its support.

And first, as the nature of the crime of which he is accused, and the serious
consequences involved in the event of this trial, are too well known to you, in
opening the cause, I shall pass them even (...) silence, only mentioning that
it is an accusation easy to be made, hard to be proved, but harder, much harder
to be defended by the party accused, though perfectly innocent. As it is an
offense of so dark a nature, so easily charged by the woman, and the negative
so difficult to be proved, putting the life of a citizen in the hands of a
woman, to be disposed of almost at her will and pleasure; you therefore will
find it necessary in the first place to examine with the strictest scrutiny
into the character and conduct of her upon whose evidence he must stand or
fall. Her character, her conduct, to entitle her to be that evidence who shall
take away the life of a citizen, ought not only to be perfectly chaste, but
through the whole scene should not leave the sl^ghtest suspicion of
impropriety; she ought indeed to be a person who would have avoided the house
in which she pretends the fact was committed, as she would have avoided her own
ruin. The first ground of our defense she has furnished from the relation of
the facts themselves, which she has just now related, from which we infer, that
she is not the evidence who is ^ntitled to belief by a jury of the country. So
that if we had not a single evidence on the part of the prisoner, upon your
oaths you ought to acquit him; but kind Providence, who sometimes protects the
innocent, has furnished us with that evidence which cannot leave the least
suspicion upon your minds of his guilt, but will indeed disclose a scene of
fraud and falsehood; clearly show that the measure of her iniquity is full; and
that the yielded herself up a willing sacrifice on the altar of prostitution.

I now proceed to state the substance of the prisoner's evidence, which in many
instances will correspond with that offered on the part of the people; and
indeed the first evidence we shall offer, will begin at the time the
Prosecutrix and the Prisoner came to the house of Mrs. Carry, which was nearly
between 10 and 11 in the evening of Wednesday night; that the Prisoner with,
Miss Sawyer, while at Mrs. Cary's front door, were in a very agreeable
conversable mood, and that there were no noise or tokens of violence appearing
to be offered by the Prisoner to Miss Sawyer; that after continuing some time
they walked off arm in arm; that they had been gone above an hour or longer,
when Mrs. Carry and the family were alarmed by the barking of dogs in, the
backyard; that at this time the Prisoner and Miss Sawyer came into the lane
from Ann-Street to the gate that leads into Mrs. Cary's garden; that this gate
was fattened by a heavy latch with a nail over it, which was inserted for
greater security; that the Prisoner left Miss Sawyer on the out side of the
gate, while he climbed over the sense and unbolted the gate, and let Miss.
Sawyer through into the garden; that upon letting her in, be fastened the gate,
and came with Miss Sawyer to the back door of Mrs. Cary's house, and wrapped
for en^^^^ce; that upon hearing the noise, Mrs. Carry came to the door, and
enquired who was there; whereupon the Prisoner replied a friend; on hearing the
Prisoner's ^oice, she knew him, opened the door, and introduced him into the
room, and presently handed a candle to them; that while Mrs. Carry was at the
door, there was no noise no signs of violence; that after the Prisoner shut the
door, he and Miss Sawyer were heard to converse in a soft agreeable manner, for
about an hour; that during this time the Prisoner and Miss Sawyer were both
heard to laugh; that no noise of distress or violence during any part of the
night was made after the Prisoner came to the house, although if there had been
this pretended noise, a number of persons then in the house, from their
situations, certainly most have heard it; that the Prisoner and Miss Sawyer
continued in the room until 10 o'clock next morning, when the left it with a
great degree of apparent complacency and satisfaction in her looks and conduct.
I will further proceed to state certain facts respecting the situation of the
gate and likewise the rooms in Mrs. Cary's house; as to the gate, it was 7 feet
high and well bolted; the windows and shutters of the room in which the
Prisoner and Miss Sawyer were, had no ^^orts or fastening; the lock of the door
of the same room was spoiled, and had no latch to keep it together. It will
also be proved that there was a child of about 3 and half years old who slept
in the same room, within about two foot or the bed on which the Prisoner and
Miss Sawyer lay: that the child was not awakened by any disturbance by the
night time, and without any assistance came out (...) the room about 7 o'clock
in the morning, leaving the door upon a crack; from whence, Gentlemen of the
Jury, you will infer that Miss Sawyer might have left the room at any time in
the night or morning; we shall further prove, that the door of the room direct
(...) opposite, was within three feet; that the bed in the room opposite, on
which one of our witnesses lay, was at the distance of 13 feet from the bed in
the room where the fact is pretended to have been committed; that the door of
the same room was partly open; that the bed in the room in the front of the
house, on which Mrs. Carry and one other of the witnesses lay, was 14 feet; that
the door of the same room was 7 feet; that these rooms were all upon the lower
floor of the house; and that the rooms are divided from each other by thin
boarded partitions; of consequence the slightest whispers in one room of the
house, must necessarily be heard through out the whole.

If we can prove these facts, you will without hesitation, discover that the
whole is a scene of iniquity, contrived to extort money from an aged infirm
^ather, or to deprive an innocent man of his life; and in truth, to his
parents, it is a day of tribulation, of rebuke, and of sorrow; but to the
prisoner a day of joy, that he has an opportunity of coming forward, and
showing to the world, that he is innocent of a most scandalous and wicked
charge. Mr. Thompson then called

MARY CARRY, who deposed, that on the evening of September the 4th, being
Wednesday, she heard, some time after 10 o'clock, a knocking at her door, upon
which she opened the shutter of her room window, and the prisoner demanded
entrance; this she refused, saying her doors were locked, her husband was from
home, and she was afraid of opening the doors; that the Prisoner did not appear
to hold the Prosecutrix who made no noise, nor struggles; that a number of
people were passing and repassing the street; that she then returned to her
bed, and fell into a doze of a (...) sometime after, she was awakened by a
barking of dogs and a noise at her back door; she got up, greatly alarmed, as
did Mary Franklin, who slept with her; enquired who was there, and heard
Bedlow's voice; she then opened the door in her shift; asked him how he got in;
he replied, he jumped over fence; she then told him there was a room; she did
not see the Prosecutrix come in, nor saw her night, as she then ran in, to tell
Mary Franklin to light a candle. When the witness had put on some clothes, she
shoved the candle in at the door, and went away. In the morning the family
arose, breakfasted at 8, and passed and repassed through the entry several times.
The Prosecutrix came out of the room at 10 o'clock, and then the witness had
the conversation with the Prosecutrix as mentioned by her, except as to wishing
to meet her father; that she appeared perfectly composed and satisfied; that
she made no noise in the night -- and that if she had, the witness must have
heard it, as she did not sleep afterward; and as words spoken in one room of
her house, could almost be heard in any other. That in the room they slept
there were no means of making it totally dark, for part of the shutter was
broke, and the least light might be seen through the cracks; that the back
passge to her house was obstructed by logs and clam-shells; the back gate was
fastened at night, so that nobody could open it from without; no fastenings to
the windows of the room, no fastening to its door.

That on the next evening being Thursday, at the hour of lighting candles, the
Prosecutrix called, and enquired for Mr. Bedlow: the Witness told her he was
not there: The Witness had some pumpkin pie -- gave some to a lady who was
there, and asked the Prosecutrix to have some, which she refused; the lady then
went into the kitchen to see her child. The Witness afterward, requested the
Prosecutrix to go into another room, as gentlemen might come in; the
Prosecutrix told her she could not stay; upon which, the Witness said, if she
left a message for Mr. Bedlow, it should be conveinced to him; the prosecutrix
said, "give my love to him, and (...) him if I can get out, tomorrow evening,
I will meet him," and then departed. The witness could not recollect the dress
of the Prosecutrix, but the gown had a frill round the neck. The Prosecutrix
was four times at her house.

ANN, M'FAUL deposed, That she was a relation of Mrs. Cary's, who kept her
child; that on Thursday evening she was there to see her child, she saw the
Prosecutrix there at dark, repeats exactly the story of the pumpkin pie as the
last Witness, and that she then went into the kitchen; knows the Prosecutrix,
from having frequently seen her lean over her father's door, it being near
where she lived.

MARY FRANKLIN deposed, That on Wednesday evening she was in bed with Mrs.
Carry; that after ten they heard knocking at the door; that Mrs. Carry opened her
window-shutter, and refused admittance; that no noise was made either of
struggling or of screams, and that if any had been made, she must have heard
it; that the house was a mere shell, and any little noise either in or near the
out part of the house, must have come to their ears; that they did not go to
sleep; some time afterward an alarm was heard at the back door, of dogs
barking; Mrs. Carry called to her to get up, being afraid of thieves breaking
in; that Mrs. Carry heard Bedlow's voice and opened the door: no struggling was
made in the passage; Mrs. Carry called to her to light a candle, which she did
and gave it to her; no noise or screams were made in the night; she heard them
converse, and a woman's laugh: she never observed any obstructions in the back
part of Mrs. Cary's house, though she knew it well. The room in which the
parties lay, must have shown light through the cracks of the window at break of
day, and part of the shutter was broke; that the child got up at eight in the
morning, came out, and left the door upon a crack; that they staid in the room
till long after breakfast; no fastenings to window or doors.

ELIZABETH SMITH deposed, That on Wednesday night she was alone in bed in a
room in Mrs. Cary's house; she heard the knocking at the back door, the letting
in, no noise or screams were heard during the night, but a talking and a
woman's laugh; no struggling made at the entrance; must have heard it had there
been any; saw the Prosecutrix go out next morning, perfectly composed and easy;
to the broken shutter; to the light that must have been in the room; and to the
opening of the window in the morning by Mr. Bedlow she speaks: a latch to the
door.

THOMAS M'READY went to Mrs. Cary's house by desire of the Prisoner's father,
measured the distance from room to room, and from bed to bed, which were as
follows: the entry way through Mrs. Cary's house, is 3 foot wide; that the bed
in the room opposite the back room, is 13 foot; that the bed in the room in
front of the house, is 14 foot from that in which he was told the fact
happened; that the door of the same room to the other room is 7 feet; that the
height of the garden gate is 7 foot; but all the rooms in the house are divided
from each other by a thin boarded partition. He also saw Mr. Bedlow in the
streets and attending a building after the affair.

The MAYOR testified, That the warrant was issued on the 10th of September, and
afterward the prisoner and his father came to his office to make a complaint
against Callahan for an assault; that not liking to arrest him himself, he sent
to different officers; that he amused the Prisoner with making a deposition as
to the assault, till an officer came, and he then wrote on a paper to the elder
Mr. Bedlow that he must commit his son. That the deposition of the Prosecutrix
to ground the charge, came from Evertson and Riggs's office, ready to be sworn,
was a little inaccurate, and amended by the Witness. That on the examination of
Mrs. Carry before him, she said there was nobody in her house at the time, but a
young woman and a negro wench.

The Attorney General then called the following witnesses, to prove that the
Prosecutrix was not at Mrs. Cary's on the second night; the marks of violence
on her; and that her character was blameless.

JOHN CALLAHAN deposed, That being extremely alarmed at the absence of his
daughter, on Wednesday night, and the subsequent day, he had some conversation
with Mr. Hone, a neighbor of his, on the subject; Mr. Hone informed him of
seeing Bedlow with her, and he thence concluded she was with him. On Thursday
evening, he requested Mr. Hone to go with him in search of her: and they
accordingly walked about the (...) for that purpose. After some time they met
the Prisoner; the Witness accosted him, and demanded where his daughter was:
the Prisoner, at first, said he (...) nothing about her -- but afterward
pretended he had taken her home. [The Witness proceeding to relate a s^^ssie
between them, was stopped by the Court.] On returning home he heard his
daughter had returned but Mr. Hone would not discover where she was, till he
had promised not to beat her, which he did; he told Mr. Hone it his daughter
was wrong, he would turn her out of doors, if right he would say nothing to
her; but he does not know that this came to her ears. After seeing his daughter
the next morning, and hearing the story from her, he made her go with him and
Mr. Hone to Mrs. Cary's; that they went into a side room; he demanded of Mrs.
Carry whether she knew the Prosecutrix; Mrs. Carry repeatedly said, in answer to
different interrogatories, that she had never seen her before. He then demanded
a sight of Mrs. Cary's back room, which she refused. The Witness never
threatened his daughter, nor compelled her to bring this prosecution, but left
her to her own will.

JOEL HONE, deposed, That on the morning after Bedlow had first came home with
the Prosecutrix, he told her what a smart Bean she had had, and that his name
was Harry Bedlow; she told him it was lawyer Smith; but the Witness did not
mention the character of the Prisoner to her, or that he was a great rake. --
That on Thursday evening, Mr. Callahan appearing much alarmed at what bad
become of his daughter, was conversing with him, and the Witness then mentioned
that he had seen Bedlow with her; comfirms the left Witness's account of their
search after her: That being told by his wife of the return of the Prosecutrix,
and where she was, a knowing Mr. Callahan to be a very violent man, and
apprehensive he might beat her, he exacted a promise from him, not to do it,
before he discovered where she was; that Mr. Callahan told him if she was
wrong, he would turn her out of doors; if right, he would not say a word to her
about it; but this the Witness did not tell the Prosecutrix, nor knows that she
heard it. He afterward went with Mr. Callahan and his daughter to Mrs. Cary's;
that Mr. Callahan asked her if she knew that young woman; Mrs. Carry replied she
had never seen her before; Mrs. Carry also refused to show her back room.

JANE CALLAHAN deposed, that on Thursday evening she saw her daughter; was
extremely angry at her? Mrs. Harper, a relation, took her home that evening;
soon after Mrs. Harper returned to her, and told her that her daughter's linen
was discolored, and that she must have had connection with a man. In the
morning the Witness went to Mrs. Harper's; examined-her daughter's linen, and
found it very bloody; and that she could (...) ^^ng^^ be a virgin; her daughter
then told her the whole (...) she mentioned to her her father's anger. -- HONE
deposed that the Prosecutrix came to her (...) ^^^tle after seven, on Thursday
evening; that com^^^^^ng there, she did not ask her any questions. She st^^ed
till putt nine, when her mother came home, and Mrs. Harper took her away.

LUCRETIA HARPER deposed, That she was at Mrs. Hone's when the Prosecutrix came
in; it was a little after 7, on (...) evening. When her mother came, finding
her to be very angry, the Witness though it i^ prudent to carry the Prosecutrix
home with her, which she did; in going home, the Prosecutrix went a little
a^h^^d; no questions were asked her that evening; when she got to the Witness's
house she took a candle and went to bed, after she had been some time, the
Witness went, and finding her asleep, drew the clothes off her, and examined
her linen; saw it much discolored and very bloody, and evident marks of her
being no longer a virgin; she then went to Mrs. Callahan, and told her what she
had seen. In the morning Mrs. Callahan came to her house, and before the girl
had spoke a word, threw her down and examined her linen. Then the Prosecutrix
told her the story, extremely similar to that given in evidence. That the
character of the Prosecutrix is generally good and she reputed to be a
discreet, prudent girl, never kept much company.

ROBERT DOW had known the Prosecutrix for some time; always esteemed her a
modest girl was generally reputed to be so.

MARY MACDONALD had been acquainted with the Prosecutrix for two years; thought
her a very discreet, prudent, modest girl, and was generally esteemed so.

Another witness had known the Prosecutrix about 14 months, had lived 2 months
in the same house, without ever seeing any lightness in her conduct, but she
was generally thought a modest, prudent, and discreet girl.

GEORGE WARNER deposed, That the general character of the Prosecutrix was good,
and she esteemed to be modest and prudent.

Another witness deposed, That the Prosecutrix, on Thursday afternoon, came to
Mrs. Bruce's to see an aged lady, that she appeared very much down and
dejected; stayed to tea, and went away between 6 and 7 -- nearer 7.

ROBERT TOWT deposed, That on Thursday evening, about seven, or a little after,
the Prosecutrix going down George Street, was called to, by Miss Pine, then
looking over her door; that he then went into a neighbor's house, but was
called out by his wife to go with her home, as she was afraid of her father;
that he offered to go, but she said she would not trouble him; that he said,
she and Miss Pine might go on first, and he would follow; that he only went, as
she was afraid of going home, and had no apprehension of their going to an
improper place, as she was a decent girl; that he followed them home; the
Prosecutrix went into her father's house, and then into Mr. Hone's -- and he
returned with Miss Pine. That she is known generally to be of good character,
modest and virtuous.

The cause was then summed up, on the part of the Prisoner, first by

Mr. BROCKHOLST LIVINGSTON.
Gentlemen of the Jury,
THE solemnity of the present occasion; the awful situation of the prisoner at
the bar, charged with having committed a crime of the deepest dye; the natural
consequence of which, if proved against him, is the loss of his life, has no
doubt impressed you with the serious importance of the cause you are now to
determine. The magnitude of offense, the wild character of Mr. Bedlow, the
stories which have been circulated, have excited the attention of the public,
sufficiently evinced by the numerous auditory present, and have no doubt
created strong prejudices against the prisoner; they are prejudices however,
which, after a fair and impartial view of the evidence even of the Prosecutrix
herself, it is time to dismiss. By examining the various inconsistencies and
contradictions throughout the whole of her testimony; by separating truth from
falsehood, I pledge myself to prove that the present prosecution is founded in
fraud and malice. The task, gentlemen, may be long, and the hour is late; but
you will not require an apology for that length, when the life of a
fellow-citizen is at stake.

In order to determine whether Mr. Bedlow is guilty of a rape, let us see the
nature of that crime; whether the facts sworn to, amount to a proof of the
Prisoners' culpability. An eminent writer of the English law, who is deservedly
esteemed of high authority in that nation, Lord HALE, defines Rape to consist
"in the carnal Knowledge of a woman, forcibly and against her will." Has the
Prosecutrix proved any force? Has the proved a violation against her will?
Gentlemen, I by no means pretend to justify the conduct of Mr. Bedlow,

[Here a cry of "Prisoner at the Bar."]

I will call him Mr. Bedlow, or Prisoner at the Bar, as I think proper for his
defense. I know of no obligation to call him one more than the other.
Gentlemen, as I was going to observe, Mr. Bedlow may have been highly culpable,
and yet not guilty of a Rape. He may have seduced this girl; yet he did not
force her. Overcome by his assiduities, his attentions, his address, his
persuasions, she may have fallen a victim to seduction, but she has not
experienced the monstrous brutality of a rape. The Prisoner is known to be a
gallant man, fond of women, one who will not refuse the favors of the Fair, and
one perhaps, who will go considerable lengths in soliciting their consent to
his wishes; but he is not known to be a wretch so lost to every sense of honor
and decency, as to be capable of satisfying his lustful appetite by a recourse
to the brutality of force. Besides, his character as a man of gallantry, is by
no means a circumstance against him, it is strongly in his favor; accustomed to
the company of women; a genteel figure; an insinuating address; would probably
open sufficient avenues to the gratification of his pleasures, and prevent the
necessity of force from ever occurring to his mind. His character, gentlemen,
is almost a demonstrative proof, that seduction, and not rape, was the crime
committed. We shall presently see from examining the testimony of Miss Sawyer,
that throughout the whole of her tale, there are evident marks of the former --
none of the latter.

In cases of this kind, it is true the law has from the necessity of the case,
admitted the testimony of the party herself; but it has not allowed it to be
conclusive; it must be accompanied with circumstances which show that the party
is entitled to credibility. The same writer whom I just now mentioned, and the
respectability of whose authority does not require my word in his support, has
a passage so extremely applicable to the present occasion, that I cannot
forbear quoting it: And first, "the party ravished, may give evidence upon
oath, and is in law a competent witness; but the credibility of her testimony,
and how far forth she is to be believed, must be left to the jury, upon the
circumstances of fact that appear in that testimony. For instance, if the
witness be of good fame; if she presently discovered the offense, and made
search for the offender; if the party accused fled for it; these and the like
are concurring circumstances which give greater probability to her evidence.
But on the other side, if she be of evil fame, and stand unsupported by others;
if she conceal the injury for any considerable time, after she had opportunity
to complain; if the place where the fact is alleged to be committed, was where
it was possible she might have been heard, and she made no outcry, these, and
the like circumstances, carry a strong, but not conclusive presumption, that
her testimony is feigned. These, gentlemen, are the circumstances by which you
can put the evidence of Miss Sawyer to the test -- Do they appear in the
present case? Or do they not? Is she of good fame? Did she make complaint as
soon as she had the power? Was she in a place where she might have been heard,
and did she make any outcry? Did the Prisoner, conscious of guilt, fly? If all
these were the case, admit him guilty. If they were not, you must say he is
innocent.

First, gentlemen, I will show, from the single testimony of the Prosecutrix,
without comme^^^ng on the evidence produced by the Prisoner at the bar, that
all these circumstances are wanting. We may be told that our witnesses appear
in a suspicious light, but even if they are not worthy belief, I want them not;
the Prosecutrix has said sufficient to acquit Mr. Bedlow.

What is her reputation? A cloud of witnesses have sworn that she is a modest,
discreet, prudent girl. It is true, before this discovery, she might have been
so esteemed. She may have had the art to carry a fair outside, while all was
foul within. She may have appeared modest, discreet and prudent to her
neighborhood, while she was the very reverse, when not under their
observation. Possibly before this affair, there were no means of judging (...)
her discretion and prudence. Never before in the way of temptation, she had
been innocent for the want of opportunity. But gentlemen, facts speak for
themselves; the testimony of a whole neighborhood in her behalf, is not so
strong and convincing, as what she herself has disclosed. Determine her
character from her own evidence, you will judge of the probability of the
material part of her story -- you will then fer^ the real motives which actuate
the present prosecution.

Her first acquaintance with the Prisoner at the bar, is a proof of her
discretion. She walks alone through the city, at a late hour of the night --
picks up the Prisoner, (than an utter stranger) in the street, suffers him to
convey her home, and appears to be pleased with his conversation. On the Sunday
following she sees him again; instead of exercising her prudence on this
occasion, s^^^ makes no attempt to repel his assiduities; permits him to walk
with her again, to attend her home, and actually makes an appointment to walk
with him on the Battery the next Wednesday evening. Whatever prudence she might
have previously had, she seems, throughout the whole of her conduct toward the
Prisoner at the bar, to have thought it no longer necessary. But this is not
all, it seems he had told her his name was Smith, a lawyer; that next morning,
she had a conversation with her neighbor Hone, who told her she had got a smart
beau and that it was Harry Bedlow. Upon receiving this information, would not a
discreet girl have been alarmed? Would she not, star^ed at the idea of
deception, have made enquiries into the reason? no, nothing of this; she
suffered no fears or alarms to possess her; but by her conduct on this occasion
evinced a disposition to become a willing victim to what ensued. But it will be
inferred, that the Prisoner at the bar concealing his name and assuming that of
lawyer Smith, is evidence of his guilty intentions. Recollect gentlemen the
character of the Prisoner, as a man of gallantry, had he mentioned his real
name, he was so well known, he might have supposed the girl would have been
shy, and that he should have been resisted in his efforts to become acquainted
with her. This concealment is consistent with an intention to seduce, and we
cannot suppose, without doing violence to our reason, that Mr. Bedlow at that
instant meditated a rape.

Knowing this to be Mr. Bedlow, yet willing to be deceived, she accompanies the
Prisoner at a late hour on a walk; goes with him into Corre's Hotel, and
instead of taking a single glass of ice-cream, and returning, as would a girl,
jealous of her reputation, she stays with him here a full hour and an half; and
according to her own story, at the late hour of near ten o'clock, quits the
hotel, and turns, not homewards, but toward the battery with the Prisoner.
Here they walked round twice, before she discovers any wish to go home; at last
she hears the clock strike, distinctly counts twelve, tells us she is much
alarmed, but at the Prisoner saying it was only ten, her fears become composed,
and they set off on their return. At the head of Broadway they meet with three
watchmen, of whom Mr. Bedlow enquires the hour, and was told near one. Here let
us rest gentlemen, and reflect a little on this: curious testimony. You will
probably wonder how so much time could have elapsed since their, departure from
the Hotel. They leave it at near ten, walk slowly to be sure twice round the
battery; return to the head of Broadway, and it is one o'clock. Had they
crawled with the pace of snails, they surely could not have employed all this
time; they must either have sat out later, or it was not so late when they
quitted the battery. If the first was the case, we are told it was not later,
to make us suppose she had more discretion than she really had. If the last was
the case, if it was not really one, it was artfully said, to account for there
being no people in the street, when she was returning. You will likewise
observe gentlemen, that Mr. Bedlow, and not the Prosecutrix, enquired what it
was o'clock; he could then have no intention to deceive; but fairly suffered
the real time to be disclosed. Had the Prosecutrix likewise been alarmed at the
lateness of the hour; had she felt that the Prisoner had deceived her, would
she not have applied to the first people she saw for assistance? Would she not
have made known to the watchmen her fears and her alarms? Prudence I should
presume, would have dictated this conduct; but her prudence appears to be of a
curious nature; it led her to continue in the paths of destruction, though she
had the means of turning aside.

She proceeds quietly with the Prisoner, till they came to John-Street -- From
her we have a lamentable tale of her being dragged by him to the door of Mrs.
Carry; of her screaming aloud; the inefficacy of her resistance; and of her
being finally exhausted. Gentlemen, view the Prisoner; is he of that Herculean
make which is necessary to accomplish all that has been related of him? Or
rather does he not appear to be of equal strength with the Prosecutrix?

[Here a hiss.]

Gentlemen, I stand here i^ defense of the Prisoner -- I will use every means
in my power to detect the falsehoods that have been accumulated is deprive him
of life; and neither hisses nor clamors shall make me swerve from what I
conceive to be the line of my duty.

[Here a Clap.]

I repeat, gentlemen, the impossibility that the Prisoner at the Bar, should
drag a girl of equal strength through so many streets; (...) as well as
herself, must have been exhausted at the attempt; but they wish us to suppose
that Autoeus like, every exertion of his strength endued him with fresh vigor.
In going through with this tale, I am amazed at the blindness of the girl, in
supposing her incredible relation could gain belief. I am still more amazed at
the blindness of her parents, in being imposed on by a story so unnatural. Had
they drawn the veil of prejudice from their eyes, they never would have
suffered her to publish her shame.

The farther we proceed, the more inconsistencies appear -- the nearer do we
approach to the falsehood of the charges. At the door of Mrs. Cary's house,
after the fatigue which the Prisoner must have undergone, she is still held
down, and her mouth stopped, one arm round her waist, the other on her mouth;
yet he knocks at the door and at the window; but as to how he knocked, or with
what, we are left in the dark, and without conceiving that he had a third hand,
this knocking was not possible. The truth is, willing to go in, she was sitting
quietly on the sloop while he was endeavoring to gain admittance.

At last we find the Prisoner dragging the girl through the back way, she
screaming, and nobody is alarmed -- Here, though it has been sufficiently proved
there were obstructions, such as logs and clam-shells in the way, he had held
of both hands, and going backwards, pulled her along, and none of these
obstructions were perceived. She is next let into the house of Mrs. Carry,
making a noise which nobody ever heard; and we find the Prisoner and her
together in a room. She must then have had no doubt of his intentions. She
tells you indeed she screamed; but were there no other means which a virtuous
woman would have employed in defense of her chastity? Would she have exercised
her voice alone? Would she not rather have stamped with her feet? And even if
she was exhausted, have exerted her small remains of strength in opposing the
ravisher? Let me ask you, gentlemen, whether the description she gave amounted
to a rape? Was she forced? Did the Prisoner accomplish his wishes against her
will?

After the affair, Mr. Bedlow slept: Why did she not then escape? She informs
us she arose and went to the windows, but could not open them; the door
likewise was fastened, but it has been proved there were neither bolts nor bars
to either; how easily might she have shoved open the window and got into the
street? But on this occasion she lost her sense of feeling; in the morning,
people were passing and repassing in the passage, yet she heard them not. The
room in which she lay was totally dark for some hours after sunrise, though
the shutter was broke, and the light always before had appeared through the
cracks. It seems that she who had lost her sense of feeling, and was deaf
before, had of a sudden became blind. The sun which had rose for others, did
not rise for her, and truly one would imagine she had lost her senses, when she
attempted to impose such an incredible story on the minds of an enlightened
jury. What kind of credit, gentlemen, can you give to such a string of
falsehoods; the nature of which, without opposite testimony, is sufficient to
show the character of the Prosecutrix.

Thus far, gentlemen, I have proved the falsehood of the charge, from the story
of the Prosecutrix. It is now time to compare it with the testimony offered in
behalf of the Prisoner, and from that to corroborate his innocence. The
character of these witnesses I am aware will be strongly attacked by the
counsel for the prosecution. You will be told to pay no credit to their
evidence, considering their habits of life. Mrs. Cary's occupation, too well
known to deny, will be thought to impeach her credibility. She has, it is true,
been charged as an accomplice with the Prisoner; but nothing of the kind has
been made out. Her very refusal to admit the Prisoner and the Prosecutrix into
her house, is a clear proof of her innocence. Had this been a previous
concerted scheme, contrived between Mrs. Carry and Mr. Bedlow, would her doors
have been shut? Would she have hazarded a discovery by keeping them in the
street? Surely if this is a fact, though Mrs. Carry has been termed a woman of
intrigue, she possessed very little intrigue in this instance. Her doors being
shut at ten o'clock, evinces, that though she is a woman who keeps a bad house,
still it is one of a decent kind. But why did she open her back door, when she
was so careful of her front door? She tells us she was alarmed, supposed
thieves were breaking in; hearing Mr. Bedlow's voice she opened the door. Was
there any thing strange in this? From the Prisoner's character as a man of
gallantry, he was probably well known at the house; the woman happy to find her
fears dissipated, with gladness opened the door. It will likewise be said, when
before the Mayor, she told him she had never seen the girl; and that when the
father of the Prosecutrix went to Mrs. Cary's house, she likewise denied any
knowledge of the Prosecutrix. But was there any obligation on Mrs. Carry to
disclose the secrets of her house? Out of decency and delicacy she refused to
publish Miss Sawyer's shame, for which purpose she concealed the truth to
questions that were improper. When questioned in this Court upon oath, she,
actuated by conscience, discloses the whole truth. Every part of Mrs. Cary's
evidence, strongly concurs with that of the Prosecutrix in many circumstances;
she does not appear to be influenced by any undue motives; she cannot be
interested in the event, not have any Witnesses been brought forward against
her credibility. Mrs. Carry has testified, That the Prosecutrix came to her
house on the next evening, enquired in a friendly manner after Mr. Bedlow, and
left a message for him, which by no means comported with the injury she
pretends to have sustained. This is confirmed by the evidence of Mrs. M'Faul, a
poor decent woman, who, though a relation of Mrs. Carry, appears not to be in
the same walk of life. The girl denies it. Who, Gentlemen of the Jury, are you
to believe? A single interested witness, or two who derive no benefit from the
event of this trial? For my own part, I cannot doubt but that she did go; and
if this is the case, what credit can we give to the whole of her testimony,
when she has the audacity to step forward and deliberately swear to a falsehood?
Is it likely, Gentlemen of the Jury, that if this pretended violence had been
committed on her the preceding night; that if she had been actually ravished,
she would so mildly have fought her seducer, and have appointed to meet him the
next evening? This transaction evidently explains the nature of the whole
affair, and demonstrates beyond a doubt, that if she had been injured at all,
it was by seduction, and not rape.

I believe Gentlemen, it is time to slop on this head: The question whether
Miss Sawyer's character is such as to command belief, has been sufficiently
answered: Credulity itself cannot credit her improbable tale.

Let us consider her conduct subsequent to the violence of which she complains.
Did she immediately pursue the offender? She tells us, though it is flatly
contradicted by Mrs. Carry; she said to her I will go out at the "front door,
and wish the first man I meet, may be my father or some other friend. When she
was walking freely her own mistress in the street, did she complain? When Mr.
Bedlow passed her, did she call to the people passing, stop that ravisher?
Surely she did not want a father to redress an injury of this atrocious nature.
Had she mentioned it to a single citizen, he would have immediately stopped the
offender, and delivered him into the hands of justice. Smarting with the
violence she had received; impressed with a deep and strong s;ense of her
wrongs; one would hardly suppose she could mildly suffer the wretch who caused
them, to pass her without complaint to the public. Instead of following what
nature would dictate on such an occasion, how different her conduct. If
delicacy had prevented her complaining in the street, why did she not go
immediately home? Why direct her steps toward the bathing-house, and feat
herself down by the side of the river? Had she been seduced; had she been
overcome through the entreaties of the Prisoner at the Bar to consent to her
ruin, this would have been very natural; we might reasonably suppose that a
sense of guilt had filled her parents in the face, she had retired to ruminate
on her crime in solitude. While she was in this place, she tells us of a very
romantic scene; after which she goes to her aunt's, to whom she does not
mention a single word of what had passed. After loitering in this manner
throughout the whole day, she in evening again enters the streets. Here,
Gentlemen, it is again necessary to recur to the circumstance of her going to
the house of of Mrs. Carry the second night; that explains the reason of her not
going home this day, she wished to see Mr. Bedlow again; had she gone to her
father's, she had reason to believe she would have been prevented; but when she
went to Mrs. Cary's, finding him not there, she began to suspect he had done
with her, and that home was her only refuge. An idea of a rape never entered
her head; we find she never mentioned it to any body, not even to her aunt;
instead of making a hue and cry, she again seeks the ravisher in the very house
where she had been ravished; not finding him there, she then goes home; but to
her mother, whom the says she wished to see first, she mentions not a word; to
Mrs. Harper, who kindly took her home, she still preserves silence; it is not
till she is in bed that any discovery is made, and then a circumstance occurs
which clears up the whole mystery; which sufficiently accounts for the present
prosecution. The curiosity of Mrs. Harper discovers the whole; she finds from
inspection, the girl must have had connection with a man; tells her mother; the
mother goes to the house; before she hears a word, throws her daughter down,
and the secret is discovered. The girl obliged to account for these
appearances, to justify herself from these marks of guilt, to allay the wrath
of her parents; invents this rape, which probably before never entered into her
head; whence originates the present prosecution. Had it not been for the
impertinent curiosity of Mrs. Harper, it would have rested to this day in
silence. After this discovery, five day elapsed before any prosecution, and no
reason assigned for the delay. Another strong mark of Mr. Bedlow's innocence
is, his continuance in the city, walking about the streets as usual, perfectly
unconcerned; superintending a building of his father's, and even after hearing
that a warrant was issued, going to the Mayor to prosecute the father of the
girl for an assault. Was this a mark of conscious guilt or of conscious
innocence? Would a man who had actually committed a crime, the penalty of which
was death, hear that a warrant was issued for his apprehension, go to a public
magistrate and deliver himself into the hands of justice? Or would he fly?

The last circumstance laid down by Lord HALE, as discrediting the testimony of
a Witness in these kind of prosecution is, if the fact was committed where it
was "possible she might have been heard, and she made no outcry. This is really
the case in the present instance. Mrs. Cary's house has been proved to be a
mere shell; any noise in it must be heard by the neighbors; almost every word
said in one room must be heard in another; yet notwithstanding the screams of
which the Prosecutrix has told us, none were heard by three people who lay in
the same house; they all tell you they heard a talking and the laugh of a
woman, who appeared perfectly satisfied and pleased. I directed Mr. M'Cready to
measure the distance from room to room, from bed to bed, and the closeness of
them is a convincing proof, that if a noise had been made, it must have been
heard by the witnesses. When Miss Sawyer went out in the morning, did she make
any complaint to Mrs. Carry? Did she say I have been injured in your house, I
demand redress? No, she appeared perfectly composed and satisfied.

I now trust, Gentlemen, when you consider the evidence of the Prosecutrix,
when you observe that it wants those essential marks of truth which ought to
stamp its credibility, you can scarcely entertain a serious doubt of Mr.
Bedlow's innocence. When you weigh the testimony of a girl whose interest it is
to get the prisoner convicted, with that of those who have no interest in
getting him acquitted, you will determine on which side inclines the balance.
Let impartiality and justice hold the beam, and my client has nothing to fear.

Keep in mind the strong interest which Miss Sawyer has in the event. In common
crimes, the interest of the prosecutor is little compared with hers. A man
robbed of his watch, goes to a court of Justice, perhaps with it in his pocket,
and testifies against the criminal for the sake of justice alone. Even if he
loses his watch, the consequence is trivial, a small sum of money replaces his
loss; but the woman who complains of a rape has more at stake, if she does not
succeed, her reputation and character are irretrievably lost, she is shunned by
her former dearest connections, and life itself must become a burden. To the
motive of justice, she superadds the more powerful one of revenge; actuated by
their united impulsive force, she leaves not a single effort untried to procure
the prisoner's conviction. All the stories that malice and art can contrive,
are spread into the world; the public voice is raised against the accused; any
former wildness of character, or juvenile indiscretion, creates a general
prejudice, and the unhappy man is condemned without being heard. The universal
abhorrence which men feel to the crime, involves an abhorrence to the supposed
criminal; the more charge of a rape is his condemnation. When you, Gentlemen of
the Jury, consider how easily this offense is charged; when you consider the
various motives which may actuate a woman in its prosecution, you will not fail
to examine the evidence in the present case by the circumstances I have
mentioned. You all know how strong the passion of revenge exists in a female
breast; a deserted woman sets no bounds to her anger. How probable is it that
Miss Sawyer finding Mr. Bedlow had no farther occasion for her, and neglected
to meet her on the second night, filled with malice, meditated his destruction.
The love of a woman is indeed intense; but when turned into hatred, the latter
becomes equally intense. Instances of this nature are not wanting in history --
indeed the author from whom I quoted a passage in the beginning of these
observations, relates two so very extraordinary, that it will be proper to
recite them: It is "true says Lord Hale, that rape is a most detestable "crime,
and therefore ought severely and impartially to be punished with death; but it
must be remembered that it is an accusation easy to be made, hard to be proved,
but harder to be defended by the party accused, though innocent. I shall never
forget a trial before myself of a rape in the country of Sussex. There had been
one of that country, convicted and executed for a rape in that country, before
some other judges, about three assizes before,and I suppose very justly. Some
malicious people seeing how easy it was to make out such an accusation, and how
difficult it was for the party accused to clear himself, furnished the two
assizes following with many indictments, wherein the parties accused, with some
difficulty escaped. At the second assizes following, there was an ancient
wealthy man of about 63 years old, indicted for a rape, which was fully sworn
against him, by a young girl of 14 years old, and a concurrent testimony of her
mother and father, and some other relations. The ancient man when he came to
his defense, alleged that it was true the fact was sworn, and it was not
possible for him to produce witnesses to the negative; but yet he said his very
age carried a great presumption that he could not be guilty of that crime, but
yet he had one circumstance more, that he believed would satisfy the court and
jury that he neither was nor could be guilty; and being demanded what that was,
he had for about seven years last past, he said been afflicted with a rupture
so hideous and great, that it was impossible he could carnally know any woman,
neither had he upon that account carnally known his own wife, and offered to
show the same openly in court, which for the indecency of it I declined, but
appointed the jury to withdraw into some room to inspect this unusual evidence;
they accordingly did so, and came back, and gave an account of it to the court,
that it was impossible he should have to do with any woman in that kind, much
less to commit a rape, for all his bowels seemed to be fallen down in those
parts, that they could scarce discern his privities, the rupture being full as
big as the crown of a hat; whereupon he was acquitted. Again at Northampton
assizes, before one of my brother Justices, upon the nisi prius, a man was
indicted for the rape of two young girls, not above 14 years old, the younger
somewhat less; and the rapes fully proved, though peremptorily denied by the
prisoner; he was therefore to the satisfaction of the judge and jury convicted;
but before judgment it was most apparently discovered, that it was but a
malicious contrivance, and the party innocent, he was therefore reprieved
before judgment. I mention these instances, that we may be the more cautious
upon trials of offenses of this nature; wherein the court and jury may with
much ease be imposed upon, without great care and vigilance. The heinousness of
the offense many times transporting the judge and jury with so much
indignation, that they are overhastily carried to the conviction of the party
accused thereof, by the confident testimony of sometimes false and malicious
witnesses.

Thus says lord HALE, and thus says reason. But Gentlemen, I hasten to
conclude; these instances need no comment; by this time you well understand the
complexion of this charge; you see the prosecutrix in her true colors; you
discover her secret springs and motives, and can have no hesitation to acquit
the Prisoner. You cannot require deliberation, the case is so plain, and I
trust your minds will be made up, and Mr. Bedlow's innocence determined by a
verdict given without quitting the bar. The prejudices against the Prisoner
must now be dismissed, and this honorable acquittal you owe to justice, for the
purpose of clearing his character to the public, and of showing the world that
you have not a shadow of doubt of his having never committed the crime. Renew
to him the reputation destroyed through malice, by this honorable testimony in
his behalf, by acquitting him without leaving the bar.

Mr. TROUP.
Gentlemen of the Jury,
THIS cause no doubt will be discussed with considerable eloquence by the
Gentlemen on the opposite side. They will atempt to awaken your passions and
feelings in behalf of the youthful Prosecutrix. For my part, Gentlemen, I
consider the innocence of the prisoner so plain, that did I possess the powers
of eloquence, I should not use them on this occasion. Reason is sufficient,
without having recourse to the passions to acquit the prisoner of this
scandalous yet inconsistent charge.

I cannot but consider it as peculiarly fortunate for Mr. Bedlow, that he is a
subject of a free country; of a country whose laws, attentive to the
preservation of the accused from a malignant prosecution, has wisely provided
that no man shall be deprived of life, unless by the judgment of twelve of his
fellow-citizens. Had this happened in a despotic country, the enormity of the
crime might have hastily transported the judges to find the Prisoner guilty,
without a fair and impartial trial. He might not have been permitted a thorough
investigation into the affair, and perhaps his life would have fallen a victim
to malice. But happily, Gentlemen of the Jury, he stands before you, his peers
and his equals, and depends upon your oath to find a verdict according to
evidence.

Rape is a crime perhaps the most enormous in human society. The man who dares
forcibly to violate female honor; who dares thus to insult a sex whom it is his
duty to defend, deserves the greatest punishment which the vengeance of man can
inflict. Rape is a crime indeed which poisons the sweetest springs of human
happinese. The enormity of its guilt however induces a presumption in favor of
the Prisoner at the Bar; common charity will not let us suppose him this
abandoned wretch, unless the proof is as clear as the open face of day. The
more abominable the crime, the less probability there is of its having been
committed. This reflection, Gentlemen of the Jury, will make you consider the
evidence in support of the prosecution, with the greatest degree of caution;
will make you call for the clearest testimony, are you deprive a fellow-citizen
of life.

It has been well observed by the Gentleman v spoke last, that seduction, and
not rape, is the crime with which Mr. Bedlow should have been charged. View the
whole of Miss Sawyer's narration from beginning to end, and what can you
pronounce, but that she fell an easy prey to the seducing arts of the Prisoner
at the Bar? I cannot indeed. Gentlemen of the Jury, exculpate him from all
degree of blame; neither can I from the whole of the evidence, collect a single
circumstance which appears to evince that the Prosecutrix was forced against
her will. This material essence of a rape is wanting in proof; it cannot be
collected from any part of the testimony.

Lord HALE, in the passage judiciously quoted by Mr. LIVINGSTON, tells us that
though the party injured is in law a competent witness of the rape, yet that
her evidence must be taken with many grains of allowance. The character of the
Prosecutrix must be pure and unblemished; if the fact happened in a place where
she could have been heard, she must have made all the outcries in her power;
after she was at liberty, she must have made immediate complaint of the
outrage; if these circumstances are wanting, the credibility of the Prosecutrix
is destroyed; and unfortunately for Miss Sawyer, they are indeed wanting in the
present instance. Though Mr. LIVINGSTON has entered very fully into an
examination of Miss Sawyer's testimony by these circumstances, and though your
patience may be nearly exhausted with the extreme length of this trial, yet the
importance of the subject to the Prisoner, and the safety of his life, will
excuse my going again through the testimony, and placing it in the light which
truth and justice requires; of making his innocence manifest.

As to the character of Miss Sawyer, this is pretended to be established by a
multitude of Witnesses, who have told you a great deal of her prudence,
discretion, and modesty; but who are these Witnesses? An obscure set of people,
perhaps of no character themselves. We know none of them, and the very girls
who have testified in behalf of the Prosecutrix, require testimony in behalf of
their own reputation. But after we have heard so much of this prudence and
discretion, it is astonishing we see nose of it in her conduct toward the
prisoner. Her very story gives her witnesses the lie, and is in fact a scene of
indiscretion and imprudence, from the commencement to the conclusion. Was it
prudent to pick up a man in the streets and become instantly acquainted with
him? To meet him again and make an assignation for another evening? Was it
discreet to go on the battery with this stranger, and amuse herself with him
beyond midnight? After these confessions, let us bury the idea of her
discretion and prudence; let us put no confidence in witnesses who are
contradicted by the Prosecutrix herself.

The improbability and sometimes impossibility of the story, is a convincing
proof of Miss Sawyer's not being worthy of credit; that malice is the
foundation of her charge, and falsehood the superstructure. She tells us that
Mr. Bedlow dragged her through the streets at a late hour of the night,
notwithstanding her screams. Can you suppose, Gentlemen of the Jury, that at
this still hour of the night, the screams of a woman who was in danger of being
ravished, would not have been heard? The smallest noise must have awakened and
alarmed some of the citizens to her assistance. But where were the nightly
watch who guard the streets? Could a woman have been dragged from the top of
Ann-street to the brick meeting house and the watch beignorant of it?

It has been proved by Mrs. Carry; -- but before I mention her evidence let me
remark, that though much may be said against her general character, yet on this
occasion her credibility ought not to be impeached. She Can have no temptation
to come into a court of justice, and deliberately to swear to a falsehood.
Whatever be her reputation as a woman of intrigue, you have no right to suppose
she is a woman who disregards the solemnity of an ^ath. I say it has been
proved by Mrs. Carry, that the garden gate on the back of her house was fastened
on the evening of this affair, by a strong latch and a nail; yet the
Prosecutrix has asserted that Mr. Bedlow having hold of her hand, drew her
along, he walking backwards, and shoved open this gate with his back. This was
impossible, he must have jumped over the fence to unfasten the gate, and Miss
Sawyer must have willingly waited till this was done: Instead of taking this
opportunity to make her escape, she abides, and voluntarily consents to her own
rain. These sufficiently mark the features of the prosecution.

As to the outcries, she was in a place where the least noise must have been
heard; she herself tells you she screamed, but this is flatly contradicted by
three witnesses in the same house; they all tell you they heard the Prosecutrix
and Prisoner converse together in a cheerful manner; that they heard a woman's
voice; and that when she came out in the morning, satisfaction and composure
appeared on her countenance. But a circumstance stronger still, is not to be
forgotten; these loud screams were not capable of awakening a child who lay in
the same room, scarcely two feet from the bed. The Prosecutrix has owned that
the child continued asleep. Gentlemen, need I comment on this fact? Need I
endeavor to make that plainer which is so extremely plain? Need I ask you what
outcry, what struggles could a woman make, when this child was not awakened?

Let us now attend to the conduct of the Prosecutrix when she left the house of
Mrs. Carry. One would have supposed a women who had been injured in such an
atrocious manner, would have flown immediately to her friends, have disclosed
her wrongs, and had proper measures pursued to arrest the offender. Instead of
this, we view the Prosecutrix coolly walking through the streets; instead of
going home, directing her steps toward the north-river, and at last reposing
herself by the bathing-house. Can there be a stronger proof of her feeling
herself a willing party in the scene that had been acted the night before.
Shame, Gentlemen of the Jury, is ever attendant on guilt; fear, and shunning
the sight of the world, are strong marks of criminality. The misery which this
unhappy girl had brought on herself; the loss of her chastity; her continuance
out all night; the probability of being discarded by her friends, and of being
thrown into the wide world, bereft of the means of supporting her future
existence, must now become objects of contemplation, and solitude was sought to
devise the means of averting these horrors. Here, perhaps, the idea of rape
first occurred, to save herself from impending ruin, wishing first to see her
seducer, with whom she might accommodate and prevent recourse to this
diabolical measure. This was probably the idea which brought her the second
night to the house of Mrs. Carry; not meeting with Mr. Bedlow there, she went
home, determined to justify herself by pretending she was forced. This accounts
for the extreme backwardness she had in relating her story to her friends.
Though she saw her mother on the first night; though she was treated with
kindness by her cousin Mrs. Harper; still the pretended violence is concealed;
not a word is mentioned till an examination has made appearances so strong
against her, that her only alternative is to acquit herself of blame by
inventing a rape. The threat of being turned out of doors by her father,
conveyed to her ears by her mother, urges the necessity of this falsehood. By
this means she imposes on her parents; partial to their child; not willing to
deem her guilty; the Prisoner becomes the object of their vengeance, and stands
charged before you with this enormous crime.

The consideration of these circumstances, Gentlemen of the Jury, must
influence you in favor of the Prisoner. To suppose him guilty, you must believe
what never could have happened; you must credit the most absurd
inconsistencies, and suppose falsehood to be truth. I am however confident, that
you are convinced, the malice and fraud of this prosecution is too apparent to
make you hesitate a single moment in acquitting the Prisoner. The life of a
fellow-citizen is of two serious importance to be taken, unless the clearest
proof is addu^ed of its being justly forfeited for a real crime. This evidence
does not appear in the present instance; your consciences, your oaths,
therefore, can only be satisfied by an honorable acquittal.

Mr. COZINE.
Gentlemen of the Jury,
THIS case has been so fully argued by the gentlemen who have preceded me, that
it is perfectly unnecessary now to enter into a minute detail of the evidence.
I shall fulfill my duty as Counsel for the Prisoner, in going through such
material parts as evince his innocence, and offering some additional
observations to those adduced by the Counsel on the same side with myself.

The evident indiscretion of the Prosecutrix, manifested by her own narrative,
affords a circumstance sufficiently strong to found the conclusion, that she
had as much desire as the Prisoner at the Bar to consent to his wishes. The
hasty acquaintance which she formed with him, shows her desire of gratifying
her passions. Remember the character she tells you he first assumed -- lawyer
Smith, and remember her condition in life -- a sewing girl. Considering the
difference of their situations, to what motive could she attribute his
assiduities? Could she imagine that a man of his situation would pay her any
attention, take her a walking, carry her to Corre's a^ treat her with
ice-cream, unless with a view of promoting illicit commerce? Was it probable
that lawyer Smith had any honorable designs in his connection with a sewing
girl? If she possessed the least pene^ation, she must have seen that lust and
nothing else was his only aim. Thus acquainted with his views, she still
permits his attentions, and stays with him till an extreme late hour in the
night, strolling through the streets, and up and down the battery. Gentlemen of
the Jury, is it Probable that a girl who had thus abandoned the outworks of her
chastity, and left every pass to it unguarded would be long in surrendering the
citadel? Would a girl who appears to have been so kind and yielding, so
complying with the desires of the Prisoner in every other instance, have
hesitated in granting him his last wish?

The very description which Miss Sawyer has given us of this pretended rape, is
a convincing proof that it wants the (...) to constitute a crime of that
nature. The ^anner of her acquaintance with the Prisoner; her indiscretion
throughout the whole of her behavior to him, affords a strong presemption of
her concern. Her (...) conduct confirms this presumption; may, renders it
^^^^^table. She tells us in the act of which the complains that Mr. Bedlow did
not use his right hand; and if he did not, how he could force her, is
inexplicable. For gentlemen, I believe you are pretty well convinced, that to
force a woman, the right hand is absolutely necessary. This circumstance must
induce you to pay little credit to a story which carries on the face of it sush
an impossibility.

Another astonishing part of the testimony of the Prosecutrix, is that wherein
she mentions the screams to which the had recourse, as a means of obtaining
assistance. This is expressly contradicted by the testimony of there witnesses
on the part of the Prisoner, and not one brought forward to confirm it. It is
true, great stress will be laid on the general bad character of these
witnesses; it will probably be said that little credit is due to their
evidence. But had these screams in fact been made, how easy would it have been
to have produced witnesses who had heard them. Mrs. Cary's house has been
proved to be a mere shell; the people in the inside can generally hear all that
passes in the street. I am credibly informed that the adjoining house is
inhabited by an industrious mechanic and family, who must have heard the outcry
of a woman on the point of being ravished. At this time you will recollect that
the steeple of the brick meeting was repairing; the workmen were there at a
very early hour of the morning; how easy would it have been to have fought out
some of these people, and have brought them to confirm these screams having
been made, if they had heard them? As this has not been done, we have a right
to presume that this part of Miss Sawyer's testimony has foundation in truth.

Another strong circumstance of discredit to the prosecutrix's evidence, is her
going the night after the affair happened to the house of Mrs. Carry, and
enquiring for Mr. Bedlow. This indeed she has positively contradicted upon
oath, but the evidence of the fact too strong to suffer you to doubt it. It is
not Mrs. Carry alone who proves it; but it is expressly confirmed by Mrs.
M'Faul, and her character is not impeached. It appears that Mrs. Carry is her
relation, keeps her child, and that she accidentally came to the house that
evening, saw Miss Sawyer there, knew her from having seen her before, and
confirms Mrs. Cary's relation, in every particle. We may perhaps be told that
on this night one witness has proved that Miss Sawyer left a house in Broadway,
near seven o'clock, and that another witness has proved she was at a house in
George-Street about seven. But gentlemen, when you consider how easy it is to
mistake half an hour or an hour of time, and that the witnesses probably
compute by guess, without referring to a time piece, it is easily conceived
that the Prosecutrix might find an interval in her way from Broadway to
George-Street, to call in at Mrs. Cary's. If this is possible, you ought to
infer it, for we must reconcile testimony whenever we can, to prevent the
presumption of perjury. That crime is too odious to be presumed.

From all the facts on this trial, even those disclosed by the Prosecutrix
herself, I trust it sufficiently appears that the charge of a rape is unjustly
founded. No force can be traced; the consent Miss Sawyer may fairly be presumed
from her conduct. How far she may have been seduced by the Prisoner at the Bar,
or won over by entreaty to consent to his desires is a question not for me to
determine; but if the facts in that light appear, let them be ever so strong,
they never will amount to a proof of the crime with which the Prisoner is now
charged. Whatever other punishment he may deserve, the laws of this country do
not for that, incur a forfeiture of his life. In any point of view therefore,
Gentlemen of the Jury, I trust your verdict will acquit the Prisoner on the
present charge of rape.

Mr. HARRISON
Gentlemen of the Jury,
IT now remains for me to close the defense of the Prisoner at the Bar, and at
this late hour of the night, you are probably willing to excuse any farther
observation on the subject. I should not indeed have thought it necessary to
add to the excellent comments already made on the evidence, did not I consider
the importance of the event of this trial to the Prisoner. His life involved in
the issue, it behooves me as his counsel, to defend him from a charge which I
trust will appear unfounded.

Our principal enquiries are, what is the crime with which the Prisoner is
charged? And does the evidence prove him guilty of that offense?

P^ape has been well defined by the counsel on the same side with myself, from
a respectable author, to consist in the carnal knowledge of a woman, forcibly
and against her will; and this definition of the crime the court will tell you
is just. The next subject of discussion is then simply, whether the Prosecutrix
has satisfactorily proved the force and a want of her consent? This must be
collected from the credibility of the Prosecutrix; the probability of her
story; her subsequent conduct and that of the Prisoner. These topics have been
so well discussed already, that I shall confine myself to remarks on the
principal features of the evidence, since by this time I trust the innocence of
Mr. Bedlow is manifest.

Some young people have testified that they esteem Miss Sawyer to be a modest,
discreet and prudent girl; but the youthful appearance of these witnesses,
their being of the same condition of life with the Prosecutrix, gives us a
right to doubt what they mean by these terms. Accustomed to levity, to allowing
male friends liberties, they may esteem this consistent with modesty. What they
term discretion and prudence, may by people of more mature judgment, be termed
the highest indiscretion and the highest imprudence. It is well known that some
girls frequently consider the permission of those liberties innocent, which in
fact lay them open easy victims of seduction. Thoughtlessness and inexperience
in the arts of mankind, give a wrong coloring to the ideas of youth; and lead
them to indiscretions cretions which pride will not permit them to call by a
right name. These considerations lead me to consider the conduct of the
Prosecutrix in the melancholy affair which has led her so unadvisedly into a
court of justice on the present charge. She appears to be highly imprudent in
continuing her clandestine acquaintance with the Prisoner, after the warning
she had received from the neighbor, that he had imposed upon her by
personating a false character. Surely had she a spark of prudence, she would
never have trusted herself alone with a man at a late hour of the night, whom
she had reason to believe had deceived her, for the purpose of cloaking a
dishonorable intention. Throughout the whole of her intimacy with the Prisoner,
the infatuation which led her on to ruin, is too apparent to leave us room to
believe that the force used by the Prisoner to accomplish his ends, was of that
kind which is necessary to constitute a rape. On the very night of the affair,
she does not pretend to have struggled much with the Prisoners; the screams
which she uttered were not loud enough to awaken a child in the same room. Some
degree of force, Gentlemen of the Jury, possibly might have been used by the
Prisoner at the Bar; but it was a force only to save the delicacy and feelings
of the Prosecutrix. Any woman (...) is not an abandoned Prostitute, will appear
to be averse to what she inwardly desires; a virtuous girl upon the point of
yielding, will not appear to give a willing consent, though her manner
sufficiently evinces her wishes. But it is not this kind of force which can be
said to constitute a rape. It is not the apparent refusal or the feigned
straggles used as a veil for delicacy, which the law con^em^^ted when it made
death the punishment of a rape. It had in view the brutal violator of female
innocence; not the seducer who had recourse to entreaty, persuasion, and
apparent force, but the ravisher, who scoring the use of these means, at once
had recourse to strength, and notwithstanding the real resistance and loud
screams of an unwilling woman, unwilling in heart as well as in show,
perpetrated the detestable crime. This is the man who justly deserves to lose
his life. This is the man to whom the law extends its terrors, and declares no
longer sit to live in society. But the bare seducer. though criminal, is not
subjected to this; the greatest punishment which man can inflict. Had the
Prosecutrix and her friends been well advised, they would have had recourse to
the proper mode pointed out by the law for her relief. They would have
commenced a civil action, and have recovered a compensation in damages for the
seduction of the Prosecutrix; it is the purse and not the life of the Prisoner
which they can affect.

some of the witnesses on the prosecution, have deposed that marks of violence
appeared on the linen of Miss Sawyer, after the affair. But you will, gentleman
of the Jury, remember the witnesses explained their meaning, by saying that
these marks were such as indicated that the girl had lost her virginity. So
that no proof of a rape can be inferred from this testimony. If the Prosecutrix
has been seduced, and not ravished, the same consequence would have ensued. The
discoloring of her linen is the natural effect of her first connection with a
man.

I shall not, Gentlemen of the Jury, urge any thing further on this subject; I
am confident you know the solemn obligation which your oath imposes on you, of
bringing in a verdict according to evidence. I am confident you will see none
adduced on the present occasion, capable of maintaining the charge of a rape
against the Prisoner at the Bar. You will not suffer positive testimony which
is flatly improbable, to induce you to deprive a fellow-citizen of life. I am
sensible, in the course of these observations, I have made use of many
arguments which have been mentioned before: but repetition is excusable on this
important occasion.

N.B. Such parts of of the last speeches as contained nearly the same arguments
as those used in the first, were curtailed, in order to prevent an immoderate
length.

The defense being thus closed, the reply of the Prosecutrix was opened by

Mr. KENT.
Gentlemen of the Jury,
I HAVE only been employed by the father of the Prosecutrix in her behalf,
since this cause began; I am not therefore, for want of a previous knowledge of
the whole affair, so well prepared to discuss it thoroughly, as the gentleman
on the same side with myself. I shall endeavor however, from the evidence
given on this trial, to draw those inferences which are natural and plain, and
leave you to judge as reason and justice determine.

Much has been said against the character of Miss Sawyer; strongly have the
counsel on the other side, endeavored to discredit her testimony; but the very
sources from which they have drawn their arguments against her, afford a
convincing proof of the artless simplicity of her story. The appearance of the
girl; the tnedest manner in which she deliverd her evidence; the effect it had
upon her feelings; all forcibly struck me, Gentlemen, and I trust it did you,
with the opinion that truth, and nothing else, flowed from her lips. Her very
indiscretions, which the counsel for the Prisoner tell you impeach her
credibility, she openly and unasked revealed to you. With an air devoid of
guile, she told you circumstances which really make against herself. Had she
been this perjured witness which we are told, would not all these parts of her
tale have been buried in oblivion? Is it probable that a prepared story would
have contained these facts? Surely the art that led her to deceive, would have
led her to conceal. But contrary has been her conduct; in a candid and
ingenuous manner she has told the whole of her story, as well the parts that
make against her, as these which make for her, and thus the appears before you
without dissimulation. In one instance indeed, she has said more against
herself than was ^^^e. She told you when Mr. Hone told her that lawyer Smith
was Harry Bedlow, he added that he was a great rake; but Mr. Hone has informed
us that he did not mention he was a rake. The girl had probably heard the (...)
of the Prisoner at the Bar, from (...) other (...), and combining it with what
Mr. Hone had (...) her, had fancied the whole came from (...) and with this
impression made it a part of her (...) evidently shows her intention of
disclosing (...); when she has even said what she fancied to be true, though it
made against her. Examine every part of her testimony, and I trust you will see
a well connected tale, highly artless and probable; you will see that ^^equer
of indiscretion and imprudence which is a forcible mark of its truth. You find
bar narration the same at all times. She relates it to her mother, then to her
father, and when she comes into court and relates it again upon oath, her
friends and relations tell you it is the same she told to them. She preserves a
uniform consistency; she does not vary from her tale a single iota; and in
itself it appears highly probable. Every part of her testimony which could
receive confirmation, has been confirmed. The information she received from Mr.
Hone, relative to the character of the Prisoner at the Bar, he repeats in the
same words, omitting what I have mentioned. Her visit to her aunt, the time she
stayed there, is proved by another witness; her calling on Miss Pine, and at
what time, is sufficiently proved by several creditable people; and in short
there is no single part of her testimony, which came under the eye of people of
reputation, but what is strongly confirmed. The only dark part is that, where
unfortunate for her, none but the most abandoned of their sex could be
witnesses; here we meet with what we must naturally expect from people of this
description; a total contradiction to Miss Sawyer's evidence. Here the question
occurs, which are to be believed? An artless simple girl who never varies from
her tale; a girl whose character is proved to be fair and unblemished; or women
whose constant life is a scene of iniquity and guilt? Woman of the most
infamous occupations, employed in the destruction of the innocent, or in the
support of themselves by prostitution? Observe too the story of Mrs. Carry;
before the father of the girl, and his honor the Mayor, she tells one thing; in
this court she tells another. But say the counsel for the Prisoner at she Bar,
when she denied what she now discloses, she was not upon oath, and prudence
obliged her to conceal the truth. Is this a justification, Gentlemen of the
Jury? Is this the witness who is brought forward to discredit the testimony of
a reputable girl? Can you believe, gentlemen, that a woman who dares to tell a
lie before a public Magistrate, will scruple at perjury? Can you put confidence
in that abandoned wretch whose notorious infamy, ought, long ere this, to have
made her a severe example to public justice. For my part, Gentlemen of the
Jury, I would as soon put faith in the most glaring inconsistencies, as in the
oath of her who would deliberately lie with an intent to deceive. I trust,
notwith-standing all that has been said in favor of the witnesses adduced on
behalf of the Prisoner at the Bar, you will not suffer their testimony to give
you one scruple in the affair.

The resistance of the Prosecutrix, and her outcries; the brutal force which
she experienced from Mr. Bedlow, are all facts which stand in the testimony of
Miss Sawyer uncontrover^ed by any but these scandalous witnesses; leaving them
out of the question, we have no reason to doubt the truth of these facts.

It has been contended that the want of an immediate complaint and pursuit,
affords an inference in favor of the Prisoner's innocence. It has been said
that nature would have dictated the Prosecutrix to have made an hue-and-cry in
the streets, after the Prisoner, and have caused him to be instantly arrested.
When you consider the delicacy of the girl's situation, you certainly will say
that such conduct would not have been natural. There is a story in the Roman
History, which snows the dictates of nature on a similar occasion. You are all
well acquainted with the History of Lucretia.

[Mr. Kent then concluded with repeating the story of Lucretia, so well known,
that the repetition is here omitted as unnecessary.]

Mr. HOFFMAN.
Gentlemen of the Jury,
IN advocating the cause of this prosecution, I shall not attempt to touch your
passions. Those means alone which reason dictate, I shall employ in replying to
the arguments of the counsel for the Prisoner (...) the bar. This is a cause,
indeed, which with very (...) ^^^^tance from oratorial talents, night influence
your passions in favor of the unhappy girl, who now demands justice for her
wrongs. But I disdain recourse to the pathetic, or the arts of eloquence, to
justify her whose character, conduct and testimony, will stand the test of the
strictest scrutiny.

I am extremely happy, Gentlemen of the Jury, to (...) the counsel opposed to
me, on their own, grounds. The very circumstances by which they have examined
the testimony of the prosecutrix, and from which they have attempted to draw
inferences unfavorable to her cause appear to (...) to stamp the highest degree
of credit on Miss Sawyer's evidence.

It has been said down, that a witness entitled to belief in a charge of this
nature, ought to be of spotless same. The character of Miss Sawyer, Gentlemen
of the Jury, has been thoroughly established as, pure and undefiled. A number
of decent and Creditable people have ^^^tified, that she has always been the
reputation of being modest, discreet, and prudent; that she never kept much
company; and that they never observed in her any room for censure. One of there
witnesses dwelt in the same house with her for the space of two months, was in
the habit of intimacy with her, yet never saw her guilty of any indiscretion.
Surely, gentlemen, had she been this light, this inconsiderate girl, as the
counsel for the Prisoner have endeavored to persuade you, she could never have
been so circumspect as to conceal it from a female friend who was constantly
with her during two months. Had she been indiscreet and imprudent, it must have
been known to her intimates; we (...) know the prying curiosity of the world;
they ^oo^ discover the smallest bolt in the character of a man or woman, and
with the help of scandal easily magnify it into a crime of deeper dye. But
imprudence and indiscretion are of such a nature, that if they exist, they must
appear abroad; their very being depends alone on apparent conduct. How can the
woman who regulates herself by a strict attention to the prudential duties in
her converse with the world, be esteemed imprudent? To say that she must be so
esteemed, is a solecism in reason and in language. Evidence alone is our guide;
when we depart from that, we wander into obscurity. But the counsel say,
setting aside this evidence of character, Miss Sawyer's indiscretion is
apparent from her own relation. Before I proceed to answer this objection, let
it be remembered, that if she was so imprudent, it does not impeach her
testimony. She might have been thoughtless in relying too much upon the
Prisoner's honor; but it does not follow that she has taken a false oath; you
have no right from this to presume that she has perjured herself.

But where are the marks of this indiscretion? From a candid investigation of
Miss Sawyer's story, there are none to be collected. Through the natural
simplicity of youth; through inexperience in the wiles of mankind; she may
probably have placed too great a confidence in the Prisoner at the Bar; but
this, instead of diminishing, increases his guilt. It only proves that he made
use of her security in his honor, to get her more effectually in his power. The
counsel have called her first acquaintance with the Prisoner, a circumstance of
indiscretion; but recollect the occasion which gave rise to this acquaintance;
she was insulted in the street by Frenchmen; Mr. Bedlow came to her assistance,
rescued her, and politely attended her home, to preserve her from further
insult. Could she refuse his offer? Could she ungratefully tell the man who had
exerted himself in her behalf, to leave her, that she would not speak to him?
Or, did not nature and gratitude dictate the conduct she really pursued? On the
following Sunday she met him again, he accosted her; would the Prisoner's
counsel have had her spurn at her generous defender, and have her treated his
attentions with scorn? Would they have had her suppose that the man who had
evinced his regard for the protection of the Fair, in his behavior to herself,
meditated designs against her honor? Recollect too the art of the Prisoner, he
imposed on her by a false name, Iawyer Smith. She presumed him to be a
respectable man, not of loose character with respect to women. But why was she
thus deceived? Why not listen to Mr. Hone when he told her it was Harry Bedlow?
The answer is at hand; not supposing from the conduct of the Prisoner toward
her^e^, that he was capable of guil^; free herself from art, she did not
suppose it in others, and of course imagined her friend mistaken. On his
requesting her to walk with him on the next evening, she prudently told him she
was engaged, to his request to his request to walk on Tuesday evening,
discretion dic^^^^d the same answer; when he said, "surely you are not engaged
every evening, you can go on Wednesday"; ^^^^k with his importunity,
recollecting that this was a man to whom she was highly indebted for his
friendly assistance; her gratitude opposed her prudence, and she replied she
was not then engaged; but observe, gentlemen, she made no promise or
appointment to take this walk. Her walking with him on the Wednesday evening
following, was not owing to any promise, but to a circumstance which has been
as industriously kept out of sight by the Prisoner's counsel, and not adverted,
to by the gentleman who preceded me on the part of the prosecution. The
Prisoner finding he could not gain her consent to go, has recourse to a scheme,
which, unfortunately for Miss Sawyer, succeeds. On this Wednesday evening he
goes to her, requests her to walk, and tells her that Miss Steddiford (with
whom she is acquainted) and a gentleman, will accompany them. The Prosecutrix
thinking no harm could arise to her, when in the company of so many, and with
Miss Steddiford, very naturally consents to go. Before I proceed, gentlemen, I
cannot help remarking the superior art with which the Prisoner conducted the
whole scheme, and from thence, drawing a strong proof of his guilt. In the
whole affair, he acted as a man who meditated a villainous design. In his first
acquaintance with Miss Sawyer, he personates the character of another man; in
the prosecution of his intention, he deludes the girl with the falsehood that
Miss Steddiford would accompany them in order to get her out. But we have been
told than (...) this might be, and yet the Prisoner meant no farther than
seduction. The intention, however, gentlemen, is best judged from the
conclusion of the story. All these arts evince the intentions of a man to go
the greatest length in the accomplishment of his wishes; and accompanied with
the actual proof of force, show the perfidious capacity of the Prisoner, to use
all means, however attrocious, to effectuate his purposes. The man who will
seduce, will ravish if opportunity serves; for we know of no bounds that can be
set to the lawless irregularities of sensual desire.

But I return to the evidence -- having thus artfully got the Prosecutrix out,
he takes her to Mr. Steddiford's; but, (as probably the Prisoner knew before)
Miss Steddiford was from home. Mr. Bedlow then suggests they had gone to the
Battery, and under this pretense, she is led to continue the walk. On the way,
he persuades her to go into Corre's and take some icecream; nothing could be
improper in this, and she consents. When they quitted this place, it has been
said that propriety would have made her turn homewards, had not the Prisoner
hinted that Miss Steddiford had gone to the battery? Was it not very natural
then, for the Prosecutrix to go that way in search of her? After walking
sometime on the battery, she for the first time hears a clock, and counts
twelve; this alarms her, but the Prisoner allays her apprehensions, by saying
it was only ten. What follows? She, upon the supposition it was only ten,
thinks it too late for her to be out, and they go immediately into the way
home. Entering Broadway, they meet three watchmen, who, to the question of
Bedlow, say it was near one o'clock. Here it has been said, that the
Prosecutrix ought to have applied to these watchman, and put herself under
their protection. Why? No rudeness had then been offered to her; the intentions
of the Prisoner had not then appeared; and they were then on the way toward
her home. It would have been absurd to complain without occasion. The
circumstance of the Prisoner's asking the watchmen the time, it has been said
shows that he had no intention to deceive. This, however, was the consequence
of cunning; supposing the Prosecutrix would natur^^ly ask the hour, he
anticipated her, and thought by this pretended fairness, to allay her
suspicions, and not to lose her confidence. He might upon second thought
imagine that her knowledge of the lateness of the hour would promote his
designs; that she being alarmed, probably supposing she was shut out, would the
more willingly go to a house.

On their reaching Ann-Street, the Prisoner kept tight hold of her, and wanted
her to turn down there -- she knowing it to be a bad place, refused. She then,
(and not till then) suspected his baseness. What was her conduct then? Screams,
and all the resistance in her power. Why were not those screams heard? She
tells you he stopped her mouth. He drags her on to Mrs. Cary's door; the
counsel for the Prisoner have talked of the impossibility of his holding her in
the manner, described, and knocking at the door. This is not a fact, when at
the door he left her, to knock at it; this is evinced by her escaping three
several times: At last he forces her to the back way into this house. But was
it possible for the Prisoner to drag Miss Sawyer thus? Had he strength equal to
the talk? Her age, her sex, her fears, her alarms, all account for her want of
strength; she tells you, besides, that with the force of the Prisoner she was
quite exhausted.

Thus far, Gentlemen of the Jury, it appears that the conduct of the
Prosecutrix (...) been in no instance improper. Hitherto, prudence and
discretion have been her guides. She was brought into the room where the fact
was perpetrated, by a combination of art and force, against her will. Let us
attend to what follows: The Prisoner finding his prey in his power, exulting in
the success of his schemes, now seizes the unhappy victim; forcibly tears off
her clothes, and accomplishes his diabolical scheme. It appears from the
testimony of the Prosecutrix, that she did not know what the Prisoner did with
his right hand. One of the counsel catching at this circumstance, has
ingeniously twisted it, and asked how it was possible for the Prisoner to
exercise this force without using his right hand. But, gentlemen, recollect the
situation of the Prisoner; the whole weight of his (...) on the Prosecutrix,
his left arm across her throat, she was incapable of motion or resistance: She
then says, not that he did not use his right hand, but that she did not know
what he did with it. There is no doubt, gentleman, of its being used, you can
conceive in what manner, though from her innocence she could not.

From all this, Gentlemen, I cannot but conclude, that the whole of the
evidence of the Prosecutrix is highly natural and probable; that no
indiscretions appear in her conduct; that what has been termed imprudence, was
really unsuspicious innocence, and that her character and good same stands
confirmed by the evidence of respectable witnesses.

Another circumstance, Gentlemen of the Jury, which supports the testimony of a
Prosecutrix in a crime of this nature, is, if the fact was committed in a place
where she might have been heard, and made outcries. -- Miss Sawyer was in this
situation, and has positively sworn that she repeatedly screamed aloud for
help, and nobody came to her assistance. But she was constantly stopped by the
Prisoner, who laid his hand upon her mouth and laughed aloud, to prevent her
being heard. In opposition to this part of the testimony, evidence has been
introduced -- the respectable Mrs. Carry, and the Ladies of her house. The
distances from room to room have been accurately measured; they were so near,
the screams must have been within ear-shot, and yet none of these credible
witnesses heard the least noise or tokens of violence. Gentlemen, need I say a
word to induce you to dismiss every particle of this testimony from your minds?
Can you believe such people? But the counsel for the Prisoner have seriously
supported them as entitled to belief. It is said no motive can influence those
women to perjure themselves on this occasion. But, Gentlemen, the strongest of
motives must influence Mrs. Carry to come forward; the future reputation of her
house, and her own safety in obtaining the Prisoner's acquittal. The women of
her house, have with her a common interest; their character in life, their
daily habits of guilt, have long since bereft them of the terrors of
conscience; and words and oaths are with them but wind. Abandoned to every
species of vide, how can you expect their adherance to truth? An unspotted
witness has declared she made these outcries; these people declare they heard
them not; but the credibility, and not the number of witnesses, ought to be
your guide. It was observed of the Prosecutrix, that on one occasion she was
willingly deaf. This observation may with much more propriety be applied to
Mrs. Carry and her creatures; it was improper for them to hear these outcries; a
sudden deafness seized them, and in telling you they did not hear, they have
the audacity to sport with the solemnity of an oath.

In supporting the evidence of these people, the counsel for the Prisoner have
departed from their own principle; have completely confuted their own
arguments. To determine whether Mrs. Carry and her train are to be believed or
not, we have only to recur to the ground on which the testimony of Miss Sawyer
has been attached. Are these witnesses of good fame? We are told that the
Prosecutrix is not -- therefore, you ought to pay no attention to her evidence.
But the fame of the Prisoner's witnesses is pretty notorious; the inference of
his own counsel, then, determine their rejection; for the principle cannot be
right in one instance, and wrong in another. If this affects the testimony of
the Prosecutrix, it affects that of Mrs. Carry with ten-fold force; her constant
life is an iniquitous scene of depravity and vice. Thus, gentlemen, the
Prisoner's counsel have impliedly admitted the incredibility of their own
evidence; through over haste to attack the Prosecutrix, where she was not
vulnerable, they have erected a battery, which has completely secured the
safety of their enemy.

The want of an immediate complaint and pursuit of the Prisoner, after the fact
happened, is alleged as another circumstance affecting Miss Sawyer's
credibility. After she left the house of Mrs. Carry, the Prisoner at the Bar
passed her in the street; -- here we have been told, she ought to have applied
to the passengers for assistance, and have caused the Prisoner to be arrested.
This might indeed, have been the conduct of a shameless woman, or of a
masculine heroine, but surely not that of a young and innocent girl. She did
what nature and simplicity dictated -- conceal her sorrows. Her delicacy
forbade the exposure of her misfortune in the public streets; indeed, had she
done so, she must have been callous to the feelings of a woman. Overcome with
horror at the transactions of the night, with shame at the involuntarily loss
of what was dearer to her than life, her fears and alarms reduced this
miserable girl to a desponding situation. She knew the violence of her father's
temper; afraid, left his impetuosity should punish her severely unheard, she
wished first to disclose her misfortunes to her mother. This accounts for her
behavior -- (...) her retirement to solitude, to ruminate on her sad
situation, and to devise the fittest means of obtaining redress for her injured
innocence. She then proceeds to her aunt's; here, full of grief, and dejected,
she stays the afternoon, but the indelicacy of telling her story without a
question, prevents her revealing what had passed. She goes home, sees her
friends and relations, no questions that night are asked her. Her mother is in
a passion, and her cousin, Mrs. Harper, takes her home; and seeing the anguish
of the girl, prudently sends her to bed, without enquiring the cause.

But before she returns home, a circumstance appears from the evidence of Mrs.
Carry and Mrs. M'Faul, which has been laid great stress on by the counsel for
the Prisoner; the Prosecutrix going to the house of Mrs. Carry the second night.
The source from which this testimony is drawn, is of itself sufficient to make
it of no weight, had it not been contradicted by respectable witnesses. The
character of Mrs. Carry, and her temptation to per^^ry, has been sufficiently
discussed; indeed, it needs no discussion; but it is said that Mrs. M'Faul
ought to be believed; who is this woman? A relation of Mrs. Carry, dependent on
her for the support of her child; if she is not an abandoned woman, still her
connection renders her testimony suspicious. It is a never failing rule, that
character is to be determined from company; for had people will naturally
associate with the bad, as will the good with the good. But respectable
witnesses have proved that Miss Sawyer was at her aunt's, at near seven
o'clock; and that about seven, she was in Great George Street, at Miss Pine's;
so that from the nearness of time when she was at these two places, her calling
at Mrs. Cary's must have been impossible. This shows the complexion of all that
woman's testimony. When it was necessary for her to be deaf, she became so; she
hears no noise or outcries. When it was necessary for her to have a more than
usual degree of eyesight; she sees Miss Sawyer in her house when she was not
there. (...) short, she was a mere tool, ready to sacrifice or use all (...)
senses, as the Prisoner may require.

The counsel for the Prisoner then ask why this prosecution was delayed. But
reflect on the important consequences of it to Miss Sawyer: She was going to
disclose an unfortunate occurrence to the world; poor and unknown, she was
going to oppose a man of rich family and connections, who might through
influence and art, or the quibbles of law, obtain an acquittal; from the
character of the people in the house where she was decoyed, she probably
expected a flat denial of her story. It behoved her therefore to be cautious;
to proceed with deliberation. But her story is told almost immediately after
her return home, and her father goes with her to Mrs. Cary's to search into the
truth of it; so that though the Prisoner was not pursued, she did not conceal
the fact; from which no inference can be drawn to impeach her testimony. Her
early disclosure of the fact, strongly confirms its truth.

The Prisoner's remaining in the city after the affair, is set up as another
mark of his innocence. It has been said, if he had been guilty, he would have
flown. This is a proof, gentlemen, of the Prisoner's matchless assurance, and
not of his innocence. A man not hackneyed in the ways of vice, would probably
through the influence of fear have fled. But the Prisoner hardened, conscious
that his flight would operate against (...) the terrors of the prosecution.
Imagining (...) cure under shelter, of riches, influence, and the perjury of
his witnesses, he defied the charge; this is the reason that he did not fly.

I believe gentlemen, little further need be said in support of the
prosecution; the Prisoner's guilt is by this time too apparent. His counsel
have made several attempts to influence your passions in his favor, from the
reflection that the effect of your verdict against him, deprives him of life.
Though I acknowledge that this dreadful consequence ought to endue you with
caution; yet when once you perceive the truth and justice of the charge, no
consideration of this kind can be of any weight in your determination. You are
solemnly sworn to give a verdict according to evidence; and the facts are, I am
sorry to say, too plain against the Prisoner. If indeed you believe Mrs. Carry
and her creatures, you must acquit him. But if you do your duty, and believe
respectable testimony, you can do no otherwise than find him guilty.

THE Attorney General then observed, that as the night was so far advanced, and
the cause of the prosecution so ably advocated by the preceding counsel, he
would not trouble the Court and Jury with any further observations, convinced
that the Prosecutrix would obtain justice for her wrongs.

The prosecution and defense being thus closed, the Jury were charged by his
Honor.

THE RECORDER:
Gentlemen of the Jury,
THE evidence has been so fully stated by the different Counsel on each side,
that it is unnecessary for me to recapitulate. The principles of law, quoted
from lord HALE are extremely just, and ought to govern you, gentlemen, in
determining the we^ght of evidence. With respect to the character of the
Prosecutrix, it has been proved to be pure and unblemished; but the strong
interest she had in the event; revenge for even the injury of seduction; the
threats and repr^aches of her friends, ^^ght influence her in the present
prosecution. Besides, her testimony is flatly contradicted by three witness,
the same of whom, however, is clearly impeachable. All these are circumstances
you are to examine, and from the whole of the evidence, you must discover the
probability of the story; the degree of credit the given to the Prosecutrix, to
the Prisoner's witnesses, (...) from the result, to acquit or condemn. With
result to the outcries, they rest merely on the same ^^nd; the Prosecutrix has
sworn to them; three witnesses in the same house, who must have heard them,
(...) they been made, have sworn they did not hear a ^creams; this opposition
in testimony cannot be re^^ed you can only consider which side is most wor^^ of
belief. The want of the two next circumstances in ^^port of the Prosecutrix's
testimony laid ^own (...) and HALE, appear from the evidence (...). No persuit
was immediately made after (...) Prisoner, nor (...) made of the offense, six
days were suffered to elapse before the warrant was obtained for the Prisoner's
apprehension. A discovery, indee^ was made by the girl two days after, to her
relations, (...) even this, if done in time, is not sufficient in law. The
complaint spoken of by Lord HALE, is a formal one, before a public officer, and
not a mere discovery (...) friends. It has been likewise shown, that the
Prisoner did not fly; on the contrary, that after a warrant was issued against
him, he went to the Mayor of the city who had issued it, and was there taken.

From revolving all these circumstances (...) mind, you, Gentlemen of the Jury,
are to determine whether the Prisoner is guilty, or not. If you are of opinion
that the Prisoner's witnesses have sworn the truth; that no outcries were made;
that no complaint was made to a magistrate in a reasonable time, and no legal
reason (...) signed for the delay, and that the Prisoner's not flying is a mark
of his innocence, you will undoubtedly acquit him. But if you should be of
opinion that the testimony of the Prosecutrix is true, you will find him guilty.

After a Trial, which lasted 15 hours, the Jury retired, and in the space of 15
minutes, returned, finding a verdict of -- NOT GUILTY.

IN judging from appearances, the Report^^ (...) believe that a detail of the
preceding trial will be gratifying to the Public. It was so numerously attended
as to evince that degree curiosity which the most interesting cases only have
the power of excite. The subject of a trial before a crowded auditory -- the
topic of conversation in private company -- a fair and unbiassed ^^^^ment
reported by a Spectator unconnected with either (...) cannot but afford data
whereon to exercise the general judgment and (...) developing the true prin^
(...) Verdict. (...) indulgence of a ca^^^^ public for any (...) which (...)
appear therein. His crowded situation in the court prevented him (...) to have
(...) course to memory. But be (...) that no material parts (...) or arguments
of the Counsel on either side have been (...). He is confident (...) have been
wilfully (...) and the errors (...) must naturally arise from the (...) memory,
he has no doubt, will be kindly excused (...) of a Report be dec^^^^ by the
(...) of pa^^on (...) it may possibly (...) some future day, to extend his
labors in order (...) furnish a (...) the ^^ire^lic science of this State, a
report of the print (...) ^^ded in the court of justice.


