ADVICE TO THE PRIVILEGED ORDERS, IN THE SEVEARAL STATES OF EUROPE, RESULTING
FROM THE NECESSITY AND PROPRIETY OF A GENERAL REVOLUTION IN THE PRINCIPLE OF
GOVERNMENT.

PART II.

By JOEL BARLOW, Author of the vision of Columbus, a letter to the National
Convention, and the conspiracy of kings.

PARIS -- PRINTED: NEW YORK -- REPRINTED FOR FRANCIS CHILD'S and CO. AND J.
FELLOWS, BY GEORGE FORMAN. -- 1794. --

ADVERTISEMENT.
SOON after the publication of the FIRST PART of this work, in February, 1792,
my attention was called to other objects, and it became impossible for me to
finish the SECOND PART so soon as I intended. I left England in November last;
and, not having then completed the three last chapters proposed in the
Introduction, I left this chapter on REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE in the hands of
the bookseller, desiring him to publish it by itself. But the violent attacks
on the Liberty of the Press in that country, which took place about that time,
induced him to suppress the publication of this, and to discontinue the sale of
the other. He has lately sent me the Manuscript; which I now offer, without any
alteration, to the English Press in Paris.

JOEL BARLOW.
PARIS, 27th Sept. 1793.
CHAP. V. REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.
A NATION is surely in a wretched condition, when the principal object of its
government is the increase of its public revenue. Such a state of things is in
reality a perpetual warfare between the few individuals who govern, and the
great body of the people who labor. Or, to call things by their proper names,
and use the only language which the moral nature of the case will justify, the
real occupation of the governors is to plunder or to steal, as will best answer
their purpose; while the business of the people is to secret their property by
fraud, or to give it peaceably up, in proportion as the other party demands it;
and then, as a consequence of being driven to this necessity, they slacken
their industry, and become miserable through idleness; in order to avoid the
mortification of laboring for those they hate.

The art of constructing governments has usually been to organize the state in
such a manner, as that this operation could be carried on to the best advantage
for the administrators; and the art of administering those governments has been,
so to vary the means of seizing upon private property, as to bring the greatest
possible quantity into the public coffers, without exciting insurrections.
Those governments which are called despotic, deal more in open plunder; those
that call themselves free, and act under the cloak of what they teach the
people to reverence as a constitution, are driven to the arts of stealing.
These have succeeded better by theft than the others have by plunder; and this
is the principal difference by which they can be distinguished. Under these
constitutional governments the people are more industrious, and create property
faster; because they are not sensible in what manner and in what quantities it
is taken from them. The administration, in this case, operates by a compound
movement; one is to induce the people to work, and the other to take from them
their earings.

In this view of government, it is no wonder that it should be considered as a
curious and complicated machine, too mysterious for vulgar contemplation,
capable of being moved by none but experienced hands, and subject to fall in
pieces by the slightest attempt at innovation or improvement. It is no wonder
that a church and an army should be deemed necessary for its support; and that
the double guilt of impiety and rebellion should follow the man who offers to
enter its dark sanctuary with the profane light of reason. It is not surprising
that kings and priests should be supposed to have derived their authority from
God, since it is evidently not given them by men; that they should trace to a
supernatural source claims which nature never has recognized, and which are at
war with every principle of society.

I constantly bear in mind, that there is a respectable class of men in every
country in Europe, who, whether immediately interested in the administration of
the governments or not, are conscientiously attached to the old established
forms. I know not how much pain it may give them to see exposed to public view
the various combinations of iniquity which appear to me to compose the system.
But I should pay a real compliment to their sensibility, in supposing that
their anguish can be as great on viewing the picture, as mine has been in
attempting to draw it; or, that they can shudder as much at the prospect of a
change, as I have done in contemplating society under the distortions of its
present organization. I see the noble nature of man so cruelly debased -- I see
the horse and the dog in so many instances raised to a rank far superior to
beings whom I must acknowledge as my fellow creatures, and whom my heart cannot
but embrace with a fraternal affection which must increase with the insults I
see them suffer -- I see the pride of power and of rank mounted to so
ungovernable a height in those whom accident has called to direct the affairs
of nations -- I see the faculty of reason so completely dormant in both their
classes, and morality, the indispensable bond of union among men, so
effectually banished by the unnatural combinations, which in Europe are called
Society -- that I have been almost determined to relinquish the disagreeable
task which I had prescribed to myself in the first part of this work, and,
returning to my country, endeavor in the new world to forget the miseries of
the old.

But I reflect that the contemplation of these miseries has already left an
impression on my mind too deep to be easily effaced. -- I am likewise convinced
that all the moral evils under which we labor, may be traced without
difficulty to their proper source -- that the spirit of investigation, which
the French ravolution has awakened in many parts of Europe, is stimulating the
people to pursue the enquiry, and will consequently lead them to apply the
remedy. Under this prospect, every person who but thinks he can throw the least
light upon the subject, is called upon for his assistance; and this duty to his
fellow creature becomes more imperious, as it is increased by the probability
of success.

In considering the subject of Revenue and Expenditure, as in other articles
that I have treated, I shall confine myself chiefly to the great outlines of
the system; only noticing its effect on the moral habits of men; habits which
must be considered as the vital principles of society, and which ought always
to be kept in view as the first object of government, both in its original
constitution and in every part of its administration. I was indeed sensible
that this subject would require more details; and that it might be useful to
form an estimate of the quantity of contributions necessary for any given
portion of mankind united in a national interest; as we might thus be convinced
how small a revenue would be sufficient for all the purposes of a rational
government. But I find myself happily relieved from this part of my task, by
the appearance of the second part of the Rights of Man, in which this branch of
the subject is treated in that perspicuous manner which might be expected from
its author; a man whom I consider as a luminary of the age, and one of the
greatest benefactors of mankind. Neither my work, nor any other that shall be
written for ages to come, will surely find a reader, who will not have read the
Rights of Man.

Men are gregarious in their nature; they form together in society, not merely
from necessity, to avoid the evils of solitude, but from inclination and mutual
attachment. They find a positive pleasure in yielding assistance to each other,
in communicating their thoughts and improving their faculties. This disposition
in man is the source of morals; they have their foundation in nature, and
receive their nourishment from society. The different portions of this society,
that call themselves nations, have generally established the principle of
securing to the individuals who compose a nation, the exclusive enjoyment of
the fruits of their own labor; reserving however to the governing power the
right to reclaim from time to time so much of the property and labor of
individuals as shall be deemed necessary for the public service. This is the
general basis on which property, public and private, has hitherto been founded.
Nations have proceeded no farther. Perhaps in a more improved state of society,
the time will come, when a different system may be introduced, when it shall be
found more congenial to the social nature of man to exclude the idea of
separate property, and with that the numerous evils which seem to be entailed
upon it. But it is not my intention in this work to enter upon that enquiry.

When the feudal system, with all its ferocities, was in full operation, the
superior lord, who represented the power of the state, granted the lands to his
immediate vassals, on condition of military service. They engaged to serve in
the wars of the lord Paramount a certain number of days in the year, at their
own expense. Thus they stipulated as to the quantity of service; but gave up
the right of private judgment, as to the object of the war. This is the origin
of the revenue system of modern Europe; and it began by debasing the minds of
the whole community; as it hurried them into actions, of which they were not to
enquire into the justice or propriety. Then came the socage tenures; which were
lands granted to another class of vassals, on condition of ploughing the lords
fields and performing his husbandry. This was a more rational kind of service;
though by a shocking pervertion of terms, it was called less honorable.

In proportion as war became less productive, and its profits more precarious
than those of husbandry, the tenures upon knight service were converted into
socage-tenures; and finally it was found convenient in most cases, especially
in England, to make a commutation of the whole in money, in certain fixed sums;
and this, by its subsequent modifications and extentions, has obtained the name
of a land tax. These feudal revenues of the crown, though they were supposed to
be sufficient for the ordinary purposes of government, were capable of being
increased on any extraordinary occasion; and such extraordinary occasions were
sure to happen, as often as the government chose to draw more money from the
people. It began this operation under the name of aids to the king, subsidia
regis; and, in England (before it was found necessary to work the engine by
regular parliaments) various expedients were used to raise from different
classes of the community these extraordinary aids. In many cases the authority
of the pope was brought in to the assistance of the king, to enable him to levy
money for the court. The pope, as head of the church, received a revenue from
the people of England through the English clergy; and the king, on certain
occasions, agreed with him that he should double his demand; on condition that
the additional sum to be raised, should be divided between themselves.
Cunningham's History of Taxes, page 6.


A perpetual pretext for these additional impositions was always to be found in
foreign wars. Edward the First must subdue the Welsh; a long succession of
kings made the glory of the British nation to consist in the reduction of
Ireland; others, in conquering the tomb of Christ; and others, the crown of
France. But in common occurrences, where the call for money could not be
predicated on any national object sufficiently glaring to excite the enthusiasm
or rouse the fears of the people, it was the policy of the king to detach some
particular classes of the community from the common interest, and to extort
money from them, as from a common enemy. Thus all strangers were heavily taxed
on coming into the realm; thus Jews, with all the wealth they possessed, were
declared to be the absolute property of the king; In one of the laws of Edward
the Confessor (which was repeatedly enforced long after the conquest, and
perhaps is not repealed to this day) the clause respecting the Jews is in these
words: Judoei et omnia sua sunt regis; quod in quispiam detinuerit eos, vel
pecunium eorum, perquirat rex, si vult, tanquam suum proprium.
thus, after the religion of the government was changed, the papists and
nonjurors were taxed double to the professors of the national religion; and
thus the king could take a savage advantage of the misfortunes of individuals,
and seize their property, under the title of wrecks; waifs, treasure-trove,
strays, amercements and forfeitures.

These, and a vast variety of other inventions, have been practiced by the
English government, to legalize partial robberies, and take possession of the
people's money, without the trouble of asking for it. But all these means were
insufficient to supply the unlimited expenses of a government founded on
Orders, Privileges, Rank and Ignorance. The most effectual way to carry on the
great business of revenue was found to be through the intervention of a
parliament; and for this purpose the farce of representation has been acted
over in this country, to much better effect than any species of fraud or
violence has been in any other.

It would be an insult to the understanding of any reader at this day, to
describe to him a thing so well known, as the manner in which this game is
played between the different branches of the government. The secret is out; and
the friends of the system, who used to be occupied in concealing its operation,
are now engaged in defending it. The drift of their defense is to change the
mode of the deception; and persuade the people by argument, to suffer to pass
before their eyes in open daylight, scenes which have hitherto been acted only
in the dark. The curtain has fallen from their hands; and they now declare that
the play can go on without it. This for England, forms a new era in cabinet
politics. While the system remains the same, the scheme for carrying it on is
totally new-modelled; and, like other novelties in the course of human
improvement, it becomes a proper subject of our investigation.

I have known a juggler, who, after having for a long time excited wonder and
drawn money from the multitude, by tricks which were supposed to be the effect
of magic, would come forward with an engaging frankness, and declare that there
was really nothing supernatural in the art; that it was only the effect of a
little experience and attention to physical causes, not beyond the capacity of
any one in the company; that, though he had deceived them thus far, he was now
ready to undeceive them; and, for another fee, he would go through the same
course again, with the explanations. This ingenuous confession redoubled their
curiosity; the spectators continued their attention, and renewed their
contributions.

The government of Great Britain, under King, Lords and Boroughs, is now
defended, both in and out of parliament, by arguments unknown to former
politicians. As nearly as any words, except the right ones, can express the
full force of these arguments, they are stated by their authors in the
following language: "No people ever has been or ever can be capable of knowing
what is for their own good, of making their own laws, or of pretending to
understand them after they are made: as the people of England, during the time
of the commonwealth, imbibed a different opinion, it has been thought best,
especially since the last revolution, to cherish them in their error, in order
to come more easily at their money. We therefore told them that they were free;
that they, as Englishmen, ought to be free, because their ancestors were so;
that English liberty was the envy and admiration of the world; that the French
were their natural enemies, because they were slaves; and it was necessary to
make a war once in seven years, to keep up this idea; that we are sorry for the
increasing burden of their taxes; but that was a circumstance not to be
regarded by a free people, as they had the privilege of taxing themselves, and
their taxes were the price of their freedom in church and state; that, we
intended to lessen their burdens as soon as the enemies to our religion and to
our happy constitution were destroyed. But now, gentlemen, we see you have
discovered, and we are willing to acknowledge, that this was all a deception:
as to liberty it is but a name; man gives it up on entering into society, in
order to enjoy the benefits of being governed; it never was nor ever will be,
realized by any nation under heaven; witness the horrors of pretended liberty
in France, the daily assassinations and perpetual robberies which you see in
Mr. Burke's book from beginning to end; witness the late infatuation of the
Americans; who, already recovering their senses, and sick of their boasted
independence, This is a serious argument, used by several writers as well as
parliamentary and coffee-house orators, to prove that liberty cannot exist in
any country. See Dr. Tatham and others.
are now wishing to return to the protection of their mother country, where
they could purchase their laws ready made by us, who understand the business;
as to the church, we are convinced it is no matter on what sort of religion it
is founded, provided it be well connected with the state. We shall say nothing
in future of the burden of taxes, as it has been falsely called, the phrase
itself has no longer any meaning; it is now clearly known that public taxes
are, in themselves, a public benefit; every well-wisher to his country must
wish them increase; and for that purpose he will do all in his power to
multiply the occasions for creating them; for it is acknowledged by all good
subjects, that a national debt is national prosperity, and that we grow rich in
proportion to the money we pay out. We are as frank to confess, as any caveller
is to assert, that the House of Commons is not a representation of the people;
it has no connection with them, and it is no longer to our purpose to suppose
that it has; for the people have nothing to do with the government, except to
be governed; but the House of Commons is retained in the state, for the same
reason that the other branches of the legislature, and the courts and armies
are retained, for the sake of increasing the wealth and happiness of the people
in the augmentation of the revenue."

Let any person look over the whole chaos of writings and speeches that have
been published within the last year against innovations in the government, and
I believe he will scarcely find an argument more or less than what are here
comprised. Now this is clearly a different ground from what has heretofore been
taken in this country for the support of the old system. It used to be thought
necessary to flatter and deceive; but here every thing is open and candid. Mr.
Burke, in a frenzy of passion, has drawn away the veil; and aristocracy, like a
decayed prostitute, whom painting and patching will no longer embellish, throws
off her covering, to get a livelihood by displaying her ugliness.

It is hard to pronounce with certainty on the success of a project so new; but
it appears to me extremely improbable that the naked deformities of despotism
can long be pleasing to a nation so enlightened as the one to which these
arguments are addressed. I cannot but think they are ill addressed, and that
their authors have missed their policy in suffering the people to open their
eyes to their true situation. It is certain that the Cardinal de Richelieu has
given them different advice. He, like most other great men, is less known by
his writings than his actions; but he left a post humous work, called a
Political Testament, which has been remarkably neglected by those for whose
good it was intended; and by none more than by the present friends of
aristocracy in England. That profound politician observes, "That subjects with
knowledge, sense or reason, are as monstrous as a beast with an hundred eyes,
and that such a beast would never bear its burden peaceably. The people must
be hood-winked, or rather blinded, if you would have them tame and patient
drudges. In short, you must treat them every way like pack-horses or mules, not
excepting the bells about their necks; which by their perpetual jingling, may
be of use to drown their cares."

It must be observed, however, that in the business of taxation, which is
nearly all the business of a public nature that is done by the government in
England; a policy not very different from that of Richelieu, has been practiced
with great success. The aggregate quantity of the revenue raised upon the
people has indeed been somewhat known; but the portion paid by each individual,
and the time, manner and reason of his paying it, are circumstances enveloped
in total darkness. To keep the subject ignorant of these things is the great
secret in the modern science of finance. The money he pays to government being
incorporated with every thing on which he lives, all that he can know of the
matter is, that whether he eats, drinks or sleeps, walks or rides, sees the
light or breathes the air -- whatever he does, drains from him a tax; and this
tax is to support the luxury of those who tell him they are born to govern. But
on which of these functions the tax falls the heaviest -- whether the greatest
proportion lies upon his bread or his beer, his shoes or his hat, his labors
or his pleasures, his virtues or his vices, it is impossible for any man to
know. As therefore he cannot dispense with the whole of his animal functions,
without ceasing to exist, and as this expedient is not often so eligible as
submitting to the imposition, there is no danger but the tax will be collected.

It is difficult to describe, perhaps impossible to conceive, the quantity of
evils wrought in society from this mode of collecting revenue by deception; or
laying the duty in such a manner, that the people shall not be sensible when or
how it is paid. This is extremely unlike that manly principle of mutual
confidence on which men unite in society. It is the reverse of that conduct,
which, arising from the open integrity of our own hearts, is the guarentee of
integrity in others. It is a policy that must have originated from two
contending interests in the nation, from a jealousy of their own power in the
legislative body, from a knowledge that something was wrong in themselves or in
the system, and from a consciousness that one or the other, or both, were
unworthy of the confidence of the people by whom they were supported.

I am aware that in the doctrine which I shall labor to establish on this
subject, I shall have to encounter the whole weight of opinion of modern times.
Men of all parties, and of all descriptions, both the friends, and the enemies
of equal liberty, seem to be agreed in one point relative to public
contributions: That the tax should be so far disguised, as to render the
payment imperceptible at the time of paying it. This is almost the only point
in which the old and new systems agree, in those countries where a change of
principle has taken place; it is one of those rare positions, on which
theorists themselves have formed but one opinion. It is therefore not without
much reflection, and as great a degree of caution as a serious advocate for
truth ought ever to observe, that I shall proceed to examine a position, which,
resting on the accumulated experience of mankind, has not yet been shaken by
enquiry.

I will begin by acknowledging the force of two observations, which go to the
support of the present system as it applies to most of the existing governments
and to the present state of society in Europe: 1. As long as public revenues
must remain as great as they now are, and as disproportioned to the abilities
of the people, it is absolutely necessary to disguise the taxes on which they
depend; otherwise they cannot be collected. 2. As long as these revenues are
applied to the purposes to which they now are, it is impossible to collect them
but by fraud or violence; and violence has been found by repeated trials,
especially in England, not to answer the purpose so well as fraud. While
society remains divided into two parties, which are constitutionally opposed to
each other, it is impossible but that they must regard each other as enemies,
and their conduct must be the dictate of mutual aversion. When the people see
that paying money to their governors, is paying it to their enemies, they
certainly never can give it with a good will; and when they know that this
money serves only to strengthen the hands of their oppressors in forging new
weapons of oppression against themselves, they must feel an obligation lying
upon them to withhold it, rather than to pay it. In this case, defrauding the
revenue is considered not only as justice to themselves, but as a duty to their
children. A tax under these circumstances is more naturally objectionable than
the Dane-gelt, which was formerly paid in England: that contribution was made
by the people, to hire a foreign enemy to leave them in peace; and it always
had a temporary good effect. But a contribution paid to the people's enemies at
home, who being few in number, must soon, if unsupported, fall of themselves,
cannot promise even a temporary benefit; the hand of the enemy that receives
it, does not so much as lay down its weapon while it grasps the money. As long
therefore as society continues in its present disordered condition, any
arguments drawn from moral propriety must be overpowered by the strong voice of
necessity; for reasons of nature generally fall in a conflict with reasons of
state.

But as a new order of things begins to make its appearance, and principle is
no longer to be borrowed from precedent, we will endeavor to discover the
ground of the received doctrine relative to taxation; and enquire how far that
doctrine is, in itself, an object of reform. Out of the seventeen millions
sterling which are annually paid into the exchequer in England, but about two
millions and a half are levied in direct taxes; that is, in taxes laid in such
a manner as to be paid directly to the fiscal officers by the persons on whom
the burden falls. These are chiefly comprehended in the taxes on lands and
houses. In France, before the revolution, the proportion of direct taxes was
much greater. According to the statement of M. Necker, it was near eight
millions sterling, out of about twenty-four millions and a half, of which the
public revenue consisted. This is something less than a third; while the
proportion in England is little more than a seventh. These proportions are
supposed by some of the most approved reasoners on the subject, in each
country, particularly M. Necker and Sir John Sinclair, to be as high as it
would be prudent to go with direct taxation. The remaining portion of the
immense revenues in these two kingdoms, about sixteen millions and a half for
France, and fourteen and a half for England, was raised in the former, and is
still raised in the latter, by indirect taxation; by customs, excise, and
inland duties of various kinds, called taxes on consumption. The art of
imposing these, so as to insure their collection, is to incorporate the sum to
be raised for government with the price of every thing for which men pay their
money in the course of life. It is the hook within the bait of all our
pleasures, of all our conveniences, and of all our necessaries. The hook cannot
be separated from the bait, nor the bait from our existence. With regard to
individuals, the question is not, shall we pay the tax? but, shall we exist?
The continuance of life is a continuance of the tax; and the language of the
system is, pay the debt to government, or pay the debt to nature.

It is said in Ethics, on the subject of necessity, that, supposing there is no
choice of action, there can be no moral agency, and no virtue. We will not
enquire into the propriety of the supposition or of the consequences drawn from
it, as it respects our relation to the Deity, and our subjection to the great
laws of nature; but there can be no doubt that the reasoning is just, when
applied to the laws of society. Perhaps it is true, that, where I am prompted
by the invisible destiny of nature, to do an action for the good of my
fellow creatures, this action is virtuous; but when the necessity for this
action arises directly from the positive laws of society, in whose favor it is
to be performed -- when the argument derives its force from the ax held over my
neck, no idea of virtue can be annexed to the action; it is merely mechanical.
On this ground we may establish a position, which I believe will not be
controverted: that the exercise of private judgment is the foundation of moral
virtue; and consequently, that all operations of government carry destruction
to the latter, in proportion as they deprive us of the former. An arbitrary
order imposed by a master, whether it be upon a nation or a simple domestic
servant, tends to debase the mind, and crush that native dignity which is
absolutely necessary to the existence of merit, or of self-approbation. And the
effect that such an order produces on the mind is nearly the same, whether the
action enforced be right or wrong.

The true object of the social compact is to improve our moral faculties, as
well as to supply our physical wants; and where it fails in the first of these,
it certainly will fail in the last. But where the moral purpose is attained,
there can be no fear but that the physical one will be the inseparable
consequence; place society on this footing, and there will be no aid or duty
that the general interest can require from individuals, but what every
individual will understand. His duties, when first proposed, will all be
voluntary, and being clearly understood to be founded on the good of the whole
community, he will find a greater personal interest in the performance than he
would in the violation. There is no position more undeniable in my
apprehension, than that this would always be the case with a great majority of
any people; and if we suppose a small portion of refractory persons, who, from
want of original consent, or from a subsequent change of opinion, should refuse
to perform their duties; in this case, the opinions of the great majority
assume the shape of government, and procure a compliance by compulsion and
restraint. This is the only sure foundation on which we can ever build the real
dignity of society or the corresponding energy of government. It is
establishing the moral relations of men on the moral sense of men; and it is
this union alone that can cherish our esteem or command our respect.

On this plan, it is of the utmost importance that the wants of the state
should never be disguised, and that the duty of the individual, in supplying
those wants, should never be performed by deception. If the state be properly
organized, such disguise and deception will be unnecessary; and if we wish to
preserve it from degeneration, they will be extremely dangerous; as, by
attacking the moral sense of the people, they sap the foundation of the state.

When a company of merchants, or other private men, engage in an enterterprise
that requires contributions in money, we hear of no difficulties in raising the
stipulated sums among the different partners in the company. Every partner
makes it his business to understand the nature of the concern; he expects an
advantage from the enterprise, and pays his money with the same willingness, as
he would pay it in his private business. He would feel himself insulted, if any
disguise were thrown upon the subject, to cheat him into his duty. Indeed, when
the enterprise has come to an end, or when there is an apprehension of loss, or
a suspicion of mismanagement in the agents, it is natural to expect a
reluctance in payment, which is only to be overcome by the arts of deception or
the compulsion of law. But this is not the case while the company is in a
prosperous condition, and while its members are united by mutual confidence in
pursuit of a common interest. A nation, whose government should be habitually
in the hands of the whole community, would always be a company in this
prosperous condition; its concerns would be a perpetual and promising
enterprise, in which every individual would find his interest and repose his
confidence. Personal protection and public happiness would be the objects aimed
at in the administration; and these would be infallibly attained, because no
human accidents could prevent it. There could be no suspicion of mismanagement
in the agents, they being perpetually under the control of the whole people.
Every reason, therefore, which could induce individuals to withhold their
pecuniary contributions, would be entirely removed; and the same motives which
influence a man to give his attention and pay his money in his own personal
concerns, would engage him to do the same things in the concerns of the public.

If these positions are not true, then have I misconceived the character of the
human heart, and the real effects to be wrought on society by a rational system
of government; but if they are acknowledged to be true, it ought to be an
indispensable maxim to abolish and avoid every vestige of indirect taxation. It
must appear evident, that to raise money from the people by any other method,
than by openly assigning to every one his portion, and then demanding that
portion as a direct contribution, is unnecessary to the object of revenue, and
destructive to the first principles of society. It has long been complained of
in England (so long that the complaint has almost ceased to make any impression
even on the minds of those who repeat it) that the Excise is an odious tax. The
reason on which the complaint is founded is what the principle of government,
and of the opposition to the government, would naturally suggest; but it is not
the reason which I should assign. The tax is said to be odious, chiefly because
it throws a vexatious power into the hands of the revenue officers, to search
the houses and inspect the affairs of individuals. As long as the government
and the people are two opposite parties in the state, at continual enmity with
each other, it is natural that each party should wish to conceal its
operations, the better to succeed in their mutual hostility and defense; for
secrecy is one of the weapons of war. But if the state consisted of nothing
more than one great society composed of all the people, if the government was
their will, and its object their happiness, the reasons for secrecy would
cease, the intestine war would cease, the parties would cease.

The business of the state and the business of individuals might be safely
exposed to all the world. An open generosity of conduct, the reciprocal sign
and guarentee of integrity, would mark the character of every member of
society, whether acting as a public agent, or as a private citizen.

But the great objection which ought to be made against the Excise, is the same
as will apply to Customs, Duties, and all other tricks of a similar kind, by
which the money is drained from the people without their knowledge or consent.
The whole system of indirect taxation, so universal in Europe, so much extolled
by the ablest financiers, as necessary in composing their enormous masses of
extorted revenue, is wrong from its foundation, and must be vicious in its
practice. It is built on the great aristocratical principle, that men must be
governed by fraud; and it can be only necessary to that system of management
which divides the nation into two permanent parties, the party that receives
and the party that pays.

The wretched resource that governments have found in Lotteries, It was my
intention in this place to have noticed, somewhat more at large, the pernicious
tendency of Public Lotteries. But the late crisis in the government of France,
when the people found it necessary to revise their Constitution, offered an
occasion for making some remarks which I thought might be useful to them on the
business then lying before them. I therefore published a short Treatise on the
Defects of their Constitution in " A Letter to the National Convention," in
which are particularly treated the subject of Lotteries, that of public
Salaries, and several other matters, which otherwise would have come into this
Essay on Revenue.
Tontines, and Annuities upon separate lives, merits the severest censure, and
ought to be held up to the execration of mankind, the moment we are ready to
resort to the real principles of our nature, in managing the affairs of
nations. A tontine partakes at once of the nature of lotteries and of simple
life-annuities, and involves in itself the principal vices of both. Like a
lottery it is founded in the spirit of gambling; and like a life-annuity, it
detaches a man from the feelings and interests of his friends, of society and
of all mankind, except those of the particular class of the tontine to which he
belongs; and to them he is rendered, in a literal sense; a mortal enemy.

Borrowing money upon life-annuities, as an operation of government, has been
much more practiced in France than in England. The reason of this is well
explained by Adam Smith. Wealth of Nations, Book V. Chap. III.
It was owing to the superior influence, in that country, of those unnatural
distinctions among families, which prevent them from associating with each
other on the principles of mutual attachment; principles congenial to the human
heart, and no less necessary to individual happiness, than to the good order of
society and the prosperity of the state. The pride of birth and the jealousy of
rank operate on society like congelation and concussion on a body of water:
they freeze up the whole mass, and break it into a thousand pieces; which
refuse to unite among themselves, or to answer the purposes which nature has
assigned to the element. The genius of aristocracy, by the distinctions of
birth, had established in France almost as many ranks as there were families.
These were perpetually repelling and repelled, tormented by jealousies, and
kept asunder by artificial aversions, which silenced the voice of nature, and
counteracted every object of society. A man in this frozen, isolated and
repulsive state of things, becomes a proper object for the government to seduce
into a selfish hostility against the generous duties of life, by the temptation
of life-annuities. An elegant French author describes the annuitant as having
subdued every sentiment most dear to the human heart: "He amasses his whole
capital upon his own head, makes the king his universal legatee, sells his own
posterity at the rate of ten per cent, disinherits his brothers, nephews,
friends, and sometimes his own children. He never marries; he vegetates, until
the return of the quarter day, and enquires with eagerness in the morning,
whether he is still alive; his whole exercise of body and mind consists in
going once in three months to the notary at the corner of the street, to sign
his receipt, and obtain a certificate, that he is not yet dead." The officers
of government know very well the advantages derived from long humid winters and
epidemical diseases; and they must delight in the winnings of the game thus
played by the public treasury in partnership with death. But how is it possible
that a wise government could throw open the gate to those numerous and
incredible disorders, which are the offspring of annuities on lives? The bands
between parents and children broken, idleness pensioned, celibacy authorized,
selfishness triumphant, cruelty reduced into system and practice; such are the
smallest evils which arise from these annuities. Is it not from these personal
and exclusive enjoyments, these additional incentives to self-love, that
parents, friends and citizens are no longer known? Friendship, love,
tenderness, paternal affection, all are sacrificed to annuities!

The young women who have passed the age of being marriageable, are, in Paris,
innumerable; they have signed contracts on annuities, and that prevents their
signing contracts of marriage; for the first reflection which they can make must
be on the inevitable misery of the children, who might be the offspring of such
a knot.

A contract on annuities always insulates an individual, and prevents the
fulfillment of the duties of citizenship.

Tablau de Paris.


I am sensible that all these maxims, which go to a change of system in the
collection of revenue, are destined to rest merely in speculation, in all
countries still afflicted with unnatural plans of government; for so they must
rest, until a total change of principle shall have taken place. But let it not
be said that, on this account, the hints here given, are useless. If they are
founded in truth and reason, the French Republic will soon be able to adopt
them. By the time that its government shall be permanently settled, its public
debt will doubtless be very considerably reduced. Its necessary revenue will
then be so small, compared with what it hitherto has been, the people will be
so far elevated to the dignity of freemen, and accustomed to the duties of
citizens, that they will find a sensible pleasure, rather than a servile task,
in paying their contributions to the state. This reasoning may likewise be
thought worthy of consideration in the United States of America; where perhaps
it may be followed by the same effects. With respect to the other countries, we
must wait. A reformation of so deep a nature must be preceded by a perfect
regeneration of society; such as can only be expected from a radical change of
principle in the government.

I am sensible that men, whose experience in the management of public affair
has taught them to judge with severity on the various perversities of human
nature, will find many obvious objections to a theory different from that on
which their practice has been founded. If I do not anticipate all their
arguments in form, I certainly mean to do it in substance; for I am not
unapprised of their weight. Where the revenue is to be raised only for honest
purposes, and where it is to be kept within a moderate compass, so that the
taxes are to be no more than what a well-organized community would be willing
to lay upon itself, all arguments against raising the whole by direct taxation
are deducible to these two points: the improvident temper of one class of men,
and the unreasonable selfishness of others, have always rendered it difficult
to obtain from them their contributions by direct and open means. The first of
these classes comprehends many of the poor laboring people in the great towns.
These people are in the habit of spending all they can earn, if not for the
necessaries of life, at least for superfluous or vicious gratifications. They
never provide for a future want, even their own; much less would they think of
providing for the wants of the state. As it is vain to ask for money where it
does not exist, no tax can be collected by applying directly to that class of
men. It is therefore thought best to mingle the tax with their meat and drink;
and, since they will spend all their money for these, let a part of it go to
the state.

To this argument several answers may be offered: first, it is in a great
measure owing to the inherent defects of the government, that such a class of
improvident men is found in any society. That men of good intellects and sound
constitutions should be inattentive to the means of procuring happiness, is
certainly contrary to the analogy of nature. Indeed we overlook the cause when
we go back to nature for it; there is no doubt but it is always to be found in
their relative situation in the social state. It is the want of early
instruction, or the want of proper objects of emulation to stimulate the mind
to a sense of its own dignity, as relative to the society in which it had to
act. When the man is taught to know and feel that he never can rise above the
condition of a beast of burden, he acts at least a consistent part, perhaps
even a wise part, in blunting his feelings, and beating down his mind to the
level of his destination. But it is not necessary to suppose that persons in
general, who are found in the class above described, have to go through the
same process of reasoning, and then of killing their reason, in order to arrive
at this condition. Such indeed must have been the origin of the business in the
first instance; but afterward, the greater part are born in this element of
apathy: they are surrounded all their lives by no other examples but beings of
this sort; and they never have a thought or wish beyond their present
situation. Their only object is to banish all thought and stifle every wish;
and whether they perish under the walls of an alehouse, or in a king's ship,
or on the king's gallows, is to them a matter of perfect indifference.

Such is the deplorable condition of a numerous class of beings whom monarchs
and ministers must recognize as their fellow creatures; and if they are called
more vicious than their rulers, it is because we have perverted the meaning of
the word. But I am not finding fault with men of any particular description
whatever. In this drama of human misery, in which so many distorted characters
are acted, our moral faculties are warped and fitted to the part assigned us;
and we perform it without scruple or enquiry. The judge upon the bench is
scarcely more to blame, than the stupid felon he condemns. The oppressors and
the oppressed, of every denomination, are, in general, just as wicked and just
as absurd as the system of government requires. In mercy to them all, let the
system be changed, let society be restored, and human nature retrieved.

Those who compose the middle classes of mankind, the classes in which the
semblance of nature most resides, are called upon to perform this task. It is
true that, as reason is slow in returning to the mind from which it has been so
fatally banished, it will require some time to bring the men, who now fill the
two extremes in the wretched scale of rank, to a proper view of their new
station of citizens. Minds that have long been crushed under the weight of
privilege and pride, or of misery and despair, are equally distant from all
rational ideas of the dignity of man. But even these classes may be brought
back by degrees to be useful members of the state; and there would soon be no
individual, but would find himself happier for the change. Place government on
the wisdom of the whole people, and they will always have wisdom enough to
conduct it.

Second, under this natural organization of the state, should there remain a
small number of improvident men, unable to perform the duties of active
citizens, there would be many reasons for excusing them from any part of the
public burden. It is probable that very few instances would be found, where
the inability did not arise from mental or bodily defects; in which case, their
claim on society for a support, would take place of any claim that society
could have upon them for the payment of a tax. In addition to these, we may
suppose a few others, who, from accidental losses, or other misfortunes to
which separate property is liable, might be unable to answer the demand of the
collector; these the government would naturally excuse. If, after these, there
should remain another class, who, wantonly regardless of their own happiness
and of their social duties, should be found without the means of payment (which
is a supposition I admit only for the sake of argument) the loss to the state
would be very trifling in omitting to collect from them. It would bear no
comparison to the infinite mischiefs that proceed from the system of disguise.

As to the other point of objection, arising from the unreasonable selfishness
of some sorts of people, which makes it difficult to come at their money by any
direct application to their persons, it deserves a farther consideration. But
to give it a full discussion would lead to a new range of speculation into
human nature, extending to a length which I fear would be disproportionate to
the limits assigned to this chapter. I cannot be satisfied with the common
opinions we have entertained in regard to the effect that property would
naturally have upon the human mind. I say naturally, not in contradistinction
to the social state, but in contradistinction to the unnatural state, in which
government, founded on conquest or accident, has hitherto placed mankind. A
natural state of society, or a nation organized as human reason would dictate,
for the purpose of supplying the greatest quantity of our physical wants, with
the corresponding improvement of our moral faculties, has never yet been
thoroughly tried. It must be confessed therefore that the opinions we have
formed of the human heart stand a chance of being erroneous; as they have been
form under the disguise of impressions which do not belong to its nature. The
picture of man could not have been fairly drawn while he sat with a veil upon
his face. These facts being premised, if we wish to come at his genuine
character, the history of his actions must be received with particular caution;
as but little reliance can be had upon their testimony. The labyrinths of error
in which he has been forced to wander, the delusive tapers with which he has
been conducted, and the load of abuses under which he has had to struggle, must
have dimmed his understanding and debased his moral powers, to a degree that
cannot yet be accurately known. He rises into light, astonished at what he is,
ashamed of what he has been, and unable to conjecture at what he may arrive.

Some general traits, however, may be discovered in his character, and
recognized as the genuine stamp of nature. Among these may be reckoned a
certain desire in every individual of obtaining the good opinion of his
fellow creatures. Some degree of distinction, at least so far as to acquire an
individuality of character among his equals, and merit their respect and
confidence, is doubtless natural to man; and whatever, in a true sense, is
natural, is, in the same sense, laudable. A man, without the artificial aid
that society gives him, has but two resources on which he can rely for
obtaining this respect; these are his physical and his moral powers. By the
cultivation of one or both of these, he renders himself useful, and merits the
distinction that he wishes. Property, which is called, perhaps with sufficient
accuracy, the creature of society, is secured to individuals, only for their
private benefit; or at most as a pledge of their attachment to the community,
by which it is guaranteed. It is not expected, on the true principles of
society, that an individual should dispose of any part of his own property to
the benefit of the public. So much of it as the public requires in
contributions, is demanded as a right; it belongs to the state by the nature of
the social contract, in return for the guarantee of the rest. It cannot be
intended therefore that this should be the way in which a man should use his
property, to procure to himself respect; neither is it so in fact. The reliance
he has upon it, for the purpose of respect, is founded on a different
principle. Except such proportion as is necessary in supplying his personal
wants, the possessor makes use of his property as a sign, or as a substitute,
of personal merit. Indeed so far as his property is the fruit of his own
exersions, it is not an unnatural indication of abilities; and even where it
has descended to him from his ancestors, it is not a more unreasonable ground
of pretention, than hereditary titles of any other description.

On this principle, it is easy to trace the beginnings of a deviation from a
rational estimate of things, in our attachment to property. A government which
had been founded in violence, and was to be carried on for the exclusive
benefit of a small proportion of the community, must have been under the
necessity, at all times, of supporting itself by imposition. This circumstance
goes at once to the discouragement and disguise of the moral powers of
individuals; as they must cease to be cultivated, the moment they cease to be
respected. As the nation, at the same time, grew more numerous, and the success
of war and other great operations were found to depend less on bodily strength,
this too began to lose its estimation, and could no longer be relied on, as a
title to respect. A natural resource therefore* by which to escape from these
unnatural restrictions, was found in a veneration for external and fallacious
signs of merit, appropriated to individuals. This was the origin of all
hereditary titles of honor; and it must likewise have been the origin, at least
in a great measure, of our excessive attachment to property.

There is another point of view in which this theory may be placed, that will
show it to be still more probable. In the same proportion as this veneration
for property offered a resource to individuals, on their giving up the natural
rights of cultivating their personal talents, it also became a necessary engine
in the hands of the government. It is easy to perceive, that, in a system where
every thing depends on hereditary rank, the person placed at the head ought
always to be entitled to the greatest share of respect. And where should a king
seek for this, but in exterior pomp? Neither wisdom nor strength can be made
hereditary, but titles and property may. It was absolutely requisite that those
qualities, in which the king might be rivalled or surpassed by his subjects,
should be brought into disrepute; and that all mankind should fix their
admiration on those in which he could excel. Governments of this kind are sure
to be administered in such a manner, that the king shall always be the richest
man in the nation; and they generally go farther, and make other men rich in
proportion to their servility to him. It is thus that the order of nature is
inverted, and names are substituted for things. The simple uses of property are
converted into the splendid magnificence of wealth. This becomes the great and
almost universal object of human ambition* it excites the gaze and veneration
of all classes of men. Individuals are really not to be blamed, nor their
judgment to be called in question, for this manner of estimating things.
Exterior pomp is, in fact, more useful to them, than personal qualifications.
It indeed often takes place of all the solid enjoyments of life; and it never
can be strange that it should do so, as long as it procures that respect, the
desire of which is doubtless among the strongest passions of our nature. We
never hear of a man committing suicide for the want of a loaf of bread, but it
is often done for the want of a coach.

Such is the passion, and such, I believe, is the origin of the inordinate
passion for property, in the present state of manners. The greater part of
rational men agree that these things are wrong; they agree that the general
taste and sentiments of mankind, on this subject, are erroneous; and they wish
they could be changed. The only point in which I differ from these men in
opinion is, that I have no doubt but these things will be changed. I think we
discern the radical cause of the evil; I think that cause will soon be removed;
and the remedy will inevitably follow; because it is nothing more than a simple
operation of nature, recovering herself from restraint. I am not preaching a
moral lecture on the use of riches, or the duty of charity; I am endeavoring
to point out the means by which the necessity for such lectures may he
superceded. A duty that runs contrary to habit, is hard to be enforced, either
by persuasion or by law. Rectify our habits, and our duties will rarely be
omitted.

Good men in all civilized nations, have taken unwearied pains, and given
themselves real grief of heart, in censuring the vices and recommending the
duties of mankind, relative to the use and abuse of property. Their labors
have doubtless done some good; for we may readily conceive that the quantity of
misery in the world is not so great as it might have been without them. But
these men have not penetrated to the root of the evil; or rather, they have
overlooked it; and the remedies they have proposed have always been partial,
unpromising, and without success. They lay the blame to the natural
propensities of the human heart, and call upon individuals for reformation.
Whereas, the fault lies not so deep, nor is he cure to be looked for from
individuals, even with respect to themselves. Habit is the ape of nature; it
assumes her appearance, and palms its vices upon her. And as the universal
habit with respect to the subject now in question has arisen out of unnatural
and degrading systems of government, a reformation can be expected, only from
referring back to nature for a change of those systems; and there is no doubt
but this remedy will be effectual.

Establish government universally on the individual wishes and collected wisdom
of the people, and it will give a spring to the moral faculties of every human
creature; because every human creature must find an interest in its welfare. It
must afford an ample subject for contemplation and exertion; which cannot fail
to give a perpetual improvement to the mind, and elevate the man to a more
exalted view of himself, as an active member of that social state, where virtue
has a scope for expansion, and merit is sure to be rewarded. Being thus
restored to nature, every thing is easy and progressive; the individual looks
to himself for his title to respect, the moment he becomes habituated to
believe and know that this is the only title that will answer his purpose. The
idea of relying on the glare of exterior pomp, whether it be of wealth or
hereditary rank, must be regarded as what it really is in fact, the effort of a
weak mind to cover its own weakness. Such efforts being resented by the people,
as attempts to impose upon their understanding, they must fall into disrepute
and be laid aside. They cannot be useful, they cannot be kept in countenance,
in a society founded on the basis of human reason.

It is difficult to conceive to what an extent this circumstance would operate
on the character of the human mind, with respect to its attachment to property.
If the present systems of government are unnatural, I am convinced that this
part of the human character is unnatural; and a change in the former must
produce a change in the latter. One of the uses of property, that of procuring
respect, would be entirely cut off. And it must be considered that this is the
use that has generally had the most powerful effect upon the mind; because it
is immoderate and unbounded. It is well known that rivals in the display of
wealth are among the most jealous rivals in the world; and that there is
usually no limit to the desires of a man on this subject, when they once pass
the limit of his real or expected wants.

One simple fact, with respect to the French nation, is almost sufficient of
itself to support the opinion I here advance. But I thought it necessary,
before adducing that fact, to recur to theoretical principles; in order to show
that both the fact and the opinion are founded in nature, and therefore may be
trusted, so far as they go, as the foundation of a practical system. It is well
known that the national character of that people within four years has
undergone almost a total change, with regard to the estimation of exterior
marks of distinction, of every kind. What is called Rank, arising from
hereditary titles, had formerly as great an influence in the country, as at
court; it was held as sacred, in the most sequestered walks of life, where
actions obey the impulses of the heart, as in the most brilliant assembly,
where they are regulated by a Master of Ceremonies. It is impossible for wealth
itself in any nation to be more respected than titles were in France among all
classes and descriptions of people. Their veneration for King was proverbial
through the world; and this was only a sample of their universal respect for
every thing that bore the name of hereditary tokens of rank. Their adoration
for these distinctions could scarcely be considered as the effect of habit; it
had so far wound itself into the native character and soul of a Frenchman, that
it could not be distinguished from an element of his nature. But the change of
government, like a chemical analysis, has separated the dross of habit from the
gold of nature; it has melted off the courtier and showed us the man.

This is not all. The brilliance of wealth has likewise in that country lost
its former value; it being no longer considered, either by the proprietors or
by others, as capable of commanding respect. I know it will be said, in answer
to this, That it is owing to a temporary circumstance; that the great body of
the people, who have taken the government into their own hands, are envious
toward the rich, and are aiming to reduce all men to a level in regard to
property. The plainest reply to this assertion which has often been repeated
is, what candor itself would make, that it is not true. No people ever showed
a more sacred regard to private property than the French have uniformly done,
during the whole revolution. And, as if to put calumny to the blush, and baffle
all theories of sophistry against a popular reclamation of rights, this regard
to private property has been in proportion to the irregularity of their
movements, and the opportunity for pillage. It is to be wished that governments
themselves would learn a lesson of honor from these examples of anarchy,
instead of employing venal writers to abuse them.

It cannot be denied, that in all other parts of Europe there are two distinct
purposes to which property is applied, -- a resource against physical wants,
and a resource for personal respect. It cannot be denied, that in France it has
already ceased, in a great measure, to answer the last of these purposes. The
cause of this is perfectly natural, and I have no doubt that it must be
permanent. The same effect will be produced in other countries, by placing the
government on the solid basis of reason, instead of propping it up on the
tottering footstool of imposition.

I am aware that my argument is still exposed to one objection, from those
readers who are acquainted with the present state of society in America. It
will be said, that the people of the United States manifest a great attachment
to property, considered as wealth, and merely for the purpose of parade; that,
though their government is American, their manners are European. To this I
reply, in the first place, that the charge is true only in a limited sense. The
influence of riches in that country, even on the minds of those who possess
them, is by no means so great as it is in Europe. But this answer will not be
completely satisfactory to the objector, neither is it so to me. We must
acknowledge the fact to exist, at least in a considerable degree, and endeavor
to search out the cause. The people of that country have been always accustomed
to borrow their maxims, as well as their manners, from the various nations of
Europe, from which they emigrated: in the trading towns, many of the present
inhabitants are really Europeans, having been in the country but a short time;
and emigration is perpetually supplying all parts of the states with new
adventures: fashions, and a taste for expensive modes of living, are imported
with other merchandise. In the article of Public Salaries, the governments
themselves have been too much guided by European ideas; which suppose it
necessary that public officers should envelope themselves in pomp and splendour,
in order to inspire a veneration for the laws. For though salaries in general
were fixed at the revolution on a scale so low as to bear little proportion to
what was common in Europe, and though in some instances they have been since
reduced, yet they are still so high as to bear little proportion to what they
ought to be. These things have a great effect on the general maxims of life in
that country. But these things can never apply to Europe; and, on a change of
government and manners in the old world, they will cease to apply to the new.

The Americans cannot be said as yet to have formed a national character. The
political part of their revolution, aside from the military, was not of that
violent and convulsive nature that shakes the whole fabric of human opinions,
and enables men to decide which are to be retained as congenial to their
situation, and which should be rejected as the offspring of unnatural
connections. Happily, the weight of oppression there had never been so great,
nor of so long a duration, as to have distorted in any extravagant degree the
moral features of man. He recognized himself as the same being, under the new
system as the old; for the change of form had not been so perceptible as to
require a great change of principle. Under these circumstances, the people
continued most of their ancient maxims, though they were a mixture of foreign
and domestic; and, as habit is a coin current in all countries, it is not
surprising that whatever had received the stamp of authority in the polished
nations of Europe, should be adopted without scruple by the offspring of those
nations in America.

The circumstance of their not being invested with what is called national
character, though hitherto a subject of regret, will in future be much in their
favor. The public mind being open to receive impressions from abroad, they will
be able to profit by the practical lessons which will now be afforded them from
the change of system in this quarter of the world. It will be found there, as
it is now found in France, that the display of wealth will cease to be
challenged as an emblem or substitute for personal talents; and it will be
coveted every where, in a less degree than at present; as it will fail to
gratify the passion for respect. It may be farther remarked, that this is not
the only circumstance in which the state of society in America will be
essentially benefited by a change of manners in Europe.

But it must be confessed, after all, that this is a theory to which it is hard
to gain proselytes; especially among that class of men, whose knowledge of the
world has taught them a caution which shuns the allurements of audacious
speculation. And, since it must be referred to experience, to that I trust the
argument. I profess nothing more in this work, than to contemplate the effects
that a general revolution will produce on the affairs of nations. But in
contemplating these, it is essential that we should be apprised of the
corresponding change that will necessarily be wrought on the character of man;
in order that, being prepared for the event, he may think of such arrangements
as shall be likely to prevent his relapsing into the errors which have cost him
so much misery.

A chapter which treats on the system of abuses so generally adopted in raising
a revenue, can scarcely be closed with satisfaction to the reader, without some
reflections on the corresponding abuses which are found in the application. I
shall say nothing of high salaries, civil list, peace establishment, and the
other enormities on which privileged orders and senseless places depend. These
will so soon fall, with the wretched plans of government they support, that it
really seems like an ungenerous triumph, to wish to hasten their fate. When the
business of government shall be conducted, like other business, on the
principles of common sense, it will be paid for, like other business, in
proportion to the service performed. And unless this proportion be strictly
observed in the payment, these principles will not long be observed in the
service. But our observations in this place, on the application of revenue,
will chiefly be confined to the subject of Public Debts. This subject becomes
more important at this time, not merely on account of the present magnitude of
those debts in most of the states of Europe, but as relative to the principle
on which they are contracted and supported. Should this principle be found to
be dangerous to liberty, and suitable only to a vicious form of government, it
will furnish matter of deep reflection to a nation that wishes to establish its
affairs on the basis of reason and nature.

Here we must take a review of that mode of anticipation, which is common to
most of the modern governments of Europe, and known by the name of the funding
system. This invention (for so the art of funding is sometimes called) has
received from the hands of different writers, a considerable degree of censure,
as well as much unqualified and injudicious praise. Indeed, when considered
with reference to its wide sweep of attending circumstances, it presents itself
to the mind under a variety of aspects, and forms altogether a stupendous
object of meditation; having produced effects that have far surpassed the
limits of previous calculation or belief. In politics and war, it has changed
the face of Europe. With regard to other concerns, both of nations and
individuals, its effects have been various, contradictory, delusive, and
incapable of accurate estimation. It has astonishingly multiplied the force and
activity of trade; but it has increased in an equal degree the quantity of
useless and destructive speculation. It has converted commerce into a weapon of
war; and it has made of that tremendous calamity an alluring instrument of
commerce. It has brought these two occupations, so extremely opposite in their
nature, to a cordial coalition and mutual support; and thus by the aid of both,
it facilitates every project of ambition in the government; until it
familiarises the public mind to a serious acquiescence in a paradox, which must
have excited the ridicule of any age accustomed only to common calculation --
That the more a nation is debilitated and exhausted, the more splendid and
powerful it grows. Indeed the system is replete with so much apparent good,
attended with its solid weight of evils, that we may be thought to incur the
guilt of partiality or inattention, should we fail to qualify our censure with
some degree of approbation.

But the question, Whether the system of funding ought to be admitted in all
its latitude, can be decided only by striking the balance of good and evil in
the effects that it must from its nature produce. And I think, on considering
the subject as relative to a free republic, the balance will be found much more
on the side of the evil, than it is when applied to the old plans of government.

The benefits, to be derived from the system, are of two kinds: -- commercial,
as it facilitates the business of individuals, and political, as it aids the
government in the great operations of war. It is well known, or at least it is
universally believed, that the public debt in England, being funded on the
basis of mortgaging the national revenue for its interest, has created a
prodigious mass of capital in the hands of trade. By furnishing men with a kind
of stock, which they are sure of turning into money at any moment they choose,
it enables them to vary their operations with such facility, as to seize many
advantages in domestic and foreign markets, which must otherwise pass without
effect. It is in a great measure to this circumstance, that many persons
(perhaps without a due consideration of causes) have attributed the flourishing
state of commerce in this kingdom. Indeed, since it is found that commerce has
increased with the augmentation of taxes, the argument in favor of unlimited
funding has become so seducing, that the paradox has arisen almost to a
solecism; it is said that public insolvency is public wealth, and the national
debt is itself a national benefit.

The advantages of a political nature, which are derived from the principle of
funding, consist in establishing such an unquestionable credit, that the
government can at all times borrow, without the means or the intention, or even
the promise of payment. This credit answers all the purpose of an inexhaustible
treasury, on which the government may draw at any moment, and to any amount. It
is easy to conceive the immense facility thus given to the measures of
administration. It enables them to begin, on the shortest notice and with the
greatest secrecy, the most expensive operations, and then to pursue them to any
extent; and this without consulting the wishes of the nation. It precludues the
necessity of accumulating a national treasure by previous taxation and economy;
a measure which must always be attended with the disadvantage of losing the use
of the money, from the time it is hoarded, until it is expended. It likewise
avoids the necessity of another operation no less to be dreaded by officers of
government in general; I mean a sudden augmentation of taxes, by which the
people should be called upon to support the expenses of the year, within the
year. A measure which, if not sometimes impossible, would often be hazardous to
the reputation of ministers, and to the success of extraordinary enterprises.

Such is the general summary of the advantages derived from the Funding System;
and this opens to our view the train of evils with which they are contrasted.
These I fear will be too numerous to be particularly noticed, and too great to
be readily conceived. In the hands of an administration, I will not say
corrupt, but an administration whose interest is in any measure different from
that of the nation at large, this system is the most dangerous instrument that
can be imagined; as it is an instrument of incalculable force, and may be
always wielded without opposition. This, from the nature of the subject, must
be the case; because the expenses of any projected enterprise being charged on
posterity; the party most interested in making the opposition, is not in being
at the time, and cannot be heard in its remonstrance. Thus, in the business of
war, which is the principal object in the Funding System, it enables
governments to hire men to slaughter each other with more than their own
swords. They wring out of the hard earnings of future generations the means of
destroying the present. Here is a double violence with the generation, that
goes to war by the aid of funding, commits on the age that is to follow. It
precludes the existence of one part of society, by destroying those who should
have been their progenitors; and it charges the portion of posterity, that
escapes into existence, with the expenses of killing the fellows of their
ancestors. And these expenses they must pay under the cruel disadvantage of
being deprived of half their natural resources, by a diminution of their
natural numbers.

As military operations are now conducted, every man killed or destroyed in
war, costs to the nation upwards of a thousand pounds sterling. This
calculation is taken from a view of the last war in which England was engaged.
The nation expended in that war, as stated by Sir John Sinclair, Hist. of the
Reve^ue, Part III, page 95.
something more than 139 millions. No financier has calculated with any
accuracy the number of lives that it cost on the part o^ Great Britain, in
battles, hospitals, and prisons; probably it did not exceed 139 thousand. So
that the people of this country are now consoling themselves for the loss of
their friends and relations, by paying for their execution at the rate of a
thousand pounds a head. Other jobbs performed in such a wholesale manner are
generally charged at a cheaper rate; but this is more expensive than the
business of a like nature, which is done in the formality of detail, at the Old
Baily and Newgate.

It requires but a slight observation on the character of the times in
different ages, to show that the object of war, and the spirit with which it is
conducted, have been altogether different, within the present century, from
what they were in more remote periods of modern history. In the maratime
nations of Europe, the object of war has changed from religion to commerce;
from a point of honor among kings, to a point of profit among merchants,
ministers and generals. These subjects have nothing in their nature
sufficiently animating to rouse the enthusiasm of a whole nation to such a
degree, as to render it safe for the projector of a war to apply to the people
for their immediate support. Therefore, to find the means of carrying it on,
they resort to a principle congenial to the object of the war; and it becomes
supported, as it is projected, in the spirit of commerce. But, as all offensive
wars, in every possible circumstance, can only be maintained by deceiving the
people, the government in this case recurs to a commercial deception, and
induces them to undertake the burden, on condition that the weight of it be
shifted off to a future period. Such is the origin of funding; and it has
evidently risen out of the necessity that governments were under, of changing
the principle of deception, in order to conform to the spirit of the times.

As an engine of state, the funding system has completely taken place of
religious enthusiasm; and mankind have been hurried on to their own destruction
by the former, within the two last ages, with as little prudence and as much
delusion, as they were by the latter, in the twelfth century. Indeed, I see no
reason why a genuine crusade could not have been undertaken, even by the
government of Great Britain within the last fifty years, and carried on to any
extent, by the aid of the funding system. For the principle of the system is
such as to prevent men from enquiring into the object of the war; as every
inducement to such enquiry is almost completely taken away, with respect to
every class of society. One class, by the previous operation of the same system
in the increase of taxes, are rendered so wretched in their domestic condition,
that they are glad to engage as soldiers in any cause, for the sake of the pay,
so pitifully small as the pay of a soldier is; another class, and one that has
great influence on the public opinion, is composed of generals, contractors,
ministers and secretaries, with all their dependants, who are sure to make a
profitable jobb of any war, however it be conducted, and whatever be its
object; another class consists of idle speculators in the funds, whose chance
of gain increases with the jostling of public affairs, and especially with the
augmentation of the debt; while the rest of the community, who cannot be
rendered active by the allurements of private profit, are rendered passive by
deferring the payment of the loss.

From the time when the predatory spirit, which led the northern Barbarians to
ravage the south of Europe, had subsided, and given place to its natural
offspring, in the establishment of feudal monarchy, the history of this quarter
of the world begins to assume a consistent shape; and it offers itself to our
contemplation, as relative to the spirit of nations, under three successive
aspects. These are the spirit of Hierarchy, the spirit of Chivalry, and the
spirit of Commerce. Out of these different materials the genius of the
government has forged instruments of oppression almost equally destructive. It
has never failed to cloud the minds of the nation with some kind of
superstition, conformable to the temper of the times. In one age it is the
superstition of religion, in another the superstition of honor, in another the
superstition of public credit.

The deplorable use that has been made of the last of these, during the present
century in England, and for a much longer period in some other governments, has
induced many persons to regret that the spirit of commerce has ever become
predominant over that of chivalry and that of the church. They see a contracted
meanness in the one, which ill compares with the open enthusiasm of the other
two. But, before we find fault with what seems to be the order of nature in
these events, we ought to consider the effects that it has and will produce, in
the progress of society and morals. Chivalry and hierarchy taught us to believe
that all men who did not pay homage to the same monarch, or use the same mode
of worship with ourselves, were our natural enemies, and ought to be
extirpated. The spirit of commerce has brought us acquainted with those people;
we find them to be like other men, and that they are really useful to us in
supplying our wants. As their existence and their prosperity are found to be
advantageous to us in a commercial point of view, we cease to regard them as
enemies; and refuse to go and kill them, unless we are hired to do it. But as
commerce may deal in human slaughter as well as in other things, when ever the
government will offer us more money for destroying our neighbors than we can
get by other business, we are ready to make enemies of our best friends, and to
go to war, as we go to market, on a calculation of profit.

This is the true spirit of commerce, as relative to war. But as this spirit
has made us better acquainted with all foreign nations, and with ourselves, it
has excited a disposition for enquiry into the moral relations of men, with a
view to political happiness. The result of this enquiry is now beginning to
appear. It has already convinced us that there can be no possible case in which
one nation can be the natural enemy of another; and this leads us to discover
the cause why they have been factitious enemies. The whole is found to have
been a fatal deception perpetually imposed upon each nation by its own
government, for the private benefit of its administrators. The same spirit of
enquiry is now leading the people to change the form of their governments, that
society may be restored to its proper foundation, the general happiness of the
great community of men.

On examining the succession of principles which mark the character of the
times through these different periods, it appears that, when the spirit of
commerce had become predominant, the only engine of state, which could be
relied upon to excite the people to war, was the establishment of a national
credit by funding the national debts. And we should not be wide from the truth
in asserting, that to the funding system alone the principal commercial nations
of Europe are to attribute the wars of the present century, as well as the
enormous debts under which they have learned to struggle.

Such have been the effects of funding, under the old forms of government; and
having ascertained the principles on which it has operated in producing these
effects, we shall be better able to determine whether it be admissable in the
policy of a free republic. In this great crisis of human affairs, it behooves
mankind to probe the wounds of nature to the bottom, and to remove every
excrescence which might prevent a perfect cure.

Men of contemplative minds, as well as those of practical knowledge, have now
become so generally agreed in the necessity of the funding system, that, though
they discern the evils to which it must expose a nation, I fear it is one of
the last of their established maxims that they will be willing to subject to
the severity of discussion. The universal opinion is that a state cannot exist
without a national credit; unless it put itself to the disadvantage of hoarding
up money, and keeping a treasure in reserve. And this latter measure, besides
the inconvenience abovementioned, of losing the use of the capital while it
lies inactive, would throw into the hands of the executive government, the same
dangerous power which is entrusted to them by the means of credit* in this
respect their reasoning is just; and perhaps a full treasury would be the
greatest evil of the two.

But after all, what is the advantage of a national credit? I mean, in the
sense in which it is generally understood, the facility of raising a capital on
long annuities, by a mortgage of revenue. Shall we not find on an investigation
of this very simple question, that the advantage derived from such a credit
(even supposing it never to be abused) can only be applicable to the old
systems of government? Will it not appear that it is an advantage totally
unnecessary to a rational and manly administration, conducted by the wishes of
a free and enlightened people? I am supposing, and it is but fair to suppose,
that such a people will always understand their own interest. Or, at least, if
they make a mistake, it will be the mistake of the nation, not of the
ministers; they will never suffer an enterprise to be undertaken, but what is
agreeable to the majority of the active citizens. This people will never engage
in any offensive war. Indeed, as soon as the surrounding nations adopt the same
change of government, the business of war will be forgotten; but in the
interval, previous to this event, a real republic cannot stand in need of
funds, as a preparative for war, unless it be invaded. It is even safer without
funds; because they might be a temptation to the officers of government to
counteract the spirit of the republic. In case such a people be really attacked
by an enemy, then it is that the force of society may be seen and calculated.
But the calculation does not turn on the cabinet-rules of royal arithmetic; the
power of the republic for the purpose of defense does not depend on a national
credit, in the sense abovementioned, or the facility of borrowing money; the
government, in making up its estimate of resistance, never asks, how many
soldiers have we in pay? And how many recruits can we enlist or impress? But of
how many men does the nation consist? Armies start into being by a spontaneous
impulse; every citizen feels the cause to be his own, and presents his person
or his provisions and his arms, not as an offering to a tyrannical master, of
whose intentions he would be suspicious, but as a defense of his own family and
property. The enemy being repulsed, whatever inequalities may be found to have
arisen in this emulous contribution, are liquidated and settled on a general
scale of justice.

Even supposing the war to be of long continuance* and to require sums of money
beyond the voluntary contributions, and beyond the power of prudent taxation
for the time; (which indeed, in a wealthy and well regulated republic, would be
an extraordinary thing, and I believe never would occur) in such a case, the
justice of the cause, and the natural magnanimity which habitual freedom
inspires, would be a sufficient guarantee for loans, at home or abroad. It is
true in nature, and the truth must prove itself beyond contradiction to the
world, as soon as it shall have opportunity to judge, that a great people
accustomed to exercise their rights, would never violate their duties.

Injustice may be expected from governments founded in usurpation; it is their
natural character, the tenure on which they hold their authority. They never
can be just, unless they deviate from their principle. What is called their
penal justice, as well as their pecuniary justice, is only the fruit of their
fears; and ought to be regarded only as an evidence of their constitutional
weakness. As every thing they do, must be done by the force of money, it is
necessary that they should establish a character for mercantile punctuality, to
serve as a substitute for the quality of justice, which quality the nature of
their existence denies them. The reverse of this is the case with governments
founded in reason and nature, where all the people have an active interest.
Justice there is the first article in the social compact; and as neither policy
nor principle can ever admit of a deviation from this, the event is not to be
expected.

This is the kind of national credit that is proper for a free republic. It is
involved in the nature of their system, and spurns those extraneous aids which
artificial credits have required. I should consider it as a circumstance
dangerous to the progress of society, if the new republics, which are to raise
out of the ruins of these antiquated masses of error, should retain the two
great principles of finance, on which much of that error has been supported. To
raise the revenue by disguising the taxes, and to force a public credit by dint
of funding, have been equally necessary to the ancient system; and it appears
to me that they would be equally destructive to the new.

How the national debts that now exist in several countries, are to be disposed
of, under a change of government, is indeed a question of serious magnitude.
Probably that of France will be nearly extinguished by the sale of the national
domains. That of Spain, and those of most other Catholic countries, may be
balanced in the same way. In some Protestant nation, where the debts and the
domains have lost their relative proportion, the case will be widely (...) But,
whatever may be the fate (...) clear that they (...) they will not, (...)
progress of liberty.

END OF PART II.

