THE HISTORY OF THE COUNTY OF WORCESTER. IN THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS:
WITH A Particular Account of every Town from its first Settlement to the
present Time; Including its ECCLESIASTICAL STATE, TOGETHER WITH A GEOGRAPHICAL
DESCRIPTION OF THE SAME.

To which is prefixed, A MAP OF THE COUNTY, AT LARGE, FROM ACTUAL SURVEY.

BY PETER WHITNEY, A. M. Minister of the Gospel in Northborough, in said County.

PRINTED AT WORCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS, BY ISAIAH THOMAS, Sold by him in
WORCESTER, by said THOMAS and ANDREWS, in BOSTON, and by said THOMAS and
CARLISLE, in WALPOLE, Newhampshire.

MDCCXCIII.

TO JOHN ADAMS, L. L. D. Vicepresident OF THE United States, AND President OF
THE American Academy OF Arts AND Sciences, etc. etc. THIS HISTORY, INTENDED TO
PROMOTE THE KNOWLEDGE OF A PART OF HIS NATIVE COMMONWEALTH,

IS INSCRIBED, WITH ALL RESPECT, BY HIS MOST OBEDIENT, AND HUMBLE SERVANT,
PETER WHITNEY.
Northborough, July, 1793.
A MAP OF THE COUNTRY of WORCESTER.
map of Worcester

PREFACE.
THE Author of the following History would most willingly have been excused
from the service, had any other person appeared to have undertaken it. A work
of this kind was wanted: The author, however unequal to the task, had
advantages herefor above some others, being born in the western part, and
having the bounds of his habitation fixed in the eastern part, of the county.
Had the writer of these sheets known before he began, what a labor it would
have been, he would not have attempted it, but having begun, he was unwilling
to desist, and has been urged on by the partiality of his friends. However
difficult the collection of materials has been, yet he has derived a
satisfaction by no means small, in ransacking records, searching into the
antiquities of this part of the country, and in endeavoring to gratify his
readers with a history thereof.

The locality of the work may be thought, by some, an objection to it. But to
have completed a history of the Commonwealth, upon this plan, would be a
labor too great, and too lengthy for any one, unless he was a person of
fortune, and should devote a long life wholly thereunto. If various gentlemen,
in different parts of the State, would undertake to write a history of their
particular counties or districts, upon this, or a better plan, we might then
hope to see a complete history of Massachusetts collected, which would be not
merely entertaining, but profitable and instructive from age to age; care being
taken to make such alterations in, and additions to the work, as time would
occasion: These would respect the civil and ecclesiastical state of the
counties, their population, and their improvements in arts and manufactures.

The greatest care and pains have been taken to ascertain exact dates, where it
was possible. Hence towns and churches may know their respective ages, if at
any time their records should be unhappily destroyed. The dates, however, are
all inserted according to the originals; and, therefore, the reader, in order
to know when a century or more has elapsed from the date of any event recorded
in this history, will always remember to add eleven days thereto, until he
comes down to the 2d of September 1752, when New Style, so called, took place.
For instance, if a town was incorporated August 1, 1728, it will not have
completed a full century until August 12, 1828.

The author of this work has endeavored to be impartial, and to do justice to
every town in its description and history, and if he has failed hereof, it must
be imputed to other causes than any particular local prejudices. He has not
omitted any thing worth preserving, which has come to his knowledge.

Many and too great defects will, most likely, be found by discerning readers
of this history; but none, however, but such as their candor and ingenuity will
readily excuse in this first attempt of the kind; and none but what may be
remedied in time, if ever a future edition should be called for. And persons,
who find defects or mistakes, or see the necessity of additions or alterations,
are requested heartily to point them out to

The AUTHOR.

INDEX TO THE TOWNS, etc.
TOWNS PAGE ASHBURNHAM. 264 Athol, 243 Bar, 287 Berlin, 303 Bolton, 177
Brookfield. 62 Boylston, 308 Charlton, 221 Douglass. 203 Dudley, 151 Fitchburg.
252 Gardner, 306 Gerry. 315 Grafton, 166 Hardwick, 174 Harvard, 154 Holden, 188
Hubbardston, 281 Lancaster, 36 Leicester, 99 Leominster, 192 Lunenburg, 143
Mendon. 54 Milford. 293 Newbraintree. 207 Northborough, 272 Northbridge. 285
Oakham, 248 Oxford, 82 Paxton. 258 Petersham. 215 Princeton. 232 Royalston. 261
Rutland. 109 Shrewsbury. 131 Southborough, 130 Spencer. 212 Sterling. 298
Sturbridge. 184 Sutton. 89 Templeton. 240 Upton. 171 Uxbridge. ^^6 Ward. 291
Westborough, 120 Western 199 Westminster 225 Winchendon, 2^^ Worcester* 25
Woodstock, 317 The County. 9 Courts of Common Pleas. 1^ -- Justices of, ibid.
-- Clerks of, 16 Sheriffs of the County. 17 Judges of Probate. ibid Registers
of Probate, 18 Registers of Deeds. ibid. General description of he County, 20
Representatives to Congress. 21 Senators, 22 Rivers. 322 Ministers Settled and
Removed. 328 Dates of Incorporation of Towns. ibid. Number of Inhabitants. ibid
Valuation List 33^
The following being omitted in its proper place at the end of the book, is
here inserted.
THE proportion of Tax, which this County bears to the whole State, will appear
by subjoining the following account of what each county pays on the thousand,
with its number of polls, agreeably to the last valuation.

Counties. Polls. On the thous. L s. d. q. Suffolk, 9884 162 12 0 1 Essex,
12376 133 19 7 2 Middlesex, 10109 104 13 4 2 Hampshire, 13912 111 18 0 3
Worcester, 13762 127 15 0 2 Barnstable, 3759 20 15 11 3 Plymouth, 6912 59 9 9 3
Dukes County, 763 5 9 8 2 Nantucket, 1121 6 13 3 1 Bristol, 6547 53 19 6 3
Berkshire, 6265 52 3 3 3 York, 6484 50 1 9 0 Cumberland, 5723 43 6 5 2 Lincoln,
6349 50 13 10 1 Hancock, 1967 13 7 1 0 Washington, 493 3 1 1 0 L1000 0 0 0

THE HISTORY OF THE COUNTY OF WORCESTER.
THE COUNTY.
IN giving a history of this county, it is fitting to begin with a recital of
the Act of the General Court for forming the same, which is as follows:

"An act for erecting, granting, and making a county in the inland parts of
this province, to be called The County of Worcester, and for establishing
Courts of justice within the same.

"Be it enacted by his Excellency the Governor, Council, and Representatives,
in General Court assembled, and by the authority of the same, That the towns
and places hereafter named and expressed, that is to say, Worcester, Lancaster,
Westborough, Shrewsbury, Southborough, Leicester, Rutland, and Lunenburgh, all
in the county of Middlesex; Mendon, Woodstock, Oxford, Sutton, including
Hassanamisco, Uxbridge, and the land lately granted to several petitioners of
Medfield, all in the county of Suffolk; Brookfield in the county of Hampshire,
and the south town laid out to the Narraganset soldiers; and all other lands
lying within the said townships, with the inhabitants thereon, shall, from and
after the tenth day of July, which will be in the year of our Lord one thousand
seven hundred and thirty one, be and remain one entire and distinct county by
the name of Worcester, of which Worcester to be the county, or shire town: And
the said county to have, use and enjoy, all such powers, privileges, and
immunities, as by law other counties within this province, have and do enjoy.

"And be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that there shall be held and
kept within the said county of Worcester yearly, and in every year, at the
times and place in this Act hereafter expressed, a Court of General Sessions of
the Peace, and an Inferior Court of Common Pleas, to sit at Worcester, on the
second Tuesdays of May and August, and the first Tuesdays of November and
February, yearly and in every year, until this Court shall otherwise order: --
Also, that there shall be held and kept at Worcester, within the said county of
Worcester, yearly and in every year, until this Court shall otherwise order, a
Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and General Goal Delivery, to sit
on the Wednesday immediately preceding the time by law appointed for the
holding the said Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and General Goal
Delivery, at Springfield, within and for the county of Hampshire: -- And the
Justices of the said Court of General Sessions of the Peace, Inferior Court of
Common Pleas, and Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and General
Goal Delivery respectively, who are, or shall be, thereunto lawfully
commissioned and appointed, shall have, hold, use, exercise and enjoy all and
singular the powers which are by law given and granted unto them, within any
other counties of the province, where a Court of General Sessions of the Peace,
Inferior Court of Common Pleas, and Superior Court of Judicature, Court of
Assize and General Goal Delivery, are already established.

"Provided, That all writs, suits, plaints, processes, appeals, reviews,
recognizances, or any other matters or things which now are or any time before
the said tenth day of July, shall be depending in the law within any part of
the said county of Worcester: -- And also, all matters and things which now
are, or at any time before the said tenth of July, shall be depending before
the Judges of Probate within part of the said county of Worcester, shall be
heard, tried, proceeded upon and determined in the counties of Suffolk,
Middlesex, and Hampshire respectively, where the same are or shall be
returnable or depending, and have, or shall have day, or days.

"Provided also, That nothing in this act contained, shall be construed to
disannul, defeat, or make void any deeds or conveyances of lands, lying in the
said county of Worcester, where the same are, or shall be, before the said
tenth of July, recorded in the Register's office of the respective counties
where such lands do now lie; but that all such deeds or conveyances so recorded
shall be held good and valid as they would have been had not this act been made.

"And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of
the Court of General Sessions of the Peace, at their first meeting in the said
county of Worcester, shall have full power and authority to appoint some meet
person, within the said county of Worcester, to be Register of deeds and
conveyances within the same, who shall be sworn to the faithful discharge of
his trust in the said office, and shall continue to hold and exercise the same
according to the directions of the law, until some person be elected by the
freeholders of the said county of Worcester, who are hereby empowered to choose
such person, on the first Thursday of September next ensuing, by the methods in
the law already prescribed, to take upon him that trust. And until such
Register shall be so appointed, by the said justices, and sworn, all deeds and
conveyances of lands lying within any part of the county of Worcester, which
shall be recorded in the Register's office of the respective counties where
such lands do now lie, shall be held and deemed good and valid to all intents
and purposes as to the recording thereof.

"And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the methods,
directions and proceedings by law provided, as well for the electing and
choosing a Register of deeds and conveyances, as a county Treasurer, which
officers shall be appointed in the same manner as is by law already provided,
on the first Thursday of September next, and also for the bringing forward and
trying any actions, causes, pleas or suits, both civil and criminal in the
several counties of this province and Courts of Judicature within the same, and
choosing of Jurors to serve at the Courts of Justice, shall extend, and be
attended, observed and put in practice within the said county of Worcester, and
by the Courts of Justice within the same: Any law, usage or custom to the
contrary notwithstanding.

"Provided always, That the inhabitants of the several towns and places herein
before enumerated and set off a distinct county, shall pay their proportion to
any county rates or taxes already made and granted, in the same manner as they
would have done, had not this act been made."

This act passed April 2, 1731.

When the county was thus erected, the following persons were commissioned
officers of the Court of Common Pleas, and for the county, viz.

COURTS of COMMON PLEAS.
JUSTICES.
Hon. John Chandler, of Woodstock, Joseph Wilder, of Lancaster, William Ward,
of Southborough, William Jennison, of Worcester, Esquires, Judges. John
Chandler, jun. of Worcester, Clerk, Daniel Gookin, of Worcester, Sheriff.
And the first Court of General Sessions of the Peace, and Inferior Court of
Common Pleas, for the county, was held at Worcester, August 10th, 1731, when
the Rev. John Prentice, of Lancaster, preached a sermon before them, which was
printed, from 2 Chronicles, Chap. xix. 6th, and 7th verses; "And said to the
Judges, Take heed-what ye do: For ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who
is with you in the judgment. Wherefore now, let the fear of the Lord be upon
you, take heed and do it: For there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor
respect of persons, nor taking of gifts." This was king Jehoshaphat's charge to
the judges of Judah.

The Judges of the Court of Common Pleas, after the first appointment, as there
have been vacancies by death, resignation, etc. have been as follow.

When the Hon. John Chandler, of Woodstock, died, Joseph Dwight, Esquire was
appointed, and the Hon. Joseph Wilder, of Lancaster, was first.

Upon the death of Judge Jennison, Samuel Willard, Esquire of Lancaster, was
appointed a Judge in 1743.

In 1745, Nahum Ward, Esquire of Shrewsbury, was commissioned Judge, vice William
Ward, Esquire.

In 1750, Edward Hartwell, Esquire of Lunenburg, was appointed Judge, in the room
of Joseph Dwight, Esquire.

In 1753, Jonas Rice, Esquire of Worcester, was constituted Judge, vice Samuel
Willard, Esquire.

In May, 1754, John Chandler, Esquire of Worcester, who had, from the beginning,
been Clerk of the Court, was appointed a Judge of said Court.

In the year 1756, Thomas Steel, Esquire of Liecester, was commissioned Judge of
the Court, vice Jonas Rice, Esquire deceased.

In May, 1757, upon the death of Judge Wilder, a new arrangement took place, in
the following order: Hon. John Chandler, Edward Hartwell, Thomas Steel, Timothy
Ruggles, Esquires, were commissioned Judges.


Upon the resignation of Judge Chandler, in February, 1762; a commission issued
from the Governor and Council, appointing Hon. Timothy Ruggles, of Hardwick,
first Judge, Thomas Steel, of Liecester, Joseph Wilder, of Lancaster, and
Artemas Ward, of Shrewsbury, Esquires, Judges.


These gentlemen all continued in that office, until the year 1774, when the
people, in consequence of the controversy with Greatbritain, put a stop to the
exercise of all judicial powers, held under the King of England, or the
Governor of the province, his representative. In this situation the whole then
province remained, until October 17th, 1775, when a commission issued, from the
powers which then were, constituting and appointing the Hon. Artemas Ward, of
Shrewsbury; Jedidiah Foster, of Brookfield; Moses Gill, of Princetown; and
Samuel Baker, of Berlin, Esquires, Justices of the Court of Common Pleas.


In pursuance of which a Court was holden December 5, 1775.

On September 19th, 1776, the Hon. Joseph Dorr, Esquire of Ward, was appointed a
Justice of this Court, vice the Hon. Jedidiah Foster, Esquire who was advanced to
be one of the Judges of the Supreme Judicial Court of this Commonwealth.

Since the appointment of the Hon. Mr. Dorr, there has been no change or
alteration in the Judiciary department; that is, for more than sixteen years.

CLERKS.
The Clerks of the Court of General Sessions of the Peace, and the Court of
Common Pleas, from the beginning, have been as follow:

Hon. John Chandler, jun. of Worcester, first Clerk. In November, 1751, the
Hon. Timothy Pain, Esquire was appointed joint Clerk with Mr. Chandler; and after
Mr. Chandler's advancement to the bench, in 1754, Mr. Pain continued sole
Clerk of said Courts, to the year 1774. In December, 1775, the Hon. Levi
Lincoln, Esquire was appointed Clerk, who continued in the office but a year, and
resigned, when Joseph Allen, Esquire of Worcester, was appointed, and still
continues Clerk.

SHERIFFS of the COUNTY to this time.
In 1743, Benjamin Flagg, Esquire of Worcester, was appointed Sheriff, vice Daniel
Gookin, Esquire deceased. August, 1751, John Chandler, jun. Esquire of Worcester,
succeeded Benjamin Flagg, deceased. In 1762, Gardner Chandler, Esquire of
Worcester, was constituted Sheriff, vice, Hon. John Chandler, promoted. Mr.
Gardner Chandler continued in the office until the year 1775, when Simeon
Dwight, Esquire of Western, was commissioned Sheriff, and continued until his death
in 1778, when William Greenleaf, of Lancaster, was appointed, who continued ten
years, and was succeeded by the Hon. John Sprague, Esquire of Lancaster, who
resigned the office in 1792, when Dwight Foster, Esquire of Brookfield, was
appointed. Mr. Foster being chosen a Representative for this district, resigned
the office of Sheriff; whereupon William Caldwell, Esquire of Rutland, was
appointed in his place, July 9, 1793.

JUDGES of PROBATE from the beginning.
Hon. John Chandler, of Woodstock; who was succeeded by Joseph Wilder, Esquire of
Lancaster; succeeded by John Chandler, Esquire of Worcester; succeeded by his son,
Hon. John Chandler, Esquire of Worcester, in 1762, who continued in office until
the Revolution. After that period, Jedidiah Foster, Esquire of Brookfield, was
appointed and continued until his advancement. He was succeeded by Artemas
Ward, Esquire of Shrewsbury; succeeded by Levi Lincoln, Esquire of Worcester; succeeded
by Joseph Dorr, Esquire of Ward, the present Judge.
REGISTERS of PROBATE.
Hon. John Chandler, jun. Esquire of Worcester, first Register; he was succeeded in
the office by Timothy Pain, Esquire of Worcester. A few years before the
Revolution, Mr. Clarke Chandler, of Worcester, (...) ^ppointed joint Register
with the Hon. Mr. Pain. In 1776, Joseph Wheeler, Esquire of Worcester, was
appointed Register, and continued to his death, Feb. 10, 1793. Upon his
decease, Mr. Theophilus Wheeler was appointed Register.
Probate Courts are held at the Probate Office in Worcester, on the first
Tuesday of every month; and, for the accommodation of the inhabitants, on
certain other days, in different parts of the county.

REGISTERS of DEEDS.
Hon. John Chandler, Esquire of Worcester, the first, and succeeded by Timothy
Pain, Esquire of Worcester, who continued in the office until the Revolution --
when Mr. Nathan Baldwin, of Worcester, was chosen; -- after his death, Daniel
Clap, Esquire of Worcester, was elected, who now fills that station. The office for
the registry is kept at Worcester.
The public buildings of the county are good and convenient. The Court House is
well situated; is a handsome building, but wants to be enlarged, and in all
probability speedily will be.

The Jail is a large, commodious house, lately erected at the expense of the
county: it is built with good stones, of a greyish color, from Millstone Hill,
so called, in Worcester, the inhabitants whereof freely gave the stone for this
purpose. It is 64 feet in length, and 32 in breadth, and three stories high.
The lower story is divided into four arches crosswise, forming four rooms for
the safe custody of persons convicted of, or committed for gross crimes. The
second is divided, in the same manner, into four rooms, but not arched with
stone. These are for the keeping of debtors, who have not the liberty of the
yard; and for persons committed for small offenses. The upper story has an
entry or walk from end to end, and is divided into eight convenient rooms for
the use of prisoners for debt who have the liberty of the jail yard. This yard
extends so as to include the jailor's house, and the meetinghouse of the second
parish. The house built for the keeper of the jail is the property of the
county: It is a handsome, well finished building.

The Court of Common Pleas, and of the General Sessions of the Peace, have four
terms in a year, appointed by Act of the Legislature, for sitting and
transacting business -- viz. on the fourth Tuesday in March, the second Tuesday
in June, the last Tuesday in August, and the first Tuesday in December.

The Supreme Judicial Court of this Commonwealth holds two sessions in this
county annually: The times herefor, by law, at present established, are the
Tuesday preceding the last Tuesday of April, and the third Tuesday of September.

Since the establishment of this county, sixty two years ago, twelve persons
have been tried and executed for the following crimes: For Murders, 5 For
Burglaries, 5 For Rapes, 2


A GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTY.
THE County of Worcester, however small in its beginning, The late Governor
Hutchinson, who was then a member of the General Court, strenuously opposed, as
it is said, its being erected into a county; urging the utter improbability of
its ever making any figure. He lived to see that he was greatly mistaken in his
conjectures. This is an instance which may show us we have no certain rules to
proceed upon in calculating the growth and population of new settlements; they,
generally, exceed the most raised expectations of people, and, often, all
rational probability.
consisting of but fifteen or sixteen towns, the greater part of which were
infant plantations, with but few inhabitants, has flourished and increased in
the most rapid and s^rprising manner. It has risen to eminence and distinction
among the counties of the Commonwealth; for while it is but the tenth in age,
it is the third in wealth, paying a larger proportion of a state tax, than any
of the other counties, except Suffolk and Essex, and falling but a little short
of these two.

It is large in extent; being bounded on the south, almost equally, by the
States of Connecticut and Rhodeisland; and on the north by the state of
Newhampshire. On the east it is bounded, mainly, by the county of Middlesex,
just touching at its south east angle upon the county of Suffolk; and on the
west by the county of Hampshire. It is about 48 miles in length from north to
south, and about 35 miles in width from east to west. It contains forty nine
towns, the most of which are large in extent of lands, and number of
inhabitants.

According to a late census, taken by an act of Congress, in order to a just
apportionment of the number of Representatives among the several States, it
contains 56807 souls.

REPRESENTATIVES to CONGRESS.
IN the first and second Congress, under the present Constitution, this county
was entitled to an eighth part in the representation of this Commonwealth. The
Hon. Jonathan Grout, Esquire of Petersham, was elected Representative for this
county in the first Congress. The Hon. Artemas Ward, Esquire of Shrewsbury, was
chosen to represent this county in the second Congress, whose term expired on
the fourth of March, 1793. And whereas by an enumeration of all the inhabitants
of the United States lately made, the number of Representatives for this
Commonwealth, according to Constitution, is increased to fourteen; so the
Legislature by a late Act, joined the counties of Worcester, Hampshire and
Berkshire, in one district, for the choice of four Representatives for the
third Congress; one of whom was to be chosen in each county, and the fourth in
either of the three. At the late election, in this district, the Hon. Artemas
Ward, Esquire was chosen Representative for this county, by a large majority of the
votes of the three counties. The Representative chosen for the district, in
whose election this county gives its voice, is the Hon. Dwight Foster, Esquire of
Brookfieid, the late Sheriff of the county of Worcester.

Besides that this county may have its full share of representation in
Congress, it gives in its suffrages, with a number of other counties, for one
Representative for the State at large, who is chosen, viz. the Hon. David Cobb,
Esquire of Taunton, in the county of Bristol.

The county of Worcester, also, chooses annually, an eighth part, five, of the
Senators in the Legislature of the Commonwealth.

SENATORS.
THE following is a list of the gentlemen who have been chosen Senators for
this county, from the commencement of our new constitution, on the 25th of
October, 1780, to the present time.

1780, Hon. Moses Gill, of Princeton; Samuel Baker, of Berlin; Joseph Dorr, of
Ward, Israel Nichols, of Leominster; and Seth Washburn, of Leicester, Esqrs.

1781, Hon. Moses Gill, Samuel Baker, Joseph Dorr, Israel Nichols, Jonathan
Warner, of Hardwick, Esqrs.

1782, Hon. Moses Gill, Samuel Baker, Joseph Dorr, Israel Nichols, Jonathan
Warner, Esqrs.

1783, Hon. Moses Gill, Samuel Baker, Israel Nichols, Seth Washburn, Jonathan
Warner, Esqrs.

1784, Hon. Moses Gill, Samuel Baker, Israel Nichols, Seth Washburn, Jonathan
Warner, Esqrs.

1785, Hon. Moses Gill, Samuel Baker, Israel Nichols, Seth Washburn, John
Sprague, Esqrs.

1786, Hon. Moses Gill, Samuel Baker, Seth Washburn, Abel Wilder, of
Winchendon; Israel Nichols, Esqrs.

1787, Hon. Seth Washburn, Abel Wilder, Amos Singletary, of Sutton; John
Fessenden, of Rutland; Joseph Stone, of Harvard, Esqrs.

This year, 1787, Hon. Peter Penniman, Esquire of Mendon, was chosen Counselor.

1788, Hon. Samuel Baker, Abel Wilder, Amos Singletary, John Fessenden,
Jonathan Grout, of Petersham, Esqrs.

This year the Hon. Artemas Ward, Esquire was chosen Counselor.

1789, Hon. Moses Gill, Abel Wilder, Amos Singletary, John Fessenden, and Peter
Penniman, of Mendon, Esqrs.

1790, Hon. Moses Gill, Samuel Baker, Abel Wilder, Amos Singletary, John
Fessenden, Esqrs.

1791, Hon. Moses Gill, Samuel Baker, Jonathan Warner, Abel Wilder, Timothy
Newell, Esqrs.

1792, Hon. Moses Gill, Samuel Baker, Abel Wilder, Jonathan Warner, Timothy
Newell, Esqrs.

In the fall of 1792, the Legislature, according to Constitution, chose the
Hon. Josiah Stearns, Esquire of Lunenburg, to fill the vacancy occasioned by the
death of the Hon. Mr. Wilder.

1793, Hon. Moses Gill, Samuel Baker, Jonathan Warner, Timothy Newell, Josiah
Stearns, Esqrs.

The Hon. Moses Gill, Esquire has uniformly been elected a Counselor for this
county, from the commencement of the Constitution, in 1780, to this time, 1793,
except only in the years 1787 and 1788.

As by the Constitution of the Commonwealth, every town in the state, having
150 rateable polls, may send one Representative to the State Legislature: And
every town, having 375, may send two, and so on in the same ratio; so every
town in the county can send one, except Gardner: Diverse of them are entitled to
two, and some of them to three.

WORCESTER.
AS this is the shire town of the county of Worcester, we will first give an
account and description of this place, and then proceed to the other towns in
the county according to their respective ages, reckoning from the dates of the
acts of incorporation.

Worcester is part of a tract of land called by the aboriginals, Quinfigamond;
which territory was by them esteemed to bound easterly, partly on Quinsigamond
pond, and partly on Hassanamisco, now Grafton; southerly, on the Nipnet, or
Nipmug country, where Oxford and some adjacent towns now are; westerly, on
Quaboag, now Brookfield, and lands in that vicinity; and northerly, on
Nashawogg, now Lancaster, Sterling, etc. etc. On October 24th, 1668, a township
of land of rather more than eight miles square, to be bounded, easterly on
Quinsigamond pond, was granted by the General Court, to Daniel Gookin, Daniel
Henchman, Thomas Prentice, and their associates. But war, at that time, and for
several succeeding years, prevailing with the Indians, the settlement of the
place was prevented until the year 1685: At which time, the natives appearing
peaceably disposed, and behaving in a friendly manner to the English, the above
named persons, together with John Wing, George Danson, Peter Goulding, Dickery
Sargeant, Isaac Bull and Jacob Leonard, ventured to begin the plantation.

The town was incorporated the preceding year October 15, 1684, and the name of
Worcester given to it. But the first town meeting ever held in the place, was
on the last Wednesday of September, 1722. A special order of the General Court
passed directing Judge Fulham of Weston, to call said meeting. Here we must
observe, by the way, that the method of the Government was very different in
former times, from what it has been since. -- In those earlier days,
plantations were named, and said to be incorporated, when there were few, or no
inhabitants in them; and when a sufficient number of people had settled in
them, a special resolve of Court passed to empower them too meet, and choose
their town Officers: But for 60 years past, they have been incorporated, named,
and empowered to hold town meetings, by the same act.


In the year following several other men, with their families, moved into the
place. And the settlement thereof went on prosperously until the year 1701,
when the Indians began again to attack the frontier towns in Massachusetts. In
the year 1702, the Indians killed the wife of Dickery Sargeant, and two of his
children, and carried three of his children into captivity. These children, two
sons and a daughter, chose to dwell among the Indians. However, in 1726, they
accompanied Miss Williams, taken from Deerfield, on a visit to then friends in
New England.
In this town also, Mr. Elisha Ward was supposed to be killed, for he was known
to be shot at, and never after seen, or heard of. The war raged with such fury
at this time, that Worcester was entirely depopulated. But peace being
concluded with the Indians, in the beginning of the year 1713. Some of the
proprietors of the township applied to the General Court for encouragement and
direction toward its resettlement.

In consequence of this application the Court appointed a committee to
ascertain the claims of the grantees; and conduct the resettlement of the
place. On the 21st of October, 1713, Jonas Rice, with his family, moved into
the place and remained there, without any other inhabitants, until the spring
of the Year 1715, when a considerable number of persons joined him. The number
of settlers was augmented by Emigrants from Ireland in 1718: Since which time
it has flourished and increased exceedingly, and become large, populous and
wealthy. In the year 1740, Holden was set off from Worcester, and became a
distinct town; and in 1778, 2200 acres, with the inhabitants thereon, were
taken from this town to aid in forming the town of Ward; -- Yet still Worcester
is large in its dimensions, being about six miles square: And bounded,
northerly, on Holden; easterly on Shrewsbury, Boylston and Long Pond;
southerly, on Ward and Sutton, and westerly, on Leicester, and Holden. It is
become very populous, containing two thousand one hundred inhabitants,
according to the census taken in the year 1791: And it will no doubt, still
greatly increase for many years. It is also wealthy and opulent, being the
third town in the county, in the proportion which it pays in a state tax; and
would be the first, most certainly, in the list, did not the other two,
Brookfield, and Sutton, greatly exceed it in extent and dimensions; and also in
the number of souls.

The inhabitants, in the outer parts of this town, subsist by husbandry. But in
the center, in the compass of one mile, and mostly on one street, are collected
the county officers, a number of merchants and shop keepers, professional men,
and mechanics of various sorts. A very great trade is here carried on, in
European and Westindia goods; and the adjacent country is supplied from this
town: Here are large apothecary stores, and stores of all kinds of hardware.

A printing press was here set up in 1775, by Mr. Isaiah Thomas, who is thought
to do far more business than any other in the state, or in the United States of
America. In the time of the political controversy between Great Britain, and
these States, previous to the war, near the close of the year 1774, several
gentlemen applied in Boston, to Isaiah Thomas, printer of the Massachusetts
Spy, (a Newspaper famed for its opposition to the British government, and which
was no small spoke in the wheel of the American Revolution) to set up a
printing pr^ in Worcester: He consented, and issued proposals for that purpose
and for printing a newspaper weekly, in the town of Worcester: But, soon after,
the politics of that time wearing a more serious aspect, and Mr. Thomas being
one of a list of persons, who it was thought, would first feel the weight of
British vengence, secretly withdrew himself, and his printing materials, from
Boston. His printing apparatus he sent off for Worcester, about three days
before the battle of Lexington, and he himself followed the day after that
battle. On the 3d of May, 1775, he, at Worcester, recommenced the publication
of the Massachusetts Spy, which was the first printing performed in the county.
This newspaper is still printed at Worcester, and is the oldest in the State,
the Boston Gazette excepted.

When the war ceased, Mr. Thomas extended his business, and in the year 1788,
reestablished a printing office i^ Boston, he himself residing in Worcester,
where he still carries on the printing business on a very larger scale, as he
does also in Boston. Among other large works which have issued from his presses
in Worcester, are three editions of the Bible, viz. a large Folio, with 50
copper plates; a large Royal Quarto, with Concordance, etc. and one in Octavo;
-- they are all the first of the kind ever printed in America: -- And, upon
examination, his editions are found the most correct of any now extant. He is
now preparing to print two other editions of the Bible; viz. a small Quarto;
and one in Duodecimo, or the common school Bible: For this last, all the types
will be kept standing for the whole work, as is the method in the King's
printing houses in England and Scotland. Mr. Thomas has also carried on the
Bookbinding business very extensively; and is now engaged in building, in
Worcester, as large a Paper Mill as is in this state. His Bookstore in
Worcester is kept well filled with a large assortment of Books in all branches
of Literature, which is a great accommodation to purchasers, in the town and
county. His manufactures employ and support a large number of people; and it
may justly be said, that the business of no one person, has added more to the
consequence and advantage of the town and county of Worcester, than his.


The houses in the street, are very compact, many of them large and elegant, as
also the stores and shops. And here they have a number of large inns, not only
for the accommodation of the people of the county, at the times for holding the
courts, but for travelers, and it is a place of great resort. On the street
has lately been erected a large and handsome schoolhouse, of about 60, by 30
feet, and two stories high. On the lower floor are two apartments, one designed
for a grammar school, and the other for a writing school. In the ^pper story
there is one large apartment, with a fire place at each end: This is used by
the scholars on their exhibition days. On the top there is a cupola with a
bell. The street is wide, straight, and very pleasant, and adorned on either
side with trees. And upon the whole, this town is one of the most populous,
lively, flourishing, agreeable inland places in the state. There are two
congregational religious societies in this town, called the first and second
parishes. These have no parochial boundaries, but are called poll parishes;
each inhabitant having a right by law, to pay and to connect himself to which
parish he pleases, only signifying his choice, by leaving his name at any time
for that purpose, with the town clerk. They have accordingly two large and
elegant meetinghouses, about three quarters of a mile apart; one standing near
the south end, and the other the north end of the street, by which the
inhabitants are happily accommodated.

In the year 1719, the first meetinghouse was erected, and here a church was
gathered, and the Rev. Andrew Gardner, the first minister was ordained in the
autumn of that same year 1719, but the month and day cannot be ascertained. He
was dismissed from Worcester on the last Wednesday of October 1722, and was
afterward settled at Lunenburgh. Mr. Gardner was succeeded in the sacred
office by the Rev. Isaac Burr, who was ordained their second pastor, on the
25th of October 1725. He, likewise, after a few years, was dismissed from his
work, viz. on November, 1744.

After his removal the Rev. Thaddeus Maccarty, for a short space Minister of
Kingston, in the county of Plymouth, where he was ordained November 3d, 1742,
was installed pastor, the third in succession, of the church and people of
Worcester, on the 10th of June 1747. He continued in office until his death,
which was on July 20, 1784.

After the Rev. Mr. Maccarty's death, a second church was formed here on
December 1st, 1785, and the Rev. Aaron Bancroft was ordained to the pastoral
care thereof, February 1, 1786. This second religious society was incorporated,
as a distinct Parish November 13, 1787.

To the Rev. Mr. Maccarty succeeded, as pastor of the first church and society
in Worcester, the Rev. Samuel Austin, who was installed here on the 29th of
September, 1790. This gentleman had been for a short space, minister of the
fourth congregational society in Newhaven, in Connecticut.

In Worcester, a Social Library company has lately been established; their
stock already amounts to 90l. and as the institution is founded on a large and
liberal plan, it will doubtless be greatly increased.

In this town, a number of gentlemen, requesting the same, received a charter
in April, 1793, from the Massachusetts Grand Lodge for holding a LODGE of FREE
MASONS, by the name of the MORNING STAR LODGE, and Isaiah Thomas, was
unanimously elected Master. And on the 11th of June, the Grand Lodge, of
Massachusetts, meeting at Worcester for the purpose, he was installed by the
most worshipful Grand Master, John Cutler, and the Lodge consecrated. The
stated meetings of the Morning Star Lodge are on the third Tuesday of every
month.

We shall now present our readers with a geographical description of the town
of Worcester.

The town is full of round gradual rising hills, and of dales* There are few
craggy precipices, and few extensive plains. The middle, or most thick settled
part, is in a valley, surrounded by pleasant hills, and from the hill as we
enter the town from the east, it makes an agreeable appearance. Tatnuck and
Boggachoag hills are remarkable for having formerly had Indian towns on them.
They are neither of them very high. Millstone hill, about a mile from the
courthouse, to the east, is the common property of the inhabitants, who procure
from thence stones, some of which they split out, and hew for underpinning to
their houses, for door stones and steps. The stones are hard grained, and
peculiarly fit for Millstones* It must be a singular advantage to such a town
as Worcester, to have such an inexhaustible quarry of building stone, which can
be worked into any shape, where there are, and will be so many gentlemen who
wish to build with elegance, as well as for convenience.

The natural growth of wood is oak, walnut and chestnut, on the higher lands,
some pine on the small plains and valleys, and in the swamps and low lands,
ash, birch and maple. The town is well supplied with wood. And as every farmer
has his own plat of woodland upon his homestead, so the face of the town
appears more woody from the hills, than it is in fact. The interspersion of
hills and dales, fields and woods, affords an agreeable and variegated
prospect, extending about six or seven miles from the observer's eye. And a
more enlarged view is not to be had from the greatest eminence in the town. --
The soil is pretty good, warm, more inclined to sand than clay, however it
cannot be called sandy; is is friendly to the growth of Indian corn. Some of
the farmers have lately turned their attention to raising wheat and flax, and
with considerable success. Rye is raised here in great quantities. The rising
grounds are very good for pastures and orchards; and the lower not indifferent
for hay. Indeed, there is soil of almost every kind in Worcester, and almost on
every farm. It is not easy to describe its general properties for it is
productive, in a degree, of almost all kinds of country produce, and not
noticeable for any particular one.

How far this town affords mines and minerals, has never yet been fully
ascertained. About the year 1754, a broad flat vein, about a foot thick, of
lead and silver ore, in the proportion of 2 pennyweights of silver to one pound
of lead, was discovered, running slauntwise down into a rock. Some persons
purchased it, and procured a miner, who followed it a little way into a rock,
on a hill; and then advised to meet it by digging away before it. In this
undertaking considerable money was expended, but they never met the vein. After
a while, they left off discouraged. However, in digging to meet this vein, they
found several pieces of ore, about the size of a peck, or half bushel.

Worcester has really but one pond within its limits, this is called North
Pond, and is of an oval form; covering about 30 acres of ground, and is
surrounded partly by woods and partly by a swamp and meadow. Though not an
agreeable pond, yet it is well supplied with the usual sorts of common pond
fish, as pickerel, perch, shiners, breams, eels, and pouts. These fish,
however, are not of the best quality, as the water is rather slagnant, and the
bottom muddy. As to Quinsigamond, or Long Pond, or what is sometimes called
Worcester Pond, the facts are these, that all the water of that pond which lies
within the line of the town of Worcester, does not cover more than one acre of
land, being two or three small coves: The rest of the pond lies within the
bounds of Shrewsbury, and will be particularly described when we come to speak
of that town.

Worcester is very well watered by rivers, brooks and rivulets. Bimilick, or
Mill brook has its source in North Pond; and running southerly, it crosses the
great road a little north of the Courthouse, and empties into Blackstone river.
It is not more than ten feet wide and one foot deep; but a fine stream.
Turkeybrook, which is about the same size, originates in Holden. Tatnuck, or
Halfway River, in the southwesterly part of the town, runs also from Holden,
empties perhaps ten times as much water, and is about two rods wide. This
passes on through Sutton, to the southward. Boggachoag river, which runs
northwardly, through a corner of Ward, is nearly as large as Halfway River.
These three streams unite in French River, so called.

Upon these streams there are, within the town of Worcester, a very large paper
mill, four grift mills, four saw mills, two fulling mills, and two trip
hammers. The fulling mills are the property of Messrs. Stowell, father and
sons, by whom the clothier's business, in all its branches, is carried on to as
great perfection as any where in the state. They dye fine scarlet, and deep
blue colors, in the best manner.

Besides the above mentioned there are two or three works for the making of
Potash, in which Pearlash is also made: Also a distillery for gin.

There is a Post office in this town; the Postmaster is Isaiah Thomas.

The great post road, from Boston to Springfield is very good in that part of
it which goes through Worcester. As this is the shire town, roads from all
parts of the county, and in every direction, center here. There is now a Post
road established, from Worcester to Providence, which passes through Mendon.

Worcester is situated 47 miles from Boston, a little to the south of west.

Having said what may be thought sufficient, in describing the town of
Worcester, we cannot take our leave of it, without mentioning with respect, the
name of Chandler. The town of Worcester, in particular, and the county of
Worcester at large, were originally greatly indebted to the Hon. John Chandler,
Esquire of Woodstock, the first Judge in the county, and his son, the first Col.
John Chandler of Worcester, who, in process of time succeeded his father in all
his offices, titles and honors, for their address, activity and enterprise.
And their names ought to be held in grateful remembrance.

LANCASTER.
THIS is, by several years, the eldest town in the county of Worcester, and,
originally, one of the largest, as will appear in the sequel of this history,
when we come to mention the several large towns which have been set off from
it. So early as in the year 1645, Sholan, alias Shaumauw, proprietor of
Nashawogg, and Sachem of the Nashaways, who lived at Waushacum, (which is in
Sterling) informed Mr. Thomas King of Watertown, with whom he traded, and for
whom he had a respect, of this tract of land as well accommodated for a
plantation, desiring the English would come and set down by him. Accordingly,
Mr. King, Mr. John Prescot, Harmon Garret, Thomas Skidmore, Mr. Day, Mr.
Symonds, with others, procured of said Sholan, a deed of Nashawogg, ten miles
in lengh, and eight in breadth, under these restrictions, that the English
should not molest the Indians in their hunting, fishing, or usual planting
places. -- And the General Court confirmed the deed. And here we ought to
observe, the fidelity of Sholan who conveyed this tract of land to the English,
that he always behaved in a peaceable, friendly manner toward them. As did
also Matthew, his nephew, and successor as Sachem; but Sagamore Sam, nephew to
Matthew, and succeeded him, was of a different temper and character; and,
joining with Philip in his rebellion, was taken by the English, and executed as
a rebel. They of the tribe who survived this war of Philip's divided; one part
moving to Albany, and the other to Pennicook, with which tribe they
incorporated.

Let us return from this digression. Mr. King sold all his interest in this
grant to his associates, who having given lots of land to Richard Linton,
Lawrence Waters, and John Ball, sent them up to perform diverse things at the
common expense of the proprietors: And these were the first inhabitants. For
the space of seven years little was done to forward the settlement of the
plantation; nevertheless, there being nine families in the place, they
petitioned the General Court to be incorporated as a town, which was granted on
the 18th of May, 1653, and the name of Lancaster was given to it.

The town was in peace and prosperity for the space of twenty two years, from
its incorporation -- and the Indians were very serviceable to the inhabitants,
by supplying them, on reasonable terms, with such corn and wild meat as they
needed.

But on the 24th of June, 1675, Philip, Sachem of Pocanoket, commonly called
King Philip, rebelled against the English, and commenced a most bloody and
destructive war. -- And on the 22d of August following, eight persons, viz.
George Bennet, William Fagg, Jacob Farrar, Joseph Wheeler, Mordecai MacLoad,
with his wife and two of their children, were killed in different parts of the
town. The Narraganset Indians, joining Philip in his rebellion, marched into
the country, and persuaded the Nipnets and Nashaways to take up arms also
against the English.

Philip at the head of about 1500 Indians, marched for Lancaster, in which
there were then above fifty families. And on the the 10th of February, 1676,
very early in the morning, assaulted the town in five distinct bodies and
places, burning most of the unfortified houses, and killing several persons,
viz. Jonas Fairbank, Joshua Fairbank, Richard Wheeler, Ephraim Sawyer, Henry
Farrar, and Mr. Ball and wife. However, they destroyed no garrison, but that
round the Rev. Mr. Rowlandson's house; in which there were soldiers and
inhabitants to the amount of forty two.

The enemy soon set fire to the house, which reduced the English to the sad
necessity of surrendering to the Indians, rather than to perish by the flames.
The men, except Ephraim Roper, who made his escape, were immediately slain, or
reserved for torture: Their names were, Mr. Divol, Abraham Joslin, Daniel
Gains, Thomas Rowlandson, William and Josiah Kerley, John MacLoad, John Kettle
and his two sons, Josiah Divol, etc. etc.

Two of the women, one the wife of Capt. Kerley, the other the wife of Ephraim
Roper, were killed in attempting to escape; the other women, with the children,
about twenty in number, were carried into captivity; among whom was the consort
of the Rev. Mr. Rowlandson, with three children, the youngest of which died on
the 18th of the same mon^ ^s wounds in the wilderness, at an Indian place
called Wenlmesset, or Meminimesset, north of Quaboag, aged about six years and
a half. This place, was included in the original grant of Lan^stown, or
Hardwick, but is now within the limits of Newbraintree. In the same place also,
the wife of Abraham Joslin, being unable to travel by reason of her pregnancy,
the Indians first knocked her in the head, with her child about two years old,
made a large fire, stripped them naked, and then threw them both thereinto. The
other women and children, or the most of them, soon after returned. Mrs.
Rowlandson, with her two surviving children, returned in about three months. We
must in this place, observe the reason of Mr. Rowlandson's not falling into the
hands of the enemy with the garrison, was, that he was then at Boston,
soliciting the Governor and Council for more soldiers for the protection o^
the town; and met the heavy tidings, before related, on his return. Capt.
Wadsworth, then at Marlborough, hearing of the assault of Lancaster, with forty
brave men, marched immediately for its relief, and, entering the town
undiscovered, sorced the enemy, at that time, to quit it. He quartered his men
in various parts of the town, and tarried several days, but before his
departure, had one of his men, George Harrington, killed by the Indians.

This is that famous Capt. Wadsworth, who afterward with Capt. Brocklebank,
and the much greater part of their men, gloriously fell, in the cause of their
count^ in a fight with the enemy at Sudbury*

About six weeks after the above assault of the town, it being judged un^enable
und^ the then present circumstances both of that an^ he country, the remainder
of the inhabitants, ex^pt John Roper, who was killed by the enemy that same
day, drew off under a guard of horse and foot. And immediately on this
desertion of the place, all the buildings, save two, were reduced to ashes. In
this state of desolation, the town continued about four years; during which
time the Rev. Mr. Rowlandson preached at Wethersfield in Connecticut, and there
he died, before the resettlement of the town. From 1680 to the year 1692, they
were not molested in the resettlement of the town. But the French king
espousing the cause of James the second in 1688, who had abdicated the British
throne, involved the nation in a war with France, and New England in a war with
the Canadians, both French and Indians: In the calamities of which this town
had a large share. For, on the 18th of July 1692, the Indians assaulted the
house of Peter Joslin, who was at his labor in the field; and knew nothing
thereof, until, entering the house, he found his wife and three children, with
a widow Whitcomb, who lived in his family, barbarously butchered with their
hatchets, and weltering in their blood. His wife's sister, with another of his
children, were carried into captivity -- she returned; but that child was
murdered in the wilderness. -- In 1695, on a Lord's day morning, Mr. Abraham
Wheeler, was mortally wounded. -- On the 11th of September, 1697, when the
inhabitants, not suspicious of any enemy, were gone out to their labor, the
Indians came, in several companies, into the town, and were n^ surprising
Thomas Sawyer's g^rrison, both the gates being left open; but Jabez Fairbank,
who was at his own house half a mile's distance, and, designing to bring his
little son from said garrison, mounted his horse, (which came running to him in
a fright) and rode, full speed, into the gate, but yet nothing suspicious of an
enemy: However, this was a mean of saving the garrison; for the enemy, who were
just ready to rush into it, supposing they were discovered, gave over that
design, and fired at such as were in the fields. -- At this time, the Rev. John
Whiting being, on some occasion, at a distance from his garrison, they
surprised and killed him -- they, indeed, offered him quarter; but he chose
rather to fight to the last, than resign himself to them whose tender mercies
are cruelty. At the same time they killed twenty others, viz. Daniel Hudson and
his wife and two of their daughters, Ephraim Roper, and wife and daughter, John
Skait and wife, Joseph Rugg and wife and three children, widow Rugg, Jonathan
Fairbank, and two of his children, and two of the children of Nathaniel Hudson:
They wounded two, but not mortally; and captivated Jonathan Fairbank's wife,
widow Wheeler, Ephraim Roper's son, John Skait's son, Joseph Rugg's son, and
Mary Glasier: Five of these returned.

In 1704, a large army of French and Indians came from Canada, with a design to
destroy Northampton, but, finding they were prepared to receive them, they
turned their course toward Lancaster; and on the 31st of July, early in the
morning, they fell furiously upon the town; and in their first onset killed
Lieut. Nathaniel Wilder, near the gate of his own garrison; and on the same day
three others, viz. Abraham How, John Spaulding, and Benjamin Hutchins, near the
same garrison.

The enemy were uncommonly brave, and therefore, though Capt. Tyng, who
commanded the soldiers of the garrison, and Capt. How, with a company from
Marlborough, who marched immediately to their assistance, together with the
inhabitants of the town, maintained a warm conflict with them, for some time,
yet being much inferior in number were obliged to retreat into the garrison.
Upon this the enemy burned the meetinghouse, and six other buildings, and
destroyed much of the live stock of the town. Before night there came such
numbers to the relief of the town, that the enemy retreated; and though
pursued, were not overtaken.

What number of the enemy were killed at the above time is uncertain; but it
was supposed to be considerable: -- French officer, of some distinction, was
mortally wounded, which greatly exasperated them.

On the 26th of October, the same year, 1704, a party of the enemy having been
discovered at Still River, the soldiers and inhabitants belonging to Mr.
Gardiner's garrison, with diverse others, went in quest of them, and returned in
the evening much fatigued with the service of the day -- Mr. Gardner, (who had
been preaching several years with the people of Lancaster, and was now their
Pastor elect) in compassion to the soldiery, took the watch that night upon
himself; and coming out of the box, late in the night upon some occasion, was
heard by one Samuel Prescott in the house, between sleeping and waking, who,
supposing him an enemy, seized the first gun which came to hand, and shot him
through the body in the parade. But the fatal mistake immediately appeared; and
he, being carried into the house, forgave the person who shot him, and in an
hour or two expired, to the great grief, not only of his consort, but of his
people, who had an high esteem of him.

On the 15th of October, 1705, Mr. Thomas Sawyer, with his son, Elias Sawyer,
and John Big^^w, were captivated at his garrisoned house, about the dawn of
day. Mr. Sawyer's youngest son, about fourteen years of age, escaped through a
back window of the house.

The Indians treated Mr. Sawyer with much cruelty, but at length they arrived
at Montreal. There Mr. Sawyer observed to the French Governor, that on the
River Chamblee there was a fine seat for mills; and that he would build a
sawmill for him, provided he would procure a ransom for himself, his son, and
Biglow. The Governor readily closed with the proposal, as, at that time, there
was no sawmill in all Canada, nor artificer capable of building one. He
accordingly applied to the Indians, and obtained the ransom of young Sawyer and
Biglow, without the least difficulty; but no sum would purchase Mr. Sawyer's
redemption: Him, (being distinguished for his bravery, which had proved fatal
to a number of their brethren) they were determined to immolate. -- The victim
was accordingly led forth and actually fastened to the stake, environed with
materials, so disposed as to effect a lingering death. -- The savages,
surrounding the unfortunate prisoner, began to anticipate the horrid pleasure
of beholding their captive writhing in tortures amidst the rising flames, and
of rending the air with their dismal yells. -- On a sudden a Friar appeared,
and, with great solemnity, held forth what he declared to be the key to the
gates of Purgatory; and told them unless they immediately released their
prisoner, he would instantly unlock those gates, and send them headlong
thereinto. Superstition prevailed, and wrought the deliverance of Mr. Sawyer*
For they, at once, unbound him, and gave him up to the Governor. In one year he
completed a mill, when he and Biglow were discharged. They detained his son
Elias one year longer, to instruct them in the art of sawing and keeping the
mill in order; when he was amply rewarded, and sent home to his friends; where
his father and he both lived to a good old age, and were gathered to their
graves in peace.

On the 16th of July, 1707, Mr. Jonathan White was killed by the Indians. And
on the 18th of August in this same year, 1707, twenty four stout Indians, who,
according to their own account, had all been captains, came to Marlborough,
and, besides other mischief they did there, See mention of this same company,
in the account of Northborough.
captivated Mr. Jonathan Wilder, a native of Lancaster: The next day, they were
pursued by about thirty people from Marlborough and Lancaster, and overtaken in
what is now Sterling. The front of our men came upon them before they had the
least apprehension of a pursuit. -- Their packs were all slung, and, it being a
misty day, their cases were on their guns: -- And, therefore, had our men all
run down upon them, they might probably have destroyed, or taken them all, and
saved the life of the captive. -- The enemy, at the first appearance of our
men, had determined to resign themselves to their mercy -- But observing only
ten of the thirty, to come toward them, they took courage, unslung their
packs, and fought like men, having first dispatched their captive Mr. Wilder.
-- In this action the enemy lost nine of their number, and all their packs: And
on our part two men, Mr. John Farrar and Mr. Richard Singletary, were killed,
and two, Mr. Ephraim Wilder and Mr. Samuel Stevens, were wounded, but not
mortally.

On August 5th, 1710, a party of the enemy coming by advantage of the bushes
very near to Mr. Nathaniel and Mr. Oliver Wilder, and an Indian servant at
their labor in the field, the servant was killed, but the men escaped to the
garrison. -- And this was the last mischief done by the enemy, in Lancaster. --
After that period they were a peaceable, prosperous, happy people; they grew
and flourished, multiplied and increased, they spread and extended their
branches far and wide: So that, with the greatest propriety, the people of this
place may adopt the words of the psalmist, in reference to Israel, and say, --
"Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth -- many a time have they
afflicted me from my youth, yet they have not prevailed against me." -- I would
here observe, the account given above of the desolations, and calamities which
befell the town of Lancaster, is, chiefly in the words of the Rev. Mr.
Harrington, in a century sermon he preached there on the 28th of May, 1753.

I will now proceed to give some particular account of the Ecclesiastical state
of this town, from its beginning. -- It was incorporated, as we have said, in
1653. The following year, Mr. Joseph Rowlandson preached among the people, and
continued so doing, until April 14th, 1658, when they invited him to settle
with them in the work of the ministry; their invitation he accepted, and
probably was ordained the same year, at which time, no doubt the Church of
Christ was gathered here: Although of these things we cannot speak with
certainty, since the records of the Church, in Mr. Rowlandson's time, were, in
all probability, consumed in his garrison. As the town was wholly broken up and
destroyed, as above related, in 1676, so the Rev. Mr. Rowlandson continued with
the people from the first but about 22 years, and died before the resettlement
of the town. -- The place lay in ruins about four years. In 1680, they began to
resettle: And diverse gentlemen preached with them. In February, 1688, Mr. John
Whiting was invited to preach with them on probation; and continued preaching
until November, 1690, when he was invited to take the oversight of them in the
Lord; and he, accepting their invitation was, probably, soon after ordained.

But we cannot be certain of the precise day, as no records of the time of his
ministry have ever been found. -- He continued but a short space, in the sacred
office, being cut off, by the enemy, as before mentioned, on the 11th of
September, 1697.

In May, 1701, Mr. Andrew Gardner, began to preach at Lancaster, and in
September following the people gave him a call to settle with them in the work
of the gospel ministry. This invitation he accepted, and his ordination was
appointed; but before the day came a sudden and surprising death arrested him:
Being unfortunately, but mortally wounded in the house of his friends, in his
own garrison, in the night following the 26th of October, 1704; the particulars
of which have been related above.

In May, 1705, Mr. John Prentice came to preach among this people, and supplied
the desk until February, 1707, when he received an invitation to settle among
them, which he accepted; and he was accordingly, solemnly separated unto this
sacred employment on the 29th of March, 1708. In his day there was peace, and
the town grew and flourished exceedingly: For during his ministry, from his
diocese were formed the towns of Harvard, Bolton, Leominster, and the second
precinct, which is now called Sterling. He was a good and faithful servant of
Jesus Christ, continuing in his office almost forty years, living much beloved;
and died greatly lamented, on the 6th of January. 1748. The breach made upon
the Church and town was happily repaired the ensuing fall, in the installment
of the Rev. Timothy Harrington, to the pastoral office among them, November
16th, 1748; who still continues, in an advanced age.

The Rev. Mr. Harrington, through age and bodily infirmities, being taken off
from his public labors, the people of Lancaster have invited Mr. Nathaniel
Thayer, to settle with them in the work of the gospel ministry, as colleague
with the venerable Mr. Harrington, who, having accepted their invitation, is,
by the leave of Providence, to be solemnly separated unto the same October 9th,
1793.

We must here observe, that although this place was greatly frowned upon, in
their early days, in the short lives, and premature deaths of their first
ministers, yet since that time, the people have been as signally smiled upon,
and bl^ed in the long and useful lives of two eminent ^i^ters in succession,
whose courses together ma^e ^p the long space of 84 years.

The Rev. Mr. Harrington, was first settled in the ministry at a place then
called, Lower Ashuelot, now Swanzey, in the state of Newhampshire: Here he was
ordained November 16th, 1741. This place was totally destroyed by the Indians
on the 2d of April, 1747, from whence he was driven with his family and flock.
The people of Lancaster having invited Mr. Harrington to settle with them, and
there being no prospect of the return of his former Church and flock to
Ashuelot, he first obtained a regular dismission from them, and thereupon upon
generously resigned to them his whole interest there, and all arrearages due to
him, and accepted the invitation to take the oversight of the Church and flock
of God in Lancaster.

Let us return; the town of Lancaster (...) all the appearances of age. A
number of gentlemen have built very elegant seats here: And there are a
considerable number of stores and shops in the town. And as there are large
roads, and much travel through the place, of course much business is done here
in the way of trade. The pleasantness of the place has invited many persons of
education and fortune hither. And here they have a large social library, under
good regulations and consisting of a fine collection of good and useful books.

In this town there is established a Lodge of Free Masons, the history whereof
is as follows. Upon the petition of a number of gentlemen to the ancient Grand
Lodge of free and accepted Masons, a charter was granted January 31, 1778, to
the petitioners, and their successors, for holding a Lodge in Lancaster, by the
name of Trinity Lodge. This is held on the first Tuesday evenings in each
month. From the date of the charter to this time, there have been initiated 166
persons, from this and other towns in the vicinity: Of these 135 have received
the degree of Fellow Crafts; and 125 have been raised to Master Masons. From
its commencement the Lodge has been governed by the following masters, viz.

In the year 1778, Michael Newhall was elected Master, 1779, Edmund Heard, do.
1780, do. do. 1781, do. do. 1782, do. do. 1783, Isaiah Thomas, do. 1784,
Timothy Whiting, jun. do. 1785, do. do. 1786, Ephraim Carter, do. 1787, Timothy
Whiting, jun. do. 1788, Abijah Wyman, do. 1789, Edmund Heard, do. 1790, do. do.
1791, do. do. 1792, do. do. 1793, do. was again chosen master, but soon after
leaving the government was succeeded by Timothy Whiting, jun.

We proceed to a Geographical, and Topographical description of Lancaster. It
is about nine miles in length from north to south, and four in width from east
to west: Bounded by Lunenburgh and Leominster on the north and north west; by
Shirley in the county of Middlesex, on the northeast; by Harvard, Bolton and
Berlin, on the east; by Boylston on the south, and by Sterling on the west. The
body of the town is situated on low and level lands near the intervals; and so
as to afford an agreeable prospect of a considerable part of it. There are two
main branches of the River Nashaway. The north branch originates from a Pond in
Westminster, and, running through Fitchburgh and Leominster, enters Lancaster
in the North west part of the town; and pursues a southeast course into the
middle of it, within a few rods of the meetinghouse. The south branch springs
up from the foot of Watchusett, in Princeton, and running through Sterling and
Boylston, enters at the southwest angle of the town; then running
northeasterly, meets the north branch about half a mile below the meetinghouse;
and then, keeping a northeastern course, enters Shirley. On both branches and
within the town of Lancaster they have corn and saw mills. There are nine large
bridges within the town: Two on the north branch, three on the south, and four
after their junction. None are less than five rods in length; and the first
after the confluence of these waters is planked ten rods. On the two branches,
and after they unite, there is a vast body of exceeding rich ^terval land, of a
great depth of soil, and which i^ most excellent for grass, and produces in
abundance the best of hay. This interval is also good for raising flax and
hemp: It is also good for Indian corn; and a steam of fog from the waters
preserves the corn in ^he intervals, when at the distance of ten or
fifteen^ods, the corn will be destroyed by frosts. The river Nashaway overflows
the whole interval, of nearly 3000 acres, twice in a year, in the spring, and
in autumn and in some places two miles in width. Sometimes it has overflowed
the interval lands in summer; and then it has generally done vast damage, by
carrying off fences, great quantities of hay and flax, etc. and destroyed large
fields of Indian corn. In 1787, by a freshet, a saw mill, on the north branch,
about two miles from the meetinghouse, was swept off, and about three acres of
good rich interval land washed away to the depth of 12 feet, leaving only a bed
of cobble stones, entirely useless. The lands rising from the interval are,
mostly, plain and level, on which the buildings, in the middle of the town,
stand; and these lands are good for all kinds of grain: Wheat and hemp are
raised upon them in great plenty. The higher lands are good for wood and
pasturage. George ^ill, so called, lays all along on the westerly side of the
town, on which there are a number of very excellent farms; it rises, gradually,
high, but is not too rocky: It is a moist soil, abounding with springs, and
clay: And in this town are an^^ally mad^ many hundreds of thousands of brick.
There is a great plenty and rich variety of fruits on the high hilly lands,
west of the town; large and good orchards: But there are very few apple trees
in the middle of the town.

The growth of wood, on the higher lands is oak of the various sorts, chestnut
and walnut. The intervals abound with elm, buttonwood, butternut, and shagbark.
In the north and south and east parts of the town there are extensive plains
covered with pitch pine. Here are works for making pearl and pot ash. And the
late Col. Caleb Wilder, was the person who first discovered the method of
making potash in kettles.

In the northeasterly part of Lancaster is the fine and valuable, and, perhaps,
inexhaustible, slate pit, furnishing slates and tile for the roofs of houses;
and most excellent stones, for tombs and graves. This was first discovered by a
Mr. Flagg. The slates have been in use about 40 years. The quarry is now owned
by Mr. Joseph Wales. No slates ^qual to these have yet been discovered on the
Continent. Great numbers are ^sed in Boston, every season. They are also
exported to Virgi^i^, to Newyork, to Hartford in Connecticut, etc. etc. etc.


Lancas^er has a number of ponds within its limits. C^mberry Pond lies i^ the
north part of the town, toward Lunenburgh, not far from the slate pit. It is
not large; but what is very noticeable is, the water in this pond is observed
to rise as much as two feet just before a storm. Not far from this, and about
five miles from the meetinghouse, is situated Turner Pond; there is a small
outlet from hence to Spectacle Pond, in form of a bow, whence they take the
name, Spectacle Pond. Near these is another, called Fort Pond, whence issues a
stream on which there are mills in Shirley. From Spectacle Pond a stream runs
sufficient to carry a saw mill, and a fulling mill, and then falls into the
north branch of Nashaway River. In the southwest part of the town there is a
small pond, called (...), from the border of which between high and low water
marks, they gather a (...) white sand. At the southeast angle of the town lays
Clamshell Pond, near to Berlin, from whence issues Northbrook, as mentioned in
the description of Berlin.

On the west of the stream which carries Prescott's mills, which runs from
Little Pond in Sterling, is situated Mossy Pond, opposite to, and about the
size of Sandy Pond. This last mentioned pond always rises in a dry time.

We have now to observe, that the town of Lancaster is at great expense in
building and repairing bridges and causeways: And the General Court, in
consideration hereof, granted a Lottery, a few years past, whereby they might
raise a certain sum of money for these purposes. Nevertheless, although their
rivers occasion the people much cost, and sometimes great loss and damage by
the freshets, yet the bounteous Author of Nature, seemed to consider these
things, and made them great, if not full compensation, by some singular natural
advantages in the town; and in particular, by the richness and fertility of
their large intervals; and the ease with which their lands are cultivated, and
made productive. And upon the whole, notwithstanding it has been curtailed on
every side, this is still a very large and wealthy town; peaceable and happy;
prosperous and flourishing; and the people are industrious and good.

In this town when the general census was taken, in the year 1791, there were
214 houses, and 1460 inhabitants. The town is just about 40 miles from Boston,
very little to the north of west, and 14 miles from the Courthouse in Worcester
a little to the northeast.

MENDON.
THIS is a very ancient town indeed, the second in age in the county. It was an
original grant to certain persons, of eight miles square, made by the General
Court, at an early period, we cannot say exactly when; it was called
Quanshipauge by the natives. It was incorporated by an Act of the Legislature,
on the 15th of May, 1667, and the name of Mendon given to it. It was located, a
plan drawn, and return made to the General Court, by a Mr. Joshua Fisher. After
the Province line was settled, it was again surveyed, and a plan of it drawn by
a Mr. William Rider, in the year 1725; according to which plan its boundaries
and extent were as follow, beginning at southwest corner it ran east seven and
an half miles on the line between Massachusetts and Rhodeisland; then north
four miles and 40 rods; then east, one mile by a river; then north again, three
miles and 280 rods; then west, eight and an half miles; then south eight miles,
to the first bounds. But this measure must be very large, since all Uxbridge,
almost the whole of Northbridge, and a large part of Upton were taken from
Mendon, together with Milford; and still there remain two parishes in the town.
Its present boundaries by actual survey, are south, by Rhodeisland State, six
miles and a quarter; on the west, by Uxbridge and Northbridge, seven miles and
140 rods to Upton line; northwest, by Upton, two miles; northeast, by Milford,
four miles and a quarter; east, by Bellingham in the county of Suffolk, four
miles and three quarters. When they held their first town meeting, or first
acted as a corporate body, does not appear, nor when the Church was gathered
and the first minister was settled. Here, as in some other instances we may
meet with, we have to lament the entire want of ancient records. If ever any
records were kept in those early days, of these matters, they were lost when
the town was broken up in the time of the Indian wars, or in some other way. We
have also to regret the obscurity and defects attending such records as are to
be found.

In little more than eight years from the incorporation of Mendon, commenced
the Narraganset, or King Philip's war. And all that I can find in "Hubbard's
history of the Indian wars," or in "Governor Hutchinson's history of
Massachusetts," or by any other way, is this, viz. "On the 14th of July, 1675,
the Nipnet or Nipmuck Indians, killed four or five people at Mendon." And this
was the first mischief ever done by the Indians within the ancient limits of
the Massachusetts. For it must be remembered, that the colony of Plymouth was
not annexed to Massachusetts until the charter from William and Mary in 1691. I
cannot find that ever any other mischief was done by the Indians in Mendon,
except the abovementioned. However the people then here were in such fear and
danger, as that the town was entirely broken up for some time, and most or all
of them moved off. How long the place remained desolate, we are unable to say
with certainty. It could not be long, as will appear by the following account
of the ecclesiastical state of Mendon.

All we can find on record is simply this -- "The Rev. Joseph Emerson was the
first Pastor of the Church in Mendon. He lived here before the war, known by
the style of King Philip's Indian war." I add, in this war the town and church
were broken up, and Mr. Emerson never returned to officiate with them in the
pastoral office. Tradition says, he was minister here about eight years, this
will carry back the date of his ordination, and the gathering of the Church, to
the year 1667, that is, to about the time when the town was incorporated. --
The records go on to say --

"The Rev. Grindall Rawson was the second Pastor of the Church in this town. He
was ordained in the 20th year of his age. He died February the 6th, 1715, in
the 57th year of his age, and 37th of his ministry." But here we must observe,
his tombstone says, "he died in the 35th year of his ministry:" And this is the
more probable for several reasons. According to the town record, he must have
been settled in the year 1678, which is carrying it back too near the time when
the town was broken up: And considering the then state of the country, in
constant fear, and great danger from the Indians, it is not at all likely they
should resettle so soon; but in the year 1680 they probably might.

The records further say, "The Rev. Joseph Dorr was the third Pastor of this
Church. He died March 9th, 1768, in the 79th year of his age, and the 52d year
of his ministry." This will carry back the time of the Rev. Mr. Dorr's
ordination to the year, 1716. The Rev. Joseph Willard succeeded Mr. Dorr in the
work of the gospel ministry in Mendon, whereunto he was solemnly consecrated on
the 19th of April, 1769. He was dismissed from his pastoral relation to this
Church and people, on the 4th of December, 1782, in the 13th year of his
ministry. This dismission of Mr. Willard was occasioned by the coldness and
inattention of the people. The Rev. Mr. Willard was installed Pastor of the
Church and flock of God in Boxborough, in the county of Middlesex, on the 2d of
November, 1785, where he lives in peace and harmony with his people. The Rev.
Caleb Alexander succeeded Mr. Willard as Pastor of the first Church and
congregation in Mendon, (the fifth in succession) where he was installed the
12th of April, 1786, in the 31st year of his age, and where he continues in his
sacred employment. This gentleman had been previously settled at Newmarlborough
in the co^nty of Berkshire for a short space.

There is a second parish in this town, which was incorporated as a distinct
precinct for ministerial purposes, by the appellation of "The south parish in
Mendon," in the year 1766. In this same year the congr^gational inhabitants of
this parish began to build them a meetinghouse for the public worship of God,
and accomplished the work in a short time. And in the year 1768, the Church of
Christ, in this south parish was imbodied, and the Rev. Benjamin Balch was
ordained their Pastor. And on Saturday morning March 27th, 1772, before
daylight, Mr. Balch left the parish, without knowledge or consent of the people
of his charge. Mr. Balch was, a few years since, installed at Barrington in
Newhampshire. About one half of the people of this south parish have been
Anabaptists and Quakers, ever since that part of the town was first settled,
which was about 90 years ago. And from the time when Mr. Balch left this
parish, the congregational interest therein has been in a declining state. They
seldom have any preaching; nor is there any present prospect of their ever
having another minister settled among them.

As to the religious state of both parishes in Mendon, let it suffice to say,
there are, in general, three denominations, Congregationalists, Anabaptists,
and Friends. There is another class without a name. A small society of Friends
are very punctual in attending their form of worship; and they have a very
decent meetinghouse for the purpose. Some who are, politically, Friends, do not
interest themselves much in any form. There is not in the town any incorporated
society of Anabaptists. They who are of this persuasion, go sometimes on the
sabbath to other towns, to attend public worship, in their way.

Having said what will be thought sufficient, respecting the religious state
and ecclesiastical polity of Mendon, some Geographical Description of the town
shall now be presented to the reader.

The land, in general, is good, though there is some which is rough and hard:
The soil is rich and very productive. It is mostly high, hilly land, yet not
very uneven: And there is a sufficiency of stones to fence their farms. The old
parish abounds principally in mowing and pasture land. The south parish is
better adapted to grain. The town is excellent for orcharding, and all kinds of
fruit trees. There are three high hills in this place, from either of which the
four New England States, may be seen, in a fair day. They are known by the
following names, Caleb's Hill, this is near the center of the town; Wigwam
Hill, is situated a little to the south west, from Caleb's Hill; and Miskee or
Misqueo Hill, this lies in the northwest corner of the town, and part of it
falls within the limits of Upton.

The groves of wood here are, in general, very thrifty and tall, consisting for
the most part of walnut and oak. There are fine forests of most excellent
chestnut, suitable for buildings or for fences.

The town of Mendon, like almost all other high, hilly, rocky places, is moist,
rich, strong land, well watered with numerous springs and rivulets: But there
are no streams of note, except two: The first is Charles River, which touches
on the eastern part of this town. This River takes its rise from a marshy place
in the southwest part of Hopkinton, in the county of Middlesex, and runs south,
through Milford in this county, and the easterly part of Mendon, and then
passes on to Bellingham, in the county of Suffolk. The second is Mill River,
which also originates in the southwestern part of Hopkinton, and, running
through the western part of Milford, passes through the easterly side of
Mendon, and crossing the road to Providence, joins Blackstone River, near
Winsooket Falls, in the town of Cumberland, in the State of Rhodeisland. There
is but one Pond in this town, situated in the western part of it, and called
Taft's Pond; it is large, and affords great plenty of the usual sorts of hook
fish. There is no visible stream which runs into this pond; but a stream issues
from it sufficient to carry a grist mill. On these rivers and streams, within
the town, there are five grist mills, two saw mills, two clothiers' works, and
one forge. There is some good interval lands upon these streams, and some
bodies of excellent meadows, and industry might make more.

The people subsist chiefly by farming; they have indeed the common mechanics,
and one or two dealers in European, East and Westindia goods: And here they
have both pot and pearl ash works.

The place derives great benefit from the public roads which pass through it
in various directions. The road from the northerly part of Connecticut, passes
through Mendon to Boston. The post road from Worcester to Providence also goes
through this town; as also a road, of much travel, from Vermont and
Newhampshire, and the north part of the county of Worcester into the State of
Rhodeisland. Mendon is situated quite at the southeast angle of the county; and
is 37 miles from Boston, to the southwest, and 18 miles from the Courthouse in
Worcester. When the late enumeration was made there were 222 dwelling houses,
and 1555 inhabitants, in the place. It has stood as the twelfth among the
towns, in the proportion it pays to a state tax.

BROOKFIELD.
THIS is the third town in age, and the first as to its wealth and number, in
the county, containing, when the census was taken, 438 dwelling houses, and
3100 inhabitants. A number of inhabitants of Ipswich, in the county of Essex,
petitioned the General Court for a tract of land, and obtained their request,
in the words following, "At a great and general Court of election held at
Boston the 20th of May, 1660. In answer to a petition of several inhabitants of
Ipswich, this court judges it meet to grant the petitioners six miles square,
or so much land as shall be contained in such a compass, in a place near
Quaboag pond." The grantees, that they might have a just and equitable, as well
as a legal, right to the land, purchased it of the natives, who claimed and
possessed it, and it was conveyed to them by deed. Notwithstanding the great
disadvantages under which they then labored, in the infancy of our country, in
the midst of the Indian enemy, and no English settlements nearer than
Marlborough on the east, and Springfield on the west, the inhabitants so
increased and flourished, as that upon application to the General Court, they
were incorporated into a township, by the name of Brookfield, by an act which
bears date, October 15th, 1673. But the court appointed and continued a
committee of three gentlemen, belonging to other places, to direct, regulate
and ratify all affairs relative to settling and building up the town. A
committee, appointed as aforesaid, petitioned the General Court to be released
from such services, and prayed that the inhabitants might be left to conduct
and manage their own affairs, which was granted November 12th* 1718. The
inhabitants, not satisfied with their first grant, petitioned the Court for
more land, when an act passed December 3, 1719, making the town eight miles
square.

In the year 1675, not two years after its incorporation, Brookfield was
utterly destroyed by the Indians, when the inhabitants consisted of about
twenty families; they had then a house for public worship, and preaching, but
no settled minister. The circumstances of its desolation are of importance to
be transmitted to posterity, and I shall relate them, as I have collected and
laid them together from the late Governor Hutchinson's history of
Massachusetts, the Rev. Mr. Hubbard's history of the Indian war, and Capt.
Thomas Wheeler's narrative thereof. "The Nipnet or Nipmuck "These were seated
upon less rivers and lakes, or large ponds, where Oxford now is, and towns near
it." Hutchinson's history.
Indians, having on the 14th of July, 1675, killed four or five people at
Mendon, the governor and council, in hopes of reclaiming them, sent Capt.
Edward Hutchinson, of Boston, to Quaboag, Brookfield, near which place there
was to be a great rendezvous of those Indians, to treat with several Sachems,
in order to the public peace: and ordered Capt. Thomas Wheeler, of Concord,
with a part of his troop, about 20 men, to accompany him for security and
assistance. They arrived on the Lord's day, August the 1st, and sent a message
to the Indians, desiring to treat with them. Three of the chief Sachems
promised to meet them next morning about eight o'clock, August 2d, upon a plain
at the head of Wickaboug Pond, two or three miles west of the meetinghouse.
Captains Hutchinson and Wheeler, with their company, and three of the principal
inhabitants of Brookfield, Capt. John Airs, John Coye, and Joseph Pritchard,
resorted thither at the appointed time, but found not the Indians there. They
then rode forward about four or five miles toward the Nipnet's chief town.
When they came to a place called Mominimisset, a narrow passage, between a
steep hill and a thick swamp, they were ambushed by two or three hundred
Indians, who shot down eight of the company, viz. Zechariah Phillips of Boston,
Timothy Farley of Billerica, Edward Colburn of Chelmsford, Samuel Smedley of
Concord, Sydrach Hapgood of Sudbury, and Capt. Airs, John Coye and Joseph
Pritchard of Brookfield, named above, and mortally wounded Capt. Hutchinson.
The rest escaped, through a bye path, to Brookfield. The Indians flocked into
the town; but the inhabitants, being alarmed, had all got together in the
principal house, on an eminence, a little to the southeast of where the west
parish meetinghouse now stands. They had the mortification to see all their
dwelling houses, about 20, with all their barns and outhouses burnt. The house
where they had assembled, was then surrounded, and a variety of attempts were
made for two days and nights to set fire to it, but did not succeed. At length,
August 4th, at evening, the Indians filled a cart with hemp, and other
combustible matter, which they kindled, and endeavored to thrust to the house
in order to fire it; but this attempt was defeated, partly by a shower of rain
which fell and wet the materials, as Capt. Wheeler says in his narrative, who
was on the spot, and partly by aid arriving: For Major Willard, who had been
sent after some other Indians westward of Lancaster and Groton, hearing of the
distress of Brookfield, when he was about four or five miles from Lancaster,
altered his course, and the same night reached Brookfield, with Capt. Parker,
and 46 men about an hour after it was dark, after a tedious march of 30 miles.
And though the Indian scouts discovered him and fired their alarm guns, yet the
main body, from their high joy, always accompanied with a horrid noise, heard
them not. Willard joined the besieged, and the Indians immediately poured in
all the shot they could, but without execution, and then burning all the
buildings, except this garrison, and destroying all the horses and cattle they
could find, withdrew to their dens. They were not pursued being much superior
in number.

It is fitting to add to the above, the very particular account, which the Rev.
Dr. Fiske of Brookfield, has given in a marginal note, annexed to an historical
discourse concerning the settlement of this town, and its distresses during the
Indian wars, preached December 31st, 1775, and immediately published. The
account is as follows, viz. "That three of the men killed in the ambushment,
belonged to Brookfield, as above named: That when the Indians pursued the party
into the town, they set fire to all the buildings except a few in the
neighborhood of the house in which the inhabitants had taken shelter: That
they endeavored to intercept five or six men who had gone to a neighboring
house to secure some things there: But they all got safe to the place of
refuge, except a young man, Samuel Pritchard, who was stopped short by a fatal
bullet: That the house in which they were besieged was unfortified, except by a
few logs hastily tumbled up on the outside, after the alarm, and by a few
feather beds hung up on the inside. And though the siege continued from Monday
in the afternoon, until early on Thursday morning, August 5th, in which time
innumerable balls entered the house, only one man, Henry Young, who was in the
chamber, was killed. The Indians shot many fire arrows to burn the house, but
without effect. -- When the troop which relieved Brookfield, got into the town,
which was late at night, they were joined by great numbers of cattle, which had
collected together in their fright at the conflagration of the buildings, and
the firing and war whoops of the Indians: and for protection these poor animals
followed the troop till they arrived at the besieged house. The Indians
deceived hereby, and thinking there was a much larger number of horsemen than
there really was, immediately set fire to the barn belonging to the besieged
house, and to Joseph Pritchard's house and barn, and the meetinghouse, which
were the only buildings left unburnt, and went off. A garrison was maintained
at this house till winter, when the court ordered the people away, soon after
which the Indians came and burnt this house also."

Having mentioned Major Willard, Capt. Hutchinson and Capt. Wheeler, it will be
proper to say something further respecting each of them. -- Captains Hutchinson
and Wheeler, tarried at Brookfield until August 13th, and then, with most of
their men, set off for their homes; they arrived at Marlborough the next day,
where Capt. Hutchinson, fatigued with his journey and his wound growing worse,
died August 19th, and was there buried the next day, August 20th, 1675.

Captain Wheeler, who accompanied Capt. Hutchinson, and saw him buried, the
next day, August 21st, arrived safe at Concord, where he and they who returned
with him, kept October 21st, 1675, as a day of praise and thanksgiving to God
for their remarkable deliverance and safe return, when the Rev. Mr. Bulkley of
Concord preached a sermon to them from those words in Psalm cxvi.12, "What
shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me?" which was
printed.

Major Willard tarried at Brookfield, and at Hadley and the adjacent towns, for
several weeks, and then returned to Groton, where the safety of that and some
neighboring towns required his presence. He was soon after displaced for going
to Brookfield without orders, or while under orders to march another way. The
Rev. Dr. Fiske's observations hereupon in a note, are well worthy insertion in
this place. "Major Willard's conduct in altering his course and coming to the
relief of Brookfield, being dictated by humanity and executed with bravery and
success, has gained him the applause of people in general. But as it was beside
his orders, he was censured by the court and cashiered, which disgusted his
friends, and broke his heart. And though the punishment may seem too rigorous,
yet it is to be remembered, that if commanders of parties, sent upon particular
expeditions, may take liberty to vary from their express orders, nothing
effectual could be accomplished, and only confusion, disappointment, loss, and
in many cases ruin, would be likely to ensue."

To return to Brookfield. The town, totally destroyed by the Indians in August
1675, lay in ruins several years, and the inhabitants were dispersed. "But,
says the Rev. Dr. Fiske, in the sermon above referred to, peace being settled
with the Indians, some of the dispersed, after a while, returned to the place
of their former habitation, and in conjunction with others, gradually resettled
the town, so that in the year 1692, they had a committee appointed by the
court, as formerly, to direct and regulate the settlement of said plantation
and the affairs thereof. But it being still in the midst of a wilderness, and
always exposed to the blood thirsty savages, whenever they should take it into
their heads to molest the English, its increase and improvements were slow."

In the war which is commonly denominated Queen Anne's war, which broke out not
long after the resettlement of the town, and continued several years,
Brookfield, as well as many other towns, was greatly harassed and annoyed; the
Indians frequently making sudden inroads, killing and scalping, or captivating
one and another of the inhabitants. During this war, a number of men, women and
children were killed, several taken prisoners, and some were wounded. The
particulars are as follow, as related by the Rev. Dr. Fiske, in the sermon
above referred to. "The first mischief was in the latter end of July or
beginning of August 1692. A party of Indians came into the town and broke up
two or three families. Joseph Woolcot being at work at a little distance from
his house, his wife, being fearful, took her children and went out to him. When
they returned to the house at noon, they found the Indians had been there, for
his gun and several other things were missing. And looking out at a window he
saw an Indian, at some distance, coming toward the house. He immediately sent
out his wife and his two little daughters to hide themselves in the bushes; and
he taking his little son under his arm and his broad ax in his hand, went out
with his dog in sight of the Indian. The dog being large and fierce, attacked
the Indian so furiously, that he was obliged to discharge his gun at the dog to
rid himself of him; immediately upon which Woolcot sat down the child and
pursued the Indian till he heard the bullet roll down his gun, the Indian
charging as he ran; he then turned back, snatched up his child and made his
escape, through the swamps, to a fort. His wife being greatly terrified,
discovered by her shrieks where she was; and the Indian soon found and
dispatched both her and her children. Others of the party about the same time,
came into the house of one Mason while the family were at dinner. They killed
Mason and one or two children, and took his wife and an infant which they had
wounded, and carried them off. They also took two brothers, Thomas and Daniel
Lawrence; they soon dispatched Thomas, pretending he had misinformed them about
the number of men which were in the town. John Lawrence, their brother, rode
with all haste to Springfield for assistance. A company, under Capt. Colton,
came with the greatest speed and pursued the Indians. They found Mrs. Mason's
child, which the savages had knocked on the head and thrown away in the bushes;
and continuing their pursuit, they came upon the Indians' encampment, which was
a sort of brush hedge, which they deridingly called "Englishmen's fort." The
party waited till break of day, and then came so near as to put their guns
through this brush and fire upon the Indians, fourteen or fifteen of whom were
killed, the rest fled with such precipitation as to leave several of their
arms, blankets, powderhorns, etc. and their prisoners, Daniel Lawrence and Mrs.
Mason, whom our men conducted back. This same John Lawrence, who rode express
and procured the company which rescued the abovementioned prisoners, was
afterward going in company with one Samuel Owen, in search of a man who was
missing; the Indians came upon them, killed Lawrence, but Owen escaped. Mary
MacIntosh was fired upon and killed as she was milking her cows. Robert
Grainger and John Clary were passing along the road, on a certain day, and
being fired upon by the savages, Grainger was killed on the spot; Clary
attempted to escape, but had not fled far before he also was shot down. At
another time, Thomas Battis of Brookfield, riding express to Hadley, was killed
in the wilderness, in a place now called Belchertown. Early one morning John
Woolcot, a lad about twelve or fourteen years old, was riding in search of the
cows, when the Indians fired at him, killed his horse from under him and took
him prisoner. The people at Jennings's garrison hearing the firing, and
concluding the people at another garrison were beset, six men set out for their
assistance, but were waylayed by the Indians. The English saw not their danger,
till they saw there was no escaping it. And therefore, knowing that an Indian
could not look an Englishman in the face, and take a right aim, they stood
their ground, presenting their pieces wherever they saw an Indian, without
discharging them, excepting Abijah Bartlet, who turned to flee and was shot
dead. The Indians kept firing at the rest and wounded three of them, Joseph
Jennings in two places; one ball grazed the top of his head, by which he was
struck blind for a moment; another ball passed through his shoulder, wounding
his collar bone, yet by neither did he fall, nor was he mortally wounded.
Benjamin Jennings was wounded in the leg, and John Green in the wrist. They
were preserved at last by the following stratagem. A large dog, hearing the
firing, came to our men; one of whom, to encourage his brethren and intimidate
the Indians, called out, "Capt. Williams is come to our assistance, for here is
his dog." The Indians, seeing the dog, and knowing Williams to be a famous
warrior, immediately fled, and our men escaped. John Woolcot the lad
abovementioned, was carried to Canada, where he remained six or seven years,
during which time, by conversing wholly with Indians, he not only lost his
native language, but became so naturalized to the savages, as to be unwilling,
for a while, to return to his native country. Some years afterward, viz. in
March, 1728, in a time of peace, he and another man having been hunting, and
coming down Connecticut River with a freight of skins and fur, they were hailed
by some Indians; but not being willing to go to them, they steered for another
shore. The Indians landed at a little distance from them; several shots were
exchanged, at length Woolcot was killed.

The last mischief which was done by the savages, in Brookfield, was about the
20th of July, 1710. Six men, viz. Ebenezer Hayward, John White, Stephen and
Benjamin Jennings, John Grosvenor and Joseph Kellog, were making hay in the
meadows, when the Indians, who had been watching an opportunity to surprise
them, sprung suddenly upon them, dispatched five of them, and took the other,
John White, prisoner. White spying a small company of our people at some
distance, jumped from the Indian who held him, and ran to join his friends; but
the Indian fired after him, and wounded him in the thigh, by which he fell; but
soon recovering and running again, he was again fired at and received his death
wound."

Great indeed were the difficulties, discouragements and hardships, under which
this then infant plantation labored, so that it was more than forty years from
the breaking up of the town, and burning the first meetinghouse, before they
erected another. A church was gathered, and the Rev. Thomas Cheney was ordained
their first Pastor, the third Wednesday of October, 1717. He continued their
minister a little more ^han 30 years, as he died December 11th, 1747, ^ged 57
years. To him succeeded, in the work ^f the ministry, the Rev. Elisha Harding,
who w^ solemnly separated hereunto September 13th, 1749. So rapidly did the
town increase and flourish, after the settlement of their first minister, that
on March 29th, 1750, a second parish was incorporated in the northerly p^rt of
the town. Here a church was gathered May 28th, 1752, and the Rev. Eli Forbes
was ordained their first minister on the third of June the same year. Mr.
Harding continued the minister of the first precinct until the people fell into
a most unhappy controversy about erecting a new meetinghouse. The contention
was so sharp, and the opposite parties so uncomplying that they parted, and
formed two distinct religious societies. The act for dividing the first parish,
and incorporating the third precinct passed November 8th, 1754. In consequence
hereof, Mr. Harding requested a dismission, which was granted by the church and
confirmed by a mutual ecclesiastical council, May 8th, 1755. After his
dismission the Rev. Joseph Parsons was ordained Pastor of the first church and
precinct, on the 23d of November, 1757. A church was gathered in the third
parish, or east precinct, April 15th, 1756, and on the 24th of May, 1758, the
Rev. Nathan Fiske, D. D. was ordained their spiritual overseer, and still
continues. Mr. Parsons continued Pastor of the first church upwards of thirteen
years, being released from the sickness and pains of this mortal state January
17th, 1771, in the fourteenth year of his ministry, and 38th of his age. In
about nine months after his decease, viz. on October 23d, 1771, the Rev.
Ephraim Ward was separated to the pastoral office, the fourth in succession in
the first church and precinct.

The Rev. Mr. Forbes continued in the faithful discharge of the ministerial
work among the people of the second precinct almost 23 years; and on the 1st of
March, 1775, the pastoral relation was dissolved by mutual consent, under the
conduct of an ecclesiastical council, each party in charity with, and heartily
recommending the other. To him succeeded, as second Pastor of the second
precinct, the Rev. Joseph Appleton, ^ho was solemnly separated to the work of
the gospel ministry, October 30th, 1776.

The Rev. Mr. Forbes was, June 5th, 1776, installed Pastor of the first church
in Gloucester, Cape Anne, where he continues, faithfully serving God in the
gospel of his Son. It is fitting farther to observe, that Mr. Forbes, while
minister in Brookfield, went repeatedly Chaplain to provincial regiments, in
the last French war, to the westward, which qualified him the better to endure
the hardships and fatigues of a mission to the western tribes of Indians, which
he was requested by the board of Commissioners at Boston to undertake. His
people were at first averse to his going; but were at length prevailed upon by
a committee of that board to consent, May 30th, 1762, that he might go for a
few months. He accordingly set out the first of June, with Mr. Rice, now
minister of Westminster and Mr. Elisha Gunn of Montague, for an interpreter:
They followed Mohawk River about 70 miles, then turned southward to lake
Ostiego near Cherry Valley, (this lake makes the head of one of the main
branches of Susquehannah River) crossed the lake, went down that river 120
miles to a town called Onoquagie, pleasantly situated on the eastern bank of
the Susquehannah, then containing 30 houses, 40 families, and 300 inhabitants,
besides upwards of 20 warriors. Here they arrived June 21st, 1762. Near this
place were two small towns of Tuscaroras. Here he preached; opened two schools,
one for adults, and another for children; gathered a church; administered
special ordinances to them; and left them September 1st, 1762, under the care
of Mr. Rice. During his stay there, he baptized great numbers; some brought
their children 60 and 70 miles to receive Christian baptism: They were mostly
infants, whose parents had been baptized by former missionaries, or in the
Dutch or English churches in the vicinity of Albany.

Having gone through with the ecclesiastical history of Brookfield, a
Geographical Description thereof shall now be presented.

Brookfield is distant from the Statehouse in Boston between sixty and seventy
miles. The great post road from Boston to Newyork, runs through it; and the
sixty one mile stone stands near the eastern boundary, and the seventy
milestone near the western line. This town is bounded on the east by Spencer;
on the south by Sturbridge and Western; on the west, by Western and Ware; and
on the north, by Newbraintree and Oakham. It is a township of most excellent
land in general. The face of the town is pretty uneven and stony, though there
are three or four plains of considerable extent within it, one especially in
the first parish, extensive, excellent for raising grain, and beautiful for
building spots, and large tracts of meadow and interval upon Quaboag River,
which runs in a westerly direction through the town. The main branch of this
river comes from Rutland, another branch issues from North Pond, so called, in
Leicester, and, running through Spencer, falls into Quaboag River in the
easterly part of Brookfield.

The land is generally fertile, and richly repays the cultivator for his labor
and pains; and there is such a variety of soils, as to be suited to tillage,
grazing, mowing and fruit. All kinds of grain are raised here to advantage; and
farmers here, as well as elsewhere are making great improvements in husbandry.

There is so little descent in Quaboag river for five miles, that the current
is very sluggish, the waters almost stagnant, and the extensive meadows on each
side are of small value in their present state, being so liable to be
overflowed. This evil has been growing for many years, through increasing
obstructions in so torpi^ a stream; so that the grass, from being large and of
good quality, is now so poor, and the making it into hay so uncertain, as to be
very generally rejected. By much labor and expense in clearing the channel of
obstructions, this evil may be cured. A trial was made last year by the
proprietors of the meadows, whereof they reaped, sensibly, good effects; and
hence are encouraged to a determined perseverance. Besides this flat meadow,
there are large tracts of swaley or swampy land, which yield considerable
quantities of fowlmeadow and other valuable grasses, to the amount of two tons
on an acre when made into hay.

There is one large pond in the south precinct of the extent of a mile square,
called by the Indians Quaboag Pond; but now more generally denominated Podunk
Pond, from a tract of meadow adjoining, which the Indians called Podunk.
Quaboag river advances directly to the very bank of this pond; then turns,
almost at right angles, and runs parallel with the edge about twenty rods,
leaving a narrow beach or ridge; then diverges so as to form a small island,
upon which shrubs, alders and bushes are growing; then bends its course and
opens a channel into the pond, at the northeast, running nearly through the
middle of it, and passes off in an outlet at the westerly edge. Close to the
side of the pond where the river enters, is a large bridge, there being a
county road along the beach of this pond, for more than half a mile; and
travelers pass about twenty rods on a narrow ridge, between the river and
pond, which, though very moderately sloping on the side next the pond, is
perpendicular on the side of the river, and is generally overflowed in the
spring and fall, to the hazard and sometimes suspension of traveling. This
beach had formerly a row of large pines and swamp white oaks growing upon it.
But the floods, agitated by the winds, have so washed away the soil, that the
most of them are dead and blown down, and the beach is gradually wearing away.

On the south of this pond, and about a quarter of a mile distant, is another
pond, of not more than half the amplitude of the former, known by the name of
the South Pond. This communicates with, and empties its redundant waters into
the larger pond, by a creek or brook, except in the time of a freshet, when the
waters flow so much faster into the great pond as to reverse the current of the
brook, and replenish the lesser.

There is another considerable pond in the west precinct, called Wickoboag
Pond, from whence quantities of iron ore are annually collected. This pond is
supplied by several rivulets, and has one large outlet into the river, about
twenty or thirty rods in length, called Lashaway. These ponds and rivers, and
the other smaller streams, by which the land is intersected, are plentifully
furnished with pickerel, perch, and diverse other kinds of fish.

On the rivers and streams in the town, there are seven grist mills, six saw
mills, and three fulling mills. Mr. Jenks, besides his mills, prosecutes the
blacksmiths' business largely, and has two trip hammers, and a grindstone
carried by water.

One of the clothiers' works above referred to, is in the first parish; a very
convenient situation indeed for carrying on the clothiers' business in all its
branches. Ellis and company are the proprietors hereof. About 5000 yards of
cloth are annually dressed at these works. These men have obtained the art of
coloring scarlet, which competent judges pronounce equal to any which is
imported; an art which few in this Commonwealth have attained unto.

In a considerable part of the low lands, the clay lies near the surface. There
is much clay adjoining the south pond, and clay forms the bed of the river. No
mines have, as yet, been discovered, although search therefore has been made at
no small expense. There is some iron ore, a bed of yellow ocre nearly
exhausted, and large quantities, both of mud and stone, which yield copperas,
and contain a strong vitriolic quality. Many of the wells, both on high and low
grounds, have what is called hard water. There are also stones which contain
sulphur; but how to extract it has not yet been discovered.

There are two large hills, principally in the first parish. One is called
Coye's Hill, and supposed to take its name from one Coye, a proprietor of, and
an early inhabitant in Brookfield. This hill extends into Western. The other is
called Ragged Hill, probably from its extreme rough and rocky appearance. Both
these hills are excellent for mowing, for pasturing, and for orcharding; and
there are several very good farms upon them. Partly between these two hills
there is a large ledge of rocks, which in all probability was rent asunder ages
ago, by an earthquake: The rock on one side is shelving over, and the opening
made is sufficient to contain an hundred men; and the appearance indicates that
it was formerly a place of rendezvous for Indians. This place is called by the
people of Brookfield, The Stone House.

The rivers, ponds and meadows, in this town, occasion heavy fogs, which, in
some seasons, have produced putrid fevers, etc. But observation clearly teaches
that the inhabitants here are as healthy as in other places; and they who live
in the low lands, as they who live on the high. This place has been famed for
the longevity, and fruitfulness of some of its inhabitants. In 1782, a Mr.
Green, then above ninety, followed his fifth child, a woman in her sixty second
year, to the grave, above four miles, riding erect and steady, on a lively
horse. He died not long since, in the vicinity of Hanover in Newhampshire, aged
upwards of an 100 years. Also in 1782, died the widow Elizabeth Olds in her 92d
year. Her posterity were as follow; ten children, seventy three grand children,
two hundred and one great grand children, and two of the fifth generation; two
of her grand daughters being grandmothers. Total, two hundred and eighty six.
Of these, two hundred and thirty two were living at her decease. In 1788, died
Mr. Cyprian Rice, in the ninety eighth year of his age; and in a few months
after died Mr. Elisha Rice, his brother, in the ninety ninth year of his age.
They were born at Marlborough. They left not a numerous issue. There is now
living in Brookfield a Mr. Thomas Ainsworth, who supposes he is the last
surviving soldier who was in the famous Lovell's fight.

It is so long since the aboriginals quitted these grounds, that their
monuments are almost effaced. Once in a while a point of an arrow, or some
stone is found which be^ the mark of Indian labor and dexterity. And there is
still to be distinguished the spot on which they had a fort, and a cemetery
where they buried their dead.

The growth of wood is principally chestnut, white oak, red oak, and some
walnut. The swamps and swales yield maple, black birch, ash, and some hemlock.

The inhabitants of Brookfield are chiefly farmers, though there is a
proportion of mechanics, traders, and professional gentlemen. And the general
appearance of the farms, buildings, roads, and manners of the people, makes a
favorable impression, and denotes a good degree of cultivation, taste and
improvement.

Brookfield is distant from the Courthouse in Worcester, about twenty miles to
the southwest.

OXFORD.
THIS was a grant made by the government in the year 1682, to Joseph Dudley,
Esquire Governor, to William Stoughton, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts,
to Major Robert Thompson, Messrs. Cox and Blackwell, and their associates. It
was styled, A tract of land lying in the Nipnet or Nipmug country. The grant
expressed eight miles square; but as surveyed and located, it must be near
twelve miles in length from east to west, and about nine in width, from north
to south, comprehending all Charlton, a part of Dudley, and a part of Ward. It
was originally bounded west, on Newmedfield, (now Sturbridge) north, on a tract
of land called the Country Gore, and Leicester; east, on Sutton; and south, by
a gore of land and Dudley. It was surveyed by Mr. Gore of Roxbury, and a return
thereof being made to the court, they accepted the same, and on the 16th of
May, 1683, they granted the plantation, and gave it the name of Oxford.

The original proprietors of Oxford, in the year 1686, let on about thirty
families of French protestants, who were driven out of France, in consequence
of the repeal of the edict of Nantz, by Lewis XIV, in the year 1684. These
unhappy French people, being seated at the easterly part, or end of Oxford,
were grievously annoyed and distressed by the Indians, and were soon destroyed,
or driven away and dispersed by them. Tradition says, one Johnson (whether a
Frenchman or Englishman is uncertain) was here killed, and one or two of his
children, while his wif^ escaped unperceived out of the house, at e^ening, with
a child in her arms, and walked to Woodstock, about fifteen miles, that night,
to a garrison there. At what time this was we cannot precisely say. But in the
year 1693, ^ particular act passed, empowering Oxford to send a representative
to the General Court; as appears by the records in the Secretary's office of
this Commonwealth.

As Oxford was then in the county of Suffolk, its first and earlier records
were kept in Boston, and are said to have been burnt in the Statehouse there.

A deed was given by the original proprietors, or their heirs and executors, to
such as were there, or others, of a part of the original grant, dated July 8th,
1713, that they might settle and build up the town. The first town meeting held
in Oxford for the choice of town officers was on the 22d of July, 1713. The
people inhabiting this territory were in continual fears from the natives; in
consequence of which, the settlement of the town went on but slowly for many
years. Except what has been related above, I cannot find that any persons were
killed by the Indians in Oxford. But Governor Hutchinson gives a piece of
history, which must not be omitted in this work. It is in these words. "On the
sixth of August, 1724, four Indians came upon a small house in Oxford, which
was built under a hill. They made a breach in the roof, and as one of them was
attempting to enter, he received a shot in his belly from a courageous woman,
the only person in the house, who had two muskets and two pistols charged, and
was prepared for all four, but they thought fit to retreat, carrying off the
dead, or wounded man." It is pity the name of this heroine has not been
preserved, that it might be handed down to latest posterity.

The first settlers in Oxford, considering the then state of the country, took
early care for the enjoyment and support of a preached gospel, and the
institutions of Christianity among them: Accordingly the first church of Christ
in this place was gathered January 18th, 1721, and the Rev. John Campbell was
ordained the first minister, that same year, viz. March 11th, 1721. This
gentleman came from the north of Scotland; was educated at Edinburgh, and
received the honors of that University. He came into America in the year 1717.
He continued the worthy and faithful pastor of the church and flock here, until
May 25th, 1761, when he died in the 71st year of his age, and in the 42d of his
ministry.

The Rev. Mr. Campbell was succeeded in the sacred office by the Rev. Joseph
Bowman, who was installed here November 14th, 1764. (This Mr. Bowman was first
ordained at Boston, August 31st, 1762, to the work of the gospel ministry, more
especially, among the Mohawk Indians on the western borders of New England. He
went to Onohoquague, an Indian town on the Susquehannah, in October following.
He returned the last of May, 1763; but hostilities commencing between the
Indians tribes in June, he did not go back to them; and the war continuing, he
was, by the board of commissioners, dismissed from his mission in June, 1764.)
-- Mr. Bowman lived in great harmony with the people of Oxford until 1775, when
the then state of the country, as to the controversy and war with Greatbritain,
occasioned differences among the people; these led a number to profess
themselves Quakers, and then they declared themselves to be of the sect, called
Universalists, which finally ended in Mr. Bowman's dismission, at his desire,
with advice of council, August 28th, 1782. After his removal from Oxford, the
Rev. Mr. Bowman was installed at Bernard, in the State of Vermont, September
22, 1784, where he still continues, enjoying the affection of the people, in a
growing, flourishing town, and blessed with peace and prosperity in his latter
days.

The Rev. Elias Dudley was ordained successor to Mr. Bowman at Oxford, April
13th, 1791.

In the town of Oxford there is a society of them who are denominated
Universalists, (about a fifth of the inhabitants:) These, with some families
from several neighboring towns, make a respectable society: And they have
erected a large elegant meetinghouse, toward the south end of Oxford plain,
where the road from Connecticut intersects the road from Worcester to Dudley.
This house is constructed upon the most modern plan, with a tower and bell.
This society have not, as yet, any settled minister. There is also a number in
Oxford of the Anabaptist persuasion; they are destitute of any stated teacher.

We will now give some Geographical Description of this town. Oxford, though
very extensive at first, has been much curtailed, nevertheless, it is still a
large and respectable town, being about seven miles in length from north to
south, and about five miles in width from east to west. The present boundaries
of Oxford are as follow; north, it is bounded on Leicester, Ward, and a country
gore of land: East, by Sutton; south, by a gore of land, and Dudley; and west,
by Charlton. When the late census was taken there were 150 houses, and 1000
inhabitants in the town. The town of Oxford is not very hilly and uneven: In
the center thereof there is a large and fine plain of a mile and a half in
length, and about a mile in width: This plain is almost wholly under
cultivation, and is pretty level. On this plain, the road from Worcester to the
easterly part of Connecticut, and to Rhodeisland, runs from the north to the
south: Near the north end of it stands the congregational meetinghouse; and
about a mile south of this is the meetinghouse of the society of Universalists:
These houses are both large and elegant: On either side of the street there are
many good buildings; and almost the whole plain is under the eye of the
traveller at once. From the plain the lands rise on all sides, especially on
the east and on the west; but not very high. The soil on the plain is good for
grain of all kinds; but not so for pasturage or mowing. But the higher lands
are very good for mowing, pasturing and orcharding, the soil is strong and
fertile. Dudley hills, so called, on the south, which are pretty high, fall
partly within the limits of Oxford. About three quarters of a mile west of the
great road on the plain, runs French River from the north to the south, which
falls into the river Quinebaug in the town of Thompson in the State of
Connecticut. This river derived its name from the French protestants who first
settled in Oxford. On this river are some very good meadows of several hundreds
of acres. On the east side of the plain there is a fine stream, which heads in
Great Meadow, so called, in the northerly part of the town, containing 100
acres, or more. By the sides of this stream there are some pretty good meadows.
This brook empties into French River. Potash Brook, so called, which is never
dry, is a fine rivulet, and falls into the above mentione^ brook. Upon the
(...), and on these streams, there are within Oxford limits, three grist mills;
six saw mills; and two clothiers' works. There are also, in the town, porash
works. There are two very pretty ponds in the town: One in the westerly part,
called Augootsback: The other a little north of the first meetinghouse on the
Worcester road, known by the name of Oxford Pond. There are some small cedar
swamps, in this town, which yield cedar for shingles, and other valuable uses.
The town is in general well wooded: On the higher lands are oaks of all kinds,
walnut and chestnut: On the lower, grow ash, birch, maple, etc. There is some
pitch pine in the town: But not much white pine, at this day, that being
chiefly taken off. On the plain, there are two or three stores of European and
India goods: And in the town there are all the common artificers, tradesmen and
mechanics; but the body of the people are farmers. The roads of travel through
Oxford are an advantage to the town -- the largest road is that which comes
from Connecticut through Charlton, Oxford, to Sutton, and so on to Boston,
falling into the post road in Weston: The next, is the road from Worcester,
through Oxford, to Dudley, etc. etc. Oxford is situated to the southwest from
Boston, at the distance of 54 miles; and from Worcester courthouse it is 10
miles, nearly south.

SUTTON.
THIS tract of land was originally purchased by a number of gentlemen, of
Sachem John Wampus, and his company, Indians who claimed it. Wampus first
reserved four miles square, for his countrymen the Indians, which they called
Hassanamisco; this is now Grafton. It was to begin at a certain bound, which he
fixed upon; and then the purchasers above referred to, were to have as much
land, as eight miles square would amount to, situated in the Nipmug country,
between the towns of Mendon, Marlborough, Worcester, Oxford, and New Sherburne
(now Douglass) and this was confirmed to the purchasers, May 15th, 1704, and
formed into a township and called Sutton, by an act of the General Court, dated
June 21st, 1715. That part of the original purchase, which fell to the eastward
of Hassanamisco, or Grafton, w^ part of it, many years ago annexed to the town
^f Westborough, and the other part, with some from M^ndon and Hopkinton, taken
to form the town of Upton. So that what now is properly Sutton does not lie in
a bad form. A few families were annexed to Northbridge, some years ago: And a
few also, at the northwest angle of the town, were annexed to Ward. The general
boundaries of Sutton, are at present, as follow: North, by Worcester; east and
north, by Grafton; east, by Northbridge and Uxbridge; south, by Douglass; west,
by Oxford; and northwest, by Ward. Oxford line is S. 1 W. Douglass, E. 60 N.
Mendon, N. 8 E. Worcester, W. 22 S.

The settling and peopling of the town was retarded for some time, by re^on of
wars with the Indians. However, in the year 1716, three families had got seated
in the place, and wintered there in the winter of 1716 and 1717, when the great
snow fell, as our fathers have told us. This snow fell on some of the last days
of February, old style, and came so deep, that it wholly covered over the hut
in which one of the families lived. The man being from home, the family might
have perished had not an Indian, who knew the circumstances, come to their
relief. He found the hut only by the hole which the smoke from the fire place
had made through the snow.

In September 1717, the fall after the great snow, the first child was born in
the town, named Abigail Marsh, daughter of Mr. Benjamin Marsh, who was
afterward an anabaptist elder in the town. This woman is now living, has had
four husbands, and is, at this time, a widow; her name is Chase.

The inhabitants of Sutton first acted as a body corporate, or held their first
town meeting on the 3d day of December, 1718, at the dwelling house of Mr. John
Stockwell. Their business was to organize themselves, and to choose a committee
to join the proprietors' committee in order to procure preaching. Consequently
they must have been incorporated a little before by an act of the Legislature,
and vested with full town powers and privileges: And this was previous to the
incorporation of Leicester or Rutland.

The exact day when the first congregational church in Sutton was imbodied
cannot be ascertained. The record says, "In the fall of the year 1720." The
first minister, the Rev. John MacKinstry, was ordained November 9th, 1720. He
was a gentleman of good abilities and had his education in Scotland. Observe,
by the way, the early care and pains this people took to have the gospel
preached, and a minister settled among them. In about four years from their
beginning the settlement of the place, they had a minister ordained.

Mr. MacKinstry differed so much from the people in his notions of church
government, that they parted: And he was dismissed from his pastoral relation
to them, September 2d, 1728. This gentleman was afterward resettled in
Connecticut.

The second minister of the town, the Rev. David Hall, was ordained October
15th, 1729. He received the honourary degree of Doctor of Divinity, at
Dartmouth college, in the year 1777. After a life of piety and usefulness, he
died May 8th, 1789, in the 85th year of his age, and the 60th year of his
ministry.

Dr. Hall was succeeded in the sacred office by the Rev. Edmund Mills, who was
separated thereunto June 23d, 1790. The people of the first congregational
church and society have lately repaired their meetinghouse, and built a tower
to it: And Mr. Ebenezer Warters, a man of large property in the town, has given
them a bell weighing about 750 lb. and which cost upwards of 80 l. And Mr.
Gardner Warters, deceased, gave 30 l. toward a clock for the meetinghouse.

The second parish in Sutton was incorporated by an act of Court, October 28th,
1743. This is about three miles wide, and six and one half miles in length; so
that the old parish is much larger. The first meeting of the second parish was
held December 26th, 1743. The second congregational church in the town, was
formed by a covenant, dated September 10th, 1747. The Rev. James Welman was
consecrated Pastor of the second church October 7th, 1747, and was dismissed
from office July 22d, 1760. The Rev. Mr. Welman was, in 1768, resettled at
Cornish, in the county of Cheshire, in the State of Newhampshire.

Mr. Welman was succeeded in the pastoral office, in the second church in
Sutton, by the Rev. Ebenezer Chaplain, who was ordained November 14th, 1764.

There is no record to be found when the first Anabaptist society was collected
in Sutton, nor when Mr. Benjamin Marsh, their first elder, was ordained.
Tradition says, it was about the year 1735. They built a small meetinghouse
about a mile westerly from the first parish meetinghouse. After some years part
of Elder Marsh's congregation left him, and joining with new ones, in the year
1767 introduced Mr. Jeremiah Barstow, as their Elder, and built another
Anabaptist meetinghouse about a mile further westerly, on the road toward
Oxford. In 1772, the major part of Elder Barstow's society became dissatisfied
with him; he then, with his adherents, asked a dismission from the rest, and
adjoined to Elder Marsh and the remainder of his society. In January 1775,
Elder Marsh died in the 89th year of his age. Mr. Barstow kept up a society in
town, until 1782, when he moved away. In 1783, they introduced Mr. Ebenezer
Lamson as their teacher, and who, continuing with them until the first of
April, 1788, was then ordained their elder. In the southeast part of the town
the people have for several years heard one Mr. William Batcheldor, who lived
among them, and in October, 179^, he was ordained their elder.

About ten years past, the Shakers made considerable appearance in the second
parish, in this town, but have some time since, wholly subsided.

There have also, for ten or twelve years past, been a number of the sect
called Universalists, in Sutton; the most of them congregate at Oxford; a few
at Grafton. There is one family in town, who profess to be Quakers. The number
of these several denominations cannot be ascertained, as many of them are
unstable.

We will now present our readers with some Topographical Description of the
town of Sutton.

The general face of it is hilly land, of a deep loam, pretty rocky, good for
orcharding, and for Indian corn and grass; but indifferent for all other sorts
of grain, and for flax. There are several meadows and swamps, but none very
extensive, or any way remarkable. There is a considerable body of poor land in
the south part of the town; and there is a small quantity of poor, broken land
in the northeast corner of the second parish. There is some good, both high and
low interval land, on Blackstone River, so called. As this river has its source
in Sutton, and is singular in its formation and course, we shall attempt a
particular description of it. The reputed head of this river is a pond of about
70 acres, called Ramshorn Pond, because of the crookedness of the stream which
issues from it. The pond is situated about two miles southwest from the second
parish meetinghouse. It has a small inlet at the southwest part; the outlet is
at the northeast; and the stream runs northeast until it comes within about
half a mile west of said meetinghouse; then bears away northwest, and runs
through Ward, within about half a mile of Ward meetinghouse; takes in several
streams in that town, which have mills on them, particularly one coming from
Leicester, called Kettle Brook; passes on to Worcester; and about a mile
southerly from the south meetinghouse, receives Bimilick or Mill Brook, which
comes from the North Pond in Worcester, then turns back, running southeasterly,
and comes within half a mile east of Sutton second parish meetinghouse; passes
on and takes in the Mill Brook, so called, the outlet of a large pond, called
Crooked Pond, lying a little west of the line between the two meetinghouses in
Sutton; and which is about a mile east of the little or Ramshorn Pond first
mentioned. The inlet of this pond is on the southwest, the outlet is northeast,
has a grist mill (in the north parish near the pond) with two runners, which,
according to the original grant, has the sole command of the water. This pond
is supposed to be fed chiefly by springs, and is little affected by droughts:
Many people from the neighboring towns bring their grain to this mill, in dry
seasons. On this same brook, about half a mile below, is Messrs. Burbanks'
paper mill. A few rods below, is an oil mill. A few rods below the oil mill, is
a fulling mill. A few rods below the fulling mill, in the late war, powder
mills were erected, but are since discontinued. A little further down, in the
year 1776, a gun manufactory was erected, but is since converted into a
manufactory for scythes, axes and mill irons; and here they have trip hammers,
bellows, and grindstones, carried by water. Having described this brook,
issuing from the pond, and the water works upon it, we return to the river. The
river, after it has received this brook, bears away, and runs northeast, and
east; and takes in a brook from a pond in the northeast part of the second
parish in Sutton, called Dorrett's Pond; having an inlet on the northwest; the
outlet is at the southeast. Said river then runs easterly into Grafton, and
there receives the stream which issues from Quinsigamond, or Shrewsbury Long
Pond. The river then bears away, and runs southerly through Northbridge and
Uxbridge; and, about a mile southeast from Uxbridge meetinghouse, takes in a
stream which issues from a pond chiefly in Sutton, near the southwest corner of
the town, called Manchaug Pond. This pond has an inlet on the northwest; the
outlet is to the southeast, and both in Sutton. This outlet runs along near the
south line of Sutton, until it comes to Uxbridge.

Having mentioned the river, and the streams, we would just observe, this town
is famed for its manufactures, its mills, and water works. Here are, one paper
mill, one oil mill, ten grist mills, six saw mills, three fulling mills, seven
trip hammers, five scythe and ax makers, one hoe maker; several who work at
nail making; and six works for making of potash. But here are no mines, no
forge, furnace, pearlshery, nor fish of any consequence.

There are two or three natural curiosities worthy of particular notice.

As first, In the west part of Sutton, within sixty rods of the rise of the
inlet of Ramshorn Pond, which is the head of Blackstone River running to
Providence and falling into the sea at Bristol, is a brook so large as to carry
a saw mill in Sutton, then bears away into Oxford, joins French River, which
unites with the river Quinebaug, and enters the sea at Newlondon.

Secondly, A few rods west of the second parish meetinghouse, there is a swamp,
having two outlets; one at the southwest; the other at the northeast: Both
these outlets enter Blackstone River, above described, at about one mile's
distance from each other: But the river is estimated to run ten or twelve
miles, after the entrance of that on the westerly side, before it returns and
takes in that on the east.

Thirdly, In the southeasterly part of the town is a cavern in the earth or
rocks, commonly called Purgatory. The rocks on each side of the chasm evidently
appear to have been rent asunder. People may enter some rods under the ground
or rocks, and there are cracks down which they drop pebbles, and after these
strike the sides alternately several times, they are heard to fall into the
water; and a brook issues out at the bottom of the hill.

It may be acceptable to give a more particular description of this place,
called Purgatory.

It is the side of a hill, which consists of vast ledges of rocks: Where the
natural descent begins, a chasm has been formed of perhaps thirty, and in some
places, forty feet in width, in these ledges, by some violent concussion, which
left this body of stones of all shapes and sizes, to fall in: Above, it is all
open to the heavens; and the ledges, on either side, are from five to ten, and
so on to twenty, and even forty feet in height. This chasm is, perhaps, near
eighty rods in length; and the descent is gradual, and not very difficult.
Where the greatest depth is, water issues from crevices in the rocks, and hangs
in icicles, and even in solid bodies of ice, no^ only in May, as I have seen,
but in June, although the descent is to the south. Some small caverns were
formed by the falling of these rocks, through which persons have descended, and
come out several rods below. This is a most stupendous place, and fills the
mind of the beholder with most exalted ideas of the infinite power of the great
Creator of all things, "who removes the mountains, and they know not; who
shakes the earth out of its place, and the pillars thereof tremble." After
all, no description given of this place, by another, will enable persons to
form just and adequate conceptions of it.

The growth of wood in Sutton, is oak of all sorts, and what they call the oak
chestnut, the bark whereof is like the common gray oak, but the leaves resemble,
almost exactly, those of the chestnut tree; walnut of all kinds; great plenty of
chestnut; considerable of butternut; but little of buttonwood. In the low lands
the wood is ash, beech, birch, elm of all sorts, maple, white and pitch pine.
They have also sassafras, sarsaparilla, and alders. Here are to be found
ginseng, and the cohush root, of special medicinal qualities.

There is much traveling through this town. The principal roads are -- one
coming from Connecticut, through Oxford, and passing from west to east, through
the town. About three miles west of the first parish meetinghouse this road
parts; the left hand road passes by the meetinghouse, and so on through
Grafton, Westborough, and Southborough, and leads to Boston, falling into the
post road in Weston. The right hand road, at said parting, passes on about two
miles south of said meetinghouse, and enters what is called the middle road in
Uxbridge, and so goes on, through Mendon, to Boston. Another principal road, is
a county road from Worcester, passing from north to south through the town, by
both meetinghouses: At the south meetinghouse it parts, and, by various
partings, leads to Douglass and the west part of Uxbridge.

There is another county road, which leads from Uxbridge to Worcester, through
the east part of Sutton. This was lately in contemplation to be made the post
road from Worcester to Providence.

The town of Sutton is distant from the Statehouse in Boston 46 miles to the
southwest. And from Worcester courthouse, it is six miles to the north parish
meetinghouse; and to the south parish meetinghouse, to the south nine miles.

This is a large and flourishing town, the second in wealth in the county; and
when the census was taken in 1791, there were 2642 inhabitants therein.

LEICESTER.
THE township of Leicester was granted by the General Court, on the tenth of
February, 1713, to Col. Joshua Lamb, of Roxbury, and others, his associates;
and on the fifteenth day of the same month and year, the Court, by a particular
resolve or act, gave this tract of land the name of Leicester. The natives
called the place Towtaid; and by the English it was usually called Strawberry
Hill. The place was not incorporated, and vested with town powers and
privileges, until the close of the year 1720, or the beginning of the year
1721: For the first town meeting held in Leicester was on the sixth of March,
172^. A survey of this grant being ordered, and a return thereof made, the
General Court established the lines and boundaries of it by a special act, on
the 19th of January, 1714. The tract was to be eight miles square; and was
granted on these conditions, that the proprietors should reserve a sufficient
quantity of land for the use of the ministry and schools, and see that fifty
families were settled thereon in seven years. The proprietors accordingly, at a
meeting in Boston, on the 23d of February, 1713, voted to give one half of the
township to fifty families who should settle thereon, in that space of time.
That number of families having removed to, and settled at Leicester, the
proprietors, at a meeting held at Boston, on the 23d of July, 1722, chose a
committee, consisting of William Dudley and Joshua Lamb, Esqrs; Mr. Nathaniel
Kenny, Mr. Samuel Tyler, and Mr. Samuel Green, to make and execute a deed of
the easterly half of Leicester, lying west of and adjoining to Worcester; east
of Brookfield, south of Rutland, and north of a gore of land lying between
Oxford and Leicester, to Mr. John Stebbins, and others; which deed bears date
January 8th, 1724; and was recorded November 26th, 1729, Libro 29th, page 329
of the records of the county of Middlesex. This grant was intended to be eight
miles square: But the measure was large, and included the whole of what is now
Spencer: And at the north end, two miles in width and four in length were taken
off to help form the town of Paxtor in 1765: And at the southeast part of the
town, about 2500 acres were taken off to aid in making up the town of Ward, in
1778. Leicester is still a very considerable town, and contained when the
enumeration was made, nearly 1100 inhabitants. -- It is bounded on the north by
Paxton; on the east by Worcester and Ward; on the south by Oxford; and on the
west by Spencer.

The first settlers of Leicester, like the people in general, of that day, paid
early attention to religion, to the support of the gospel, and the institutions
of Christ among them. When the congregational church in this place was
gathered, cannot now be exactly ascertained, as there were no church records
kept or preserved, till within about 40 years. But the probability is this,
that the church was formed at the time of the first minister's being settled
with them, who was the Rev. David Parsons. This Mr. Parsons was ordained at
Malden, near Boston, but soon removed with a considerable part of his people,
to Leicester, where he was installed, by the best account to be now had,
September 15th, 1721. He did not continue long in the ministry at Leicester,
but was dismissed from his pastoral relation to that flock, and died in about
two years after. He was succeeded in the sacred office, at Leicester, by the
Rev. David Goddard, who was solemnly consecrated thereto June 30th, 1736. He
was not suffered to continue long with this people, by reason of death; for
being on a journey, at Framingham, he was there seized with a fever which put a
period to his days January 19th, 1754, in the 48th year of his age, and the
13th of his ministry.

The Rev. Joseph Roberts succeeded Mr. Goddard in the ministry at Leicester,
whereunto he was ordained October 23d, 1754, and he was dismissed therefrom
December 15th, 1762. To him succeeded in the work of the gospel ministry, the
Rev. Benjamin Conklin, who was separated thereunto on the 23d of November,
1763, and still continues in office.

There is a considerable society of Anabaptists in Leicester, and which has
been of long standing. Their first teacher was Mr. Thomas Green, a physician.
After his death, the Rev. Benjamin Foster, A. M. was ordained among them; but
for want of support he removed, and has been resettled in the city of Newyork;
where he is a worthy minister, and has lately received the degree of Doctor of
Divinity. The Anabaptist society in Leicester, have for their present teacher
Mr. Nathan Dana. Their house of worship is in the south part of the town.

Also, there is in Leicester, a number of the people called Friends, or
Quakers, who have a very good house for their way of worship, erected in the
north part of the town in the year 1791.

Notwithstanding the difference of sentiment, in religious matters, between the
various denominations of the people of Leicester, the greatest liberality and
cordiality prevail, both in their town meetings, and family connexions and
intercourse.

There is an Academy established in this town, and called Leicester Academy,
for the purposes of promoting true piety and virtue, and for the education of
youth in the English, Latin, Greek, and French languages; together with
writing, arithmetic, and the art of speaking; also practical geometry, logic,
philosophy, and such other of the liberal arts and sciences or languages, as
opportunity may hereafter permit. Ebenezer Crafts, Esquire of Sturbridge, and Jacob
Davis, Esquire of Charlton, in the county of Worcester, generously gave a large and
commodious mansion house, lands and appurtenances, in Leicester, for an
Academy. This Academy was incorporated by an act of the Legislature, March 23d,
1784, and trustees were appointed; their number is never to be more than
fifteen, nor less than eight.

The principal instructor, ex officio, is always to be one.

The first trustees, appointed by the Court, were, Ebenezer Crafts, Esquire of
Sturbridge; Jacob Davis, Esquire of Charlton; Hon. Moses Gill, Esquire of Princeton;
Hon. Samuel Baker, Esquire of Berlin; Hon. Levi Lincoln and Joseph Allen, Esqrs. of
Worcester; Hon. Seth Washburn, Esquire and Rev. Benjamin Conklin, of Leicester;
Rufus Putman, Esquire of Rutland; Rev. Joshua Pain, of Sturbridge; Rev. Joseph
Sumner, of Shrewsbury; Rev. Archibald Campbell, of Charlton; Rev. Joseph Pope,
of Spencer; Hon. Timothy Danielson, Esquire of Brimfield.

Whenever any vacancy happens in the board of trustees, the remainder are to
elect some person to fill the place.

The Hon. Moses Gill, Esquire was elected President, the Rev. Benjamin Conklin,
Vicepresident; the Rev. Joseph Pope, Secretary; Joseph Allen, Esquire Treasurer.

PRECEPTORS. Benjamin Stone, A. M. was the first Preceptor, Thomas Payson, A.
B. assistant Preceptor; Amos Crosby, A. M. Samuel Sumner, A. M. David Smith, A.
B. Ebenezer Adams, A. B. the present Preceptor; John Pierce, present assistant
Preceptor.

The present Trustees of Leicester Academy, are, The Hon. Moses Gill, Esquire
President; Hon. Samuel Baker, Esquire Hon. Seth Washburn, Esquire Hon. Levi Lincoln,
Esquire Joseph Allen, Esquire Treasurer; Rev. Benjamin Conklin, Vicepresident; Rev.
Joshua Pain; Rev. Joseph Sumner; Rev. Joseph Pope, Secretary; Rev. Archibald
Campbell; Rev. Daniel Grosvenor; Capt. Thomas Newell, Leicester; Deacon Jonas
How, Rutland; Hon. Dwight Foster, Esquire and the Hon. Timothy Newell, Esquire.

Besides the buildings and lands given by Ebenezer Crafts and Jacob Davis,
Esqrs; the town of Leicester gave, L 500 Hon. Moses Gill, Esquire 150 Rufus Putnam,
Esquire 100 Capt. Thomas Newhall, L 100 Col. Thomas Denny, 100 Jeduthun Baldwin,
Esquire 100 Mr. Reuben Swan, 50 Mr. John Southgate, 30 Col. Samuel Denny, 30 Joseph
Allen, Esquire 30 Isaiah Thomas, Esquire 20 Caleb Ammidown, Esquire 18 Hon. Timothy Pain,
Esquire 15 Capt. Samuel Green, 15 Capt. William Watson, 12 Mr. Samuel Green, jun.
10 Mr. Samuel Watson, 10 Mr. Peter Taft, 10 Mr. Phinehas Jones, 10 Mr. John
Pierce, 10


Besides the above funds for the support of Instructors for this academy, the
General Court granted in 1792, a township of land, in the district of of Maine,
of six miles square to the use of this academy. Also the Hon. Judge Gill has
given a number of well chosen books, which cost 30l. sterling in England, to
the academy, for the use of the instructors, and also for the use of the
students, under certain regulations.

Some Topographical Description of this town shall now be attempted.

Leicester is situated upon the height of land between the Atlantic Ocean,
east and south, and Connecticut River on the west. The town is very hilly and
uneven; it is indeed famed for its hills, but these are moist, springy and
rocky yet not exceedingly so. The soil is pretty good, deep and strong, but
rather cold clayey and wet, not so well adapted to grain as to grass and
pasturage: It is pretty good for orcharding and fruit trees of all kinds.

There are diverse hills of note and fame in the town; the first we shall
mention, and the most considerable, is Strawberry Hill, so called by the
English when they first came there, in consequence of the exuberant growth of
those berries. On this hill stands their elegant new meetinghouse, on the
northwest side of the common which is level, facing to the southeast, erected
in 1784. At the northeast angle of the square stands the academy buildings; the
other sides of the square are lined with large handsome dwelling houses. This
hill is high and rather steep, but not large and extensive. A second hill is
called Indian Hill, or Bald Hill, on account of its being cleared and planted
with corn by the Indians, a long time before the white people went up so far to
live. A third is called Moose Hill, because of the great number of those
quadrupeds which were wont to harbor there. Another is called Cary's Hill,
from one of that name who went thither and dug a cave in the side of this
hill, and lived there as an hermit many years, while that part of the country
was in its wilderness state. A fifth is known by the name of Grass Hill.

Although there is no river running through the town, yet it is well watered by
springs and rivulets, and by several large brooks upon which there are three
corn and five saw mills; here also are clothiers' works, where that business is
carried on in all its branches. Two of the brooks above referred to, run from
north to south, and are emptied, one into Providence river, the other into the
Sound or sea, at Newlondon, in Connecticut. The first of these is called Kettle
Brook, and has its source in that part of Paxton which was formerly Leicester;
is a very considerable stream, and running through the easterly part of the
town, passes into Ward, and there falls into Blackstone River. The other rises
from a large meadow in the westerly part of the town, of upwards of an hundred
acres, part of which is in Spencer; this stream connects itself with the outlet
of a pond which is situated a little easterly of the center of the town of
about forty or fifty acres: These two are the sources of French River, which
runs through Oxford, and falls into the sea at Newlondon.

There is another pond in the northwesterly part of the town, containing about
one hundred acres, whence issues a stream which runs westerly, and forms a
branch of the River Chicabee, and falls into Connecticut River at Springfield.
On this stream or outlet from the pond there is a grist mill, and by a drain
and dam the pond may be raised or lowered ten feet, which is of singular
advantage to the inhabitants of the vicinity, on account of grinding in the
summer season.

In the easterly part of the town there is a place where the water, running
from the northerly side of the post road, goes to Providence, while that on the
south side goes to Newlondon. In the westerly part of the town there is also a
place where the water, from the north side of the road, runs to Connecticut
River; and that on the south side goes to Newlondon.

There is in this town a great variety of timber and wood, being a good
proportion of almost every kind which is known to grow in this part of the
country, except pitch and yellow pine.

The principal roads of travel, are, first, the post road from Boston to
Springfield, through the middle of the town: Secondly, about one hundred rods
west from the meetinghouse is the county road to Sturbridge, which turns to the
left hand: Thirdly, through the north part of the town is a county road from
Worcester to Newbraintree and Hardwick: Fourthly, from Rutland, and the
northern part of the county, there is a large road through the town, leading
through Charlton, Dudley, Pomfret, etc. to Norwich.

The inhabitants of Leicester mostly live by the cultivation of the soil; and
here are many very fine farms, and the buildings are in general good, and
indicate a very considerable degree of wealth. There are several persons here
who deal in foreign and domestic articles of trade; and they have besides the
usual mechanics and tradesmen, a famous gunsmith, Mr. Thomas Earl, who is
supposed to equal any workman in the United States, in that branch of business.

Here also there are established manufactories of cotton and wool cards, and
the work is carried on in all its branches to the greatest perfection. In this
business are constantly employed fifteen or twenty men, exclusive of a great
number of women and children: And they vend, annually, from twelve to fifteen
thousand pair.

Leicester is a growing flourishing town; and is situated upon the post road
from Boston to Hartford, Newyork and Philadelphia: It is six miles from the
courthouse in Worcester, a little to the southwest; and from Boston, it is
fifty three miles, several degrees to the south of west.

RUTLAND.
WE are happy in being able to say, that the records respecting Rutland, have
been kept very correct and perfect, and in fine order from the first.

From them we find, that on the 22d of December 1686, Joseph Trask, alias
Puagastion, of Pennicook; Job, alias Pompamamay, of Natick; Simon Piticom,
alias Wananapan, of Wamassick; Sassawannow, of Natick, and James Wiser, alias
Qualipunit, of Natick, (Indians who claimed to be lords of the soil) gave and
executed a deed to Henry Willard, Joseph Rowlandson, Joseph Foster, Benjamin
Willard, and Cyprian Stevens, for 23l. of the then currency, of a certain tract
of land containing twelve miles square, according to the buts and bounds
following, viz. "The name in general being Naquag, the south corner butting
upon Muscopauge Pond, and running north to Quanitick and to Wanchatopick, and
so running upon great Watchusett, which is the north corner; so running
northwest to Wallamanumpscooke, and so to Quaquanimawick, a little pond, and so
to Asnaconcomick Pond which is the northwest corner; and so running south and
so to Musshauge a great swamp, and so to Sassakatassick, which is the south
corner; and so running east to Pascatickquage, and so to Ahumpatunshauge, a
little pond, and so to Sumpauge Pond, and so to Muscopauge, which is the east
corner." This Indian deed, signed and acknowledged by the above named Indians,
was received April ^4th, 1714, and entered with the records of deeds, for the
county of Middlesex, libro 16, page 511, by Samuel Phips, register. Of this
tract of land thus purchased of the Indians we hear nothing for upwards of 26
years. But upon the petition of the sons and grandsons of Major Simon Willard,
This was the famous M^ Willard who went to relieve Brookfield, when (...) by
the Ind^ans. See Brookfield.
of Lancaster, deceased, and others, for approbation and confirmation of their
title to the above tract of land, the General Court, on the 23d of February,
1713, passed this order, "That the lands in the Indian deed, and according to
their buts and bounds, be confirmed to the children of the said Simon Willard,
deceased, or to their legal representatives, and to the other petitioners, or
their legal representatives, and associates, provided that within seven years
time there be 60 families settled thereon and sufficient lands reserved for the
use of a gospel ministry and schools, except what part thereof the Hon. Samuel
Sewall, Esquire has already purchased, and that this grant shall not encroach upon
any former grant or grants, nor exceed the quantity of twelve miles square. The
town to be called Rutland, and to lie to the county of Middlesex." But this
order, resolve or act of court was not considered as an act of incorporation,
as will presently appear. This tract of land contained 93 160 acres including
1000 acres for the Hon. Mr. Sewall; and was surveyed by William Ward, in
October 1715. The names of the original proprietors of Rutland as named in the
associate deed, and their shares, are Joseph Foster had two shares, the rest
had one share each. Cyprian Stevens's wife, Mary Willard's heirs, Joseph
Rowlandson's heirs, Simon Willard, John Willard, Benjamin Willard, Joseph
Willard, Josiah Willard's heirs, Rev. Samuel Willard's heirs, Henry Willard's
heirs, Daniel Willard's heirs, Jonathan Willard's heirs, Thomas Brintnal,
Nathaniel Howard's heirs, Robert Blood's heirs, Joshua Edmund's heirs; and Col.
William Tailor, Penn Townsend, Paul Dudley, Adington Davenport, Col. Adam
Winthrop, Capt. Thomas Hutchinson, Major Thomas Fitch, Thomas How, John
Chandler, Col. William Dudley, Esqrs. Mr ^hn White, John Farnsworth, Col.
Buckley's heirs, Moses Parker, and Jacob Stevens. In all 3^ shares.

The proprietors, at a meeting at Boston, December 14th, 1715, voted that the
contents of six miles square be surveyed, and set off for the settlement of 62
families in order to the performance of the condition of the grant. The six
miles square, granted to men who would go on and settle, was that part which is
now called Rutland. The settlers on the 11th of August 1720, entered into a
written agreement with the proprietors, and bound themselves by certain
articles, signed and witnessed. And on the 26th of June 1721, this six miles
square was confirmed to the settlers by the proprietors, as a sure estate of
inheritance to them, their heirs and assigns forever, and recorded. On the 12th
of July 1721, the inhabitants of Rutland were assembled, by order of the
committee of the proprietors, to choose a minister, when the Rev. Joseph
Willard was chosen, by a great majority of the voters. At a meeting of the
freeholders and inhabitants of this six miles square, or Rutland, October 9th,
1721, Samuel Wright moderator, "Voted, that the town will prefer a petition to
the General Court, to give their sanction, and establish them as a town, to
have and enjoy all the privileges other towns enjoy."

A petition was accordingly presented to the General Court, and they sometime
in their session, which was begun at Boston upon Wednesday the 30th of May
1722, passed an act of incorporation, entitled, "An act for further
establishing the town of Rutland, and empowering them to choose all proper
officers, and for the empowering them to raise and collect money for the
defraying of the necessary charges of the said town. Forasmuch as it appears
that the proprietors of the township of Rutland, have performed the conditions
of the grant made thereof by the Great and General Assembly of this Province in
1713, Be it enacted by his Excellency the Governor, the Council, and House of
Representatives in General Court assembled, and by the authority of the same,
That the inhabitants and freeholders of the said town of Rutland be invested
with, and forever hereafter enjoy all the powers, privileges and immunities,
which other towns within this Province, by law, have and usually enjoy; and
that they be, and hereby are enabled, to levy, assess and collect three pence
per acre, per annum, for the space of two years and a half from the first day
of July last past (the time that the minister began to officiate as a minister
there) on all the lands both improved and unimproved, whether divided or
undivided, contained within the lines of the contents of six miles square, as
is already laid out, and within which the present inhabitants settled; and that
the said land be subjected and made liable to the payment of the same, to
defray the charge of building the meetinghouse, and paying the minister's
settlement and salary, excepting only the present minister's lot, and ministry
lot, with their divisions, also the school lot, and also one thousand acres of
land appertaining to S^muel Sewall, Esquire (the committee of Rutland have agreed,
for certain considerations with the said Samuel Sewall, Esquire) and five hundred
acres of land appertaining to the Artillery Company of this Province, and
eighty acres of land on and near Buck Brook, and one hundred and forty acres of
land about Mill Brook (being part of Benjamin Willard's nine hundred acres laid
out there to promote a mill) which said lands shall be free from said tax or
assessment, any law, usage or custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

"Passed in the house of representatives, and in council, and consented to by
the Governor.

"A true copy examined, per Josiah Willard, Secretary."




From the foregoing statement, it appears that the whole grant of 12 miles
square was named Rutland, in 1713; but that only the six miles square granted
by the proprietors to the settlers, was called Rutland, and incorporated as a
town; and that this was not done until the session of the General Court which
was begun May 30, 1722. And in consequence of the above recited act, an order
of the General Court passed July 6th, 1722, authorizing and empowering Capt.
Samuel Wright to call a meeting of the freeholders and other inhabitants of the
town of Rutland, on the last Monday of July current, then to choose town
officers to serve until the general meeting in March next. The town was
notified and met accordingly; and this was the first legal town meeting ever
held in Rutland.

After the settlers had performed their conditions, and the six miles square
was incorporated, we find the proprietors of the township of Rutland, in all
future meetings, had nothing to do with said six miles square, which is now the
town of Rutland; but concerned themselves only with the other parts of their
original grant, we shall therefore leave them, and confine ourselves to the
account of Rutland.

We have said, the settlers of the six miles square, on the 12th of July 1721,
invited the Rev. Joseph Willard to settle with them in the work of the
ministry, which invitation he accepted. This Mr. Willard had been ordained a
minister of Sunderland in the county of Hampshire, but continued a very little
time with them before he was dismissed. After he had accepted the invitation to
settle with the people of Rutland, he met with many and great discouragements,
and particularly by reason of the fears and dangers arising from the Indians;
so that an appointment of his installation was deferred. However, at length a
day was fixed upon for his solemn separation to the work of the ministry in
that place, in the fall of the year 1723; but he lived not to see the day,
being cut off by the enemy, as shall be now related. As Deacon Joseph Stevens
and four of his sons were making hay in a meadow, at Rutland, a little north of
the place where the meetinghouse now stands, August 14th, 1723, they were
surprised by five Indians. The father escaped in the bushes; two of his sons
were then and there slain; the other two, (Phinehas the eldest, and Isaac the
youngest) were made prisoners. Two of the five Indians waylaid a Mr. Davis and
son, who that afternoon were making hay in a meadow not far off, but weary of
waiting they were returning to the others, and met Mr. Willard in their way,
who was armed: One of the Indians' guns missed fire, the others did no
execution. Mr. Willard returned the fire, and wounded one of them, it is said
mortally, the other closed in with Mr. Willard; but he would have been more
than a match for him, had not the other three come to his assistance: And it
was some considerable time before they killed Mr. Willard. This account
Phinehas Stevens gave upon his return from captivity, who was a spectator of
some part of the tragedy. The Indians having killed and scalped Mr. Willard,
and taken some of his clothes, went off to Canada with the two captives above
named. They were redeemed in about a year. Phinehas Stevens was a famous
warrior, a captain, and a principal man in building up and defending the then
young plantation No. 4, now Charlestown, in Newhampshire state. Isaac Stevens
lived at Rutland. They have both been dead many years. On the 3d of August
1724, the Indians came again upon Rutland, killed three persons, wounded one,
and made another prisoner. This is as I find it related in Governor
Hutchinson's history. Others speak of but two killed: But the names of the
killed, wounded, or prisoner, cannot now be ascertained. This was the last
mischief done at Rutland by the Indians, so far as we can learn.

The Ecclesiastical History of Rutland is brief and as here follows. The church
of Christ in the town was gathered November 1st, 1727, and on the same day the
Rev. Thomas Frink was ordained their first Pastor. Mr. Frink continued but a
little time as their minister, being dismissed from his office September 8th,
1740. (Mr. Frink was installed Pastor of the third church in Plymouth, November
7th, 1743, where he continued minister but a short space; being dismissed from
thence, he was installed at Bar on the last Wednesday in October 1753; from
whence also he was dismissed July 17th, 1766.) The Rev. Joseph Buckminster
succeeded Mr. Frink, as a minister of the gospel of Christ, at Rutland,
whereunto he was ordained September 15th, 1742. Mr. Buckminster continued the
able faithful and worthy minister of Rutland until November 3d, 1792, when he
died in the 73d year of his age, and the 51st of his ministry. He was succeeded
in about eight months, by the Rev. Hezekiah Goodrich, who was separated to the
pastoral office in Rutland, on the 19th of June 1793.

In this town upwards of forty persons have lately united, and established a
social Library, of the value of nearly 30 l. and containing about 70 volumes at
present.

Some Geographical Description of Rutland shall now be attempted.

The town is situated on the height of land between the sea and Connecticut
River: It is hilly and very uneven: The hill on which the meetinghouse stands
is high: And the meetinghouse may be seen in many of the adjacent towns, and
even at a great distance to the west and northwest; but as the town abounds
with hills it affords no extensive and commanding prospect of itself. East of
the meetinghouse is a hill called Muschapauge hill or Rice's hill, containing
two or three hundred acres, this is very good land, and has some fine farms
upon it. Part of Turkey Hill, so called, on the south falls within Rutland, the
rest is in Paxton. This is high, but most excellent land.

Other hills there are many, but none particularly noticeable. The land in
general is very good, and the soil is rich and strong: It is not extraordinary
for raising of grain, though a sufficiency is produced for the inhabitants; it
is very well adapted to grass and grazing, and most excellent for orcharding:
Here are large and fine orchards, and much cider is made in the town.

Rutland, being the height of land, has no large rivers running through it.
Piss River, so called, which originates on the west side of Watchusett Hill,
runs through Hubbardston, and passes across the northwest angle of this town,
and so falls into Ware river. On this river are one corn mill, two saw mills,
one fulling mill, and one trip hammer, within the limits of Rutland; and the
meadows on this river are considerable. There is a large stream, called Long
Meadow Brook, running through the town, in the westerly part thereof, on which
are large meadows, and two corn mills and two saw mills within the bounds of
this town. About half a mile east of the meetinghouse is a famous spring, the
waters whereof soon divide; part runs to Merimack and part to Connecticut
River: And it is to be observed that all the waters of Ru^land run to these two
great rivers. There are diverse pond^ in the town; Muscopauge Pond, mentioned in
the Indian deed; this is large, covering about 100 acres. In this pond two
persons have been drowned. Evans's Pond, so called, of about 60 or 70 acres, in
the southwesterly part of the town. Also, Gregory's or Long Pond, which is long
and narrow, in the southwesterly quarter. These are all well stored with fish.
Browning's Pond is large, this is situated in the southerly part, and is partly
in Rutland, partly in Spencer; but the largest part is in Oakham. The growth of
wood in Rutland is, oak of all sorts, chestnut, walnut, pine of all sorts, ash,
maple, birch, beach, poplar, elm, sassafras, hemlock, hackmatack, etc. etc. In
the westerly and northwesterly part of the town is an extensive plain, a great
part of which is still covered with pitch pine. This is rather light land. The
people of Rutland are principally farmers, except a few traders in European,
East and Westindia goods, the usual mechanics, and those employed in the card
making business, which is newly set up here: And they are a peaceable, happy,
flourishing people. In this town, pot and pearl ash making is carried on very
largely. When the census was taken about two years ago there were 1072 souls in
the town.

Rutland is bounded, on the north by Hubbardston; on the northeast, by
Princeton; on the east, by Holden; on the south, by Paxton; on the west, by
Oakham; and on the northwest, by Bar. This town is situated about west from
Boston, at the distance of 56 miles; and from the courthouse in Worcester, it
is northwest, at the distance of fourteen miles.

WESTBOROUGH.
THIS town was taken from Marlborough, and lying the whole length of that town
on the west side, thence was called Westborough when incorporated by act of the
General Court on the 18th of November 1717. This before used to be called
Chauncey Village at the west end of Marlborough. Here a Church was gathered on
the 28th of October 1724, and on the same day the Rev. Ebenezer Parkman, their
first Pastor, was ordained. Having obtained help of God, he continued to
minister to the people in holy things until within about six weeks of his
death, which was on the 9th of December 1782, in the 80th year of his age, and
59th of his ministry. The town remained destitute of a settled minister until
January 14th, 1789, when the Rev. John Robinson was consecrated their second
pastor. This town increased so fast that on October 20th, 1744, the north part
was made a separate parish; the particulars whereof will be related when we
come to give an account of the town of Northborough.

This westerly part of Marlborough, being then a frontier, having no town
between it and Brookfield on the west, about 40 miles distant, did not settle
so fast: Nevertheless, toward the close of the seventeenth century several
families had here seated themselves; and among others, Messrs. Thomas and
Edmund Rice had families, and were fixed down but a little west of where the
present meetinghouse in Westborough stands. On August 8th, 1704, as several
persons were busy in spreading flax, on a plain about eighty rods from the
house of Mr. Thomas Rice (the first settler in Westborough, and several years
representative of the town of Marlborough, in the General Court) and a number
of boys with them, seven, some say ten, Indians suddenly rushed down a woody
hill near by, and, knocking the least of the boys on the head (Nahor, about
five years old, son of Mr. Edmund Rice, and the first English person ever
buried in Westborough) they seized two, Asher and Adonijah, sons of Mr. Thomas
Rice, the oldest about ten, and the other about eight years of age, and two
others, Silas and Timothy, sons of Mr. Edmund Rice abovenamed, of about nine
and seven years of age, and carried them away to Canada. The persons who were
spreading flax, escaped safely to the house. Asher, in about four years,
returned, being redeemed by his father. This was effected by the kind mediation
of the Rev. Mr. Lydius, then minister of Albany. And here, by the way, it
should be noted, that when the old Indian Sachem Ountassogo, the chief of the
Cagnawagas, at the conference with Governor Belcher at Deerfield, made a visit
to Boston, he stopped awhile in Westborough; the beforementioned Asher Rice saw
and knew him to be one of the Indians who rushed down the hill, as above
related, when he was taken by them. This Mr. Asher Rice married, had a family,
and was living but a few years past in Spencer. His brother Adonijah, grew up
in Canada, and married there, first a French, afterward a Dutch woman, and
followed the business of husbandry on some land a little way off from Montreal,
on the north side of the great river St. Lawrence, and had a good farm there,
as we have been certified. The Indian name whereby he was called was
Assaunaugo^ton.

As to the other two, Silas and Timothy, they mixed with the Indians; lost
their mother tongue, had Indian wives, and children by them; and lived at
Cagnawaga. The name by which Silas was distinguished among the Indians was
Tookanowras.

Timothy, the youngest, however, was much the most noticeable person. The
accounts received from thence, have uniformly represented him as the third of
the six chiefs of the Cagnawagas. This advancement was in consequence of the
death of his foster father, or master, who had adopted him for a son, instead
of a son which he, the former chief, had lost. "However,) said the Rev. Mr.
Parkman, who had the best means of information) Timothy had much recommended
himself to the Indians, by his own superior talents, his penetration, courage,
strength, and warlike spirit, for which he was much celebrated, as was evident
to me from conversation with the late Sachem Hendrick, and Mr. Kellogg, when
they were in the Massachusetts; and his name among them the same as we had ever
heard, viz. Oughtsorongoughton."

The venerable Mr. Parkman, in a manuscript account of these persons found
among his papers since his death, adds, with respect to this Timothy, in these
words: "He himself, in process of time, came to see us. By the interposition of
Col. Lydius, and the captive Tarbell, who was carried away from Groton, a
letter was sent me, bearing date July 23d, 1740, certifying that if one of
their brethren here would go up to Albany, and be there at a time specified,
they would meet him there; and that one of them, at least, would come hither to
visit their friends in New England. This proposal was readily complied with, and
it succeeded.

The chief abovesaid came, and the said Mr. Tarbell with him as interpreter and
companion. They arrived here September 15th. They viewed the house where Mr.
Rice dwelt, and the place from whence the children were captivated; of both
which he retained a clear remembrance; as he did likewise of several elderly
persons who were then living; though he had forgot our language. His Excellency
Governor Belcher sent for them, who, accordingly, waited on him at Boston. They
also visited Tarbell's relations at Groton; then returned to us in their way
back to Albany and Canada. Col. Lydius, when at Boston, not long since, This
account was written in 1760.
said this Rice was the Chief who made the speech to General Gage, which we had
in our public prints, in behalf of the Cagnawagas, soon after the reduction of
Montreal," Thus far the Rev. Mr. Parkman.

To the above account I would add, there are at this present time, 1/93, a
brother and sister of the ^bovenamed Silas and Timothy, living in Northborough,
in a very advanced age, though not born when their brethren were captivated,
who have heard that these men were living in Canada, in the summer of 1790.

Let us proceed to some Geographical Description of Westborough. The town is
pretty large, and very generally settled, containing, when the census was taken
in 1791, houses 118, and inhabitants 934. It is about 34 miles from Boston, a
little to the south of west, and 13 miles east from Worcester. The middle of
the town is level, but the lands rise, at about a mile's distance from the
meetinghouse into higher, especially to the east, south and west. The soil is
in general good, the farms are large, and the inhabitants industrious and
wealthy, as any one must naturally suppose from the appearance of their places
and buildings. The growth of wood here is similar to that in the neighboring
towns: The higher lands bear plenty of oak and chestnut, some walnut; in the
swamps and low lands grow ash, birch and maple: Here also they have large and
excellent cedar swamps, which afford the people much cedar for shingles and
other important and necessary uses: There is, at this day, but little white
pine, but considerable pitch pine. There is very little broken poor land in the
town; neither is it very rocky; but bears all kinds of grain in plenty; it is
good for orcharding, grass and pasturing: It is very well watered by small
streams and rivulets, on which they have mills; and on these they have
considerable bodies of good meadow land. The river Assabet, running through the
northwest angle of the town, has upon its banks a very large body of very
excellent meadow or interval.

Ponds there are several in the town, as Great Chauncy in the northeasterly
part, into which a rivulet enters at the south end from swamps and low lands;
this is a fine pond, and here is a plenty of fish. A small stream issues from
the north end of this pond and empties into Little Chauncy, which is in
Northborough.

About a mile south of Great Chauncy, there is a small pond, near the road from
Westborough to Boston, whence issues a small stream to the south, entering a
large cedar swamp, and running through that, empties into a large pond called
Cedar Swamp Pond, which is environed on the east, north and west, with said
swamp; from this pond, on the south, there is an outlet which runs into
Hopkinton, and aids in forming Sudbury, or Concord South River. It is worthy of
notice, that the waters in this town, though they take different routs, finally
unite in Concord, by the confluence of the north and south river in that town.
In the northwesterly part of Westborough is situated Hobomocho Pond, not large,
encircled with a meadow, bearing the same name, and from this there is an
outlet into the River Assabet, abovementioned.

Westborough is bounded on the east, by Southborough and Hopkinton; on the
south, by Upton; on the west, by Grafton and Shrewsbury; and on the north, by
Northborough.

UXBRIDGE.
THE town of Uxbridge was taken from the ancient town of Mendon, and was
incorporated by an act of the Legislature, on the 27th of June 1727, and then
received its present name. It was the westerly part of that town. It was large
at first, extending ten or twelve miles from north to south; but has since been
curtailed, having the north part set off in 1772, and made a distinct town, by
the name of Northbridge.

Uxbridge still remains a very considerable town in extent, and for the number
of its inhabitants. When the census was taken in 1791, there were 180 dwelling
houses, and 1310 inhabitants in the place.

The people took early care for the support of the gospel, and the institutions
of Christianity among them; accordingly, soon after the incorporation of the
town, viz. on the sixth of January 1731, a church of Christ was here gathered
under the direction of the Rev. Joseph Dorr of Mendon: and on February third,
1731, the Rev. Nathan Webb, was invested with the pastoral office in the place.
Mr. Webb continued the faithful minister of the town upwards of 41 years; being
removed by death on the 14th of March 1772. The Rev. Hezekiah Chapman succeeded
Mr. Webb in the work of the ministry in Uxbridge; whereunto he was solemnly
separated January 27th, 1774; and from which he was dismissed April 5th, 1781.
The Rev. Josiah Spalding, succeeded Mr. Chapman as minister of Uxbridge, being
ordained on the 11th of September 1783: He continued with this people but about
four years, being dismissed from his pastoral relation to them, October 23d,
1787. These two gentlemen were dismissed more on account of the peculiarity of
their religious sentiments, than any thing beside. Mr. Spalding has since been
installed at Worthington in the county of Hampshire. On the 17th of October
1792, the Rev. Samuel Judson was ordained Pastor, the fourth in succession, of
the congregational society in Uxbridge.

In the town of Uxbridge there are a few families of the Anabaptist persuasion.
And here also is a very considerable society, nearly one quarter of the
inhabitants of the town, of the sect called Friends, who have a meetinghouse
for the worship of God in their way, built with brick.

We will now give some Geographical Description of the town of Uxbridge.

This town is situated at the southern extremity of the county, and is bounded
on the south, by the line between this Commonwealth, and the state of
Rhodeisland; on the west, by Douglass; on the north, by Northbridge; and on the
east, by Mendon.

Uxbridge is 42 miles from Boston, somewhat to the southwest, and is 18 miles
from the courthouse in Worcester, to the southeast.

The land in the town is pretty level, for the space of about one mile round
the meetinghouse, being a plain, and rather sandy and light; however, good for
raising of grain of all sorts; then it rises to hills on all sides, but not
very high, nor very rocky; these are moist and good for orcharding, and for
grazing, and for English grass: There is a good proportion of interval and
meadow lands upon the rivers, which are in general very good. There are three
rivers in this town, all of them unite in the south part; Blackstone, Mumford,
and West River. Blackstone River has its source in Sutton; and was particularly
described in the account of that town. This river comes from Sutton through
Grafton and Northbridge, and enters Uxbridge at the north end of the town, and
running through the town, near the middle, passes into Rhodeisland State: This
is a large and fine river. Mumford River has its rise in Rocky Woods, so
called, in Douglass, being increased by streams from Badluck Pond, and from
Manchaug Pond, in Douglass, and by springs and rivulets, and runs an easterly
course into Uxbridge, then turns and runs southeasterly within a few rods of
Uxbridge meetinghouse, where there are several sorts of mills and water works,
in excellent order, and where much business is well performed. This river
continues its course, and joins Blackstone River about one mile southeast of
the meetinghouse.

West River is not large, its main source is a pond in the northerly part of
Upton, and running through a part of Northbridge, it passes through the
easterly side of Uxbridge, and falls into Blackstone River about two miles
southeast from the meetinghouse. Besides these rivers, there are diverse brooks
and rivulets, by which this town is finely watered. There are also three small
ponds in the town, covering ten or twelve acres of land each, and are called,
Pout Pond, Mud Pond, and Shoelog Pond. Pout Pond is in the east part of the
town, about one mile from the meetinghouse. Mud Pond is situated in the
southeast part of the town, not far from Blackstone River, with which it holds
a communication when the water is high. Shoelog Pond is situated in the
southwest part of the town, from whence issues a small stream, which runs into
Gloucester, in the State of Rhodeisland. Not far from this pond an iron mine
has been discovered, and wherein persons have wrought to very considerable
advantage. Upon the farm of Dr. Samuel Willard, in Uxbridge, there is a fine
quarry of stone, of a greyish color, easily split, and wrought into any shape
for underpinning, door stones, etc. etc.

The growth of wood and timber in this town is pretty much like that of other
towns in general: Oak of various sorts, some chestnut, walnut, poplar and pine.

The people of Uxbridge subsist chiefly by the cultivation of the soil: They
have, however, all the common sorts of mechanics, and a few dealers in
European, East and West India goods.

There is one road of considerable travel, from Connecticut, directly through
this town to Mendon, and so on to Boston.

This may be considered as a large, wealthy, flourishing place, and stands
forward in the list of towns, according to the proportion which it pays to a
State tax.

SOUTHBOROUGH.
THE town of Southborough, was taken from the ancient town of Marlborough, and
derived its name from the circumstance of its lying about south from that town.
It was incorporated, by act of Court, July 6th, 1727. A few years past, a strip
of land, belonging to Framingham, of about three hundred acres, and running up
between Southborough and Hopkinton, was annexed to Southborough.

The church of Christ in this town, was embodied on the 24th of October 1730,
and on the same day the Rev. Nathan Stone was ordained their first Pastor: He
was a judicious, prudent, and faithful minister of Christ, and was continued
serving God in the gospel of his Son, to the great satisfaction of his people,
until May 31st, 1781, when he departed this life, in the 74th year of his age
and 51st of his ministry. The people were destitute of a settled minister for
the long space of ten years, even until June 1st, 1791, when the Rev. Samuel
Sumner was solemnly separated unto the pastoral office over the church and
flock of God in Southborough.

We shall proceed to give some Geographical Description of this town. It is
situated on the east side of the county, and is bounded by Marlborough on the
north, Framingham on the east, Hopkinton on the south, and Westborough and
Northborough on the west: It is 29 miles from Boston, a little to the south of
west; and 17 miles from Worcester courthouse, about east. It is not large in
extent, but pretty well filled with people, who are generally good and wealthy
farmers. They have about 120 dwelling houses, 150 families, and 840
inhabitants. The town is not level, nor yet very uneven; there are no extensive
plains, and no very high hills; the soil is strong, good and rich, and
productive, amply repaying for its cultivation. It is not very rocky, however,
there is a sufficiency of stone, perhaps on every farm, whereby it is, or may
be walled in. In the South part of the town there is a hill, which, from the
steepness of its ascent, is called Breakneck Hill, over the steepest part runs
a town road; it is rocky and rough, but covered with a large growth of young
wood, and descends to the north. In the northeast part is situated what is
called Pine Hill, which was covered with pines and timber until the year 1787,
when, by a hurricane, the wood was chiefly destroyed. On the west side of the
town there is a steep hill over which the county road lies, but not
distinguished by any particular name.

The town is well watered by streams and rivulets. Stony Brook rises in the
easterly part of Westborough, runs through Southborough in a course which in
general is easterly; but not without several great angles; for what is worthy
of remark, the road through the town to Boston crosses this stream three times
within the space of four miles. This stream enters Framingham and there falls
into Sudbury River. On this stream are two saw mills, in fine order, of profit
to their owners, and benefit to the town. Upon the same brook are four corn
mills. One in the westerly part of the town, nearest its source, and on the
great road, can grind but about half the year, as raising a pond in the summer
season would damage a large body of meadow land. But below this, at the
distance of two or three miles, as the stream runs, stands another mill in good
repair, and where much business is done, not only for the benefit of this, but
the neighboring towns. About two miles further down this stream, are two well
constructed corn mills, the property of Col. Thomas Nixon, which grind all the
year, except in a very dry season, as the waters of Angle Brook, and Broad
Meadow Brook fall into this stream above these mills. On this Stony Brook,
clothiers' works have lately been erected in the easterly part of the town
where much business is well performed.

A second stream is called Angle Brook, from its winding course. One branch of
this stream rises near the meetinghouse in Marlborough, and another branch a
little further south, and soon uniting enters Southborough, and there joining
with Broad Meadow Brook, in about the distance of a mile, falls into Stony
Brook, as abovementioned. There are many other streams less noticeable. But we
must observe what is called Sudbury River, issues from Cedar Swamp Pond, in the
southeasterly part of Westborough, and when it leaves that town, is the
boundary between Southborough and Hopkinton, on the south. The meadows on this
river, in Southborough, are narrow, but produce large quantities of good stock
hay, being a mixture of meadow, and English grass. Those upon Stony and Angle
Brooks are good, and yield most excellent bank hay. There is but one pond in
this town, in the western part, small, covering perhaps six acres of ground. To
this there is a small inlet, and an outlet to the south; and all the waters in
this town run southerly and easterly, and empty into Sudbury, or Concord River.
Here are no pot or pearl-ash works.

The growth of wood is sufficient for the town, if prudently used, and consists
of white, red and black oak, some walnut, and more chestnut: The low lands are
all under cultivation. Upon the whole, this, though not large, its contents
being but about 8350 acres, is a good town; and the people are industrious and
wealthy, in general; and hospitable and peaceable.

SHREWSBURY.
IN the year 1717, November 2d, a grant was made to certain persons, chiefly of
Marlborough, who petitioned therefore, of all the lands lying between the
original grant of Lancaster on the north; Marlborough, on the east; Sutton on
the south; and Worcester on the west. Most of the first settlers were from
Marlborough. The tract of land was very long (about fifteen miles north and
south) but not very wide (from three and an half to four and five miles.) The
whole was called, by the proprietors, Shrewsbury from the beginning.

In about ten years from the date of the grant, it was so stocked with
inhabitants, as that the General Court incorporated it as a town, by an act
which bears date December 19th, 1727, and gave it the name whereby it had all
along been distinguished.

The town so flourished and increased, as that in a little more than twenty
years a second parish, in the northerly part, was formed, viz. on the 17th
December 1742, which has since been made a distinct town.

The south part of this original grant which is now Shrewsbury, is about seven
miles in length from north to south, and about three and an half or four miles
in width; and it is bounded by Worcester on the west; by Boylston on the north;
by Westborough and Northborough on the east; and by Grafton on the south. It is
situated about six miles from Worcester courthouse, a little to the northeast,
and from Boston 41 miles a little to the southwest. The post road from Boston
to Worcester, and so on to Newyork, etc. passes directly through the town; and
the great road from Vermont, and from the upper part of Newhampshire, and
northwestern part of the county, unites with the post road about a mile and an
half west of the meetinghouse. Besides which there is a road of considerable
travel from the northward, directly through Shrewsbury, to Providence.

The ecclesiastical history of this place is but brief, and is as here follows:

On the fourth day of December 1723, the church of our Lord Jesus Christ was
gathered here, and on the same day the Rev. Job Cushing was ordained their
first Pastor. He continued in peace and love with his people, and faithfully
serving the Lord in the work of the ministry almost 37 years; and was suddenly
cut off, by a fit of the apoplexy, August 6th, 1760, in the 67th year of his
age. And on the 25th of June 1762, the Rev. Joseph Summer was solemnly invested
with the pastoral office in this place; and who still continues to minister to
them in holy things. There are a few Baptists in the south part of the town,
but no church of that denomination.

Before we proceed to a Geographical Description of this town, I have thought
that so remarkable and sorrowful an occurrence as took place in Shrewsbury, in
its infancy, ought to be recorded in this history. I shall give it in the words
of the account published in the only Newspaper (I have been told) then printed
in New England, if not on this side Philadelphia. It was a small half sheet
printed by B. Green.

" Boston, August 15th, 1723.
"An exact account of the awful burning of Capt. John Keyes's house, with five
persons in it, at Shrewsbury, in the night between the 7th and 8th of this
inst. taken from a letter of the Rev. Mr. Breck of Marlborough, and from the
mouth of Mr. Ebenezer Bragg of the same, formerly of Ipswich, the only person
of those who lodged in the house, who, by a distinguishing providence, escaped
the flames.

"Capt. Keys was building an house about nine or ten feet off his old one. It
was almost finished. And Mr. Bragg aforesaid, the carpenter, with his brother
Abiel, of 17 years of age, and William Oaks of 18, his apprentices, were
working about it. Capt. Keys, with his wife and four daughters, lodged in the
old one; and the three carpenters, with three sons of the Captain's, viz.
Solomon of twenty, John of thirteen, and Steven of six years of age, lay in the
new. On the Wednesday night, going to bed, they took a more than ordinary care
of the fire, being excited thereto by the saying of one, He would not have the
house burnt for an hundred pounds; and the reply of another, He would not for
two hundred. Upon which, they carefully raked away the chips lying near it, and
stayed till the rest were almost burnt out; and then they went all six together
into three beds in one of the chambers; and were very cheerly and merry at
their going to bed, which was about ten of the clock.

"But about midnight Mr. Bragg was awaked with a notion of the house being on
fire, and a multitude calling to quench it; with which he got up, saw nothing,
heard no voice, but could hardly fetch any breath, through the stifling smoke;
concluded the house was on fire, perceived some body stirring, against whom he
hit two or three times in the dark: And not being able to speak, or to breathe
any longer, and striking his forehead against the chimney, he thought of the
window and happily found it: When he gained it, he tarried a minute, holding it
fast with one hand, and reaching out the other, in hopes of meeting with some
or other to save them, till the smoke and fire came so thick and scorching upon
him, he could endure no longer; and hearing no noise in the chamber, only, as
he thought, a faint groan or two, he was forced to jump out, and, the window
being small, head foremost; though he supposes, by God's good providence, he
turn^ before he came to the ground. A^ Mr. Bragg was just got up again, Capt.
Keys being awaked in the old house, was coming to this side of the new, and m^
him. But the flame immediately burst out of the windows, and the house was
quickly all on a light fire. No noise was heard of the other five who perished;
and it is very questionable, whether more tha^ one of them moved out of their
beds. The old house was also burnt, and almost every thing in it: But the
people were saved, through the great goodness of God. But a most dreadful sight
it was in the morning, to see the five bodies frying in the fire, among the
timbers fallen down in the cellar, till toward the evening, when the few
almost consumed fragments, without heads or limbs, were gathered, put into one
coffin, and buried. Ps^ lxvi, 3, Say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy
works! James iv, 15th, Ye know not what shall be on the morrow. Luke xii, 40th,
Be ye therefore ready." Thus far the newspaper.


The Capt. Keys abovenamed, was afterward the well known and much esteemed
Major John Keys, who died in Shrewsbury, not many years since, in a very
advanced age. The new house which was burnt, stood on the great road about
three quarters of a mile eastward from the present meetinghouse. And upon the
same spot a large dwelling house now stands.

Let us now proceed to describe the town of Shrewsbury. Much the greater part
of this town is upon quite high land. Indeed it is one large and extensive
hill, and the meetinghouse stands nearly upon the highest part of it: The land
f^lls but very little to the north: To the south, the descent i^ng, but
gradual: To the east, as the great road runs, there is a descent toward
Northborough, for the space of two miles or more, nay, even some way into
Northborough: To the west, there is half a mile of rocky plain, and then a
pretty steep descent to a small plain, before you come to the head of Long
Pond, and beyond that the land rise^ immediately, and there is quite a steep
hill before you leave Shrewsbury, on the way to Worcester. The town is not very
uneven considered altogether, but is pretty rocky. There is a very large and
extensive prospect from the middle of the town, and all round the meetinghouse,
east and west, north and south, and from some parts of the town seven
meetinghouses can be discerned. The land, in general, is rather rough and hard,
but the soil is strong, rich, and very productive when subdued. The higher
lands are very good for orcharding, and fruit trees of all kinds, and for
pasturage, and even for mowing; for the land is not dry, and it bears a dry
season exceeding well. It is not so well proportioned with tillage land;
however, what they till is very productive, and richly repays the labor
bestowed upon it. There is very little poor broken, waste land in the town. And
it is richly stored with a fine young thrifty growth of the best of wood (...)
fuel, such as oak of all kinds, walnut and chestnut, and the lower lands bear
ash, birch, maple, etc. etc.

The town is pretty well supplied with w^ers, by various springs and rivulets,
although there is not one large stream which runs through the town. The largest
stream in the town is that which issues from Sewall's Pond, which is within the
limits of Boylston, and running southerly a mile and a quarter, falls into Long
Pond, on the road to Worcester, over which is the bridge at the head of said
pond. This pond, called by the natives, Quinsigamond, but commonly Long Pond,
is a beautiful piece of ^ater, in the form of a crescent, nearly four miles in
length, as it runs (though on a straight line but three miles and twenty four
rods) and it is from 100 rods to nearly a mile in width, although in one place,
it be not more than forty rods. This pond lies almost wholly within the bounds
of Shrewsbury, not more than one acre falling within the limits of Worcester.
It is, perhaps, the largest and finest pond in the county. Indeed, it may very
fitly be denominated a lake. Upon the top of the hill, on the west side of
Shrewsbury, it appears to travelers as a large river, ornamented with woods on
each side. It affords great plenty of fish, as pickerel, large perch, eels,
shiners, breams, etc. and the brooks which run into it, contain some trout. The
water of this pond is in general deep; in some places it has been found ninety
six feet deep. In this pond there are a numb^r of Islands of various sizes. The
first, or uppermost, at the north end, is called Little Pine Island, has upon
it a thicket of vines, and contains about a quarter of an acre. The second is
Grass Island, covered with grass and willows, and which has been mowed in a dry
season. The third is called Sherman's Island, and contains about one acre and
an half, and has a growth of small timber and wood upon it, of different kinds.
The fourth is called Bowman's Island, of about three acres, and is clothed with
pine and other timber. The fifth is denominated Barberry Island, from the
considerable quantity of those berries which grow thereon; this contains about
three acres. The sixth is another Grass Island, having upon it willows and
waterbushes. The seventh is known by the name of Grape Island, of about the
fourth of an acre, bears large quantities of grapes. The eighth, commonly
called Sharp Pine Island, of three quarters of an acre, is covered with diverse
sorts of wood. The ninth is known by the name of Ram Island, of two acres,
covered with oak and chestnut. The tenth and last is a very large island, and
generally called Stratten's Island; this contains about 150 acres; a
considerable part of which is under cultivation; and there are three families
living thereon, having good farms: These are inhabitants of Shrewsbury. This
island has oak, chestnut, walnut, and some pine thereon. There are two or three
other places in the pond where land appears in a dry season, but at other times
are covered with water. This is bounded north and west, by the Long or Great
Pond; southeast, by what is called Half Moon Pond; south, by Flint's Pond;
east, by Round Pond, all which communicate with each other. From them runs a
river, at the southeast, which passes into Grafton, whereon are a number of
mills, and other water works. There is a small outlet from Long Pond,
southerly, into Flint's Pond; and from Flint's Pond eastwardly, there is an
outlet into the river just mentioned. And what is truly noticeable is this,
while the water, more generally, runs out of Long Pond into Flint's Pond, yet
in the drier seasons of the year, the water runs out of Flint's Pond into Long
Pond; for Flint's Pond is fed by springs and rivulets, which keep it always
full. There is a pond called Jordan Pond, lying about half a mile eastward of
the great or Long Pond, and about midway of the length of it, and from this
there is an outlet, by which waters some parts of the year empty into Long
Pond. On the stream which runs from Sewall's Pond into Quinsigamond or Long
Pond, there is a grist mill. Besides this, there is a stream which rises in the
northwest part of the town, on which there are two saw mills: This runs
southerly, and empties into Long Pond on the ea^ter^ side There is also another
stream, which rises from springs a little south of the meetinghouse, on which
are mills, and running northeasterly, comes to the side of the great road,
affording a fine watering place to travelers and teamsters, and there it is
joined by two other rivulets, and taking a southeast direction, and running
through the southwest angle of Northborough, there empties into the River
Assabet.

In this town there are both Pot and Pearl Ash works, and where large
quantities are made in a year.

The people in Shrewsbury are generally farmers, though they have a due
proportion of traders in European and Westindia goods, and mechanics of
various sorts. On the great road the buildings are large and handsome; and the
town makes a pretty appearance; and the number of inhabitants, when the census
was taken, was 963.

LUNENBURG.
ON the 4th of November, 1719, the General Court, at the request of a number of
gentlemen, made a grant to them of this territory for a valuable consideration,
reserving, however, college, school, and ministerial rights of land; as also a
right to the first ordained minister.

There is a hill, in the middle of the town, called Turkey Hill, on account of
the great number of wild Turkies which frequented the place in that day. It
still retains the name; and gave denomination to the whole tract, previous to
its incorporation; which took place on August (...) ^7^8, when the name of
Lunenburg (...) in compliment to George II, who, the preceding year, came to
the British throne; and was styled Duke of Lunenburg, as having in his German
dominions a town of that name.

The first settler in this place, was a Mr. Samuel Page, who was dubbed
governor Page, and is mentioned by that title to this day: He lived to a great
age, and died in September, 1747. Many of the first settlers were emigrants
from Ireland and Scotland; whose descendants, by intermarriages, are now
blended and incorporated with the other inhabitants.

The Ecclesiastical History of the place is as follows. Like people in general,
at that day, who came to America for the sake of enjoying the sacred rights of
conscience, they were fond of supporting the public institutions of religion,
and took early care to settle a minister: Accordingly, here a church was
gathered, and the Rev. Andrew Gardner, (who had been the first minister at
Worcester) was installed their first minister on the 15th of May, 1728, a
little before the incorporation of the town. Mr. Gardner continued not four
years in the ministry here; being dismissed the 22d of February, 1732. After
his dismission, he moved up nigh to Connecticut River, in Newhampshire State,
where he died, but a few years since, in a very advanced age.

The second minister of Lunenburg, was the Rev. David Stearns, who was ordained
April 18th, 1733; and died of a peripneumony, March 9th, 1761, in the 52d year
of his age, and 28th of his ministry. As he lived greatly beloved, he died no
less lamented.

He was succeeded, for a few days, by the Rev. Samuel Payson, who was separated
unto the sacred work of the gospel ministry September 8th, 1762; and died
February 14th, 1763, of an atrophy.

He was succeeded by the Rev. Zabdiel Adams, who was solemnly consecrated unto
the service of God, in the gospel of his Son, on the 5th of September, 1764,
and who is still living.

During the administration of these ministers there have been baptized, of
infants and adults, down to the present time, no less than 2400 persons: And
the church here is comparatively large, containing very little short of two
hundred communicants.

The growth and increase of Lunenburg was rapid and great; for in the year
1764, the whole town of Fitchburg was taken from it. It is now bounded by
Townsend, in the county of Middlesex, on the north; by Shirley, in the same
county, on the east; by Leominster, on the south; and by Fitchburg, on the
west. It is about 44 miles distant from Boston, over Charles River bridge, to
the northwest; and 25 miles north by east, from the courthouse in Worcester.

The soil of this town is sweet, and as productive as is usually found in so
northern a situation. For though the land be in general high, yet by reason of
its cohesive texture, and having a clayey stratum within a few feet of its
surface, it retains moisture sufficient for vegetation through the whole
summer, unless in seasons of severe drought. The soil is friendly to the
growing of wheat, rye, Indian corn, oats, etc. The wheat raised on the hills is
of the first quality. Many parts of it bear hemp and flax luxuriantly. The
mowing and pasture lands are equal to what are generally found in the county.
It is a place famed for cider; as their high lands are excellent for
orcharding: But the canker worms beginning to infest the trees, threaten them
with a scarcity of this kind of fruit.

The natural growth of wood and timber in the town is oak, white, red, black
and gray. Of walnut there is considerable plenty; and of chestnut a large
proportion. In the low lands there is ash, also rock and white maple, black,
white and yellow birch, some beach and other hard wood. Nevertheless, as there
is very little waste land, and the people are numerous, fuel will in a few
years be scarce and dear. White and yellow pines were plenty in the infancy of
the plantation; but from the great and long consumption of both, a scarcity is
sensibly felt. Although the surface of the town is uneven, and may be
denominated hilly; yet it is not rocky; there being, take the town in general,
not more than stones sufficient to wall in the several enclosures.

From the elevated situation of the land, and its proximity to those lofty
mountains, the Grand Monadinock in Newhampshire, and the Watchusett in this
county, being about twelve miles from the latter, and twenty five from the
former, the air is keen and piercing in winter, pleasant in summer, and through
the whole year very salubrious. Here are little or no stagnant waters; but few
meadows; and but few brooks and streams. In consequence of which they are in a
great degree exempted from fogs, from deleterious vapors and exhalations; and
having the air ventilated by high winds, the inhabitants are remarkably
healthy, and free from those disorders of the put^escent kind which sweep off
many in other places; and they double their numbers in less than 25 years. This
occasions large emigrations, and as the farms are small in general, being on an
average not more than 75 or 80 acres; this, together with the fecundity of the
people, produces a large number of paupers, with which the town is burdened
more so, perhaps, than any other town in the county; creating an expense beyond
that of supporting the gospel. However, the greater part of the people live
comfortably, and a few may be said to be opulent. The people are industrious
and economical, generous, hospitable to strangers, and much given to convivial
entertainments.

The town labors under other disadvantages besides those already mentioned.
For though the directest route from the northerly part of Connecticut River,
and from the State of Vermont, to Boston, be through Lunenburg, yet from
difficulty in the road for a short space of way, and the influence of certain
men, the travel passes to the north or south of it; whereby the people are left
destitute of all the benefit arising from travelers depositing their money
among them.

Besides this, they labor under the want of sufficient water to carry their
corn and saw mills. Though there are several small streams on which there are
mills, yet they are generally inoperative a considerable part of the year.
Mulpus, so called, is but a small brook, which, originating in the west part of
the town, runs east about twelve miles, and then empties itself into the River
Nashaway, in the north part of Shirley. This deficiency of water obliges some
of the inhabitants to carry their grain to other towns to be ground, a certain
part of the year. But while we speak of this singular deficiency of water, we
are constrained to mention a Mr. Wetherbee, who, having built both corn and saw
mills, in the southwest part of the town, on what is called part of the north
branch of Nashaway River, and finding, by several years experience, that the
water was not sufficient to carry his mills, except in the spring of the year,
or in rainy seasons, was at great expense to dig a canal, in length about a
mile, to convey water from a larger branch of the same river, (which comes from
Westminster) into his mill pond; which enables him in a wet season, to grind
for all; and, in a dry one, for most of his numerous customers. An instance of
so spirited and laudable enterprise is worthy to be transmitted to posterity.
This man, it is thought, makes the best wheat flour within the compass of
New England; and has grain brought to his mill from remote places.

In the southwest, south, and southeast parts of the town, are three ponds,
which, retaining their Indian names, are called Onkeshewalom, Massapog, and
Catatoonamug; The first of which is nearly two miles and an half; the second,
two miles, and the last not more than one mile in circumference. From these
ponds, the neighboring anglers draw from time to time, pickerel, perch, roach,
bream, and other fresh water fish, not only so as to give themselves a
delicious repast, but sometimes a quantity to sell to their townsmen.

Mines, minerals or fossils, there are none in the town; nor furnaces, or
forge^. The blacksmiths bring their iron from a distance. The nailing business
has been carried on here to advantage.

In giving an account of Lunenburg, we ought not to omit the mention of Edward
Hartwell, Esquire who early came into the place, and possessing advantages above
people in general, was promoted in the town and county; he was a deacon of the
church; and, passing different grades of office, was Major of a regiment of
militia; a justice of the peace; a Judge of the Court of Common Pleas; and a
representative of the town, with few interruptions, for a great number of
years; in which station he continued until a very advanced period of his life;
and, finally, he died in the 97th year of his age, as full of piety as of days.
This gentleman was much engaged in the Indian wars, and was very helpful to the
neighboring towns in scouring the woods, and driving off the savages. In
Lunenburg, indeed, he had little work of this kind to perform. For, though the
Indians aforetime inhabited this territory, as is evident by vestiges thereof
remaining to this day, yet they never much annoyed the English; they did,
indeed, so put them in fear, that between the years 1740 and 1750, the
inhabitants frequently went armed to the house of God on the sabbath. There
were also a few troops stationed in this town at garrisoned houses, to which
the people retired at night for safety. In the summer of the year 1749, the
Indians came into the northwest limits of the town, and killed two soldiers,
Jennings and Blodget, who were stationed there, and carried Mr. John Fitch and
his family into captivity, who all returned in safety, after enduring
incredible hardships and fatigues, except Mrs. Fitch who sickened and died in
Canada.

Lunenburg is almost wholly settled: The town contains but 14000 acres of land;
and on this space, when the late census was taken, there were 192 houses, and
nearly 1300 souls.

I shall close the account of Lunenburg in the words of the Rev. Mr. Adams, in
a letter to the author. "The town is much more remarkable for the health than
the wealth of its inhabitants. Almost destitute of travel through it, the
people live an independent, but solitary life. In their ecclesiastical affairs
they have been remarkably peaceable. They dismissed Mr. Gardner; but because he
was unworthy. Two of their ministers died in rapid succession. None of them
were so long in the ministry, nor so old, as myself. Almost thirty years have I
lived among them in profound peace."

DUDLEY.
THE grant of this township was originally made to the Hon. Messrs. Paul and
William Dudley, of Roxbury, while yet in the possession of the aborigines, the
tribe known at this day, by the name of the Pegan Tribe. It was to comprise all
the lands between Woodstock, or the colony line, south; Oxford, north; the
grant to Medfield, now Sturbridge, west; and Newsherburne, now Douglass, east.
This tract of land was incorporated by act of the Legislature, on the 2d of
February, 1731, and the name of Dudley was given to it, as a token of respect
to that family, who were principal proprietors of the soil, and great
benefactors to the first settlers in their infancy. Since the incorporation of
Dudley, an addition was made to it by a strip of land taken from Oxford, and
annexed thereto. The present extent of this town is nearly east and west about
nine miles; north and south about four miles. It is now bounded, north, by
Oxford, and Charlton; east, by Douglass; south, by the state line, or
Woodstock; and west, by Sturbridge.

Dudley has but one religious society, viz. congregational, although there may
be about thirty families of various other persuasions, in the place. The church
of Christ here was founded in the year 1732, and the Rev. Perley How was
solemnly invested with the sacerdotal offi^ in the year 1735. He was dismissed
from his particular relation to the church and flock of God in Dudley in 1743.
The Rev. Mr. How was afterward installed at Killingsley in Connecticut. He
was succeeded in the pastoral office at Dudley by the Rev. Charles Gleason, who
was ordained October 31st, 1744. He continued the worthy, faithful and beloved
minister of the town until his death, which took place May 7th, 1790. The Rev.
Joshua Johnson, who had been for a short time minister of the north parish in
Woodstock, was installed Pastor of the church and congregation in Dudley, as
successor to Mr. Gleason, December 1st, 1790.

The congregational meetinghouse, which is the only one in this town, was
erected in the year 1734. It stands on an hill, which commands a south prospect
of extensive farms even to the distance of twelve miles. Four acres of land on
the summit of this hill were given to the town for public uses, by the Pegan
tribe of Indians, on condition that all of their tribe, who should ever inhabit
the town, should have the right to convenient seats in the meetinghouse on days
of public worship. This tribe still exists, to the number of ten or twelve, and
hold about 200 acres of excellent land near the middle of the town; but their
whole interest is constantly taken care of by a committee of the General Court.

The general face of this town is hilly, but not mountainous. It is richly and
beautifully interspersed with hills, valleys, and streams of water. The hills
are of easy ascent, passable with ^eams, and most of them suitable and good for
cultivation. The soil in general is good and fertile, producing all sorts of
grain and fruit, and grass in plenty; and the land affords a sufficiency of
stones for fencing in the farms. There is one hill in (...) own ^ot very high,
famous for yielding great quantities of most beautiful building stones. They
are taken out in ^qua^ edged slabs, of any manageable length or width, with one
natural face, smoother than can be wrought; they are capable of being split,
cut, or hammered into any shape or thickness. The color of these stones is a
very fine light gray; and they are much used for jambs, hearths, mantle pieces,
under pinnings, for steps and door stones, and cellar walls.

The forests, are principally of oak, chestnut, and walnut, yellow pine, and
some white pine.

This town abounds with ponds, streams, rivers and springs. There are four
large ponds, well stored with all the usual sorts of fish: But there is one
especially in the east part of the town, called by the Indians
Chaubunagungamaug: This is five miles in length, and one in breadth. Through
the west part of the town, from northwest to the southeast, runs the rapid
river Quinebaug, of about twenty yards in width, coming from Sturbridge, and
passing down on the east of Woodstock, Pomfret, etc. to Norwich. Through the
east part of the town, from north to south, runs French or Stony River. This is
about fifteen yards in width. On this are fine interval and meadow lands, which
being in spring and autumn overflowed, become very excellent mowing and arable
ground. This river comes from Oxford, and falls into Quinebaug ten miles below
this town.

This is a large and flourishing town, the people subsist chiefly by farming,
except the usual mechanics, and a few traders; and when the enumeration of the
Commonwealth was made, there were 160 houses and 1114 inhabitants in the place.
Dudley is situated upon the State line, sixty miles from Boston, lying about
southwest, and from Worcester it is eighteen miles, nearly south.

HARVARD.
THE town of Harvard is situated on the eastern side of the county, thirty five
miles from Boston, a little to the north of west, and is twenty three miles
from the courthouse in Worcester, to the northeast. It is bounded by Groton on
the north; by Lyttleton on the northeast; by Boxborough on the east; by Stow on
the southeast; by Bolton on the south; and on the west by the river Nashaway,
which separates it from Lancaster, and Shirley. Harvard was not an original
grant, but taken from Lancaster, Stow and Groton, principally from the two
former. From the circumstance of its being made up of the corners of other
towns, it was rather irregular in its shape; but before the incorporation of
Boxborough, which took off the easterly angle of this town, it was nearly equal
to seven miles square: It is now more than six. The bill for the incorporation
of this tract of land passed the Legislature, June 29th, 1732, when it was
called Harvard, to bear up the name of that excellent and worthy minister of
Charlestown the Rev. John Harvard, who died in 1638, who laid the foundation of
Harvard University in Cambridge, bequeathing thereto 779 l. 17 s. 2 d. when by
a special order of court, it took the name of Harvard College. At the time of
the incorporation of the town of Harvard, it consisted of about 50 families.

The town of Harvard is very hilly and uneven; the land is rough and hard to
subdue, but the soil is warm and strong, rich and fertile. It produces good
crops of grain of all kinds. Such broken land, however, is better adapted to
the raising of wheat and rye, than Indian corn. As the township is rocky, the
farmers are induced to appropriate a large proportion of their land to grass
and pasturage. The principal articles carried hence to market, are beef, pork,
butter, and cheese. The high lands are particularly fertile in chestnut trees,
whose fruit yields the owners no inconsiderable profit. And as the lands are
excellent for orcharding, many farmers pay particular attention to raising all
kinds of fruit, which they have in plenty, and of the best quality.

There are about 1000 acres of what is called interval land in this town;
though perhaps half of it may more properly be styled meadow.

Although there are several hills in this place, yet there are but three which
have names, or merit particular notice. The first we shall mention is called
Pin Hill, from its remarkable form which is pyramidical. The perpendicular
height of this hill, from the brook which runs at the foot of it, is judged to
be two hundred feet. In the bowels of this hill are contained vast quantities
of blue or slate stone. It leases to the stone cutters in this and a
neighboring town for 6 l. 10 s. per annum. The stones taken hence, are not so
easily wrought, as some of a similar kind: But on this account, however, they
are more valuable for jambs and hearths, as they in the same proportion, do the
more resist the heat of fire. These stones are chiefly used, for grave and tomb
stones; and are carried to a great distance.

Those called Bear Hill, and Oak Hill, are not, strictly speaking, distinct
hills, but links only in a chain of hills, which begins in the west part of
Lyttleton, and extends southwesterly through Harvard, as far as the center of
Bolton. Oak Hill, however, which rises in the easterly part of the town, is the
summit of this range, and affords a prospect singularly diversified and
extensive. The land upon these hills is mostly exceeding good.

The general growth of wood in Harvard, is the same as in other towns of
similar soils. Chestnut, oak of all kinds, and walnut, constitute the principal
part on the high lands. They have some white pine, and in the northerly part,
considerable pitch pine. In the low lands they have much elm, some butternut
and button wood, birch, ash, etc.

Harvard is like other hilly, rocky places, not dry, but moist land, and well
watered indeed by numerous springs and rivulets, running about among the hills,
and which cause them to rejoice on every side.

Nashaway, or Lancaster River, flows along the confines of Harvard upwards of
six miles. The depth of the water, when the bed of the river is full, is about
twelve feet; and about six feet at low water. This river, an humble imitator of
the Nile, overflows its banks at certain seasons, and greatly fertilizes the
bordering lands.

Still River originates in some marshes and quagmires in the westerly part of
Bolton, and is joined by a brook running from the interval lands in Lancaster,
near the river. These two streams unite in Harvard, and compose what is called
Still River, or long pond, or lake, which passes in a silent and almost
imperceptible manner, for three miles, (one mile or more of which is in
Harvard,) and then by a small outlet, empties itself into the river Nashaway.

There are two or three ponds of some notoriety in this town. The largest of
these begins but a little southwesterly of the meetinghouse, and very nigh the
seat of Col. Bromfield, and extends away southerly. It is called Bear Hill
Pond, as it lies upon the westerly side of that hill. Its figure is oblong: Its
circumference more than three miles. In this pond are two small islands of
about three acres each. The greatest depth of this pond is not more than twenty
feet.

At the north west angle of the town, is situated what is commonly called Hell
Pond, from its amazing depth, being ninety five feet in one place, by measure;
and between eighty and ninety feet in general, all over the pond, and
immediately as you launch from shore. This pond is nearly circular. Its
diameter is about three hundred yards. Fish were never caught here until within
a few years, when pike and perch were put therein, which have since multiplied
exceedingly. Near this is a small pond, with which the former is supposed to
maintain a subterraneous communication. There is also another, in the north
part of the town, called Robbins's Pond; but this is not remarkable for size or
depth. About an hundred rods from Hell Pond, is a spring, known by the name of
Cold Spring. The waters hereof are always pure and cold, and never freeze. The
head of this spring is two or three yards broad. Bear Hill Pond emits a stream
from its north side, which almost winds around Pin Hill; and which, within the
limits of Harvard, supplies with water, four grist mills, one saw mill, one
clothiers' works, one forge, and one trip hammer. These are all in the north
part of the town. In the south part, there are two grist mills, and one saw
mill, furnished with water from two streams which issue from the east side of
the chain of hills above described.

It is worthy of particular mention, that the eastern side of the above hills
is uniformly steep, while the opposite side has a gentle and gradual declivity.

At the foot of Oak Hill, on the eastern side, there is a mine which may be
justly deemed a curiosity. Early in the year 1783, when a rage for the
treasures, thought to be hid in the bowels of the earth, was prevalent in the
country, it was thought by some persons, from the color of the earth in this
place, and from the working of the mineral rods, that silver ore might be
obtained not far beneath the surface of the ground. Accordingly some gentlemen
in this town and its vicinity, (twenty five in number) formed themselves into a
mine company for the purpose of descrying those hidden treasures, and enriching
themselves therewith. Under the conduct of certain men, Messrs. Ives and Peck,
they began their operations in July following. These were continued, though
with frequent interruptions, until sometime in the year 1789. During this time,
they had, with some difficulty, dug through a considerable quantity of
condensed gravel, until they came to a solid rock: Into this they penetrated
more than forty feet. But, either from the unskilfulness of the mineralists, or
for want of perseverance in their employers, the shining ore has not yet been
discovered. The company, after expending one thousand one hundred dollars in
the process, is amically dissolved. The sides of this cavity are almost
rectilinear. It is about six feet high, and half as wide. The excavation was
made, partly by heating the rock to a great degree, and then cooling it
suddenly with water; but the greater portion of it was effected with powder.
Pieces of the earth, which they dug before they entered the rock, had the
appearance of yellow lead, and were considerably sulphurous. This cavern now
rests a deserted monument of successless toils. Its mouth opens to the east;
and the rising sun, to a person in the other extremity, renders the prospect
highly delightful.

The town of Harvard is large and numerous, here are 200 dwelling houses,
which, like those of most country towns in this State, are scattered over the
place without much order; and consist of some good and more ordinary buildings.
The inhabitants are 1400; these are chiefly farmers, who are frugal and
industrious, and some are become wealthy. They have two or three traders in
foreign goods, and all the usual sorts of mechanics.

This town discovers great solicitude for the good education of its children.
The inhabitants divide themselves into eight districts: In each there is a neat
and commodious schoolhouse; and six of them, in the winter season, are
furnished with latin grammar instructors; the other two with English grammar
masters. In the summer, the very young children are taught by approved females;
while they who are more advanced, are handling the plough and the distaff. Here
a library company has lately been formed. They have at present, about one
hundred volumes in their library. No doubt it will soon be considerably
augmented. There is also here a social club established, consisting of twelve
of the principal inhabitants, who have monthly meetings. In them they endeavor
to acquire information on the common, as well as on the most important affairs
agitated in the world.

The principles and modes of religion in Harvard, are uncommonly numerous.
Within the limits of the town dwell congregationalists, anabaptists,
presbyterians, episcopalians, universalists and shakers. Until after the
commencement of the late war, they were all of the denomination
first-mentioned; and this still comprises five sevenths of the souls in the
town.

The congregational church in Harvard was imbodied by an ecclesiastical
^ouncil, October 10th, 1738, and the Rev. John Seccombe was, the same day,
ordained their first Pastor. He continued until September 7th, 1757 (almost
twenty four years in the sacred office here) when he was dismissed from his
pastoral relation to this people. Mr. Seccombe was afterward employed many
years in the work of the ministry in the province of Novascotia, where he died
in 1792, aged eighty four years. Mr. Seccombe was succeeded in the work of the
ministry at Harvard, by the Rev. Joseph Wheeler, who was consecrated thereunto
December 12th, 1759. In a few years Mr. Wheeler was afflicted with bodily
infirmities, which peculiarly affected his voice, in consequence whereof he
solicited a dismission from that sacred employment, which accordingly took
place by advice and under the direction of a mutual council, July 28th, 1768.
Mr. Wheeler was soon after, and for several years employed by the town as their
representative in the General Court. He was also a worthy Magistrate, and
Register of Probate in the county of Worcester, from 1776, until February 10th,
1793, when he died in the fifty eighth year of his age. On ^ovember 1st, 1769,
the Rev. Daniel Johnson was ordained to the pastoral office in Harvard. He was
suffered to continue but a little time, being removed by death on the 23d of
September 1777. After Mr. Johnson's decease, the Rev. Ebenezer Grosvenor was
installed their Pastor on the 19th of June 1782. He had been before Pastor of
the first church in Situate almost seventeen years. Mr. Grosvenor was not
suffered to continue long at Harvard, being translated by death to a better
world May 28th, 1788, in the forty ninth year of his age.

The town was destitute of a settled minister near four years, when the Rev.
William Emerson was separated unto that sacred office, May 23d, 1792, the fifth
Pastor in succession. In this church of Harvard 1805 persons have been
baptized, and 540 have been admitted to church communion.

In the year 1776 an anabaptist society began to collect in Harvard. It was
established in 1778, when Mr. Isaiah Parker, who is also a physician, was
ordained their teacher, and still continues. The number of this society has
since been somewhat increased by persons from the skirts of the adjacent towns.
This society have a pretty meetinghouse in the southwest part of the town, near
to Still River, in a pleasant conspicuous place. The episcopalians,
presbyterians, and universalists are but few, and have no distinct and separate
societies.

Sometime in the year 1780, the leaders of that sect of religionists, called
shakers, came into this town; and as there are few of them indeed in any other
part of the county, it is highly fitting and proper to give a full account of
them in this place.

They fixed themselves down in a corner of Harvard, where superstition and
enthusiasm had considerably flourished under the auspices of one Mr. Ireland. A
part of this man's followers kindled at this new torch of fanaticism, while the
majority of these old fashioned enthusiasts at the sight of the shakers'
distraction became more rational and sober. Since their beginning in Harvard,
they have been continually making reforms in their sentiments, modes of worship
and manners. In a religious and political view they have greatly meliorated.
From gross indecencies in their rites and behavior, they are become moderate
and civil. Formerly they were indolent and troublesome in society; now they are
the most industrious and peaceful members of the community. The number of
shakers in Harvard is about one hundred and fifty. These are divided into three
orders; or as they call them, gifts. The first of these orders consists
principally of the youngest and fairest of them who are gathered. These are
under the most rigid rules possible. They are never to see any of the world's
people, nor converse with them of the lower orders. All their actions, words
and steps, are narrowly inspected by their spiritual teacher, who almost
persuades them to believe that he is conversant with their thoughts. They of
the first order are privileged with his oral addresses; to the others he
usually communicates his monitions by a messenger.

The second order is composed of them who are gathered, but who are more
advanced in years, and otherwise less vigorous and alert in labor and in
devotion.

The lowest order are they who live about in families.

Extreme simplicity in dress and manners characterizes this singular religious
sect. They are neat in their apparel and furniture. The houses which they have
erected in this town, are large and commodious, and approach to something like
elegance. Their floors and stairs are all covered to prevent making a noise.
They imitate the Moravians apparently more than any other denomination;
particularly in their modes of government and subordination. They affect to be
wholly under the dominion of the Spirit; and to crucify even the innocent
desires of the flesh, insomuch that they neither marry nor are given in
marriage. So strict are they in their laws of abstinence from women, that the
two sexes are not permitted to live in the same house, nor even to enter the
same door. Instances of inchastity, especially among the governed, seldom or
ever occur. The orders are under the most complete subjection to their leaders.
The utmost precision and regularity are observed in their eating, sleeping and
working. Hence they are making quite rapid proficiency in the lower kinds of
the mechanic arts; and such is their agricultural skill and perseverance, that
they have reduced the most rugged and indomable part of Harvard to a state
resembling that of a garden.

We conclude this account with only remarking, that it is not a little strange,
that the leaders of this deluded sect, who certainly can claim no preeminence
above ordinary men in point of capacity and improvement, should thus keep bound
in servitude so great a number of their brethren in the very heart of
New England. But it will be stranger still, if in such an era as this, the
majority of the shakers, who now pant for liberty, should long continue in
shackles of bondage to their elders.

Having said what may be thought quite sufficient upon the ecclesiastical and
religious state of Harvard, we shall close our account of this place, with
saying it is a large, prosperous and wealthy town; and notwithstanding the
diversity of sects, the people are peaceable and happy.

GRAFTON.
THIS is that tract of land of four miles square, which was reserved for the
Indians when the town of Sutton was granted to the English. It was called by
the Indians Hassanamisco, and known by that name only until April 18th, 1735,
when it was incorporated by an act of the Legislature, and called Grafton.
Since its incorporation one half a mi^ land was taken from Shrewsbury and added
to Grafton, on the north, and about half a mile of Sutton, on the south, was
annexed to it; so that Grafton is now five miles in length, from north to
south, and four in width from east to west. This town is bounded, on the north,
by Shrewsbury; on the east, by Westborough and Upton; on the south, by Upton
and Sutton; and on the west, by Sutton.

At first there were diverse Indian families here: As they diminished, the white
people became proprietors of the soil, by purchase; and a grant from the
General Court, upon these conditions, however, that they should always provide
preaching and schooling, and seats in the meetinghouse, for the remaining
Indians. And as the people hold the lands of the original four miles square, on
such conditions, they must all of whatever persuasion, be equally bound to
contribute to the support of a gospel minister in the place. The General Court
has from the beginning, appointed a committee of three, called the trustees of
the Indians' interest; their business is to take care of their property, both
real and personal, and dispose of the same to the best advantage, for the
support and maintenance of the Indians. This committee, at present, have little
to do in the execution of their trust, as the lands have by length of time, and
various concurring circumstances, chiefly passed into the hands of the white
people. There are indeed several farms in the possession of the heirs of the
Indians, married to negroes; but it is said there is not one male in the town
at this day, who is all of Indian extract or blood.

The Indians very soon decreased in this place, and the whites became
possessors and occupiers of the soil; and so early as the 28th of December
1731, a Christian congregational church was imbodied here, and on the next day,
the Rev. Solomon Prentice was ordained their first Pastor. He became what was
called in that day, a zealous newlight, or more properly, a raving enthusiast.
He was dismissed from his pastoral relation to Grafton, July 8th. 1747, and
became an itinerant preacher. He was succeeded in the work of the gospel
ministry at Grafton by the Rev. Aaron Hutchinson, who was solemnly consecrated
hereunto on the 6th of June 1750. Mr. Hutchinson continued upwards of twenty
two years as Pastor of Grafton, and was dismissed from his relation to that
church and people, November 18th, 1772. He has since generally been employed in
preaching the gospel, and is still living. The Rev. Daniel Grosvenor succeeded
Mr. Hutchinson as Pastor of the church and flock of God in Grafton, to which
office he was separated by the laying on of the hands of the presbytery, on the
19th of October 1774. By reason of great bodily infirmities of long
continuance, he requested a dismission from his particular relation to the
Church and people of Grafton, to which they acceded with great reluctance, and
which took place January 1st, 1788. No minister is since settled in the place.
Mr. Grosvenor's health, being in a good measure restored, he is most constantly
employed in preaching in neighboring vacant parishes.

Some years ago there was an anabaptist society and church established in
Grafton, and they had a regular minister of public education settled with
them; but now there is neither minister nor church of that denomination in the
town, and very few anabaptist families.

Let us now proceed to some Geographical Description of Grafton. It is a most
excellent township of land. The face of the town is hilly and uneven, and in
general rocky; but the soil is moist and strong, rich and very productive: It
is good for Indian corn, wheat, rye, oats, barley, and flax: The lands are
naturally warm and not subject to frosts; and as they are high and rocky, they
are well adapted to orcharding and all kinds of fruit trees. There are three
noticeable hills in the town The first to ^e mentioned, is called Chestnut Hill,
as abounding in that sort of wood. This is situated but a little east of the
meetinghouse, and is the highest land in the town, hiding Grafton from
Westborough: This is not large; the land is moist and good. On the easterly
side of the town lies George Hill, two miles and an half in length. It took its
name from one George Misco, an Indian who dwelt upon it. This is a hill of most
excellent land; and there are a number of very fine farms upon it. A third is
denominated Brigham Hill, from a number of that name who have lived upon it:
This lies in the westerly part of the town, is high, about two miles in length;
has upon it several excellent and large farms, though some parts of it are
rough, broken lands.

The general growth of wood is walnut, oak of all kinds, chestnut, some pitch
pine, butternut, button wood, black and white ash, and birch. There is some
pine plain land in the town near the rivers.

Blackstone River, from the north parish in Sutton, enters Grafton in the
southwesterly part of the town; this is then become a large and beautiful
river, and runs about three miles in the southerly part of Grafton, and then
passes into Upton. Little River, or more properly Quinsigamond, being the
outlet from the pond of that name, runs along on the west side of the town,
within about half a mile of the meetinghouse, and between that and Brigham
Hill; and about one mile and an half south from the meetinghouse joins
Blackstone River. On these rivers, before and after the junction, there are
conside^^ble bodies of good meadow, and rich interval lands. The River Assabet,
which runs northeast, and empties into Merrimack, has its source in Grafton,
about one mile and an half northeast from the meetinghouse: This passes through
the northwest angle of Westborough, into Northborough, etc. Besides these, on
the west side of George Hill, runs George Brook, which rises in the northerly
part of Grafton; this passes to the south. On this stream there are large and
good meadows. There is no pond in the town. Upon the several rivers and streams
abovementioned, there are four grist mills, several saw mills, three trip
hammers, and one fulling mill. The town abounds with rivulets and springs of
water.

The people subsist mainly by the cultivation of the soil, and they are amply
recompensed for all their labor. They have one or two traders in foreign
goods, and the usual tradesmen and mechanics; and here pot ash making is
carried on. Grafton, though not a large tract of land, yet being a rich and
good soil, is pretty well filled with people, and they are become wealthy.
There were nearly 900 inhabitants when the census was taken about two years
ago. This town reaps considerable advantage from the travel through it. A road
much used, leading from Connecticut to Boston, passes through this town; as
also the post road from Worcester to Providence. Grafton is forty miles from
Boston, to the southwest: It is thirty four miles from Providence, to the
northwest, and eight from the courthouse in Worcester, a little to the south of
east.

UPTON.
THIS town was not an original grant, but taken from several other towns, part
from M^ndon on the south, part from Sutton on the west, and part from Hopkinton
on the east. It is bounded by Westborough on the north. The post road from
Worcester to Providence passes through this place, about a mile southwest of
the meetinghouse. It was incorporated by an act of the Legislature on the 14th
of June, 1735, and contains upwards of 13000 acres of land; and when the census
was taken there were 126 dwelling houses, about 150 families, and about 900
inhabitants in the place.

As no church records are to be found of what took place in the earlier days of
this town, so the precise time when the congregational church was formed here
cannot be ascertained; but it was soon after the incorporation of the town,
when the Rev. Thomas Weld was ordained their first pastor. This gentleman
continued in the ministry among this people but a few years, being dismissed
from his pastoral relation to them; and was afterward installed at a parish in
Middleborough, in the county of Plymouth. From hence also he was removed, and
soon after entered the army, in the last French war, in the capacity of
chaplain, where he died. He was succeeded at Upton, in the work of the gospel
ministry, by the Rev. Elisha Fish, who was solemnly separated unto this sacred
employment on the 5th of June, 1751, and who, having obtained help of God,
still continues, faithfully serving the Lord in the gospel of his Son. There is
a considerable society of anabaptists in this town, and has been for many
years. For early in the year 1751 they ordained one Mr. Abraham Bloss for their
teaching elder, who continued there but a few years before he left them; after
which the society and church dissolved. However, a few individuals remained,
who called themselves anabaptists, who rarely had any meetings for religious
worship among themselves for several years, but occasionally attended upon
teachers of that denomination in other towns. But early in the year 1787 there
arose a considerable number, very suddenly, who called themselves anabaptists,
and still remain as a distinct society, to whom one elder Ingalls first
ministered; and since they have the occasional instruction of Mr. Simeon Snow
who has been ordained at large. However, there is not, so far as I can learn,
any church so gathered among them as to celebrate the Lord's supper by
themselves.

In the town of Upton there are also a number of the people called friends or
quakers, but no distinct society of that denomination is formed there.

We shall proceed to some Topographical Description of Upton. Some parts of the
town are very rough and uneven, others more level. The soil is generally
strong, rich and good, favorable for orcharding, and fruit of most kinds, and
for pasturage and grass; and there are a number of rivulets passing about in
the valleys, between the hills, whereby it is pretty well furnished with water.
There is one river, which has its source in Grafton, and passing-through the
west part of Upton, in a southerly course, known by the name of West River:
This is emptied into Blackstone River in the lower part of Uxbridge. On this
river there are some good meadows; also mills. A little north of the
meetinghouse, there is a small pond fed by rivulets and springs, from the south
end of which there issues a fine stream, on which there is a corn mill within a
few rods of the meetinghouse, whereby the inhabitants are greatly accommodated
and benefited; this falls into West River. The growth of wood is similar to
that of other towns of like kinds of soil. The high lands have plenty of oak of
the several sorts; considerable quantity of walnut; some chestnut: The low lands
have birch, maple, elm, alder, etc. There is much pitch pine in the place, and
also considerable white pine remaining even at this day. This town is situated
about thirty eight miles from Boston, to the southwest; and fifteen miles from
Worcester courthouse, about southeast; and is bounded on the north by
Westborough; on the east, by Hopkinton and Milford; on the south, by Mendon;
and on the west, by Northbridge and Grafton.

HARDWICK.
FOR the sum of 20 l. New England currency, John Magus and Lawrence Nassowanno,
two n^d Indians, so early as in the year 1686, Dece^ 27th, gave and signed a
deed of a large tract of land to Messrs. Joshua Lamb, Nathaniel Page, Andrew
Gardner, Benjamin Gamblin, Benjamin Tucker, John Curtiss, Richard Draper, and
Samuel Ruggles, of Roxbury. This tract of land included what is now Hardwick.
In consequence of the abovementioned deed, the heirs of those gentlemen
petitioned the General Court, and obtained a grant of this township on the 17th
of June, 1732. It was called Lambstown, from the first named proprietor, until
it was incorporated and made a town by an act of the Legislature, which bears
date January 10th, 1738, when the name of Hardwick was given to it.

This town contains, according to its original grant, about six miles square,
notwithstanding a part on the easterly side of the place was set off more than
forty years ago, to help in making up the town of Newbraintree. Hardwick is now
bounded on the north, by Petersham and Bar; on the east, by Bar,
Newbraintree and Ware River; on the south, by Ware River, and the town of Ware,
in the county of Hampshire; and on the west, by Greenwich in that county.

After the location of this grant a number of settlers immediately entered upon
the lands, and others followed so rapidly, as that they soon had the gospel
preached among them, and as early as November 17th, 1736, a little more than
four years from the date of the grant, the church of Christ was gathered, and
the same day the Rev. David White was ordained their first Pastor. He died
January 6th, 1784, in the 74th year of his age, and the 48th of his ministry.
He was succeeded in the sacred office by the Rev. Thomas Holt, who was
separated unto that high and holy calling on the 25th of June, 1789, after a
vacancy of five years and almost six months.

The people of Hardwick, considering their number, are remarkably united in
their sentiments respecting religion. There are a few antipedobaptists in the
place; as also a few professed universalists.

We proceed to some Topographical Description of Hardwick. The town is of a
good form and shape, being nearly square. The face of the town is rather rough,
hilly and uneven: Although there are no very great and remarkable hills. The
soil is, in general, deep, loamy, and very fertile. The lands produce all kinds
of grain in sufficient plenty for the inhabitants; but they are best adapted to
grass and pasturage: Here vast quantities of butter and cheese are made, and
most excellent beef fatted for the market. All kinds of fruit trees flourish
here.

The principal growth of wood is oak of all sorts, chestnut and walnut; but in
the north western part of the town, there is some white and pitch pine. The
land is generally rocky and moist; and it is finely watered in every part by
springs, streams and rivulets, which run about in the valleys among the hills;
but there are no streams of note or distinction in the town, although they
furnish water for all sorts of water works; and there are within the town, five
corn mills, four saw mills, and two clothiers' works, where much business is
performed to the great advantage of the people.

Ware River, which is large, runs on the east and south of the town, and is the
boundary between this town and Newbraintree, and also between Hardwick and the
town of Ware. The interval on this river, in the eastern part of the town, may
contain perhaps as much as two hundred acres of very excellent mowing land. On
this river a furnace was erected several years ago, and where much hard ware
has been manufactured; but at present there is no business done thereat.

There are two considerable ponds in the town; one called Pottapoug, in the
northerly part, is about two miles in length, and nearly one third of a mile in
breadth; this is stored with fish. It has an inlet which comes from Petersham;
its outlet passes through the northwestern part of Hardwick, and falls into
Chicabee River. The other, called Muddy Pond, is about one mile in length, and
about half a mile in width in the southerly part. It has plenty of good fish.
It has a small inlet; its outlet is into Ware River.

The roads of travel are from Boston, either through Worcester or Rutland, to
Hardwick, and so on to Northampton. Another road from the southwest, with one
from the southeast, form a junction near the center of the town, and then
passing northward, through Petersham into the States of Newhampshire and
Vermont. Hardwick is situated a little southwest from Boston, distant from the
State house seventy two miles, and from the courthouse in Worcester twenty five
miles, a little to the northwest. It is a very large, flourishing, wealthy
town, and contained, when the census was taken, 245 houses and 1725
inhabitants; and was the fifth town in the county in the proportion it paid to
a State tax in 1790.

BOLTON.
THIS town was taken from the ancient town of Lancaster; and was incorporated
on the 24th of June, 1738, by act of the Legislature, when it received its
present name. The tract of land was large at first: In the year 1784, the
district of Berlin, to the south, was set off from it: Still it is large enough
to make a very respectable figure among the towns in the county. It contained,
when the continental census was taken, 125 houses, and 861 inhabitants. It is
bounded by Lancaster on the west; by Harvard, on the north; by Stow, in the
county of Middlesex, on the east; by Marlborough on the southeast; and by
Berlin, on the south. It ^s distant from Boston about thirty four miles nearly
west; and from the courthouse in Worcester, it is about eighteen miles, lying
to the northeast.

The Ecclesiastical History of Bolton is as follows. The church of Christ here
was gathered on the 4th of November, 1741; on which day the Rev. Thomas Goss
was ordained their first pastor, who continued until January 17th, 1780, when
he died in the sixty third year of his age, and thirty ninth of his ministry.
He was succeeded, a short space of time, by the Rev. John Walley, who had been
before for several years minister of a parish in Ipswich. Mr. Walley was
dismissed from Bolton, not long before his death. He was succeeded in the work
of the gospel ministry in this place, by the Rev. Phineas Wright, who was
solemnly separated hereunto October 26th, 1785, and who still lives. The people
are peaceable and happy, prosperous and flourishing.

In Bolton, and the district of Berlin, there is a society of friends, or
quakers, consisting of a large number of mostly wealthy families; their house
of worship stands within the limits of Bolton, near to Berlin line.

We shall proceed to give some Geographical Description of Bolton. The town in
general is good land, not level, nor yet has it any very high hills. The
highest lands in the town are rich and moist; excellent for orcharding and
pasture land. It is not very rocky, however, there are stones sufficient to
wall in all their farms. The people raise rye, wheat, Indian corn, barley,
oats, flax, etc. etc. upon their lands, in such plenty as richly to repay their
labor in the cultivation thereof. About half a mile from the center of the
town, to the west, begins the great hill, known by the name of Wattoquottock
Hill, which extends southwesterly into Berlin. This long, large hill, is not
very high; it is in general very good land, and there are diverse fine farms
upon it. The great road from Lancaster to Boston passes over the north end of
this hill, upon its declivity, where it is very moist, consisting of clay and
loam, sensibly felt by travelers in the wet seasons of the year. On the
westerly side of this hill, about halfway from its foot to the summit, is a
cavity opening to the southwest, parallel with the main course of the hill,
near the upper end of which is a pool, or small pond of water, known by the
name of Welsh Pond. This pond is of a circular form about twenty feet in depth,
and occupies the space of about one acre on its surface. It is supposed to have
diminished about one half, both in depth and circumference within forty years
past. People now mow considerable grass, where they went with boats and canoes
half a century ago. On the southeasterly side of this hill, and nearly opposite
to W^h Pond, issue a number of rivulets, which soon unite in the low lands, and
form a considerable brook, taking a southeasterly course, till it falls into
Assabet River, in the northerly part of Marlborough. This brook has water
sufficient to carry two mills, in the wet seasons of the year, at the distance
of less than one mile from the hill. There is a glade of most excellent meadow
on each side of this stream, its whole length, with but few small
interruptions, by hard land. The higher parts of these meadows, next the hill,
are known by the name of Wattoquottock Meadows. At a small distance from the
northeasterly foot of Wattoquottock, begins another large hill, with a gradual
ascent, which extends northeasterly through Harvard into the boundaries of
Lyttleton, in the county of Middlesex. By some, this is called Bear Hill, by
others Oak-Hill. This hill has been thought to contain mines and minerals, and
has, consequently, for a number of years engaged the attention of a respectable
society of mineseekers; but their expectations have far exceeded their gains:
For though its bowels have been explored with much painful labor, and sanguine
hope, yet the mountain has not even to this day brought forth a mouse. At the
intersection, between this last mentioned hill and Wattoquottock, is a narrow
bar of hard land, about fifteen rods in width; and on each side of this bar, is
a small piece of low, s^nken, boggy ground, in which arise several springs,
soon forming a rivulet each way. That on the northwestly side runs a northerly
course, a^ (...) continual increase of waters, and empties into Still River, so
called, within the boundaries of Lancaster. The rivulet on the southeasterly
side runs an easterly course; the waters of which being augmented by small
additions, become sufficient to carry mills, where much business is done, at
the distance of two miles from their source, except in the summer months, and
they are emptied into the river Assabet, about two miles southeast from Stow
meetinghouse; previous to which, however, the road to Boston crosses this
stream three times. On this brook are several bodies of meadow, but not equal
in goodness to those beforementioned. In the northeasterly part of Bolton,
about two miles and an half from the center of the town, is situated the large
and extensive hill, called Rattle Snake Hill, belonging to the heirs of the
late Genesis John Whetcomb. In the south side of this hill is a body of limestone;
and here are annually made about one hundred and fifty hogsheads of the very
best of lime. In the easterly part of the town is a large hill, known by the
name of Long Hill. It lies close on the south side of, and runs parallel with
the great road, about one mile and an half, to Stow line, with a gradual ascent
to the south of about half a mile to its summit. There are two small ponds, of
a circular form, at the distance of about eighty rods from each other, in the
easterly part of the town, supposed to cover, one about forty, and the other
about thirty acres of ground. The largest of these lies near the west end of
Long Hill, in sight of the great road and known by the name of West's Pond,
from a person of that name formerly living on its shore. In the northwest angle
of Bolton, mainly, is situated a large body of almost stagnant water, and
therefore called Still River, but might be more properly denominated a lake, or
very long pond. It is various in its width and depth. It begins within the
boundaries of Lancaster, in the great intervals (about twenty rods east of the
great bridge over the Nashaway, after the junction of its two branches) and
proceeds in a circular course, upwards of three miles, across the northwest
corner of Bolton, into Harvard, from the north end of which there is a very
small outlet into the river Nashaway. On the south side of this lake, and
between this and the river Nashaway, is a very large body of most excellent
interval land, part of which is within the limits of Bolton, used for tillage,
mowing and pasturing: And which is often laid several feet under water by
spring and fall floods, presenting the appearance of a small sea.

Various are the conjectures of people respecting Still River, Lake, or Long
Pond, above mentioned. Some suppose the bed of the south branch of Nashaway
once was here, and that by some great freshet it was cut off above, formed a
new channel, and joined the north branch the sooner, where the junction now is.
Be this as it may, it is certain these branches have shifted their beds, in
various places, and of considerable lengths, in the revolution of ages. There
are several rivulets fall into this lake on its easterly side; but there is no
inlet at its upper end, exc^ ^at (...) directly out of the ground; and the
great probability is, that a stream, which begins in Bolton, feeds this Lake by
a subterraneous passage; for while this stream is constant, brisk and lively,
for half a mile, coming to a spot of pine, sandy land, it disappears, and no
water is discernible for near two miles. There is a small inlet into this lake
on the eastern part of Lancaster intervals, in wet seasons, but in the summer
no water runs in this, and yet the lake appears no way to be affected thereby.

Let us leave this lake, and finish our Description of Bolton.

There are two pot ash works in this place, and one of pearl ash. Here are two
famous brickyards where above two hundred thousands of bricks are annually
made. The town is very well wooded. On the high lands there is plenty of
walnut, chestnut, and oak of all sorts: And here vast numbers of barrels and
hogsheads are manufactured yearly; and great quantities of hoops are carried to
market. In the low lands there is much maple, but little ash, some birch. There
are some plains covered with pitch pine, very little white pine.

Upon the whole, this is a town of rich, strong and good land, and the people
are increasing in number wealth and reputation. They are now building a large
elegant meetinghouse, upon the modern construction, with a steeple to it, to
which Messrs. Joshua and James Richardson, formerly of Boston, have generously
contributed 100 l. and bought their pews, as others, at ve^due, but upon this
condition, that they should not be taxed to the building said house. The pews
will pay for the house. The underpinning of this meetinghouse is very
beautiful, and equal to any in the county, if not in the whole State. It is a
white and free stone, easily split into any size, and was discovered just when
wanted.

STURBRIDGE.
THIS is styled in the act for erecting the county of Worcester, "The land
lately granted to several petitioners of Medfield," and many of the first
settlers here were from the town of Medfield, and hence the place was called
Newmedfield, until its incorporation, which was, by an act of Court, on the
24th of June, 1738, when it received the name Sturbridge.

This town is large in its dimensions, containing by actual survey, about 28929
acres. It is situated in the southwest corner of the county, and is divided
from Woodstock and Union, on the south, in the state of Connecticut, by the
state line; and bounded west, on Holland and Brimfield, in the county of
Hampshire; on the north, by Brookfield; and on the east, by Charlton and
Dudley. The grant of this tract was made in the year 1729, in the month of
August, but it was thought scarcely habitable by reason of its broken rough
state; and the soil, for the most part, requiring hard and great labor to
render it productive; but the first settlers being a robust, resolute, sober
and industrious set of men, were determined to get an honest living, by "the
sweat of their faces," and, through the blessing of God, they soon converted
this wilderness into a fruitful field. The original proprietors built a house
for the worship of God, which was raised on the 20th and 21st days of June,
1733, and on the 3d of September following it was consecrated by the Rev.
Joseph Baxter of Medfield, who preached from Isaiah lxiii, and 5th. From that
time the place increased fast in the number of good and industrious people, who
very quickly obtained to live comfortably; and like others of that age, early
sought for a teacher of piety and morality. On the 29th of September, 1736, the
Rev. Caleb Rice was ordained to the pastoral office over the church and flock
of God in the place. He was a pastor after God's heart; sound in faith; a good
preacher, endued with excellent ministerial gifts, and very exemplary in life,
as well as social and benevolent in his deportment. He lived in great harmony
with his people, in the fore part of his ministry: But about the year 1747, a
number of the brethren and inhabitants, conceiving they had received new light,
different from what was common among their neighbors, separated from him,
which rendered his work more arduous, and his life uncomfortable. From
separatists they became anabaptists: But it pleased the Great Head of the
church to remove Mr. Rice from his labors, by death, on the second of
September, 1759, whose praise was then through all the churches, and his memory
is still dear to many. He was succeeded in the work of the gospel ministry, in
the congregational church and society in Sturbridge, by the Rev. Joshua Pain,
who was separated hereunto on the 17th of June, 1761, and still continues the
faithful and beloved pastor thereof. The people here have surprisingly
flourished and increased; for there are now about 1800 souls in the place. The
congregational church is large, consisting of about 150 members of both sexes.
On the 29th and 30th days of June, 1785, they raised a large new meetinghouse,
which is elegant and well finished; in which the first sermon was preached by
the Rev. Mr. Pain on January 7th, 1786, from first of Kings, viii. 27.

There is in the town a very respectable society of anabaptists, comprising
about one fifth part of the inhabitants. These also have built them lately a
handsome meetinghouse. As great peace and harmony subsist between the two
societies, as can well be expected under such circumstances: Difference of
sentiments, as to modes and rites of religion, scarcely injures good
neighborhood; nor does it prevent their mixing in families, or friendly ^o^ial
circles.

The inhabitants at present are industrious and frugal, charitable, and given
to hospitality. The great precepts of the Christian religion, moral virtue, and
the instruction of their youth, they make their study and care. They live in
peace and love.

However hilly, rough and uneven the town was at first, yet, by industry and
frugality, the people are become wealthy, subsisting chiefly by the cultivation
of the earth. By hard labor the soil is become fruitful. It is good for
orcharding and grazing. Much butter and cheese are made here, especially the
former, which has obtained high credit in the markets. The land is pretty good
for grain. The growth of wood is similar to that of the towns in the vicinity,
oak of all sorts, walnut, chestnut, pine in considerable plenty, especially in
its earlier days; ash, beech, birch, maple, elm, etc.

The town is in general well watered by springs, brooks, rivers and ponds. The
River Quinebaug, which has its source in Brimfield, runs through this town near
the center, from west to east. On this there are large bodies of good interval,
and valuable meadow lands. There are valuable ponds in the town, well stored
with the usual sorts of fresh water fish.

Near one of these ponds, called Lead Mine Pond, a number of adventurers from
Europe, some years past, dug deep for ore. A considerable quantity of which
they carried with them to England; but they have never returned to their
pursuit.

Sturbridge is situated at the southwest angle of the county, on the state
line, about twenty miles ^om the courthouse in Worcester; and it is sixty five
miles from Boston, and considerably to the (...) ^est.

HOLDEN.
THE town of Holden was taken wholly from the town of Worcester, being included
in their original grants; and was the northwesterly part thereof.

It was incorporated on the 9th of January, 1740, when the name of Holden was
given to it to perpetuate the name and deeds of the Hon. Samuel Holden, Esquire one
of the directors of the Bank of England; and of his lady and their amiable
daughters, who had been great and generous benefactors to the literary and
religious interests of this country.

This worthy, benevolent man, transmitted to New England for charitable
purposes, in books and bills of exchange, to the amount of 4847 l. New England
currency. After his decease, Mrs. Holden and daughters sent over in value, 5585
l. for the same noble and pious uses. With part of this latter sum Holden
Chapel, in the University of Cambridge, in Massachusetts, was erected in the
year 1745. There are nineteen volumes, chiefly octavos, in the hands of the
Rev. Mr. Avery, given by Mrs. Holden and her daughters, to the minister of
Holden, and his successors. This town was said to be laid out six miles square,
but it considerably exceeds that: From east to west it is about seven miles
across: From the south point at Leicester it is ten miles. It is bounded
northerly, on Princeton and Sterling; easterly, on Worcester and Boylston;
southerly, on Worcester, Leicester and Paxton, and westerly on Rutland and
Paxton. We shall next present the reader with the Ecclesiastical History of
Holden.

The church of Christ in this place was formed on the 22d of December, 1742,
and on the same day the Rev. Joseph Davis was ordained their first pastor. He
was dismissed from his pastoral relation to that people October 18th, 1772.
Since that time he has been employed in preaching the gospel in various places;
and on Wednesday the 2d day of January, 1793, he preached a special lecture to
the people of Holden, as on that day half a century, from the imbodying the
church and his ordin^^^on, expired. The discourse was printed.
Mr. Davis was succeeded in the (...) office at Holden, by the Rev. Joseph
Avery, who was publicly separated thereunto December 21st, 1774, and still
continues in the ministry there.

We go on to a Geographical Description of the town of Holden. The soil of this
town is somewhat various, yet in general of a loamy kind: The land in the
outskirts of the town is the most springy and natural to grass. The general
produce is rye, Indian corn, spring wheat and oats. Some farms produce good
barley. Flax is raised with various success; when there is a failure of a crop,
it is generally owing to other causes than the nature of the soil. Though the
town is rather hilly and uneven, yet not very much so. Such land is generally
good for fruit; and, accordingly, here are very large and valuable orchards
indeed, but they are chiefly at a considerable distance from the center of the
town; the middle not being so fruitful, and more exposed to destructive frosts.
There is a brickyard two miles and an half northeast of the meetinghouse, where
are made annually about sixty thousands of bricks. The clay is very strong and
good. There are two potash works about three miles east of the meetinghouse,
one of them lately erected. The growth of wood in Holden is mainly chestnut and
oak of all kinds. In former years there was a great quantity of excellent white
pine timber, but the most of it has been cut off. There still remains, chiefly
in the northerly part of the town, considerable yellow pine. There are other
kinds of wood in various parts of the town. Some walnut, hemlock, hornbeam,
white maple, ash, and some valuable rockmaple.

At the northwest part of the town there is a Pond called Quinepoxet, the
greater part of which is in Princeton: A narrow fordable strait of water issues
from this into a lesser pond, perhaps fifty rods in length; from this there is
an outlet into a second pond; from this second an outlet into a third; and from
the third, into a fourth pond. These lesser ponds are in Holden; and from them
proceeds a river called Quinepoxet, which holds an easterly course, and passes
out of Holden into Boylston, where, quite on the west side of that town, it
joins Still River which comes from the foot of Watchusett Hill, and from thence
takes the name of the south branch of the River Nashaway-Just below the
abovementioned ponds in Holden, and on this River Quinepoxet, stands a fine saw
mill. There is another pond about two miles and three quarters northeast of the
center of the town, called Lily Pond, which has neither inlet nor outlet. There
is a fine stream coming from the west and southwest parts of the town, part of
which is derived from Asnebumskit Pond in Paxton, and crossing the main road
leading to Rutland, one mile and an half west of the meetinghouse, joins
Quinepoxet River about that distance north of it. On this stream are three saw
mills and two grist mills. Another stream, which has its r^se mainly, a mile
and upwards south of the center of the town, takes a circuitous course, crosses
the great road about two miles east of the meetinghouse, and falls into
Quinepoxet about two miles northeast of said house. It was formerly called
Cedar Brook. On this are two saw, and two grist mills. On a branch which enters
it, and about two miles southeast of the middle of the town, stands another saw
mill. In the south part of the town rises a stream which holds a southeasterly
course, and passes into Worcester, called Turkey Brook. On this there is a saw
mill, and also a grist mill. There are no extensive intervals in Holden; but
yet, in several parts of the town, there are farms whose value is much enhanced
by the meadows and pieces of interval which lie on the river and streams
mentioned above.

About three miles northeast from the center of the town is situated Molden
Hill where there is a large quarry of most excellent stone for underpinning,
etc. and which may (...) ^ought into any form, although they do not hew very
ea^* In the west part of the town is a hill called Pine Hill. In the southwest
part of the town the foot of the famous Asnebumskit Hill, which is mostly in
Paxton, falls within Holden limits; and east of this, and stretching southeast
and northwest, lies Stone House Hill, so called, whose sides in some places are
very steep, and exhibit horrid cliffs of rocks, noticeable for affording dens
for rattlesnakes; they are however, mostly destroyed, and rarely seen at this
day. Winter hill lies in the southeast part of the town, and is partly in
Worcester.

This town is large, increasing in number and wealth, and when the census was
taken contained 1080 souls. It is fifty one miles from Boston, nearly west, and
seven miles from Worcester cour^house, to the northwest. It has one large road
running through it, from Boston to Connecticut river, Vermo^t, etc.

LEOMINSTER.
THIS town was taken from Lancaster, and was part of what ^as called Lancaster
new grant. It was incorporated on the 23d of June, 1740.

The Ecclesiastical History of Leominster is as follows. The church here was
imbodied on the 14th of September, 1743: And on the same day the Rev. John
Rogers was ordained their pastor. He was a sensible, worthy man, and used his
natural right to examine, think and believe, for himself. And what he thought
to be the truth as it is in Jesus, that he preached to his people; always
appearing to act uprightly and conscientiously. However, a number of the church
and people, apprehending Mr. Rogers (...) doctrines contrary to the gospel,
called in a larg^ council for advice in July 1757, consisting of fifteen
churches. The council judged the brethren had reasons for dissatisfaction, but
advised them to attend on Mr. Rogers's ministry for three months, and if he did
not retract his errors, as they called them, in that time, then they advised
the church to dismiss him; which they accordingly did, and shut him out of the
meetinghouse. Upon this Mr. Rogers preached to such as were disposed to attend
on his ministry, in his own house. At length Mr. Rogers sued the town for his
salary: And after a long contest in the law, the dispute was compromised in
this manner, viz. Mr. Rogers relinquished all claims upon the town as their
minister; the town to pay to Mr. Rogers whatever sums of money his adherents
had been obliged to pay toward supplying the pulpit after he had been shut out
of it; and, finally, that all who wished to have Mr. Rogers for their minister,
should be made a poll parish; about a fifth part of the town were accordingly
made a distinct, but poll parish, by an act of the Legislature; after this
settlement of their unhappy controversy, the church and town proceeded to the
choice of a minister, and on the 22d of December, 1762, the Rev. Francis
Gardner was ordained their second pastor; in whose ministerial labors the
people have been very happy for more than thirty years already; and during this
period they have been peaceable and prosperous. And when the town, a few years
since, erected a large and elegant new meetinghouse, Mr. Rogers's adherents
contributed their full proportion to the building of it. The Rev. Mr. Rogers,
having obtained help of God, continued to preach and administer special
ordinances to the people of his parish until the year 1788, when, finding his
age and bodily infirmities so great, he wished to be excused from the sacred
labors, to which his people consented, and generously paid him three years
salary in advance: Whereupon, by an act of the Legislature, this poll parish
was dissolved, and the whole town now form but one church and congregation
under the ministry of the Rev. Mr. Gardner.

The Rev. Mr. Rogers lived but a little while after he ceased from his public
labors. He departed this life October, 1789, in the 47th year of his ministry.

Let it now be observed, there was no way to avoid giving this particular
detail, and yet mention the two religious societies which for a time subsisted
in Leominster. Our plan, truth, and impartial justice, required the mention of
them. And nothing derogatory of any one has been said. Nay, the design has been
to pay tribute due to worthy characters, to Mr. Rogers and Mr. Gardner, and to
the people, who once were two parties and societies. The majority of the church
and town dismissed Mr. Rogers, that the truth and purity of the gospel, as they
thought, might continue with them. The friends of Mr. Rogers supposed him to be
a good and faithful minister of Jesus Christ; and therefore adhered to him to
the last; and treated him with all possible respect, kindness and generosity,
until the Great Head of the church was pleased to remove him from this world.
And now he is gone to be here no more, we find the two societies cordially
receiving and embracing each other, and cheerfully attending upon and
supporting one and the same minister, the Rev. Mr. Gardner. The moral character
of Mr. Rogers was never impeached. Had he lived in the present day, perhaps
such a controversy would never have been heard of. We have seen in Mr. Rogers a
uniform character, and an honest upright man, whose integrity, and firm
attachment to what he thought were important truths, were superior to the
trials he met with, and by which persons of more easy virtue might have been
overcome.

Some Geographical Description of the town of Leominster shall here be
presented to the reader. Leominster contains about as much as five miles
square, and is situated in the northeastly quarter of the county, and is
distant about nineteen miles from the courthouse in Worcester; and from Boston,
it is a little to the northwest at the distance of fifty miles. It is bounded
on the north and northeast, by Fitchburg and Lunenburg; on the east, southeast
and south, by Lancaster; and on the southwest and west, by Sterling, and a gore
of land. This town is pretty plain and level in the middle of it, and for a
mile and a half or two miles round the meetinghouse, and indeed all the way
south of the meetinghouse toward Lancaster; to the north, toward Fitchburg,
it is not quite so level; yet the land is pretty good, and the soil is clayey:
Upon the east, and especially on the west, the land becomes hilly and more
uneven, and the land is proportionably better. The farms in the middle of the
town, are by no means poor; but those in the skirts of the town are very
excellent indeed; and the land is equal to that in any town. The land is well
adapted to all kinds of grain, and the hilly parts to grass and pasturage; and
the town abounds with famous orchards, and all kinds of fruit, and much cider
is made in the place. The land is not very stony and rocky in general, except
it be some particular part of some of the hills. Of these none are famous or
worthy of particular notice, except one in the westerly part of the town,
called Wauhnoosnook Hill; this is about two miles in length, and a mile or more
from the meetinghouse in the nearest place: It is pretty high and steep: And
although there is some broken and unimproveable land upon it, yet there are
many very fine farms thereon. This hill is famous for affording vast quantities
of most excellent stone, of a grayish color, pretty free, and easily split and
wrought, and some have natural faces, sixteen, eighteen and twenty feet in
length. This store is perhaps inexhaustible. In the south part of the town
there is a very large body of plain land covered with pitch pine; and there is
considerable white pine within the town. But the main growth of wood consists
of oak of all kinds, chestnut in plenty, much walnut, elm, butternut, shagbark,
etc. etc.

The town is very well watered in every part, by numerous springs and rivulets.
There are two streams which claim a particular mention: One is Wauhnoosnook
Brook, so called from the hill of that name, as it originates at the foot of
this hill, at the north end, and runs all along on the east side of the hill,
and on the westerly side of the town, and finally falls into the river
Nashaway. The other is the north branch of the river Nashaway, which coming in
from Fitchburg, at the northwest angle of the town, runs about a mile east of
the meetinghouse, and at the southeast angle of this town passes into
Lancaster. There is some good interval land on this river, but in many places
the banks of it are high and very steep. There is but very little meadow land
in the town. On this river and the streams there are two grist mills, five saw
mills, one oil mill, and clothiers' works very excellent. There are only a part
of two ponds fall within the limits of this town, and these were mentioned in
giving an account of Lunenburg.

It has been mentioned before that the soil of this town is clayey. There are
indeed vast bodies of the best of clay in the town: And upwards of two hundred
thousands of bricks are made here in a year. These bricks are said to endure
the fire longer than any made in the county. The people of Leominster live
mostly by the cultivation of the earth; and their farms and buildings proclaim
their industry, and indicate a good degree of wealth. They have all the
mechanics and tradesmen in common with other places. And besides, the
manufacturing of combs is here established, in two or three places, and the
work is carried on to great perfection and profit. About twenty persons work,
more or less at this trade; about ten are constantly employed therein, and they
manufacture about six thousand dozen in a year. Mr. Jotham Johnson, a trader
here, employs five men in this work, who make twenty five hundred dozen per
annum. Among these, is one who makes ivory combs, equally good perhaps, as any
imported from any country. Here are several stores and shops filled with
European, East, and Westindia goods. There is much travel through this town,
from the north part of the county of Hampshire and of Worcester, by the way of
Westminster, and from Vermont State, and the western part of Newhampshire, by
the way of Fitchburg; these roads unite in the northwesterly part of
Leominster, and come to the meetinghouse, where they part again; one turns
nearly east, leading on through Harvard to Boston; the other runs south,
bearing a little to the east into Lancaster, and so on to Boston. The county
road from Leominster to Worcester runs southwesterly through Sterling.

Leominster is a growing, flourishing town; it stands about the middle of the
towns of the county in the proportion it pays to a state tax; and when the late
census was taken there were 166 dwel^ houses, and 1190 inhabitants in the place.

WESTERN.
THIS town was taken from Brookfield Brimfield and Palmer, and was incorporated
on the 16th of January 1741. In this place a congregational church was formed
in the year 1743, and on the last of January, 1744, the Rev. Isaac Jones was
ordained their first pastor. He died July, 1784, in the 67th year of his age,
and 41st of his ministry. Mr. Jones was succeeded in the sacred office by the
Rev. Stephen Baxter, who was separated hereunto March 9th, 1791.

Western is situated at the southwest angle of the county, and is bounded on
the north and east by Brookfield, on the south by Brimfield, and on the west by
Palmer: It ^s about seventy three miles from the statehouse in Boston to the
southwest, and from the courthouse in Worcester it is about twenty eight miles,
and on the post road from Boston to Springfield, although this road does not
pass through the center of the town, or by the meetinghouse. From Brookfield
this road enters Western on the northeast, about one hundred and twenty rods
from the River Quaboag on the south side thereof, and runs nearly parallel
therewith for about the space of two miles; then the road to Northampton parts
from this, taking a northwesterly direction across the abovenamed river. The
left hand, or post road, bears a southwestern course to Springfield. The town
does not lie in a square and regular form. The lands in general, are very
uneven: There are some s^ll meadows on the several brooks, and some good
interval lands on Quaboag River which runs through the town; also some small
swamps and mora^ses, but the principal part of Western is high land. The middle
o^ the town is broken and rough. A hill, by the name of Mark's Mountain, of
about two miles in ci^cumference, on its base, and terminating uneq^ally in
ragged cliffs, greatly injures the prosp^ct of the middle of the town. A bod^
of land in the northwest angle of the town, known by the n^me of Coy's Hill, is
most excellent for g^azing. ^^rt of this hill falls within the limits of
Brookfie^d, and over this hill passes the road to Northampton. On ^he west and
southwest, this town is separated from the towns of Ware and Palmer, by a chain
of rocky hills and mountains. The inhabitants in general, are farmers; and the
lands, though rather rough, produce large crops of Indian corn, rye, and oats;
and some considerable wheat is raised in the town: But much the greater part of
the land is best adapted to English grass and pasturage. The soil is propitious
to the cultivation of fruit trees of all kinds; and the height and uneven
surface of the lands; are a great security to the grain and fruit from frosts.
Western has its proportion of unimproveable lands; some of which are dry and
rocky; some almost entirely inaccessible, by reason of vast ledges of rocks;
yet almost all the unimproved and unimproveable lands are covered with wood and
timber. On the high lands grow chestnut, oak and walnut; and in the lower lands
grow ash, birch, maple, elm, pine, hemlock, etc. etc. Western is sufficiently
watered by springs, brooks and rivulets, which run about in the valleys among
the hills.

The river Quaboag, from Brookfield, enters this town on the northeast, and
passing through it about a mile west of the center, goes out at the southwest
angle, and falls into Chicabee. A great number of brooks and rivulets are
emptied into Quaboag River in its course through Western. Salmon were formerly
taken from this river within the town; but now their course is o^structed by
several dams which extend across it, for the accommodation of mills and other
water works: However, the river and other streams afford all the various kinds
of fish which are common to fresh water. About a mile from the center of the
town, are fixed on this river, two grist mills, one saw mill, one scythe mill,
one fulling mill, and one forge; and the town affords some ore for the supply
of the forge. Besides the manufactory of iron, there is no other which claims a
particular mention, except it be that of silk. Several gentlemen are turning
their attention to the cultivation of mulberry trees. Col. Joseph Jones, from
about thirty trees, has for three seasons past, fed upon an average about
30,000 worms; their produce has been between three and four pounds of raw silk
annually. And when manufactured, after making all deductions for labor and
trouble, has yielded a clear profit yearly, of sixty dollars, which is an
annuity of two dollars per tree. A sample of the sewing silk, manufactured by
Col. Jones, and presented to the writer, is equal to any imported.

There have been some vestiges of the aboriginals discovered on an extensive
hill in the easterly part of this town, which was taken from Brookfield. On
ploughing the ground a few years since, large beds of clamshells were
discovered under the soil, which appeared to be placed at equal distances from
each other; these, together with Indian utensils found there, prove this was a
place of their resort and dwelling.

This town is very flourishing, and is growing in number, and increasing in
wealth. When the census was taken two years ago, there were 124 dwelling
houses, and 900 inhabitants in the place.

DOUGLASS.
THIS was an original grant, and was prior to that of Sutton. It is about
seventy years since some families settled in the place. The first settlers came
from Sherburne, in the county of Middlesex, whence it was called Newsherburne,
until its incorporation, which was in the year 1746, when it received the name
of Douglass to perpetuate the name and deeds of William Douglass, M. D. of
Boston, originally from Scotland, educated there, a famous physician in his
day, and who also wrote a History of New England in two vol. 8vo. a proprietor,
and considerable benefactor.

The first person born here is yet living, almost seventy years old.

The lands in this place were not so pleasing and inviting as some others, and
were therefore but slowly settled. The lands were burnt over yearly in the
spring, for the purpose of turning cattle from the neighboring towns, to feed
thereon. Hereby the growth of timber was greatly injured, and the land became
hard to subdue. Hurtleberry and whitebush sprung up, together with laurel,
sweetfern and checkerberry, which nothing but the plough will destroy. For
thirty five years past the inhabitants have greatly increased, have prevented
the fires running, have cultivated the lands, erected decent buildings; and are
industrious and prosperous. When the general enume^ation of the Commonwealth
was made in the year 1791, there were in the town 165 dwelling houses, and 1080
inhabitants. This town is bounded on the north, one mile by Oxford, and five
miles by Sutton; on the east, by Uxbridge, six miles; on the south, by
Gloucester, in the State of Rhodeisland, seven miles; on the west, two miles,
by Thompson, in the State of Connecticut; two miles by a gore of land, and two
miles and an half by Oxford. It lies 47 miles from Boston, about southwest; and
about sixteen miles from the courthouse in Worcester, nearly south. The lands
of Douglass, in general, are better for the growing of Indian corn, rye, oats
and flax, than natural to grass. They are exceedingly adapted to the growth of
apple trees, and all the other kinds of fruit trees common in this part of the
country. The natural growth of wood in the town is, in the swamps and low
lands, cedar, spruce, etc. in some; in others, hemlock, white pine, ash, birch,
beech, hornbeam, and maple: On the uplands, walnut, gray, white and yellow oak,
chestnut, and chestnut oak, (its leaves like the chestnut, and bark like the oak)
maple, pine, elm, locusts, balm of Gilead, so called, etc. etc. and almost
every kind of tree, shrub, and bush, which is to be found in any of these
northern States. The town has greatly abounded with good timber, and in the
west part thereof there are almost four thousand acres of rocky woods; and in
the place, potash, hoops and barrels are made in plenty; some shingles are
manufactured here, and pine boards sawed (...) general face of the town is
uneven; hills a^ (...) interspersed; there are many steep, pine, (...) hills;
good building spots abound; and (...) hills descending every way; dry cellars,
a^ (...) on such spots, eighteen feet is deep enough (...) constant water for
wells, and that within t^ (...) of the top of the higher lands. The town (...)
ceedingly well watered: Rivulets and (...) every where abound; and the people
rea^ gr^ advantages indeed, by turning and spreading the water over their lands
at their pleasure. T^ brooks and streams run easterly, until they f^ to rivers
which go to the south.

In the southwest part of the town is W^ Pond, so called; it has a ^mall inl^t
at the north end, and an outle^ a^ the south end, ^n the State of Rhodeisl^ The
(...) two m^ in Douglass, (...) one (...) and is about three qua^ of a m^ in
width. Badluck Pond so called, in the border of rocky woods, in the westerly
part of the town, covers about one hundred and fifty ^res of ground. In this
pond great rocks appea^ above the water, ev^ (...) the midst of it. This is
supposed to contain much ore, and may be easily dra^ed. It has an inlet at the
south, and an outlet on the north, which passes into Mumford River. Manchaug
Pond, in the northwesterly part of the town, is about one mile long, and one
quarter of a mile wide in Douglass, the remainder of it lies in Sutton. This
has several inlets on the west and north; the outlet is on the east, runs in
Sutton, becomes a river, turns south and comes into Douglass, and finally
unites with Mumford River. Mumford River rises in rocky woods, increasing by
streams from the ponds and from springs, and runs east into Uxbridge. There is
a spring in rocky woods, a little southwest from Badluck Pond, which issues out
of an apparently dry hill, and forms a stream, which runs southeast, never dry,
and never known to freeze. This passes one rod and an half south of the great
road, and is greatly admired for its pleasantness and refreshing nature. The
soldiers in the late war, called it the White Oak Tavern. There is considerable
interval land on Mumford River; there are four hundred acres in one body, near
the head of it; further down there are diverse other pieces, some of them large:
Also, on this same river, there are works for making refined iron, near to
Uxbridge line, and a corn and saw mill, very profitable. There are four hills
in the town, large and noticeable. The first we shall mention is a little north
of the meetinghouse, large and considerable; originally well clothed with
timber, but now affords good tillage, mowing, and pasture land. On the west
side of this hill, at the bottom near a swamp, the Indians, in old time, had
their Wigwams and a sort, the remains of which are yet visible, and their tools
are still found in the fields. About forty rods north of this hill, lies
another hill, larger, but not cleared. Wallump Pond hill, near the pond of that
name, in the southwest part of the town, is large but not very high; this the
people are beginning to settle and improve. In the southeast part of the town
is situated Bald Hill, taking its name from the barrenness of its summit. This
hill is now become fruitful in corn, rye, etc.

We shall now give some account of the Ecclesiastical state of Douglass. The
congregational church here was gathered November 11th, 1747, and on the 16th of
December, the same year, the Rev. William Phipps was ordained their first
pastor. On the 10th of July, 1765, he was dismissed; he was succeeded in the
gospel ministry by the Rev. Isaac Stone, who was separated hereunto October
30th, 1771, and still continues with them in peace and harmony. Here are a
number of families of the anabaptist persuasion.

NEWBRAINTREE.
THE General Court of Massachusetts having granted six thousand acres of land
to certain persons of the ancient town of Braintree, in the county of Suffolk,
for services by them done to the public, it was called and known by the style
of Braintree Farms. This tract of land, together with a part of Brookfield, and
a part of Hardwick, was incorporated January 31st, 1751, and the name
Newbraintree was given to it. The people who first settled this territory took
early care for the support of the gospel, and the enjoyment of all the
instituted means of religion; they accordingly erected a house for the public
worship of God, and on the 18th of April, 1754, the church of Christ in this
place was imbodied, and the Rev. Benjamin Ruggles, their first minister, was
installed the same day. Mr. Ruggles had been, for a number of years before,
minister of the second parish in the town of Middleborough, in the county of
Plymouth. The Rev. Daniel Foster, the present pastor of the church and
congregation in Newbraintree, was ordained a colleague with Mr. Ruggles, on the
29th of Octobe^ ^ ^78. The Rev. Mr. Ruggles died suddenly, of an epilepsy, or
apoplexy, Lord's day morning, May 12th, 1782, in the 82d year of his age, and
the 62d of his public ministry. There is but one religious society in the
town, nor any sectaries excepting only two families of anabaptists. The first
meetinghouse ever built here is now standing, and on a beautiful eminence in
the center of the town, from whence there is a very extensive prospect. This
house was a few years since repaired, and is now very decent and commodious.
The people in this place are particularly attentive to the education of their
children and youth: They have eight reputable school houses and in the winter
season, as many instructors; two Latin grammar masters; and in the summer, they
have generally two or three masters, and as many mistresses: And they expend
more annually in supporting schools, than in supporting their public teacher
of piety, religion and morality, though he is honorably maintained.

We shall now present a Geographical Description of Newbraintree.

This town contains about 13000 acres of land, and is bounded south, on
Brookfield; west, by Ware River, which separates it from Hardwick; north, on
the town of Bar; and east, on the towns of Oakham and Spencer: It lays much
in a triangular form.

The town is neither remarkably hilly nor level; but agreeably interspersed
with moderate hills and valleys. There are two hills of name and note; one on
the westerly side of the town, and is steep, with large ledges of rocks on the
east side of it, called Rattle Snakes' Rocks, from the great number of those
venomous serpents, which, in the infancy of the town, inhabited them; but their
race is now almost extinct. The other is situated in the southeasterly part of
the town, and is called Mohawk Hill. On the westerly side of the town, is what
is commonly called a plain, though not very level; its natural growth of wood
is pitch pine; and it is excellent for grain, and good roads. The soil of the
town is in general rocky, moist, loamy and warm, and genial to wheat, rye,
barley, oats, Indian corn, peace, flax, hemp, etc. etc. It is most excellent for
orcharding; and, for its bigness, rather exceeds, perhaps, any other town in
the county in fine grazing lands, as is evinced by the annual produce of the
dairy and of beef. Before the settlement of this place, the fires made in the
woods, had destroyed almost the whole growth of timber; and it was feared there
would be a scarcity; but by the care and prudence of the inhabitants there
have, within a few years, sprung up fine groves of wood, and now there is a
plenty. The common timber upon the upland, or hilly parts, is oak, walnut and
chestnut; in the low lands, swamps and marshes, there is maple, ash, birch,
hornbeam and some spruce and hacma^ack.

Newbraintree is very finely watered by rivers, brooks, rivulets and springs.
Ware River runs along on the west side of the town, and is the boundary between
Hardwick and this place. On the westerly side of the town there is also a large
brook, called Meminimisset Brook, which is ^ormed entirely by springs from the
adjacent hills, and running north empties itself into Ware River. On this brook
there is an extensive and luxuriant meadow of several hundreds of acres, called
Meminimisset, the name given to it by the Indians when a hideous swamp: This
was the head quarters, and the chief place of rendezvous of the savages, at the
time when Brookfield was destroyed; and near which place eight brave men were
killed, and three mortally wounded by the Indians, August 2d, 1675, as has been
more particularly related in the account of Brookfield: And hither Mrs.
Rowlandson was carried captive, who was taken by the enemy at Lancaster,
February 10th, 1676, and here she buried her wounded child, on the 18th of that
month. See this account as related under the head of Lancaster.


This meadow beforementioned produces exceeding great crops of most excellent
hay. At the easterly part of the town lie two very considerable tracts of
meadow land, through which run two brooks which arise from springs; these
brooks, one of which carries a corn mill, after passing said meadows, and
running near the south line of the town, unite, and then carry a saw mill: This
stream then runs into the north part of Brookfield, and after several windings
and meanderings, and carrying two more mills, it again visits the south part of
this town, and runs through another large tract of excellent meadow, called
Ditch Meadow, and carrying another corn mill in Newbraintree, it leaves the
town, and falls into a large pond in the west parish in Brookfield, called
Wickoboaug Pond. The air of this town is accounted good and salubrious, and the
people prosper, flourish and increase. Excepting a few of the usual mechanics,
and one or two traders in foreign goods, the people are farmers, and have the
reputation of being good husbandmen, frugal and industrious, and they live much
independent. According to the late enumeration the number of souls amounted to
940; and their houses are in general neat and commodious. This town is sixty
six miles from Boston, a little to the south of west; and it is nineteen miles
from the courthouse in Worcester, a very little to the north of west. There is
considerable travel through the place. A road from Connecticut river, through
Hardwick, passes through Newbraintree and on to Rutland, and so on to Boston. A
road also from the northward leads through this town to Brookfield, and so on
to the southward.

SPENCER.
THE whole of this town was included in the original grant of Leicester. It was
made a parish or precinct early in the year 1744, and was called the westerly
parish of Leicester, until its incorporation on the 3d of April, 1753, when the
name of Spencer was given to it. In this place a church was gathered May 17th,
1744; and over the flock of God in this place the Rev. Joshua Eaton was
ordained November 7th, 1744, who continued in the work of the gospel ministry
until April 2d, 1772, when he died in the 28th year of his pastorate. Mr. Eaton
first turned his attention to the law, and was, for several years, an able and
skilful attorney in the county of Worcester, but chose at length to forsake
that gainful employment, for the more high and honorable one of serving God in
the gospel of his Son. He made a conspicuous figure in the sacred office. The
Rev. Joseph Pope succeeded Mr. Eaton, as an ambassador of Jesus Christ, being
consecrated unto this holy calling October 20th, 1773, and still continues
therein.

Spencer is said to be eight miles in length, and four miles in breadth, on a
straight line. The town is considerably uneven, abounding in hills and valleys,
although there are no hills very high or large, or called by any particular
names. It is an exceeding fertile township, and the inhabitants are
industrious, prosperous and wealthy. It is become more numerous and opulent
than the town from whence it was taken, as it is larger in lands, because
several years after the incorporation of Spencer, the northwesterly part of
Leicester was with the southerly part of Rutland, set off to form the town of
Paxton.

This town is watered by many excellent perennial streams which run through the
several parts of it, some of which are sufficient to carry mills, but none of
them are large. There are three in the northerly part; one proceeds from a
large and fine pond, which lays partly in Spencer and partly in Rutland, called
Browning's Pond: Its course, for several miles, is southerly. Another to the
eastward of it, has its source in Rutland, and runs for some miles in the same
direction with the former. A third issues from a pond in the north part of
Leicester; and running a westerly course for a considerable space, then unites
with the second; after this junction, turning southwest, they fall in with the
first mentioned stream. The general course of these waters still being
southwesterly, they are emptied into Podunk Pond, so called, in Brookfield;
whence issues a river which runs into Chicabee River, which falls into
Connecticut river, in the north part of Springfield. There are also in the
south part of this town, two streams, one of which uniting with the streams
mentioned above, falls into Connecticut river; the other running southerly,
falls in with French River, which is emptied into the sea at Newlondon, in the
southeast angle of the State of Connecticut. All these streams have one or more
mills standing on them. There are likewise in Spencer, two clothiers' works,
where much business is performed to great public advantage; also, there are
two potash and pearlash works.

The growth of wood in the town is of the usual various sorts. On the high
lands, oak, walnut and chestnut are the chief. The swamps are covered generally
with maple, birch and elm. In the infancy of the town, there was a large
quantity of excellent pine timber, but this is mainly worked up.

The number of the people in Spencer, according to the late census, was
computed at 1322, and the number of houses was 192.

Spencer lies about eleven miles southwesterly from Worcester, on the post road
to Springfield, and fifty eight miles from Boston to the southwest.

Spencer is bounded on the north, by Paxton; on the east, by Leicester; on the
south, by Charlton; and on the west, by Brookfield.

PETERSHAM.
THIS was an original grant made by the General Court, in the close of the year
1732, or beginning of 1733, to John Bennett, Jeremiah Perley, and others, as a
compensation for services performed by them in the Indian wars, under a Capt.
John White of Lancaster. The first meeting of the grantees was held on the 10th
of May, 1733. Some time after the grant was made, to quiet the Indians who
claimed the soil, the proprietors made them a satisfactory consideration
therefore. It is rather more than six miles square. It had been a seat for
Indians, and was called many years by its Indian name, which was Nichewaug; and
in the south part of the town lies Nichewaug Hill, so called by the natives,
whereon, as in some other parts of the town, they had formerly planted fields
of Indian corn, of which there remained evident traces when the first English
settlers began there.

The original proprietors being some of them wealthy and enterprizing, they
encouraged and drove on the settlement of this then infant plantation, although
there were no settled towns nearer than Lancaster on the east, and Rutland to
the southeast, and Brookfield to the south, except a few new settlers in
Lambstown, now Hardwick. But the land being excellent, diverse persons soon
began to work upon lots; the proprietors built a meetinghouse, and so early as
the year 1738, they contracted with and settled a minister for the inhabitants,
and who was supported by them until its incorporation. Although the prospects
from the soil were very promising, and settlers moved in fast, yet they
labored under many and exceeding great disadvantages, being then so remote
from any white people, from whom they could procure the necessaries of life, or
derive any aid and support. While in its infancy, and struggling for life, so
early as 1744, a French war broke out, and the Indians, being always in the
interest of the French, they became hostile, and began to commit depredations
in various parts of the land, which occasioned the few inhabitants great fear,
terror and danger, obliging them to build forts in different parts of the town,
round certain houses, into each of which a number of families moved for safety
and defense, and soldiers were stationed there as a guard to the inhabitants,
and to reconnoitre the country. The people used to labor on their lands, in
small parties, changing works with one another, having their guns by them, and
these also they were, for a long time, obliged to carry with them whenever they
went to the house of God for religious worship, and also to place sentinels at
the doors. But although they were often alarmed, yet no white person was ever
known to be killed in the place, When peace was settled between England and
France, and danger and fear from the Indians ceased, the settlement of the
plantation went on very rapidly, and the people were become so numerous and
able, as that the place was incorporated with all town privileges April 20th,
1754, and received the name of Petersham. The church of Christ in this place
was gathered, and their first minister, the Rev. Aaron Whitney, was ordained
December, 1738, who continued until September 8th, 1779, when he died in the
66th year of his age, and the 41st of his ministry. The year following, October
25th, 1780, the Rev. Solomon Reed was solemnly separated unto that office and
work, and who still continues therein. Here also is a society of baptists, who
have for their teacher Mr. John Sellon.

The town of Petersham has been one of the most prosperous and flourishing in
the county, if not in the Commonwealth. Although the grant of the township was
subsequent to the formation of the county, yet it has so flourished and
increased that it is become one of the foremost towns in the county for wealth
and number. There are but seven towns who pay more to a State tax; it contains
about 1520 souls, according to the late census. The natural situation of the
town is exceedingly beautiful; it is very high, but not hilly and uneven: The
body of the town lies upon the highest land in it, which is a large long flat
hill, upon the highest part of which the great road runs from the south to the
north, eight rods wide, and set with trees on both sides, and for three or four
miles in length affords a most commanding prospect, not only of the whole town,
but of all the adjacent towns; the houses are large and well finished, standing
on either side of the street, from whence the land falls each way east and
west, about a mile and an half to a stream, and then rises again, especially to
the east, where it is fully settled; is in clear view on the main street, and
appears like another town. Here they have lately erected a large and elegant
meetinghouse, standing on a most conspicuous situation, so as to be seen from
diverse of the contiguous towns; soon after it was built, Mr. Eleazar Bradshaw,
now of Brookfield, made them a present of a large bell, the weight whereof is
913 lb, and the cost thereof was 96 l. 6 s. 8 d. So noble and public spirited
a deed, ought to be perpetuated for the honor of the donor, and to stimulate
others to like generous acts.

This town is thought by some to be the pleasantest, for an inland town, of any
in the State, affording to the eye, a general, extensive, and agreeably
variegated prospect.

The land in this place is exceedingly favorable to the growth of all kinds of
fruit trees, being high and warm; and here are large and excellent orchards,
and much cider is made here, beyond what the inhabitants consume; but they find
a ready market for the surplus in the newer settlements. Having mentioned their
fine orchards, I would duly notice one very remarkable natural curiosity
relative to this subject. There is now growing in an orchard, lately belonging
to my honored father, the Rev. Aaron Whitney, deceased, an appletree, very
singular with respect to its fruit. The apples are fair and when fully ripe of
a yellow color, but evidently of different tastes, sour and sweet. The part
which is sour is not very tart, nor the other very sweet. Two apples, growing
side by side, on the same limb, will be of these different tastes, the one all
sour, and the other all sweet: And which is more remarkable, the same apple
will be sour on one side, end, or part, and the other sweet; and that not in
any order or uniformity; nor is there any difference in the appearance of the
one part from the other. And as to the quantity, some have more of the acid,
and less of the sweet, and so vice versa. Neither are the apples so different
in their tastes, peculiar to any particular branches, but are found
promiscuously on any and every branch of the tree. The tree stands almost in
the midst of a large orchard in a rich and strong soil, and was trans^anted
there about fifty years ago. There is no appearance of the trunk, or any of the
branches having been ingrafted or inoculated. It was a number of years after it
had borne fruit, before these different tastes were noticed; but since they
were first discovered, which is upwards of thirty years, there has been
constantly the same variety observed in the taste of the fruit of this tree.
For the truth of the above account, an appeal may be made to many persons of
distinction, and of nice tastes, who have traveled a great distance to view
the tree and taste the fruit; but to investigate the cause of an effect so much
out of the common course of nature, must, I think, be attended with difficulty.
The only solution I can conceive is, that the corcula, or hearts of two seeds,
the one from a sour, and the other from a sweet apple, might so incorporate in
the ground, as to produce but one plant, or that farina from blossoms of those
opposite qualities, might pass into, and impregnate the same seed. But leaving
this to the discussion of naturalists, I proceed with our description of
Petersham.

The soil is rich and fertile, and the lands bear all kinds of grain, but most
natural to grass and pasturage, and from the appearance and face of the town,
we must judge the inhabitants to be industrious and wealthy, who subsist mainly
by the cultivation of the earth. Though the town lies very high, yet the land
is not dry, but stony and moist, abounding with springs and brooks of water;
there are, however, but two noticeable streams: Swift River, which rises from
springs in Gerry, runs to the southwest, through the easterly and southerly
part of Petersham, into the northwest part of Hardwick.

West Brook, a considerable stream, rises in the northwesterly part of the
town, and runs through all the west side of it, and then enters Greenwich, in
the county of Hampshire. On each of these there are both corn and saw mills,
and clothiers' works; and by the sides of both there are considerable bodies of
good meadow land. Here are works for making pot and pearl ash, where much
business is profitably carried on, and many persons employed. On the high lands
the growth of wood is oak, more chestnut, and a great deal of walnut of later
years. In the swamps and low lands, there is birch, beech, maple, ash, elm, and
hemlock.

This town is situated sixty six miles from Boston, nearly west, and about
twenty eight miles from the courthouse in Worcester to the northwest, and is
bounded on the north, by Athol; on the east, by Gerry and Bar; on the south,
by Bar and Hardwick; and on the west, by Greenwich and Newsalem, in the
county of Hampshire.

CHARLTON.
THIS town was taken wholly from Oxford, and was the westerly part thereof: It
was incorporated November 2d, 1754, and then received its present name.

As much of the land in Charlton lies in the hands of the original proprietors,
its settlement was greatly retarded for many years. However, in April, 1761,
the congregational church here was imbodied, and the Rev. Caleb Curtis was
solemnly ordained to the work of the gospel ministry in this place, on the 15th
of October, 1761. He continued their pastor fifteen years, and was dismissed
from his office by a mutual council, October 29th, 1776. The people remained
destitute of a sett^d minister upwards of six years, until January 8th, 1783,
when the Rev. Archibald Campbell was installed their pastor. This Mr. Campbell
was ordained pastor of the church and congregation in Easton, in the county of
Bristol, on the 17th of August, 1763, where he continued nineteen years, being
dismissed from his pastoral relation to that people, August 11th, 1782. Mr.
Campbell continued in the pastoral office in Charlton, until April 9th, 1793,
when he was dismissed by council, at his special request.

There is a large anabaptist church and society in this town, but at present
they are destitute of a settled minister, as well as the congregational church
and society.

We proceed to a Topographical Description of Charlton.

This town was not in high repute at first, and was thought by some to be
hardly worth settling upon: As it was very rough in its natural state, and hard
to subdue. But such land is almost always found to be strong and to wear well.
This being the case with Charlton, from small beginnings and an inconsiderable
figure, it has risen up, in the space of thirty or forty years, to renown among
the towns of the county. It is computed to be nearly seven miles square, being
much larger in extent than Oxford from whence it was taken, and in general a
better tract of land. The people are become very numerous, there being 1965
souls in the place when the census was taken in the year 1791, which is more by
several hundreds than any town in the county, except Brookfield, Sutton and
Worcester, and it is become exceedingly wealthy, as in the last State tax there
were but six towns which paid more. There are 300 dwelling houses in the town.
The people subsist chiefly by the cultivation of the earth; and they have great
encouragement to labor, for the soil is strong and rich, and the lands are
fertile and very productive: Here they raise grain of all kinds in plenty; beef
and pork are fatted; butter and cheese are made in quantities equal to, if not
surpassing any other town in the county. The lands are well and naturally
adapted to orcharding and fruit of all kinds. The hills are moist and springy;
the hills and valleys are well proportioned and agreeably interspersed. The
town is well watered by springs, brooks and rivulets, none of which claim
particular mention: But there is one large river in the western part of the
town, near to Sturbridge, which runs from the north to the south, and is called
Quinebaug. This river is almost an inconceivable advantage, not to Charlton
only, but to many adjacent towns, by supplying great plenty of water for all
the mills and water works in the driest seasons. On this river, within the
limits of Charlton, there are some rich interval, and good meadow lands.

There are several hills in this town worthy of particular mention; one by the
name of Ponnakin. Another called Mashymuggett; this is high, for on its summit
buildings in about twelve adjacent towns may be discerned. This hill is
situated about three quarters of a mile from the congregational meetinghouse.
There is a third, known by the name of Blood's Hill. The fourth and last we
shall mention, is called Craige's Hill.

There are no ponds in the town worthy of notice, nor mines or minerals as yet
discovered.

The wood and timber which grow in Charlton is white, black, and red oak, and
walnut and chestnut in great plenty; some white pine, and some pitch pine: In
the low lands there is ash, birch, maple, etc. etc.

In Charlton there are a few dealers in European and India goods, as is usual
in country towns; and they have also all the common tradesmen and mechanics.
But there are two tanners in the town to be noticed, who carry on their
business to a very considerable degree, and in the most advantageous manner,
viz. Capt. Israel Waters, and Mr. Asa Corben; and especially the former, in the
northerly part, who carries on his work to great perfection. He has an
excellent bark mill, carried by water, and upon a new construction, whereby he
grinds all his bark. On the same stream, a little below, there is a gin still,
a brewery, malt house and corn mill, under the same roof, the property of Mr.
Eli Wheelock, who erected said works in the year 1792, and where he carries on
each branch of business very largely to his own and the public interest. On
the same stream there are several grist and saw mills, and other water works,
and most of the mechanics live in this north part of the town. There are also
a number of pot and pearl ash works in different parts of the town, where large
quantities of pot and pearl as^ ^ally made and exported. Charlton (...)
respects, one of the foremost towns in the (...). It is situated southwest from
Boston (...) the distance of sixty miles; and from W^ courthouse it is fifteen
miles, a little to the southwest. It is bounded north, by Spencer; east by
Oxford; south, by Dudley; and west, by (...) bridge.

WESTMINSTER.
THIS must be "the south town laid out to the Narraganset soldiers," Having
mentioned this grant, it is fitting to give a history of the whole matter in
brief. In the year 1728, application was made to the General Court for a reward
for services done in the Narraganset war, and the Court immed^ly granted two
townships of six miles square. But notice was given (...) who did service in
said war, or the legal heirs of such as were deceased* to ^ng in a list of
their names at the next session of the Court; when (...) ^und^d and forty
appeared, and were approved as legal claimants. Being so numerous, two
townships were judged inadequate; and upon further application, the Court
granted five townships more in 1732, assigning one hundred and twenty
proprietors to each, on condition, that sixty families be settled in each
place, with a minister, in the space of seven years from the date of the grant,
res^v^ng ^n each, one right for the first minister, one for the ministry, and
one for the school; the government to be at the expense of laying ou^ the
townships.

The whole society of petitioners, or claiman's, met at Boston on the common,
June, 1732, and, dividing themselves into seven classes, agreed to draw lots
for the townships. A committee of the General Court laid out the townships, and
numbered them. No. 1. was located back of Saco and Scarborough. No. 2, north of
Warchusett hill No. 3, at Souhegan, west; N^ (...) A^^riscogan. No. 5, at
Souhegan, east. No 6, west of No. 2, and No, 7. was n^ then located.


as expressed in the act for erecting the county of Worcester. It was granted
in the year 1728, as a reward to a number of people who did service in what was
called the Narraganset, or King Philip's war, or to their heirs, and was styled
Narraganset, No. 2, until its incorporation, which was on the 20th of October,
1759, when the name of Westminster was given to it.

The first meeting of the proprietors of this grant (who consisted chiefly of
the inhabitants of Cambridge, Charlestown, Watertown, Weston, Sudbury, Newton,
Medford, Malden and Reading) was held December 3d, 1733, when all officers were
chosen necessary to manage the affairs of the proprietors. The first committee
of the proprietors of Narraganset No. 2, were John Cutting, James Lowden, and
Joseph Bowman. From this time, to the year 1737, little was done to forward the
settlement of the place. In March this year, Capt. Fairbanks Moor moved his
family into it. He was the first planter. In June, Deacon Joseph Holden moved
his family into the place. These two families contained fifteen souls. It being
an exposed plantation, settlers moved in but slowly. In the year 1739, the
proprietors erected a decent meetinghouse, which was dedicated at a
proprietors' meeting, June 6, 1739. The few settlers were desirous of, and
forward for settling a minister; accordingly, on the 4th of August, 1742, they
made choice of Mr. Elisha Marsh, in which the proprietors concurred. The church
of Christ in this place was formed, and the Rev. Elisha Marsh was ordained
their first minister October 20th, 1742. Mr. Marsh continued with them but a
few years. An unhappy controversy arising between him and the people, he was
dismissed from his pastoral office, 1757. Mr. Marsh was afterward Judge of the
Court of Common Pleas, in the county of Cheshire, in the State of Newhampshire;
and died but a few years since, at Lancaster, being on a journey.

The town remained in a broken state until October 16th, 1765, when the Rev.
Asaph Rice was consecrated pastor, the second in succession, of the church and
congregation here, and still continues in that office; and in peace and love
with his people.

Previously to his settlement in Westminster, Mr. Rice had been a missionary
among the Indians.

At the time of Mr. Marsh's ordination, the place was in its infancy, few in
number, struggling for life, and exposed to Indian depredations, and its
population went on slowly. About the year 1743, the General Court granted 400
l. to fortify the place, with which ten forts were erected, and soldiers
stationed there for the defense of the inhabitants. In 1746, some of the people
of the place were put under pay, as a town scout. From 1744, to the close of
the year 1748, the settlers met with great discouragements, and endured severe
trials, although no person in the place was ever cut off by the enemy.

After that period, the people increased, and the place flourished exceedingly,
so that in the space of half a century, notwithstanding their dangers,
distresses and difficulties, and the smallness of their first number, only
fifteeen souls, they have spread and extended their branches, and covered the
town, and are become a great people, as at this day; having, when the census
was taken in 1791, 177 dwelling houses, and 1176 inhabitants. The original
grant was six miles square; however, the measure was rather large, for by
actual survey, including ponds, rivers, etc. it contained 27000 acres; but of
late, 7000 acres of land, with the inhabitants thereof, were set off to aid in
forming the town of Gardner, to the northwest. This town is still large, and is
bounded on the west and the northwest by Gardner, on the north by Ashburnham;
on the northeast by Fitchburg; on the east, by some farms not belonging to any
town; on the south by Princeton; and on the southwest, by Hubbardston.

Westminster is situated on the height of land between the rivers Merrimack and
Connecticut, having streams arising in the town, and running into both. The
town is interspersed with hills and valleys; and with springs, brooks and
rivulets, very convenient for watering the land, and for carrying of mills. The
northwesterly part of Watchusett hill falls within the limits of this town. And
what is called the middle of the place, or center of the town, is a large and
high hill, the top of which is nearly level; this is a square of six acres,
left by the proprietors, as a convenient place for a training field, and for
the meetinghouse. A little north of the center of this square stands their new,
large and elegant meetinghouse, directly in front of which passes the great
road from Connecticut River to Boston. At the southeast angle of this square
stands an elegant house belonging to the Hon. Judge Gill; on the westerly side
of the square stands the minister's house. On the sides of this square are
shops well stored with English and Westindia goods. In the town they have all
the usual tradesmen and mechanics. Here also are three grist mills, three saw
mills, one oil mill, one fulling mill, one clothiers' works, and one trip
hammer; also works for cutting nails, and works for the manufacture of iron are
now erecting. The soil of this town is strong, rich and fertile; the high lands
are well stored with stones, suitable and sufficient for walling in the farms,
and are good for orcharding, and almost all kinds of fruit. Here are lands for
the various purposes of mowing, ploughing and pasturing. And the town has been,
and still is well furnished with wood. The high lands have all sorts of oak,
some chestnut, some walnut, which is increasing; they have had great plenty of
white p^ne, which is chiefly cut off; some yellow and pitch pine: The low lands
are stored with ash, b^ech birch, maple, and hemlock.

There are four ponds within the town, one called Watchusett Pond, lies at the
foot of that hill, on the northerly side. The line of the town crosses this
pond, leaving part thereof in Princeton; this is of considerable bigness, and
well replenished with fresh water fish. A stream issues from the northwesterly
end of this pond, and runs northerly through the easterly part of Westminster,
receiving several streams in its course; and leaving the town it runs in a
northeasterly direction into Fitchburgh, forming a considerable branch of the
Nashaway, or Lancaster River. Another very small stream runs at the northeast
corner of the pond, and running southeasterly falls into a stream, rising out
of a large body of meadow, and continuing its course, empties into Stillwater
River in Sterling. There is a stream arising in another body of meadow land,
which falls into this pond, on its southwesterly side. This pond is fed and
supplied chiefly, perhaps wholly, by springs and rivulets issuing from the
great hill Watchusett. There is another large pond, near the center of the
town, in front of the hill, on which the meetinghouse stands; this is called
Long Pond, being one mile and twelve rods in length, and about half as much in
width. This being a very rocky pond, is not well furnished with fish. No
constant stream empties into this pond: A small stream issues from the
southeasterly corner of it, and running easterly, unites with the stream which
runs out of Watchusett Pond. There is a small pond, in the easterly part of the
town, called Grassy (...) into which there is no visible inlet: There is a
small outlet, which, running southerly, falls also into that which comes from
Watchusett Pond. The fourth pond is in the northern border of the town: No
stream of any consequence runs into it; a small one issues from it, and running
south, falls into a large stream, which rises in Westminster, and running
easterly, is known by the name of North River; and continuing an eastern
direction, unites with the stream which comes from Watchusett Pond. There is
another stream, called the Most Northerly River, which rises in Ashburnham, and
running through the northerly part of Westminster, receives various brooks and
rivulets in Westminster, and helps to form the northerly branch of the river
Nashaway. The last stream which deserves our notice, is called Otter River,
which issuing from a swamp or low land in Hubbardston, runs northerly, through
the westerly part of Westminster, into Gardner, receiving several streams in
its way, then turning, runs westerly through the north part of Templeton,
Athol, Warwick, and the southerly part of Northfield, and falls into
Connecticut River. This stream unites with Miller's River in Winchendon, as may
be seen more particularly in the description of Templeton.

Westminster is large, and become populous, and is continually increasing in
number and wealth. It is situated about fifty five miles from Boston, a little
to the north of west, and about twenty two miles from the courthouse in
Worcester, nearly north.

PRINCETON.
ON the 20th of October, 1759, the General Court of Massachusetts passed an act
for incorporating the east wing, so called, of Rutland, together with sundry
farms, and some public lands, contiguous thereto; and gave the place the name
of Princeton, to perpetuate the name and memory of the late Rev. Thomas Prince,
colleague pastor of the old south church in Boston, and a large proprietor of
this tract of land, whose daughter and only surviving child the Hon. Judge Gill
married for his first wife.

The town contained about 19000 acres: And at the time of its incorporation
there were about twenty families in the place. It was in the month of May, i^
the year 1751, when Mr. Robert Keys, now living, removed with his family from
Shrewsbury, and fixed down near the foot of Watchusett hill, on the east side,
being the fourth family which settled in the place. Upon the 14th of April,
1755, a child of his, named Lucy, aged four years and eight months, attempting,
as was supposed, to follow her sisters, who had gone to Watchusett Pond, about
a mile distant, and having nothing but marked trees to guide her, wandered out
of her way in the woods, and was never heard of afterward. The people for
nearly thirty miles round collected immediately, and in companies traversed the
woods, day after day and week after week, searching for her, but never made the
least discovery. Many journeys were taken by the father, in consequence of
reports, but all in vain. Various were, and have been the conjectures of people
respecting the fate of this child. Diverse concurring circumstances render the
following most probable, that she was taken by the Indians, and carried into
their country, and soon forgot her relations, lost her native language, and
became as one of the aborigines.

Let us return to Princeton. The people who had settled in this town labored
at first under very great difficulties, by reason of the mountainous, rocky,
and naturally moist state of their lands, from want of passable roads, and by
reason of the prodigious quantities of heavy timber with which the ground was
covered, (sure indications of a rich and fertile soil,) however, they attended
to their roads, and increased in number, and on the 30th of June, 1762, raised
the frame of their present meetinghouse, hired preaching, and were attentive to
their religious interests.

On the 12th of August, 1764, the church of Christ was imbodied in this town,
and after various fruitless attempts to settle a minister, the Rev. Timothy
Fuller was ordained their first pastor on the 9th of September, 1767. In about
eight years a general disaffection to Mr. Fuller took place, which ended in a
dissolution of the pastoral relation between him and the people of Princeton on
the 19th of April, 1776. Various attempts for a resettlement of the gospel
ministry were unsuccessful, until the 28th of June, 1786, when the Rev. Thomas
Crafts was ordained pastor of the church and flock of God in this place. In the
space of about three years, Mr. Crafts's health failed, and for nearly two
years he was unable to preach, when all hope of his being recovered, so as to
carry on the work of the sacred ministry being cut off, the pastoral relation
between him and his people was amicably dissolved at his special request, on
the 14th of March, 1791. The people remain without a settled minister.

In Princeton they have a very handsome social library established, of the
value of upwards of 70 l. ten pounds whereof were given by the Hon. Judge Gill.

In a little more than thirty years from its incorporation, Princeton is become
very considerable among the towns of the county. It has surprisingly increased
in number and wealth. When the census was taken in 1791, there were 144
dwelling houses, and 1016 inhabitants in the place. The soil being excellent,
people had every encouragement from that consideration, to settle and cultivate
the lands; and their farms are mostly large and good. The land is naturally
moist and springy, hilly and rocky, exceedingly well adapted to pasturage, and
the growth of English grass: Hence the finest of beef is fatted here, and vast
quantities of butter and cheese are produced in the town: Some parts of the
place afford grain in plenty; and from the appearance of their buildings and
farms, we must judge the people are very industrious. Many of their houses are
large and elegant.

This leads to a particular mention, that in this town is the country seat of
the Hon. Moses Gill, Esquire who has been from the year 1775 one of the Judges of
the Court of Common Pleas for the county of Worcester, and for several years a
Counselor of this Commonwealth. His noble and elegant seat is about one mile
and a quarter from the meetinghouse, to the south. The farm contains upwards of
3000 acres. The county road from Princeton to Worcester passes through it, in
front of the house, which faces to the west. The buildings stand upon ^e
highest land of the whole farm; but it i^ level round about them for many rods,
and then there is a very gradual descent. The lands on which these buildings
stand, are elevated between 1200 and 1300 feet above the level of the sea, as
the Hon. James Winthrop, Esquire informs me. The mansion house is large, being
fifty by fifty feet, with four stacks of chimnies: The farm house is forty feet
by thirty six: In a line with this stand the coach and chaise house fifty feet
by thirty six: This is joined to the barn by a shed seventy feet in length --
the barn is two hundred feet by thirty two. Very elegant fences are erected
around the mansion house, the outhouses, and the garden.

The prospect from this seat is extensive and grand, taking in an horizon to
the east, of seventy miles at least. The blue hills in Milton, are discernable
with the naked eye, from the windows of this superb edifice, distant not less
than sixty miles; as also the waters in the harbor of Boston, at certain
seasons of the year. When we view this seat, these buildings, and this farm of
so many hundred acres, now under a high degree of profitable cultivation, and
are told that in the year 1766 it was a perfect wilderness, we are struck with
wonder, admiration and astonishment. The honorable proprietor hereof must have
great satisfaction in contemplating these improvements, so extensive, made
under his direction, and I may add, by his own active industry. (...) is a
gentleman of singular vivacity and activity, and indefatigable in his
endeavors to bring forward the cultivation of his lands; of great and
essential service, by his example, in the employment he finds for so many
persons, and in all his attempts to serve the interests of the place where he
dwells, and in his acts of private munificence, and public generosity, and
deserves great respect and esteem, not only from individuals, but from the town
and country he has so greatly benefited, and especially by the ways in which he
makes use of that vast estate wherewith a kind Providence has blessed him. Upon
the whole, this seat of Judge Gill, all the agreeable circumstances respecting
it being attentively considered, is not paralleled by any in the New England
States; perhaps not by any on this side the Delaware.

Return we to our more general description of Princeton. Having said the soil
is rich, strong, and very productive; it is to be added, the growth of wood is
oak of the various kinds, chestnut, white ash, beech, black birch, and maple;
and near the Watchusett hills, some butternut is to be seen, as also some
walnut, which will undoubtedly increase and spread.

The hills of Princeton merit a particular description; they are three. First,
Pine Hill, situated about two miles from the center of the town, contains
perhaps about thirty acres, and is mostly unimproveable; but its bowels afford
a very great quantity of most excellent stones for buildings, etc.

The second, is Little Watchusett Hill, this is situated near the center of the
town, perhaps half a mile distant, to the northward. This contains 237 acres,
chiefly pasturing; though some parts of it, being ledgy and mountainous, are
unimproveable.

The third, is the Great Watchusett Hill, or Mountain. This is situated about
two miles from Princeton meetinghouse, to the north; the northwesterly part
hereof falls within the limits of Westminster. This is an exceedingly high
mountain, and is some of the first land discovered by people on board vessels
at sea, when making for any of the sea ports in Massachusetts; and it is to be
seen from the higher lands, in a greater part of the towns in the Commonwealth,
especially in those between the sea and Connecticut river. It contains seven or
eight hundred acres; about four hundred acres of which being the summit, and
being province land, were given to the Rev. Mr. Fuller, by the General Court,
in consideration that (...) was the first minister, and settled upon a small
salary, in the infancy of the town. This was no trifling gift; for although one
hundred acres of it be worth little or nothing, yet most of the remaining ^h^e
hundred acres will make considerable p^st^ ^and, and some parts very good. The
highest part of the mountain is a flat rock, or a ledge of rocks, for some rods
round, and there is a small pond of water generally upon the top of it, of two
or three rods square; and where there is any earth, it is covered with
blueberry bushes for acres round; and as you descend the hill, there are very
low and small trees, with flat tops, like those on (...) sea shore, occasioned
no doubt, in part, by the state of the air; for it is several degrees ^older,
at any time, on the top than at the bottom of the mountain; the further you
descend, the taller are the trees, until they become of the common size. Upon
the southerly side of this hill it may be ascended to the very top with horses,
but upon the east, north and northwest, it is very st^ep, broken and ledgy; and
many acres utterly unimproveable any way at present. Perhaps its bowels may
contain very valuable hid treasure, which in some future period may be
descried. There are very considerable improvements upon some sides of this hill
near the bottom of it, and some very valuable lands yet uncultivated. The
circumference of this monstrous mass is about three miles, and its height is
3012 feet above the level of the sea, as was sound by the Hon. John Winthrop,
Esquire L. L. D. in the year 1777: And this must (...) ^^00 or 1900 feet above the
level of the adjacent country.

This town is exceedingly well watered by springs and rivulets, as is generally
the case with hilly, rocky land; but there are no streams of any great bigness,
although several large and fine rivers have their sources here. One branch of
the Nashaway begins at the foot of Watchusett Hill, and runs through Sterling
and Boylston to Lancaster. Piss River, so called, springs up at the foot of
this mountain, on the westerly side, and runs through Hubbardston, and joins
Ware River. There are several places in the town where springs issue and the
waters divide, running some into Merrimack, some into Connecticut river. There
is but little meadow land in Princeton, when compared with towns in general,
but there are considerable tracts of interval which afford good hay; however,
the greatest part of their hay is produced from upland mowing. There are two
ponds only in this town, or rather a part of two: Watchusett Pond, about three
miles north from the meetinghouse, at the north end of that mountain; it covers
about one hundred acres, only about twenty of which are in Princeton, the
greater part in Westminster. It is fed by springs from the hill; its outlet is
in Westminster. Quinepoxet Pond is situated in the southwest part of the town,
some of which falls within the limits of Holden. It contains perhaps seventy or
eighty acres. Its inlets are several small streams; its outlet is the River
Quinepoxet, as described in the account of Holden. In Princeton there are four
grist mills, five saw mills, and one fulling mill, and clothiers' works. This
town is situated fifty two miles from Boston, about due west; and fifteen miles
from the courthouse in Worcester, nearly north, and bounded on the north, by
Westminster; on the east, by Sterling; on the south, by Holden; on the
southwest, by Rutland; and on the west, by Hubbardston.

TEMPLETON.
THIS was an original grant to certain persons who did service in what was
called the Narraganset, or King Philip's war, or to their heirs, and was
accordingly known by the name of Narraganset No. 6, until its incorporation,
March 6th, 176^, when the name Templeton was given to it. The first meeting of
the proprietors of this tract of land was held at Concord October 29th, 1733.
The grant was designed to include as much as six miles square, but the measure
was made rather large. Its settlement was greatly retarded through danger from
the Indians, in that then infant state of this part of the country; and
especially in the French war, in the years from 1740, to 1746. After that
period inhabitants came in very fast, so that a church of our Lord Jesus Christ
was gathered here December 10th, 1755, and the same day the Rev. Daniel Pond
was ordained to the work of the gospel ministry in this place: He continued in
the sacred office not four years, being dismissed by advice of an
ecclesiastical council, August 2d, 1759. He was succeeded by the Rev. Ebenezer
Sparhawk, who was separated unto that high and holy calling on the 18th of
November, 1761, who still continues faithfully serving God in the gospel of his
Son.

This town flourished and increased so fast, and not lying in the best shape to
continue one religious society, it was divided into two parishes, February
16th, 1774. The new or second parish lay on the west side, and being soon after
made a distinct town, we shall leave it for the present, and proceed in our
description of Templeton. Although this town is not a level, champaign tract of
land, yet it is not so uneven as many; it has no remarkable hills or eminences
distinguished by particular names, except one on the south side toward
Hubbardston, called Mine Hill, from its abounding in good iron ore; and
supposed also to be rich in other more valuable mines and minerals; this was
granted to a Capt. Andrew Robinson, of Gloucester, some time before the
original grant of the township; it was soon sold, and now a great number of
persons have a right therein: it is a long, rocky hill, and very steep on one
side.

There is but one pond in the town, and that is small, in the south part, from
whence there is an outlet, on which are mills, this forms what is called Otter
River, on which are clothiers' works, and where the business is well and
profitably carried on. This river runs southerly into a corner of Hubbardston,
then turning northeast runs back into Templeton again, and through an angle of
Gardner, where several streams join it. It is some way a boundary between
Gardner and Templeton; then it takes a northwesterly course in Templeton, and
is joined by Trout Brook; and from thence running through an angle of
Winchendon, there falls into Miller's River. The main branch of the river
Burnshirt, so called, rises from a pond on the easterly side of Gerry, at its
northeast end, and runs through meadows to the southeast, where there are good
mills, and within the bounds of Templeton, joins the easterly branch of
Burnshirt, and soon after becomes a boundary between Templeton and Gerry, for
almost two miles; and then runs through a corner of Hubba^dston into Bar,
where it unites with Ware River. Conneystow, another stream, rising from ^ngs
in the south part of this town, runs southerly into ^ubbardston, where are
mills, and then falls into Burnshirt. On these streams and rivers there are
excellent meadow and interval lands.

The general growth of wood in the town is of the following kinds, oak,
chestnut, white and pitch pine, ash, beech and birch; walnut, within a few
years, has sprung up, and is spreading. The lands are rich and good in general,
producing all sorts of ^ain, and yield pasturage and grass in great plenty. In
this town the business of making potash is carried on. Here are the usual
necessary tradesmen; but the inhabitants chiefly subsist by the cultivation of
their lands, and are a prosperous and flourishing people. This town is situated
about sixty miles from Boston, a little to the north of west; and is twenty
eight miles from the courthouse in Worcester, a little to the west of north.

The number of its inhabitants was 950, when the general census was taken in
1791.

Templeton is bounded on the west, by Gerry; on the north, by Winchendon; on
the east, by Gardner; and on the south, by Hubbardston; and contains still
about 17000 acres of land, notwithstanding the greater part of Gerry, and a
part of Gardner was taken from it.

ATHOL.
WHEN the grant of this township wa^ made by the General Court, cannot now be
asc^rtained, as the first proprietors' book was some yea^s ago lost. The
present book has recorded tha^ the original proprietors, being sixty in number,
me^ at Concord June 26, 1734, and, in the presence of a committee of the
General Court, whereof the Hon. William Dudley was chairman, drew their house
lots in the township of Pequ^og, (...) ^ge, as the natives called the place at
(...): and by this appellation it was known in an publ^k acts and records until
its incorporation by an act of the Legislature, on the 6th of March, 1762* when
it received the name of Athol. This tract was a seat for the Indians, and at
the time of its being granted, was a frontier township, and greatly exposed;
and the settlement of the place was obstructed by the French and Indian war,
which commenced in 1744. and continued several years. Previously to the
breaking out of that war, several families had seated themselves here, but they
were greatly distressed with fear, by reason of the Indians; they were obliged,
as other infant plantations, to live in garrisons for several years, and to
labor at their various occupations with their mili^ry armor by them. Although
this place was thus exposed, yet I cannot find that any persons were killed
here, except a Mr. Ezekiel Wallingford, who being on some occasion at a
distance from his garrison, was discovered by the en^my; and seeing them, he
turned to run to the fort, but was stopped short by a fatal ball, August, 1746.
In the month of April, the year following, ^ Mr. Jason Badcock was taken
captive by the Indians, and carried to Canada: From whence he ^eturned in a few
months.

The church of Christ in Athol was imbodied in the presence, and under the
countenance of three neighboring pastors and churches, August 29th. 1750; and
the Rev. James Humphrey was consecrated their first pastor on the 7th of
November following. The Rev. Mr. Humphrey, after serving the church and people
of this place faithfully upwards of thirty one years, was, at his request,
dismissed from his pastoral relation to them on the 13th of February, 1782, on
these conditions, viz. The inhabitants voted to free his person and estate from
all kinds of taxes during his natural life; and gave to him and his heirs a
good pew in the present meetinghouse, so long as it should stand.

The town remained destitute of a settled pastor until November 21st, 1787,
when the Rev. Joseph Estabrook, was solemnly separated unto the work of the
gospel ministry, as successor to the Rev. Mr. Humphrey.

There are about ten families of anabaptists in this town, but there is no
church, nor any stated teacher of this denomination in the place: There are
also three families of universalists, and one of episcopalians here.

We shall now go on to some Geographical Description of Athol. This township
was originally granted to sixty proprietors, with a reserve of a right of land
for the first settled minister, a right for the use of the ministry, and one
for a school: It was to contain as much as six miles square. A part of the town
was set off, at the southeast angle, to aid in forming the town of Gerry, and a
part at the northwest corner, to help form the district of Orange; but still
the town of Athol is more than five miles square, and contains 16000 acres of
land. It is very uneven, rocky, and hilly, though there are no famous or
remarkable hills in the place; nor any with names, except one in the east part
of the town, called Walnut Hill, from the considerable quantity of walnut wood
and timber growing thereon. The soil of this town is not so good as some: It is
rather cold, consequently not extraordinary for grain of any kind, for
orcharding, or for mowing: It is said to be very good for grazing; and much
beef is annually fatted in the place. There is some pitch pine plain in the
north part of the town; there is also considerable white pine remaining in the
westerly part of the place; but oak, chestnut, ash, beech, birch, hemlock, and
maple, constitute the principal growth of wood. The town has its full share of
water. Miller's River, so called by the English, in consequence of a man by the
name of Miller, who was drowned herein, well toward a hundred years ago, in
attempting to pass this river in his way to Northfield: But the natives called
it Payquage or Bayquage -- this river is large, and its current in many places
rapid; it comes into Athol in the northeasterly quarter of the town, and
passing within half a mile of the meetinghouse, it runs westerly into
Connecticut River; in the southwesterly part of Athol, there is some good
meadow on this river. The next stream for bigness is Tully Brook; (or rather
River if its appellation had not been established) this has its origin in
Fitzwilliam in the State of Newhampshire, comes through Royalston into the
northerly part of Athol, and joins Miller's River about one mile northwest from
the meetinghouse. On this stream, and after the junction, there are some very
good meadows. Mill Brook, so called from its having upon it many convenient
seats for mills, rises from various springs in the southeasterly part of the
town, and runs northwesterly, and falls into Miller's River in the west part of
Athol. In the southeasterly part of the town rises a brook sufficient to carry
mills, which runs to a pond of thirty acres or more, which the line between
Newsalem and Athol crosses in the southwest part, and from this pond there is
an outlet which runs north, and empties into Miller's River. There is also
another pond in the north part of the town, from whence there is an outlet into
Tully Brook: This is small, covering perhaps twenty or thirty acres.

Upon the rivers and streams abovementioned, there are in the town, four grist
mills, six saw mills, one fulling mill, and one trip hammer. We must not omit
to mention, there is a very fine spring in this town, which issues out of a
high bank upon the side of Miller's River, (perhaps twenty feet above the
surface of the river) the water whereof is medicinal. Many persons who have
drank freely thereof, have found it operate as a gentle cathartick; and some
who have been poisoned, have been speedily cured by washing the parts affected
therewith. Several who have been afflicted with rheumatick complaints, bathed
in the waters of this spring, in a cistern, some few years ago provided to
receive them, and found great relief. And what is worthy of notice is this,
these waters have the same efficacy and virtue without soap, in washing of
persons, which other waters have with. We close the account of Athol with
saying, it is situated in the northwestern extremity of the county, about
thirty five miles from the courthouse in Worcester, to the northwest, and from
Boston it is seventy two miles, a little to the north of west. It is bounded on
the north, by Royalston; on the east, by Gerry; on the south, by Petersham; on
the southwest, by Newsalem; and on the northwest, by Orange. The number of
inhabitants in this town, when the census was taken, was 850.

OAKHAM.
THE whole of this town was included in that tract of land of twelve miles
square, which was purchased of the Indians, confirmed to the petitioners, and
called Rutland, in the year 1713. After the town of Rutland was incorporated,
this part was called Rutland West Wing, until the year 1759, when the
inhabitants had certain privileges granted them, and the place was called the
Precinct of Rutland West Wing, until its incorporation by an act of the
Legislature, June 7th, 1762, when the name of Oakham was given to it.

The church of Christ in this place was imbodied, in presbyterian form, August
28th, 1767, and the Rev. John Strickland was ordained their pastor, April 1st,
1768. He was dismissed by the presbytery, and a vote of the town, June 2d,
1773. After Mr. Strickland's removal, the presbyterian church was dissolved,
and a church on the congregational plan was imbodied, June 23d, 1773, and the
Rev. Daniel Tomlinson was separated to the work of the gospel ministry among
them, June 22d, 1786. Mr. Strickland removed from Oakham to Nottinghamwest, in
the State of Newhampshire, where he was installed, and continued a number of
years; from thence he was dismissed, and removed to Turner, in the county of
Cumberland, and the district of Maine, where he is again settled in the
presbyterian mode.

In Oakham they have a social library established, containing toward sixty
volumes.

The reader shall now be presented with some Geographical Description of Oakham.

Although the shape of the town is not an exact square, yet it contains about
four miles and an half square; and it is bounded by Rutland, on the e^st; by
Bar, on the north and northwest; by Newbraintree, on the west and southwest;
and by Sp^ncer, on the south and southeast. The general face of the town is
hilly and stony. The natural soil is not inferior perhaps to that of the
neighboring towns in general; but not being settled so early as Rutland, it
was greatly injured by fires. The first settlers of Rutland used to se^ fires
in Oakham annually, or frequently, and then turn their cattle thither to feed
through the summer season. There are no remarkable hills, nor any extensive
plains in the town. The produce is, Indian corn, wheat, rye, flax, etc. etc.
and whatever is common to this country. The land is well accepted to
orcharding, and all kinds of fruit trees; for it is high, sweet, and in general
not exposed to frosts. The growth of wood and timber is oak of all sorts,
abounding especially in white oak, walnut, chestnut, and whatever is common to
the high and low lands in other towns.

Some parts of the town are high and rather dry; nevertheless, the lands bear a
drought well; and in general there are sufficient springs, rivulets, and
streams of water. There is one river which has its source in the easterly part
of the town, called Five Mile River; it runs from the north to the south; it is
not large, yet there is one corn, and one saw mill standing thereon in the
southerly part of the town; and on this stream there is some meadow land. The
northerly part of Oakham borders on and near a river, which is large, called
Ware River; on this there is some little interval and meadow land. There is but
one other meadow in the town of any considerable bigness; this is situated
about a mile southeast from the meetinghouse, and is known by the name of
Clammour Meadow. In the northeasterly part of this town, near to Rutland, is
situated Muddy Pond, so called, not large; from this pond issues a stream,
which running from the ^utheast to the northwest, falls into Ware River; on
this stream there are two saw mills.

There is a large pond, called Browning's Pond, situated in the southeasterly
quarter of this town, and lies, partly in Rutland and partly in Spencer, but
the greater part in Oakham. To this there is an inlet, and at the south end an
outlet which runs into Spencer, and so to Quaboag River. These ponds and
streams are well stored with fish.

There are several roads through different parts of the town; one through the
north angle of the town, leading from Petersham to Rutland and Worcester;
another about a mile north of the meetinghouse, leading from Rutland to
Hardwick; another which leads from Rutland to Brookfield, passing about half a
mile east of the meetinghouse; another leading from Newbraintree to Worcester,
called the New County Road; this runs near the south side of the town.

This town is situated fifteen miles from Worcester courthouse, a little to the
northwest; and from Boston it is distant sixty two miles, nearly west. When the
census was taken there were 772 inhabitants in the town.

FITCHBURG.
THIS place was originally a part of the town of Lunenburg, and wholly included
in the grant made to the proprietors of Turkey Hill. It was made a distinct and
separate town on the 3d of February, 1764. A part of Fitchburg, to the north,
was set off in the year 1767, to aid in forming the town of Ashby, in the
county of Middlesex. It is now bounded by Ashburnham and Ashby, on the north
and northwest; by Lunenburg, on the east; by Leominster, on the south and
southeast; and by Westminster, on the west and southwest.

This is a very hilly and uneven, but fertile town. On the eastern part it is
not so very uneven, resembling Lunenburg, from whence it was taken; but in the
other parts of the town, the hills are large, high, and steep; however, on them
there is not much broken, poor and waste land* In general the soil is
excellent; and the town in many respects is superior to Lunenburg. By the late
census the dwelling houses were found to be 166, and the inhabitants 1151,
spread over a territory not much exceeding 13000 acres. Most of the people live
in comfortable and easy circumstances, possessing all the necessaries, and many
of the conveniences of life. They are industrious, and having a good soil to
labor upon, live independent, and, for an inland town, several families among
them may justly be deemed rich. The people near the meetinghouse are settled
pretty thick, and there much business of various kinds is performed: For here
runs, a few rods south of the meetinghouse, the north branch of Nashaway Rive^
One part of this river comes from Ashburnha^, the other part from Watchusett
Pond; these unite a little west of Fitchburg meetinghouse* After this junction,
and just below the meetinghouse, there is one corn mill, one saw mill, one
fulling mill, one clothier's works, one trip hammer, and works for grinding
scythes: These occasion a great resort of people there to transact their
various concerns. A little southwest from the meetinghouse, is a high, rocky
hill, covered principally with pine, called Rollstone Hill. Here also is a
hill, usually denominated Pearl Hill, and is composed of a rock of a peculiar
quality, not common in this part of the country. It produces isinglass, or
talc, in great plenty. The appearance encourages a hope that there are valuable
mines, either of gold or silver, or both, imbosomed there. Attempts have
heretofore been made to explore and possess them; but for want of wealth or
perseverance in the undertakers, they have not obtained the desiderata. All
valuable mines in this part of the world, as in most other parts, lie deep in
the bowels of the earth, and much labor is necessary to reach them. In the
present state of our population, riches, in these northern parts, are with much
greater facility procured from the surface of the earth, by the various
instruments of cultivation, than from deep and latent mines of the richest ore.
When the country becomes overstocked with inhabitants, and support from the
soil shall not be so easily obtained, it is not improbable that from this
mountain will be dug large quantities of those shining metals, as every thing,
at present, favors the conjecture. Besides the river abovementioned, which
runs from the northwest to the southeast, through the tow^, there are several
other streams which pass through it, which occasion the inhabitants great
expense in building and repairing bridges. From the northwest part of
Connecticut river the people travel much through this place, in their way to
Boston; and at present they have a stage which runs between them and Boston,
and goes and comes twice in the week.

The church of Christ in this town was imbodied, and their first and only, and
present minister, the Rev. John Payson, was ordained January 27th, 1768.

This is a growing, flourishing place, and the people have hitherto been
peaceable and happy; they are indeed very much so; and if they continue in
peace and unity, they will still greatly increase in number and wealth. They
subsist chiefly by husbandry; there are, however, the usual mechanics, and a
few dealers in European, East and West India goods.

The growth of wood in this town is very excellent: Oak, walnut and chestnut,
constitute the principal part thereof, although there is some white and yellow
pine.

Fitchburg is situated northwest from Boston, at the distance of fifty miles
over Charles's River bridge; and it is almost north from the courthouse in
Worcester, distant about twenty three miles.

WINCHENDON.
ON the 10th of June, 1785, a grant of land, to be equal to six miles square,
was made by the Legislature of Massachusetts, to Lieut. Abraham Tilton, and
others: Preference, however, was to be given to the descendants of the officers
and soldiers who served in the expedition to Canada, in the year 1690. This
tract was to be laid out into sixty three equal shares; one for the first
minister, one for the use of the ministry, and one for the use of a school; the
others, for sixty proprietors. As these all, excepting eight, belonged to
Ipswich, in the county of Essex, in Massachusetts, i^ was called Ipswich
Canada, until its incorporation by an act of the General Court, which passed
June 14th, 1764, when it was made a town, and called Winchendon. The
proprietors received this grant on conditions of erecting sixty small houses,
together with a suitable, convenient meetinghouse, and settling a learned and
orthodox minister in five years from the laying out of the township. These
conditions were not punctually fulfilled; however, in the year 1752, ten
families had fixed down here. But the settlement of the place was immediately
retarded by what is commonly called the last French war. Most of the settlers
left the place; they who remained were obliged to keep in garrisons. The
proprietors set up the first meetinghouse, thirty five by forty five feet, in
the spring of the year 1762. The church of Christ in this place was imbodied,
and the Rev. Daniel Stimpson was ordained their first pastor, on December 15th,
1762. Mr. Stimpson continued not six years in the ministry; the Great Head of
the church saw fit to remove him hence by death, July 20th, 1768. He was
succeeded in the pastoral office by the Rev. Joseph Brown, who was separated
hereunto May 24th, 1769. Mr. Brown continues in his work, and enjoys the
affection and esteem of his people. The first house for public worship being
too small for the inhabitants, they on the 24th and 25th of May, 1792, erected
a large new one, fifty by sixty feet, and having completed it, met in it for
the first time January 1st, 1793, when it was solemnly dedicated to the service
of God.

In this town a foundation is already laid for a social library, which bids
fair to be large and very considerable in time.

When this township was first located it was supposed to extend northerly to
New hampshire, but upon running the line afterward between the two States, it
was found there was a mile in width for the whole length of this town left to
Massachusetts. Upon the granting of Royalston, some years after, this strip of
land was annexed to that town, and called Royalston Leg. When a number of
families had got seated thereon, at their request, it was in 1780 set to
Winchendon. It contained 3840 acres. In June, 1785, a piece of land of 3680
acres, was taken from the southeasterly part of this town, to help form the
town of Gardner; Winchendon, however, still remains more than six miles square.

The present extent and boundaries of Winchendon are as follow. Beginning at
the northeast angle of the town, on the State line, thence south twelve degrees
west, five miles and an half on Ashburnham line, to the northeast corner of
Gardner: Thence west twenty eight degrees south, three miles and eighty five
rods on Gardner line, to a corner in Templeton line: Thence north thirty six
degrees west, two miles one hundred and forty four rods on Templeton line, to a
corner: Thence north seventy eight degrees west, six hundred rods on said
Templeton line, to a corner in Royalston line: Thence north twelve degrees
east, on Royalston line, five miles two hundred and sixty rods, to the
northeast corner of said Royalston, on the State line, or the line between
Winchendon and Rindge: Thence east twelve degrees south, six miles on the State
line, to the first mentioned bound*

The soil of Winchendon is deep and good, and produces rye, barley, oats, flax,
and all kinds of vegetables: Wheat is not raised here in so great plenty as in
some other towns; yet more at present than formerly. Indian corn is not so
easily raised, as the land is rocky, and some of the extreme parts of the town
are much subject to frosts. The town is not very uneven, and there are no
remarkable hills in the place.

The general growth of wood on the high lands, is red oak, beech, rock maple,
and black birch, interspersed with white pine and hemlock. On the low lands,
white pine, hemlock, hacmatack, ash of all kinds, and yellow birch,
interspersed with red oak and beech. On some of the lowest lands, there is
little or nothing but pine, hemlock, and hacmatack. In some parts of the town
there is chestnut, and in other parts pitch pine, but neither of them in plenty.

Mines or minerals, none as yet have been discovered in the town: There are two
or three springs, however, of the mineral kind; one especially in the northerly
part of the town, which is thought by physicians and others acquainted with
such things, to be equal to many in great repute for their healing virtue. It
is certainly of the medicinal kind, and rather seems of a chalybeate quality.
There is but one pond which is wholly within the limits of this town, called
Denison's Pond, it covers perhaps as much as one hundred and fifty acres. It
has an inlet from the north, and an outlet toward the south into a river which
runs within an hundred rods of said pond. It abounds in fish of various kinds.
There is one river, known by the name of Miller's River, the principal source
whereof is a large pond, lying chiefly in the northeasterly part of Rindge, a
small part only falling within the bounds of Winchendon, where the outlet is.
This pond is known by the name of Monomenock Pond. The outlet from this pond,
together with some small streams from ponds in the northwesterly part of
Ashburnham, uniting in the northeasterly part of Winchendon, form Miller's
River, which runs westerly, southwesterly and southerly, half round the town;
in no place nearer than one mile of the meetinghouse, and in some places three
miles and more from it. It leaves this town in the southwesterly part thereof,
not far from the pond above described, the outlet of which, as we have said,
falls into this river. Otter River, so called, which runs through the northerly
part of Templeton, just touches on Winchendon, in the southwesterly part
thereof, and runs nigh the bounds of the town about a mile and a half, and
unites with Miller's River, but just before it leaves Winchendon. There are two
large streams in the westerly part of this town, taking their rise in
Fitzwilliam. One of them joins Miller's River in Winchendon, near to Royalston:
This is not distinguished by any particular name. The other, still larger, runs
into Royalston, and some considerable way in the easterly part thereof; then
turns and enters Winchendon, and after running several miles, joins Miller's
River just above Denison's Pond. This stream might have been denominated a
river from its largeness, had it not early received the appellation of Priest's
Brook. This name was given to it from the circumstance of its running through a
tract of land, now lying in Royalston, formerly granted by the General Court of
Massachusetts to a Joseph Priest, to induce him to set up an house of
entertainment for the benefit of travelers from this state to the Ashuelots
(Keen and Swansey) and to No. 4 (Charlestown) in the state of Newhampshire.
The house of this Priest, was called The Half Way House.

These two streams, especially the latter, abound with salmon trouts. This sort
of fish is also found in many parts of Miller's River, as also pickerel and
perch.

Besides the abovementioned, there are many other streams and rivulets running
in every part of this town, whereby it is exceedingly well watered.

There is but little meadow land, perhaps not more than one hundred and fifty
acres in the town of Winchendon.

Interval land on Miller's River there is considerable, and what is improved is
of a very good quality. But of this there is not so much as might have been
expected; for the high lands in most places shut down quite close upon the
river. Upon the rivers and streams in the town there are two grist mills, six
saw mills, and one clothier's works. There are also in the town, two potash
works.

Roads in various directions center at, or near the meetinghouse. The greatest
road is from Boston, through Winchendon, and so on through Fitzwilliam to
Charlestown; this road a stage passes weekly through the summer season. Another
road leads from Winchendon, through Gardner, Westminster, and so on to
Worcester. Another runs south through Templeton; another westerly through
Royalston, and another northerly through Rindge. Winchendon is situated about
sixty two miles from Boston, by the nearest route, to the northwest: And from
Worcester courthouse it is thirty five miles, a little to the west of north.
When the census was taken, there were in the place 150 houses, and 950
inhabitants, and it will no doubt still greatly increase and multiply.

ROYALSTON.
THIS is, as to the original grant and settlement, doubtless by many years, the
youngest town in the county. It was in the year 1752, or very soon after,
granted to the Hon. Messrs. Hubbard, Erving, Royal, Otis, and others, and was
to include all the unappropriated lands between Newhampshire line, on the
north; Warwick, on the west; Athol and Templeton, on the south; Winchendon, on
the east and south; and Ashburnham, on the east. This grant was known by the
name of Royalshire, until its incorporation, which was on February 16th, 1765,
when it was called Royalston, in compliment to the late Col. Isaac Royal, one
of the original proprietors. Before the last French war, some who intended to
settle here, began to work upon their lands, but the breaking out of that war
put an entire stop thereto. Toward the close of that war some people began to
work here again; and in the year 1762 several families moved into the place;
the first of which came in, in the month of June. Its increase was truly
surprising, for in less than three years, it was incorporated with distinct
town privileges; and in the close of the year 1767, there were about forty
families in the town. The number of families at this time is 195, and the
number of souls about 1130; besides that, there were a number of families with
their estates set off to aid in forming the district of Orange, in the county
of Hampshire. As early as the year 1766, on the 13th day of October, a
congregational church was imbodied here, under the countenance, and in the
presence of the churches in the vicinity; and on the 19th of October, 1768, the
first and present pastor, the Rev. Joseph Lee, was ordained to the work of the
gospel ministry among them.

There were nine or ten families of the baptist denomination among the first
settlers. At what time they imbodied into a church state is not known to us. A
Mr. Elisha Rich was their teacher, but he was never ordained among them. He was
succeeded by Mr. Whitman Jacobs, who was installed December 13th, 1770. He
lived in Athol, to which town part of his society belonged, and there he now
resides. Mr. Moses Kinney is now the ordained teacher of the baptists in
Royalston.

The lands in this town consist generally of hills and valleys; and the soil is
very excellent, being suitable for tillage, pasturage, mowing and orcharding.
The natural growth of wood is of various kinds, as oak, chestnut, beech, ash,
white, black and yellow birch, maple, or sugar tree, bass, alder, and the ever
greens, as pine, hemlock, hacmatack and spruce, etc.

This town is exceedingly well watered by rivers, rivulets and springs.
Miller's River runs through this town from the east. And there are a number of
considerable brooks or streams, which uniting, form what is called Tully River
in Athol. In the southerly part of the town one of the streams which helps to
form Tully River, has very observable falls. In the course of forty or fifty
rods, the whole fall of water is more than a hundred feet. In one place it is
twenty feet, or more. On these several streams before mentioned are large
quantities of rich interval, or excellent meadow lands.

There are two ponds in the town; one small, a little west of the meetinghouse;
the other about a mile further westward, called Long Pond. A small stream runs
out of the lesser into the greater.

Although the distance between these ponds is but little more than half a mile
in a direct line, yet the little pond is at least an hundred and fifty feet
higher than the other. There are in both ponds, various sorts of fish, and in
great plenty; those in the larger are most excellent. The distance of this town
from Boston is, by the nearest route, about seventy miles, ^o the northwest;
and from the courthouse in Worcester it is forty miles, and is bounded on the
north, by the State line* on the east, by Winchendon; on the south, by Gerry
and Athol; and on the west, by Athol and Warwick.

ASHBURNHAM.
ON the 10th of June, 1735, a grant was made by the General Court, to Thomas
Tilestone and others, for and in consideration of services done by officers and
soldiers of the ancient town of Dorchester, in the expedition to Canada in
1690, under Capt. John With^ington. This grant was to be equal to six miles
square, and went by the name of Dorchester Canada, until its incorporation,
which was on the 22d of February, 1765, when it received its present name. To
the original grant were afterward added Lexington farm of a thousand acres,
Cambridge farm of a thousand more, Rolfe's farm of six hundred, and another of
about a thousand acres.

The church of Christ in Ashburnham was gathered April 23d, 1760, and the same
day the Rev. Jonathan Winchester was ordained their first pastor. This
gentleman was somewhat advanced in life when he was settled in the work of the
ministry; and he continued but a short space therein, leaving the world
November 25th, 1767. To him succeeded in the sacred office and work, the Rev.
John Cushing, who was solemnly consecrated hereunto November 2d, 1768. In the
town there are about twenty families of baptists, who manifest far greater
catholicism than formerly. The whole number of families is about 150, and of
inhabitants about 970, besides a number who were set off to Ashby, in the
county of Middlesex, with about 3000 acres of land, and a number to the town of
Gardner, with about 2000 acres more.

In this town are situated two large hills, or mountains, Great and Little
Wetatick. Great Wetatick lies in the northeast part of the town, and Little
Wetatick to the southwest from it.

There are seven ponds within the limits of Ashburnham, which divide it nearly
into two equal parts, north and south. Two of them are large, viz. Great and
Little Naukheag. The others are not distinguished by any particular names. Here
are no rivers; but these ponds are sources of several streams, which take
different routes, and contribute to the formation of several large rivers. From
Little Naukheag, which is near the center of the town, a rivulet empties into
Great Naukheag, whence a stream issues to the west, which makes part of
Miller's River. About three quarters of a mile east of Little Naukheag begins
another stream, which runs southeast, and joining in Fitchburg with another
stream from Westminster, and other small streams, helps to form the north
branch of Nashaway River. Northeast from this last mentioned stream, arise two
more, which, joining soon, run through Ashby into Newipswich, in the State of
Newhampshire, and become a large branch of Souheagan River, which empties into
the great river Merrimack. Hence it appears that this town is upon the height
of land between Connecticut river on the west, and Merrimack on the east. And
what is worthy of particular notice is this, that scarce any water runs into
this town: It being conjectured that all which comes in, from all quarters,
would pass through a man's boot. On streams issuing from three of the ponds in
Ashburnham, there are mills, and a fine seat for more on the stream which runs
out of Great Naukheag, not yet improved. On the banks of Little Naukheag is a
white sand, equal in sineness and whiteness to that on the banks of Capeanne,
and which it is judged would make glass.

There is much broken land in this town. Some parts abound in hemlock, spruce,
white and pitch pine; this is the case more especially in the western part;
however, there is much good land for grass. Where the growth of wood is oak,
hard and soft maple beach, birch and chestnut, the land is moist and good for
grazing. It has been a noted place for lumber: The best pine timber is mostly
worked up: There yet remain great quantities of white and pitch pine, suitable
for boards. There are five saw mills, and four corn mills in the town. Here are
potash works, and have been from its infancy; and the first complete ton of
this article carried into market was from Ashburnham. Here are no remarkable
springs, or other natural curiosities. They have an elegant new meetinghouse.
The former house of public worship was, about twenty years ago, wrecked by an
hurricane, and moved three or four feet to the north and east; a barn, about
sixty rods to the south, was torn down, while the owner within it escaped
unhurt. This hurricane passed from the west to the east, extending about half a
mile in width, and upon the hills swept all before it. The town enjoys a fine
air, and is remarkably healthy.

Its distance from Worcester, is thirty miles to the north; and from Boston, by
the nearest route, is fifty five miles, but through Lancaster and Stow, it is
sixty miles, and lies to the northwest.

Ashburnham is bounded on the north, by the State line; on the northeast, by
Ashby; on the east, by Fitchburg; on the south, by Westminster and Gardner; and
on the west, by Winchendon.

PAXTON.
THIS was taken from the towns of Leicester and Rutland, in nearly equal parts;
and was incorporated on the 12th of February, 1765, when it received its name.

The ecclesiastical state of this town has been somewhat singular, from the
gathering of the church of Christ in the place, to the present time, as will
appear by the following account.

The church in Paxton, was imbodied September 3d, 1767. The Rev. Silas Biglow
was ordained their first minister the same year, viz. October 21st, 1767. He
was much beloved and respected by the people of his charge, but the Great Head
of the church suffered him to continue but a little more than two years in
office, being removed by death, November 16th, 1769.

He was succeeded in the work of the gospel ministry by the Rev. Alexander
Thayer, who was solemnly separated hereunto on the 28th of November, 1770. Mr.
Thayer continued not quite twelve years with the people, being dismissed from
office August 14th, 1782.

They were destitute, after this, of a settled minister for more than three
years, until September 8th, 1785, when the Rev. John Foster was ordained their
third pastor; at which time the town was in a most unhappy divided state, there
being but a bare majority for Mr. Foster; the other party dissenting, and
protesting, utterly refused to hear him, and were by law exempted from
contributing to his support. In this situation the people remained for three
years and a half, until April, 1789, when Mr. Foster was dismissed from his
pastoral relation to the people.

Mr. Foster was, in about three years after, installed at Taunton, in the
county of Bristol.

After Mr. Foster's removal from Paxton the parties amicably reunited, and are
in a way for the happy resettlement of the gospel ministry among them.

If the people do but continue united, they are able to support the gospel in a
very honorable, generous manner: For the town, though not large, is well
settled, being an excellent tract of land, and the inhabitants in general are
industrious, good, and wealthy farmers. It is pleasant, although uneven, having
many hills and valleys; but the soil is rich and productive: It is good for all
kinds of grain, and well repays the labor bestowed upon i^: It is peculiarly
good for grass and pasturing, and likewise for orcharding. The high lands are
moist and springy, not too rocky; and the lower lands are swamps or meadows,
but easily drained. The wood which grows on the higher lands, is oak, much
walnut, some chestnut; and in the lower lands, are found birch, beech, maple and
ash. It is truly noticeable that the wood in this town, when cut down, never
sprouts again, in consequence of which they are threatened with a scarcity of
fuel.

The town is exceedingly well watered by springs from the hills; and by small
streams, on which they have both corn and saw mills. From the same spring,
about half a mile north of the meetinghouse, waters issue, which soon divide
and take quite different and contrary directions; part runs northeasterly into
the river Nashaway; part runs southwesterly into Connecticut river. There are
two hills in the town of great height, and worthy of particular mention: One is
called Turkey Hill, near Rutland line, this is large, and affords good farms;
and especially fine pasture land: At the foot of this hill, on the west side,
lies Turkey Hill Pond, large, and well stored with fish; and from this pond
runs a stream which empties into Chicabee River, and from thence into
Connecticut river. On the east side of the town, and in that part which was
formerly Leicester, is situated what is called Asnebumskit Hill, the foot of
which, on the east side, falls within the bounds of Holden. This is a large and
high hill, containing several hundred acres, the land is rich and good;
especially adapted for pasturage. It lies about twelve miles south of
Watchusett great hill, and except that, overtops all other hills within forty
or fifty miles of it. Around this hill the vapors gather so plentifully, or
become so dense the evening preceding a rain, that it appears at a distance as
if it rained upon its summit. To this hill many of the farmers, in the
vicinity, look at evening, or a little before the setting of the sun, in the
time of making hay, that they may be able to determine with a good degree of
certainty, what the weather will be the next day. Near the foot of this hill,
is situated Asnebumskit Pond; which is a fine large pond, and well supplied
with fish: From this pond there issues a stream, which runs to the northeast
through Holden, and joining the stream from the foot of Watchusett Hill, helps
to form the south branch of Nashaway River. From springs, on the northwesterly
part of Asnebumskit Hill, a stream is formed, which running southerly, passes
through Leicester, and so to French River. The above observations show us that
Paxton is situated on the height of the lands between the sea, on the east and
south, and Connecticut river on the west.

In Paxton, works for making potash have lately been set up: And here a small
number of cotton and wool cards are annually made.

The number of inhabitants in this town was found in 1791, to be 558.

Paxton is situated eight miles west from Worcester, and about fifty five from
Boston, a little to the south of west. It is bounded on the north, by Rutland;
on the east, by Holden; on the south, by Leicester and Spencer; and on the
west, by Oakham and Rutland.

NORTHBOROUGH.
THIS was the north part of the town of Westborough, the main part whereof was
set off from Marlborough in the year 1717. It was made the second precinct or
parish of Westborough by an act of Court, on the 20th of October, 1744.

The church of Christ was gathered in this place May 21st, 1746, and on the
same day the Rev. John Martin was ordained their first pastor, who continued to
minister unto them in holy things until April 30th, 1767, when after a short
sickness he died in the 61st year of his age, and the 21st of his ministry. In
six months and four days from his death, viz. on the 4th of November, 1767, the
Rev. Peter Whitney was consecrated their second pastor.

Here, about thirty gentlemen have united, and established a social library,
containing one hundred volumes at present; and such are its regulations as that
it will annually increase.

A narrative of an Hebrew instructor at Harvard College, who died at
Northborough, and his Epitaph, are thought worth preserving.

Mr. Monis, as I suppose, the first Hebrew Instructor in our University at
Cambridge, was born in Italy. When he came into America I am not able to say.
He married a Miss Marrett, of Cambridge, who died in the year 1761; whereupon
he resigned his office, and retired to Northborough, and spent the residue of
his days in the family of the late Rev. John Martyn. Mrs. Monis and Mrs. Martyn
were sisters. He left something very honorable and generous to the church in
Northborough. He bequeathed forty six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence,
to be equally divided among seven of the ministers then living in the vicinity:
Also, he left about an hundred and twenty six pounds as a fund, the interest
whereof was to be distributed among widows of ministers who were in indigent
circumstances; and the remainder of his estate, which was considerable, he gave
to the Martyn family.

The following is the inscription on his grave stone. "Here lie buried the
remains of
Rabbi Judah Monis, M. A.
Late Hebrew Instructor
At Harvard College in Cambridge;
In which office he continued 40 years.
He was, by birth and religion, a Jew,
But embraced the Christian faith,
And was publicly baptized
At Cambridge, A. D. 1722,
And departed this life
April 25th, 1764,
Aged eighty one years, two months and twenty one days.
A native branch of Jacob see,
Which once from off its olive broke;
Regrasted from the living tree, Romans 11.17.24.
Of the reviving sap partook.
From teeming Zion's fertile womb, Isai. 66.8.
As dewy drops in early morn, Psalm. 110.3.
Or rising bodies from the tomb, John, 5.28, 29.
At once be Israel's nation born. Isai. 66.8."


This second precinct in Westborough was incorporated February 24th, 1766, and
from its local situation and bearing, was called Northborough.

There were settlers in this part of Marlborough before there were any in what
is now Westborough. As early as 1700, or rather before, a few families had
fixed down here. And there was a garrison kept at a house on the lower side of
the town toward Marlborough, near the brook where Messrs. Bartlets now live.
On August 18th, 1707, as two women belonging to the garrison were out a little
way from the fort, gathering herbs, the Indians discovered and pursued them.
One Mrs. Mary Fay, got safe into the sort; the other, Mary Goodenow, a young
and unmarried woman, was taken and carried over the brook into the edge of
Marlborough, and there, a little south of the great road, and nigh to Sandy
Hill, so called, she was killed and scalped. The enemy were pursued by some
soldiers and people of Marlborough; and were overtaken the next day, in that
part of Lancaster, now called Sterling, See (...) ^ccount of this ^attle in the
history of Lancaster and Sterli^
when a most bloody battle was fought, in which two of our people, John Farrar
and Richard Singletary, were killed. The Indians at length fled with great
precipitation, carrying off their killed and wounded, except one, whose bones
were afterward discovered; but they left behind some of their plunder, and
some of their packs; in one of which our people found the scalp of the above
named Mary Goodenow; and hereupon concluding she must be killed, on their
return they searched for, and found ^er body, and there buried it; and her
grave is visible to this day.

The town of Northborough lies in a kind of valley between the high lands of
Marlborough on the east, and those of Shrewsbury and Boylston on the west. On
its easterly side it is about four miles long, and on its westerly about five:
It is on an average about three miles and an half wide from east to west,
containing about 90 dwelling houses, upwards of an 100 families, and according
to the late census 620 inhabitants. It would doubtless admit of 150 or more
families, were the large farms (some of which contain four hundred or five
hundred acres) properly divided. This is beginning to take place, and in a few
years probably will be accomplished. The inhabitants are chiefly farmers, and
wealthy: They have also traders in European and Westindia goods; and various
tradesmen and mechanics, especially an excellent maker of edge tools of
various kinds; and considering its dimensions and number, it is doubtless one
of the ablest parishes in the county. The poorest land in general appears as we
travel the great road. The farms which lie off are good, and much of the land
very fertile. The westerly side of the town rises into high land, and the
northwest angle is very high; but the land is not rocky, and the farms are
excellent, and from thence the prospect is extensive. There is one beautiful
hill, called Liguor Hill, containing toward an hundred acres of land, very
good, opposite the meetinghouse, and not more than sixty or eighty rods from
it, on the south side of the post road. This is high, and seen from all the
neighboring towns; but it is not inaccessible even to teams. Its summit is
covered with a fine growth of good wood at present. About one mile northeast
from the meetinghouse is another hill, very similar, called Edmund Hill. Upon
the river Assabet, which runs through the easterly part of the town, are vast
bodies of rich interval and good meadow lands. And upon the other streams and
rivulets there are large and good meadows, especially on that called Cold
Harbor, which rises in the north part of Shrewsbury, and crossing the
southeast angle of Boylston, turns and runs southerly, then turns and runs
easterly, and passing between the post road and meetinghouse, soon empties
itself into the river Assabet. On the above named stream, in the westerly part
of the town, are a corn and saw mill, one a few rods below the other, and as
there is a small outlet from Rocky Pond, in the easterly part of Boylston,
which empties into this Cold Harbor stream, so the owner of those mills, by
means of a small dam at the lower end of said pond, furnishes them with a rich
supply of water, although distant a mile or more. In the north part of the town
are a corn and saw mill together, on North Brook, which coming from a pond in
Lancaster, and running through Berlin and the northeast angle of Northborough,
falls into the river Assabet. A little north of the meetinghouse runs a small
but lasting stream from the hills in the westerly part of the town, on which is
a saw mill which performs considerable work in the spring and autumn. In the
town there are two ponds; one called Solomon's Pond, from the circumstance of
an Indian of that name being drowned therein, by falling through a raft on
which he was fishing. This is in the northeasterly part of the town. It is not
large; about ninety rods long, and seventy five rods wide; has plenty of fish:
To this pond there is no visible inlet nor outlet.

The other is in the southeasterly part of the town, called Little Chauncy;
this also is well furnished with fish. From Great Chauncy Pond, in the
northeasterly part of Westborough, there is a small outlet which runs into
Little Chauncy; and from Little Chauncy a brook runs northerly, and crossing
the post road on the line between Marlborough and Northborough, and the
boundary between the two counties of Middlesex and Worcester, empties its
waters into Assabet River, On this stream are a co^ and a saw mill together;
and although it be small, yet by clearing it of obstructions, and a little
digging in a few places, they are supplied with a large quantity of water from
both the ponds above named. About half a mile from the meetinghouse, on the
post road, and on the ^iver Assab^t th^re is a mill for the fulling of cloth;
and works for carrying on the clothiers' business in all its branches, where
about 7000 yards of cloth are annually dressed, and the work is most acceptably
performed to the honor and advantage of the town, and the interest of the
community. These works are the property of two brothers, Captains Samuel and
Abraham Wood; but the business is performed at present by the latter only. On
the opposite side of the road and river are works for the manufacture of iron,
and where many tons have been made. There is in the vicinity a great plenty of
ore, especially of the bog kind. Near the forge are works for the making of
potash, where large quantities are manufactured yearly. About a mile below, on
this same river, is a grist mill which fails not to grind through the year.
Thus there are four corn, and four saw mills within the town.

There are, in this town, curious works for the conveyance of water to a great
distance, the property, contrivance, and execution of Major Holloway Tailor. I
know not that there are any similar works in the county, and would therefore
describe them.

From springs issuing out of ledges of rocks on rising lands, this gentleman
has raised a small pond, and from thence brings fine water (about seventy rods,
through bored logs, under ground, not only in low lands, but in some places
higher lands, where the water repeatedly ascends and descends) into the back
part of his house, into a large vat, near three feet in height, by a tube, from
the last log, entering the bottom of the vat, which is, or may be kept
constantly full, and running over; and the superfluous water is conveyed from
the vat, by another tube, out on to the grass land. As the water passes under
ground nigh the barn yard by a tube from a log, entering the bottom of a large
trough, he has a rich supply of water for a great stock of cattle; and such is
the quality of the water that it has seldom ever been known to freeze in trough
or vat. As this account may be read by some not much acquainted with natural
philosophy, and who therefore may think it incredible that water can be made to
pass over rising grounds, and through low lands, alternately, as in this case,
and then rise to such a height in the house; (for these logs are carried along
under ploughed fields and mowing lands;) for the sake of such it ought to be
observed, that water may be conveyed any where, to rise exactly to the height
of the fountain or pond from whence it proceeds; although it cannot be carried
to a greater height in its way to the place intended.

Should any persons wish to convey water in this manner, they may be informed,
that yellow or pitch pine logs are much best for the purpose; they are harder
and more durable; those of chestnut are too spungy and porous.




The general growth of wood in the town is chestnut, walnut, the several sorts
of oak, some white pine, and large quantities of pitch pine, which of late
years, is in great demand, as an excellent wood for fuel.

Northborough lies about thirty six miles from the Statehouse in Boston, and is
eight or nine degrees to the south of west; and is ten miles from the
courthouse in Worcester, a few degrees to the north of east. This town is
greatly benefited by the public roads, which in different directions pass
through it. Besides the post road from Boston to Worcester, (and so to the seat
of government,) which runs through it but a few rods south of the meetinghouse;
there is another from Newhampshire State, and the northern part of the county
of Worcester, and coming through Lancaster or Harvard, and Bolton and Berlin,
passes directly through this town, just by the meetinghouse, and crossing the
post road, leads on to Mendon and Providence. The road also from Worcester and
Shrewsbury, through Framingham to Boston, passes through the south part of the
town into Westborough. There is also a road of much travel from Hubbardston,
Princeton, Holden, Sterling, and especially Boylston, which coming in upon the
northwesterly part of the town, passes directly in front of the meetinghouse,
and then in the space of about fifty rods, falls into the post road.

Another great benefit the town reaps, is from the great resort of people from
all the neighboring towns to the corn and saw mills, to the fulling mill and
forge, and to the blacksmiths', for their works of various kinds, as well as to
the shops and stores.

Northborough is bounded on the north, by Berlin; on the east, by Marlborough
and Southborough; on the south, by Westborough; and on the west, by Shrewsbury
and Boylston.

HUBBARDSTON.
THIS was called "the northeast quarter of Rutland," being wholly included in
the original grant of that town, and was incorporated on the 13th day of June,
1767, and called Hubbardston, to perpetuate the name and memory of the late
Hon. Thomas Hubbard, Esquire of Boston, who had been sometime speaker of the house
of Representatives; after that, several years a counselor of the then
province, and for many years treasurer, and of course a member, of the
corporation of Harvard University in Cambridge. He was a large proprietor of
lands in this place.

The congregational church in Hubbardston was imbodied on the 13th of June,
1770, and on the same day the Rev. Nehemiah Parker was ordained to the work of
the gospel ministry in the place, and who still continues in peace and love
with the people, and ministering to them in holy things.

We proceed to a description of this place. It is about six miles square; and
is bounded west, by Bar; south, by Rutland; east, by Princeton: northeast, by
Westminster; and north, by Gardner, Templeton and Gerry. The town is agreeably
interspersed with hills and valleys. Perhaps about a twelfth part of it is
meadow and interval. The uplands are generally, excellent for grazing and some
considerable part very good for the growth of English grass. The land in
general, is not the best for grain; though in common years a sufficiency is
raised for the inhabitants. It is rather too cold for orcharding, although
there are a number of flourishing orchards in the town, and some years a
considerable quantity of cider is made. Hills there are several in the town,
however, but two which we shall notice: The largest, in the northwesterly part
of the town, extends quite through it, from Templeton to Bar; this is called
Burnshirt Hill, and is most excellent land. The other is called Read's Hill,
situated about one mile and an half east from the center of the town; this is
also very good land.

It is supposed this town is rich in iron ore, at least; there is a hill in the
north part of it, extending into Templeton, See this also noticed in the
account of Templeton.
where a number of gentlemen from Boston and other places, wrought near fifty
years ago. They dug several rods into the hill, in quest of a silver mine; but
whether it answered their expectations or not, was not divulged. A war
commencing put a stop to their pursuit, and it has never since been reassumed.

The town is finely watered by springs, streams and rivers; There are five
rivers and streams noticeable, which pass through the town from north to south.
The most easterly of these is called Piss River, part whereof comes from
Westminster, and part from the west side of Watchusett Hill in Princeton. The
next is called Ware River, which heads in Hubbardston. The next is a smaller
stream, called Meadow Brook, which takes its rise in the north part of the
town. Further west is another stream called Conneystow Brook, which has its
source in Templeton. The most westerly stream is known by the name of Burnshirt
River, the principal branch of which comes from Gerry. All these streams
running a southerly direction, unite in the east part of Bar, where their
names, as well as waters, are swallowed up in Ware River. Otter River, so
called, which rises in Templeton, runs in the north part of this town, and then
turning, falls back into Templeton, and at length, unites with Miller's River.
See this more particularly described in the account of Templeton.
On these rivers and streams, within the town of Hubbardston, there are eleven
saw mills, five grist mills, and one clothiers' works. There are also works for
making potash in the town.

There are three ponds in Hubbardston. The largest of these, known by the name
of the Great Asnaconcomick Pond, is about two miles from the center of the
town, to the east: It is a mile and a half in length, from north to south; the
breadth is various, from half a mile to five rods, supposed to cover about
three hundred acres. About half a mile further to the northeast, is situated
Little Asnaconcomick Pond, of a circular form; and what merits particular
notice is this, that for a considerable part of the way round this pond, there
is every appearance that once a stone wall was built, or building. In some
places it is two feet and an half in height, as if laid up by the hands of men;
and where there is not one stone upon another, the appearance is as of a large
stone wall thrown down. If this was the work of art, when and by whom it was
performed, or wherefore, perhaps can never be ascertained. Both the Ponds
before described are fed by small springs. There is a small outlet from each.
Another small pond is situated about a mile northwest from the center of the
town; it is called Natty Pond, which has both an inlet and an outlet. The
growth of wood in this place is chiefly white pine and pitch pine in great
plenty, hemlock, beech, maple and oak; there is but little of any other sort.

The town is settled in general, with industrious farmers; and they are become
numerous, and are increasing in wealth. There are about 150 families, and near
1000 souls in the place.

Hubbardston is situated sixty miles, nearly west, from Boston; and twenty from
the courthouse in Worcester, to the northwest. A road much used, leads through
the town from the south to the north, in which people pass from Rhodeisland,
etc. etc. to the western part of Newhampshire, and to the State of Vermont. It
is also in contemplation to open a road from the towns on Connecticut river, in
the county of Hampshire, through Petersham, to Hubbardston, and so on through
Princeton and Lancaster, to Boston. This undoubtedly, would be the nearest
route, from Hadley and towns adjacent, to the metropolis of the Commonwealth.

NORTHBRIDGE.
THE town of Northbridge takes its name from its situation and bearing with
respect to Uxbridge, from which it was chiefly taken; five or six families only
being set off to it from Sutton south or first parish. It is about five miles
in length, and about four in width; and is bounded, by Uxbridge, on the south;
by Sutton, on the west; by Grafton, on the north; and by Mendon and Upton, on
the east and northeast. It was incorporated on the 14th of July, 1772. It is
not large, having, at the time of the late enumeration 83 houses, and 570
inhabitants. The congregational church here was imbodied, June the 6th, 1782,
and on the 25th of June, 1783, the Rev. John Crane was ordained their pastor.
Here also there is a society of Baptists of about ten families; at present
destitute of any settled teacher. There are also within the town twelve
families of Quakers, and two or three of the Universalists.

We shall proceed to some Topographical Description of this place.

It is uneven and somewhat rocky and rough; but the land and soil, in general,
rich, strong and good. As it has alternately, high and low lands, it is well
calculated for orcharding, for pasture and grass land, and bears rye, Indian
corn, oats, flax, etc. Hills there are none high, or, on any account
remarkable. The meetinghouse ind^d, stands on an eminence, and commands a good
prospect for four or five miles round. As the lands in general are high, the
air is salubrious, and the inhabitants have been blessed with great health from
the first settlement of the place.

There are no stagnant waters or ponds in the town: But it is finely watered by
springs, streams and rivers. Two of these are noticeable: Blackstone River,
which originates in Sutton, and passing through the westerly part of Grafton,
enters this town, and runs from north to south the whole length of the town, on
the westerly side thereof. This is a large and fine river; and upon this there
are great bodies of very excellent interval lands: Some of these are high, and
bear corn and flax; the lower are good for grass.

There is another river, not so large, which enters this town in the southwest
part from Douglass, and joins Blackstone River. On this river there is a
quantity of valuable meadow: But the land adjoining the meadow is not the most
fertile.

There are within the town, two corn mills, one saw mill, and one forge, where
much work is performed.

The growth of wood, on the high lands is very valuable, consisting of walnut,
oak and chestnut; that on the low lands is less valuable, but like that of other
towns in general; the quantity of pine timber is small. The people here subsist
chiefly by farming; they have the cha^acter of an ^t^ious and flourishing
people; and it is said there is hardly an idle person, or a tavern haunter in
the place.

Northbridge is situated forty three miles from Boston, nearly southwest; and
from the courthouse in Worcester, it is twelve miles, lying about southeast.
The road from Boston, through Mendon and Oxford, to Connecticut, passes through
this town: And the nearest and most direct road to Providence, from Worcester,
would pass about half a mile west of Northbridge meetinghouse.

BAR.
THIS was the northwest part of Rutland Original Grant; it was made a district
by act of the Legislature in the year 1749, and called Rutland District, until
June 14th, 1774, when it was made a town, and the name of Bar was given to
it, as a token of respect to a great and worthy friend of America, at that time
a member of the British House of Commons. Bar is bounded on the north, by
Petersham: on the east, by Hubbardston; on the southeast, by Rutland; on the
south, by Oakham; on the southwest, by Newbraintree; and on the west, by
Hardwick.

The church of Christ in this place, was gathered July 30th, 1753, and the Rev.
Thomas Frink was installed their pastor, on the last Wednesday in October
following. Mr. Frink was the first minister of Rutland, and being dismissed
from thence, he was installed a pastor of the third church in Plymouth November
7th, 1743, where he ^ontinued but a little time before his remo^al. He
continued in the ministry at Bar, but about thirteen years, being dismissed
from his sacred office, by advice of an ecclesiastical council July 17th, 1766.
He was succeeded in the pastoral office at Bar, by the Rev. Josiah Dana, who
was consecrated hereunto October 7th, 1767. Mr. Dana continues in the work of
the gospel ministry in this place, and in peace and esteem with the people of
his charge.

The following sorrowful occurrence took place in this town. In March, 1780,
the house of Mr. Peter Bent was consumed by fire in the night, with almost
every thing contained therein, and two of his children, a son and daughter, of
adult age, perished in the flames.

The town of Bar is large in extent, being rather more than six miles square:
And it is one of the best townships of land in the county; the soil is
exceedingly rich and strong. The land in general, is very hilly and uneven. The
hills, indeed, are not so very high, but some are steep, and being somewhat
rocky, the roads are not so good: But this is commonly the case in most towns
where the soil is excellent, and moist: The town is well watered by numerous
springs and rivulets, and the people enjoy great advantages for turning and
conveying the water over their grass land. The soil is peculiarly adapted to
mowing and pasturage; and here they fat great multitudes of cattle, and make
the best of beef. Here also they have many and large dairies; and it is
supposed that more butter and cheese is carried from hence into the market,
annually, than from any other town of the same extent. The soil bears Indian
corn well; but it is not so well adapted to English grain as some other places.
However, they raise a sufficiency of all kinds for themselves, and considerable
for exportation. As the town is uneven and hilly, it affords no large and
commanding view of itself, but from the hills there is an extensive prospect
into other towns. The pleasantness of Bar consists in the richness and
fertility of the land, and the large, handsome, well finished buildings of all
kinds; but from no one place can many of them be seen at once. The farms are
large, and very productive: The people are industrious, and they have great
encouragement to labor: Their modes of husbandry are good, and there are sure
indications of wealth and opulence all over the town. And indeed it is one of
the foremost towns in the county, there being ^ut three which pay more to a
State tax. It ^s be^ome numerous, having, when the late census wa^ taken,
upwards of 1600 inhabitants, although but one religious society; and they have
the largest meetinghouse in the county, fifty six by seventy four feet.

The general growth of wood in the town, is large and plenty, consisting of oak
of all kinds, especially an unusual proportion of white oak; considerable
chestnut, some walnut; birch, beech, ash, white pine, pitch pine, some hemlock,
etc. There is one large river, called Ware River, which coming from Templeton,
through the westerly part of Hubbardston, passes through the easterly and
southerly parts of Bar, and then runs into Hardwick. There is also a stream
originating in Gerry which runs through the town on the easterly side, within a
mile of the meetinghouse, called Pleasant Branch: This falls into Ware River,
in the south part of the town. In the north part of the town, on the westerly
side, rises another stream from springs, which is called Moose Brook, which
runs into Hardwick, and there empties itself into Ware-River. On these streams
there are some meadows, and very good interval lands on Ware River in the
southerly part of the town. On this river, and on these streams there are four
grist mills, several saw mills, and clothiers' works.

The people in Bar subsist, mainly, by farming; here are, however, all the
usual tradesmen and mechanics, and two or three dealers in European, East and
West India goods; here also the pot and pearl ash works are carried on.

Bar is situated sixty six miles from Boston about west; and it is about
twenty four miles from the courthouse in Worcester, about northwest.

WARD.
THIS place was not an original grant, but was taken from several other towns,
as Worcester, Oxford, Sutton and Leicester, together with a gore of land lying
between Oxford and Leicester, not previously belonging to any town. On the 23d
of June, 1773, this place was erected into a poll parish, and commonly called
the south parish of Worcester. The parish was limited and bounded in the
following manner: It was to extend three miles into Worcester, as the roads
were then trod; three into Oxford, and three into Leicester by their roads, and
one mile and an half into Sutton, from the meetinghouse place. This place as
above described, was incorporated and made a distinct town, and vested with all
the privileges which other towns enjoy, by an act of the Legislature, April
10th, 1778, when it received the name of Ward, as a compliment to the Hon.
Major General Artemas Ward, Esquire of Shrewsbury, and now Representative of this
county in the Congress of the United States of America. The town is bounded
northerly on Worcester; easterly, by Grafton; southeast, by Sutton; south, by
Oxford; and westerly, by Leicester.

The church of Christ in Ward was imbodied on the 25th of January, 1776; and on
the 3d of November, 1784, the Rev. Isaac Bailey was ordained to the pastoral
care thereof, and still continues in the sacred office.

We shall now present the reader with a Geographical Description of the town of
Ward.

It is considered, by good judges, as a most excellent tract of land: The soil
in general is fertile, rich and strong, suitable for orcharding and all kinds
of fruit; well adapted to pasturage and mowing, and produces large crops of
rye, oats, wheat, barley, Indian corn, and flax. It is not very rocky; but
affords stone sufficient for fencing in the farms: It is not level, but rather
uneven, abounding in hills and valleys. The hills, however are not high; but
the lands on them are good. Part of the hill, called Prospect Hill, to the
south, lies within this town; also part of the hill, called Boggachoag, to the
north; and part of the hill, called Grassy Hill, to the southeast of the
meetinghouse. On and near these hills, there are very fine farms. The general
growth of wood is oak of the various sorts, chestnut, walnut, on the high lands;
and in the lower lands, pine, maple, cedar, etc. etc.

The town is as well watered, by springs and perennial rivulets, as perhaps any
other town in the county. The course of the streams is circuitous, and so
meandering as greatly to benefit the town. The principal stream is that which
is called French River. There is another called Kettle Brook, which passes
through the town. On these streams there are four saw mills and two grist
mills, within the town, also one clothiers' works; besides which there is a
wind mill erected on Prospect Hill, which does considerable work.

There are three or four small ponds in the town, the largest of which covers
perhaps, about thirty acres, situated about a mile south of the meetinghouse.
There is an outlet from this pond, to the north, usually called Dark Brook; and
there is an inlet from the south, while the pond is in its natural state, but
by an artificial raising of this pond about four feet, the current in the inlet
is reversed and the discharge of water is to the south.

The town is not large, but it is wealthy; there are about 80 houses; about 90
families, and when they were numbered there were 473 souls: It is situated
fifty five miles from Boston, a little to the southwest; and five miles from
the courthouse in Worcester, almost south.

MILFORD.
THIS place was the northeasterly part of the ancient town of Mendon: It was
set off from Mendon ^s a precinct, or parish, in the year 1741, and was
commonly known by the appellation o^ Mill River. It was incorporated and
invested with all distinct town ^ri^ileges, on the eleventh of April, 1780.
Soon after it was made a parish, a congregational church was here gathered,
viz. on the 15th of April, 1741, consisting of twenty six male members; and on
the 21st of December, 1743, the Rev. Amariah Frost, was solemnly invested with
the pastoral office in the place. Some time after the settlement of Mr. Frost,
a separation took place here; a Mr. Hovey preached to the disaffected, and was
ordained among them. He tarried but a few years; since his time preaching by
itinerants and laymen, and meetings held occasionally on the sabbath, have been
continued among them. A number, not large, believing in the salvation of all
men, have kept up public meetings, and sometimes had preaching. There are a
few anabaptists in this place, and but one family of friends or quakers. The
Rev. Mr. Frost continued the worthy and faithful pastor of the congregational
church in Milford, until March 14th, 1792, when he died in the seventy second
year of his age, and the forty ninth of his ministry.

An addition to, and a general repair of their meetinghouse was made in 1792,
and it is now a very decent and convenient building.

There has been greater candor and moderation of late between those of
different sentiments in this town, than formerly was discovered; and it is
hoped greater unanimity will take place in the resettlement of the gospel
ministry among them.

We proceed to a Geographical Description of the town of Milford.

Milford is situated on the easterly side of the county; and is bounded on the
north, by Hopkinton; on the east, by Holliston, in the county of Middlesex; on
the southeast, by Bellingham in the county of Suffolk; on the west, and
southwest, by Mendon; and on the northwest, by Upton. It is situated southwest
from Boston, at the distance of thirty four miles; and from Worcester
courthouse, it is southeast, distant twenty miles; and it is twenty five miles
from Providence.

The town of Milford is not a level, champaign tract of land, neither yet is it
very hilly and uneven; there is indeed, one large hill, a little from the
center of the town, to the southeast, called Bear Hill. This is mostly very
good land. The whole of the north part of the town is high and good land; it
rises by a gradual ascent; and from the highest places there is a large and
variegated prospect; from these heights may be seen the Watchusetts and
Monadnock mountains, as also the hills south of Boston. This northern part was
a purchase from the Indians, by the proprietors of the ancient township of
Mendon; and was commonly called the North Purchase. This part is the most
distant from the meetinghouse in Milford; and in this quarter, the sectaries in
the town have usually held their religious meetings. The northern and western
parts of the town, especially, are rough and rocky; but the soil is generally
strong and good; and well adapted to orcharding, grass and pasturage, and
suffers but little by a dry season. They raise grain here of all kinds in
sufficient quantities most commonly for themselves; but their articles of
produce for market, are chiefly butter, cheese, pork, beef, etc. perhaps equal
in quality to any in the county. There are but few mechanics in the place, and
seldom more than two traders in European and India goods. The people subsist
mainly by the business of husbandry, and are industrious and good livers. The
town is supposed to contain about as much as five miles square. There are 135
dwelling houses, and 840 inhabitants in the town, according to the late census.

There are two rivers running through this town, from north to south, nearly
parallel with each other, about one mile and an half distant, in some places
not so much; one on the west, the other on the east side of the town: These
have their sources in the high lands beforementioned, in the borders of
Hopkinton. That on the west is called Mill River, the name by which this place
was designated until its incorporation, this is large, running through the
easterly part of Mendon, it passes to Providence. That on the east is a
principal branch of Charles's River, which soon turns and runs easterly, and
falls into the sea in Boston harbor. Mill River is the outlet of a large pond,
said to be a mile in length, partly in Milford, but principally in Hopkinton
and Upton, called North Pond. There is another pond, a little more than a mile
from the center of the town, called Cedar Swamp Pond; this i^ i^ ^all, though
there be plenty of fish therein, as in the other; the branch of Charles's River
spoken of above, runs directly through this pond. There are very good meadows,
and interval lands upon the borders of both the rivers described before, as
well as small pieces in other parts of the town, which are a singular advantage
to the farmers. The town abounds in springs, rivulets and brooks in all parts*
And on the rivers and streams they have four grist mills, three saw mills, one
clothiers' works, and one trip hammer within the limits of Milford.

The growth of wood in this town is oak of all sorts, chestnut, walnut, etc.
there is very little pine or cedar at this day.

The roads in this town are not good, especially for carriages; but they may be
made in time, much better than at present.

We shall close our account of Milford, with mentioning, that in this place was
born Alexander Scammell, Esquire who graduated at Harvard University, A. D. 1769;
who was appointed a surveyor of mast timber, etc. in Massachusetts, and
province of Maine, under the British government; was Brigade Major in the
American army, in 1775; a Colonel in the year 1777, at the taking of Genesis
Burgoyne, and Adjutant General of the army at Yorktown, where he was
unfortunately wounded in reconnoitering, September 30, 1781, just before the
surrender of Lord Cornwallis, of which wound he soon after died.

STERLING.
THIS was for many years, the second parish in Lancaster, and was commonly
called Chockset. It was made a separate parish in the year 1743, and remained
united with Lancaster until April 25th, 1781, when it was incorporated by act
of the Legislature, and received its present name, in compliment to Lord
Sterling, of Newjersey, who served as a General in the American army, in the
late war between Greatbritain and these United States. This is a large,
populous, and wealthy town; is about seven miles in length, from north to
south, and six in width from east to west. It is situated about five miles from
Lancaster, a little to the south of west, on the road to Princeton. It is
bounded by Holden and Princeton on the west; eight miles from Holden, and seven
from Princeton, six miles from Boylston, which lies to the south of it; and
from Leominster, on the north, it is seven miles.

This town is rather hilly and uneven, though there is very little broken, or
waste land in it. It is not very rocky, but a most excellent, fertile soil,
producing in rich abundance, to repay the husbandman for its cultivation. The
high lands are excellent for all kinds of fruits, especially apples; and here
are large orchards; also, for grass and grazing; for the land is naturally
moist, and by the help of the rivulets, the water may be turned over the sides
of most of the hills. As the town is very uneven, there is no extended
prospect. Nevertheless, the fertility of the soil, the high degree of
cultivation, and the interspersion of hills and valleys, afford peculiar
gratification to the eyes of observing travelers. The meetinghouse is in a
valley; and on the road, in this valley, there is a large collection of
tradesmen and mechanics and they are lively, active and industrious.

But the bulk of the people are large farmers, and, as the bounteous Author of
Nature has blessed them with a fruitful soil, they have great encouragement to
labor. Though the town be hilly, as above observed, yet there are bu^ ^wo
worthy of particular notice. The first is Re^stone Hill, so called from the
color of the stones which are upon it.

This lies about a mile from the meetinghouse, on the road leading from
Sterling to Lancaster.

The second is called Justice's Hill, which is situated about four miles
northwest from the meetinghouse, on the road leading to Westminster.

There is but one river in the town, called Still River, from the slow motion
of its waters; for after it enters this town, it runs in a vale for sev^ral
miles, with but a small descent. The waters which form this river, are
furnished from three distinct sources. The western branch issues from the foot
of Mount Watchusett, in Princeton, and after various meanders, and receiving
accessions by several rivulets, which originate in the eastern side of
Princeton hills, joins the others a little north of the road leading from
Sterling to Princeton. This branch bears the name of Hartwell's River, upon
which are several valuable mills. The middle branch originates in Gardner's
Meadows, which are in the northeastern part of Princeton; This is the largest
of the three branches; and carries several mills. The eastern branch which is
called Justice's River, has its source in the southwesterly part of Leominster;
and taking its course, through justice's Meadows, which lie on the west side of
Justice's Hill, and receiving several brooks, empties itself into the main
stream, or Still River. After the confluence of these branches the river takes
a southern direction along the western side of Sterling, for several miles,
until it enters Boylston, thence taking a circuitous route through the westerly
and northerly parts of Boylston, loses its name in Nashaway, or Lancaster
River. On the banks of this river in Sterling there is some pitch pine plain,
some meadow and interval land.

There is one considerable stream in the northerly part of the town, which
running an easterly course, empties itself into the north branch of Nashaway.

There are two considerable ponds in Sterling; one lies by the county road to
Worcester; the other, a little to the southeast of this: These are divided by a
neck of land of about forty rods, in width, at the narrowest place; through
this neck a small stream runs, affording a passage for the fish from one pond
to the other. From the western pond issues a considerable stream, sufficient to
carry a mill, which goes from November to May, but no longer, as the mill pond
would flow a large body of meadow. These are called Waushacum Ponds: They are
very deep in some places. Each pond, upon the most exact computation, is about
one mile, and a quarter in diameter. The eastern is the largest; but the
western the most pleasant, on several accounts; as it is not surrounded with
hills like the eastern; and as it has in it an island, containing about half an
acre of land, where fishing parties often repair to regale themselves with
fish, which these ponds afford in plenty.

There are two or three things, not to be forgotten in giving the history of
Sterling: One is, that near the neck of land which divides Waushacum Ponds, on
the south side, was formerly an Indian fort; and near this, there was a place
where they buried their dead. The ruins of the fort, and the graves were very
discernible, until within a few years past, when by ploughing the ground those
vestiges of antiquity and barbarism have disappeared. On this very spot was the
palace, and Royal seat of Sholan, Sachem of the Nashaways, and proprietor of
Nashawogg.

Another thing to be mentioned is this; that about three miles northwest from
the meetinghouse, on the road leading to Westminster, is a place called The
Indian Fight, in consequence of a most bloody battle fought there between the
English and Indians, on August 19th, 1707; the particulars of which we gave in
the account of Lancaster, to which the reader is referred.

A third thing not to be omitted, and a most sorrowful Providence indeed, is
the burning of the house of Mr. Josiah Wilder of this town in January 1740; in
which conflagration his wife, (pregnant, and near the time for her delivery)
with four small children besides, perished; another child, a son, the father
plucked as a brand out of the burning, by ^ing a hole through the side of the
house, ne^ ^here the bed was, in which this child lay, and pulled him out
thereat, while the room was full of fire and smoke. This child was almost
suffocated; but was soon recovered and lived many years.

The growth of wood in Sterling is most excellent, and of the following sorts,
oak of the several kinds, walnut, chestnut, on the high lands; and the usual
sorts in the low lands and swamps, as birch, maple, ash, etc. The white pine
timber is chiefly cut off, and there is not much pitch pine remaining, and at
this day, but little of the yellow pine.

We proceed to give some account of the ecclesiastical state of this town.

The church of Christ here, was imbodied on December 19th, 1744, and on the
same day their first minister, the Rev. John Mellen, was ordained, who
continued with them until December 14th, 1778, when his pastoral relation to
them, was dissolved, by mutual agreement. Soon after, the Rev. Mr. Mellen was
installed pastor of the church and people at Hanover, in the county of
Plymouth, where he continues to great acceptance. To Mr. Mellen, succeeded in
the sacred work of the ministry, the Rev. Reuben Holcomb, whereunto he was
solemnly separated on the 2d of June, 1779, and who still continues their
pastor.

In Sterling died Mr. Sebastian Smith, a native of old Spain, on the 24th of
March, 1765, in an advanced age. He came young into this country and living a
single life, he devoted his considerable estate to pious and charitable uses.
Several years before his death he gave to the society, a folio Bible, that a
portion of the holy scriptures might be read, on Lord's days, to the
congregation. He gave much to the poor in his life time; and by will also: And
likewise furnished the communion table, with two silver tankards; and gave one
hundred pounds sterling as a fund for schooling the more indigent children and
youth. As such deeds come up as a memorial before God, so they ought to be kept
in remembrance among men.

Sterling is distant from Boston, about forty six miles, nearly west; and from
the courthouse in Worcester, it is twelve miles a little to the northeast. At
the time of taking the census in 1791, there were in the town 209 dwelling
houses, and 1428 inhabitants.

BERLIN.
ON the 13th of April, 1778, an act passed the General Court, incorporating a
second parish in the south part of Bolton. And on the 16th of March, 1784, this
precinct was erected into a district by the name of Berlin, at which time
several families, with about five hundred acres of land, were added, from the
northwest corner of Marlborough, and annexed to the county of Worcester. Since
that time, a few families have been added to this district from the southeast
part of Lancaster. This district is invested with all the immunities and
privileges of a town, excepting only that of sending a representative to the
General Court; but it has the liberty of joining with Bolton in the annual
choice of representatives. Here a church was imbodied, under the direction of
an ecclesiastical council, by a covenant bearing date April 7th, 1779; and on
September 26th, 1781, the Rev. Reuben Puffer was ordained to the pastoral care
thereof.

There is one pond in the east part of the district, called Gate's Pond, nearly
a mile in length, and from a quarter to half of a mile in width; it abounds in
the usual pond fish; and a good sand is taken up near its shores: No brook
empties into it, but at the south end there is a small outlet, which falls into
the river Assabet. There is also a large swamp, containing many hundred acres,
lying mostly within this district: It is a low, sunken tract of land, but
bears, however, spruce of a great height, and in some parts of it, white pine
timber. The most valuable uplands are seated on several hills, which afford
excellent pasturage and orcharding. Wheat has been raised on some of them to
great advantage. One lies near the above named pond, and contains a number of
very fine farms. The others are a broken range of hills, which, beginning about
a mile south of the meetinghouse, run westerly until they meet with
Northborough hills, then stretching in a northern direction, cover, with a few
intersections, all the west and north parts of the district, and thus they
continue through Bolton and Harvard, to Littleton in the county of Middlesex. A
few of the bluff points of these high lands have been distinguished with
arbitrary names, but no name applies to the whole range. The culture of hops
has lately been introduced here, and by the experiments already made, bids fair
to prove a profitable branch of husbandry. On the farm of the Hon. Samuel
Baker, Esquire in the northerly part of the district, is found a quarry of most
valuable stone, of a light gray color, out of which that gentleman has built a
handsome, large mansion house. These stones are remarkable for an excellent
quality which resists the effects of fire.

The principal stream, and the only one worthy of particular mention, is called
Northbrook; it is formed of two small streams, from the southwest, and
northwest which uniting about a mile and an half west of the meetinghouse,
afford a convenient seat for saw and grist mills, where considerable business
is performed. Taking thence a southeasterly direction, it runs upwards of two
miles, through a large and rich interval, and after passing through the
northeast corner of Northborough, where there are also mills, it soon falls
into the river Assabet at the southeast angle of the district. Northbrook is
from two to three rods in width, and of considerable depth; and formerly it
yielded great quantities of the various sorts of fresh water fish, but they are
of late exceedingly diminished.

The district consists of ninety two families, of which fourteen are of the
sect called quakers. The latter are mostly industrious, and some of them
wealthy farmers. The number of its inhabitants, by the late census, was 512. It
lies thirty four miles from Boston, nearly west, and fifteen miles from the
courthouse in Worcester, to the northeast. Berlin is bounded on the north, by
Bolton; on the east, by Marlborough; on the south, by Northborough; and on the
west, by Boylston and Lancaster.

GARDNER.
GARDNER is a town which was taken from the towns of Westminster, Templeton,
Winchendon and Ashburnham, and is accordingly bounded by them, in the following
manner; by Westminster, on the south and southeast; by Templeton, on the
southwest and west; by Winchendon, on the north and northwest; and by
Ashburnham on the northeast.

It was incorporated, and made a distinct town on the 27th of June, 1785. It is
not large in extent, its contents being about 14000 acres, but yet capable of
making a good and wealthy town; having already 85 dwelling houses, and 530
inhabitants, according to the late census.

The church in Gardner was gathered on the 1st of February, 1786, and the Rev.
Jonathan Osgood was ordained as pastor thereof, October 19th, 1791.

This town was called Gardner to perpetuate the name and memory of the late
famous Col. Thomas Gardner of Cambridge, near Boston, who was killed in the
memorable battle upon Bunker's Hill, in Charlestown, on the 17th of June 1775,
gallantly fighting in defense of the liberty and rights of his country.

The general face of this town is uneven, abounding in small hills and valleys;
and though the land be somewhat rocky, yet not in general, too much so; the
soil is good, rich, strong and fertile. It produces wheat, rye, Indian corn,
barley, oats, flax, etc. etc. It is peculiarly adapted to grass and pasturage,
being naturally moist and abounding in springs, rivulets, streams, brooks and
rivers, whereby they can water the lands at pleasure.

There is one river, called Otter River, See this river more particularly
described in the account of Templeton.
running from the south to the north; coming from Hubbardston, through a part
of Templeton to Gardner, it is some way a boundary between Gardner and
Templeton, and, in Winchendon, falls into Miller's River. There are several
brooks and streams, without names, except two; these are called Pen Brook, and
Spectacle Brook; all the waters run northerly and northwesterly, and are
finally emptied into Connecticut river. Upon these several streams, and the
river beforenamed, there are considerable bodies of good meadow land; and a
number of saw and grist mills; but no other water works at present. There are
two large and fine ponds in the town, but without names; these have, each of
them, small streams running from them. They have here the usual artificers and
traders; and here also are potash works. The general growth of wood in this
place, is similar to that of other new places of like kinds of lands, both high
and low, as oak of several sorts, birch, rock maple, white and red ash,
hemlock, white pine, and hacmatack. There are two county roads leading through
the town; the principal one, is that which leads from Connecticut river,
through Petersham, Gerry and Templeton, on to Boston. This town lies sixty
miles from Boston, northwesterly; and twenty six miles from Worcester
courthouse, to the north.

BOYLSTON.
THIS was included in the original grant of the township of Shrewsbury: It was
made a parish, by act of the Legislature, December 17th, 1742, and was
thenceforward called the second precinct, or north parish in Shrewsbury, until
March 1st, 1786, when it was incorporated and made a distinct town, and had the
name of Boylston given to it, in honor of the rich and generous family of
Boylston, two of whom in succession, were great and eminent Physicians; another
not long since, founded a professorship of rhetoric and oratory in Harvard
University.

This town is not a very large tract of land; and it does not lie in the most
regular form; it contains 14396 acres by survey, not being five miles square.

It is bounded by Shrewsbury on the south; by Worcester, on the southwest; by
Holden and Sterling, on the west and northwest; by Lancaster on the north; and
by Berlin and Northborough, on the east. It is situated almost west from,
Boston, at the distance of forty three miles; and from the courthouse in
Worcester it is eight miles.

The church of Christ in this place was imbodied on the 6th day of October,
1743, and the Rev. Ebenezer Morse was invested with the pastoral office
therein, on the 26th of the same month and year. He continued until the 10th of
November, 1775, when he was dismissed, more especially on account of his
political sentiments respecting the controversy between Greatbritain and
America. The Rev. Mr. Morse, was from the first, a skilful and eminent
physician, and is still employed in the business. Mr. Morse was succeeded, as
pastor of the church and congregation in Boylston, by the Rev. Eleazer
Fairbank, who was ordained on the 27th of March, 1777; and continued their
pastor until April 23d, 1793, when at his earnest desire and request, the
church and congregation consented to his dismission, in the presence, and under
the direction of a mutual council. Mr. Fairbank was installed pastor of the
church and congregation of Wilmington in the State of Vermont, September 11th,
1793.

We shall now attempt some description of the town of Boylston.

It lies in general, high, descending to the north, and northeast; but the land
is not so high in the middle, and round about the meetinghouse, as it is on the
east, south and west. It is rather hilly, rough and uneven; although there are
some considerable plains, covered with pitch pine. The hills on the east side,
adjoining to Northborough, are large and high, and pretty steep where the road
passes; and although there is considerable broken land in the town, yet none
but what is good for, and well covered with wood, of which there is a plenty.
The wood which grows on the high and hard land, is of all the sorts of oak,
some walnut, plenty of chestnut, some sassafras; in the swamps and swales, grow
some ash, birch, maple, spruce, juniper, some white pine and some hemlock. The
prickly ash also, is a native of this place; it is a bush or shrub, seldom
growing more than six or seven feet in height; though it grows in moist, yet
not in cold land; it possesses some singular qualities and virtues, and its
bark and seeds are highly esteemed, and much used, by Physicians.

The soil in this town is generally good, rich and fertile. There are good
arable lands; but it is very excellent for orcharding, for pasturage and grass;
and here are some of as large and good farmers, as perhaps any where in the
county, who keep great stocks of cattle. The people raise all kinds of country
produce, especially beef, pork, grain, butter and cheese, vastly more than they
consume, and carry more into the market, than perhaps, any other town of its
bigness and number. The town enjoys a fine healthy air, and the place has been
famed for the longevity of its inhabitants. There are really no stagnant
waters. There are two ponds, but the waters are kept in motion by a current, in
consequence of inlets and outlets. Rocky Pond, so denominated from its general
stony bottom, and more stony shore, is situated in the easterly part of the
town from whence there is an outlet at the south end, into Cold Harbor Brook,
and so into the river Assabet, in Northborough. This is a fine pond for all
kinds of small fish, especially pickerel. It covers about thirty six acres of
ground as appears from actual survey; and by the dam at the south end, the pond
is raised so as to cover thirty acres of meadow. Sewall's Pond, so denominated
from a family of that name, who owned the lands round it, lies in the southwest
part of Boylston, toward Worcester. This is large, covering a hundred acres of
land perhaps, or more. It is well supplied with all kinds of pond fish; there
are two rivulets, from springs which run into it, from the north and northeast;
and at the south is the large outlet, which crossing the roads to Rutland and
Worcester, in Shrewsbury, falls into Quinsigamond, or Long Pond. There are
three small brooks in the town, which originating from springs in Boylston, run
northerly into the south branch of the river Nashaway. Gates's Brook empties
into the river in the west part of the town, near to Major Beaman's. Muddy
Brook empties in about a mile west of the meetinghouse. On this brook there is
a saw mill, and a body of meadow. Mill Brook, on which there is also a saw
mill, rises and falls into the river in the easterly part. The great south
branch of the river Nashaway runs through Boylston from the northwest, and
passing southeasterly, till it comes within about a mile of the meetinghouse,
then turns and runs northeasterly, into Lancaster. This river is formed by the
junction of two large streams or rivers. One comes from the east side of
Watchusett mountain, and passing through the southerly part of Sterling, and
called Still Water River, is, on the road at the bridge, the boundary between
Sterling and Boylston, and running southeasterly about a mile in Boylston, is
joined by Quinepoxet Stream, so called: This runs from a pond, called
Quinepoxet on the south side of Princeton, partly in Holden, and running
southeast in Holden about two miles, turns and runs northeast, until it joins
Still Water, on the west side of Boylston. After the confluence of these
streams, there are four large bridges, on the river within Boylston; two of
them are good, handsome str^ng and well constructed. On the west side of the
town, after the two streams unite, there is a saw mill; also a corn mill with
two pair of stones; likewise a fulling mill, and clothiers' works, where a vast
deal of business is performed. In the northeast part of the town, on this
river, are two corn mills, a saw mill, an oil mill, and fulling mill, together
with a trip hammer, all close together. These are famous for their
construction, and for the work they do.

On this river, within the town of Boylston, are large bodies of most excellent
and rich interval lands, to the number of 1^00 acres; about 1000 in one body.
On these lands the people raise vast quantities of Indian corn, flax, and some
hemp, besides the immense quantities of hay and feed they yield. The wood yet
remaining on these lands is butternut, buttonwood, shagbark, some ash and maple.

There is a small eminence a little southwest from the meetinghouse, which
overlooks all the high lands in the town, called Diamond Hill, from the great
number of stones upon it which look like diamonds, and with which they have
actually cut glass; and which might be of use and importance if properly
attended to. There are, in several parts of the town, large quarries of stone
which are easily dug up, and many of them split, of all shapes, sizes, and
lengths; they have excellent faces, for underpinning to houses, and for door
stones, and steps, but they are too hard to admit of being much wrought upon.
Many of them are of a great length, and far superior to any hewed stones. It
was both pleasing and astonishing to see the collection of these stones, in
their natural shapes, which they collected for the underpinning of the new
meetinghouse they have lately erected.

Manufactories they have none, except of potash. Roads they have two or three
called county roads of considerable travel, leading to Worcester, to
Providence, and also to the Boston market. The people subsist chiefly by
farming; and many of them are become very wealthy indeed. It may be styled a
rich town, for they are not only clear of debt, but have several hundreds of
pounds in their treasury, which, with proper management, would, in a few years,
produce an adequate fund for the support of a public teacher of piety,
religion and morality. And if they continue united and peaceable, they will
soon vie with the town from whence they were taken; nay, they would soon equal
almost any of the towns in the county. There are 150 families in the place; and
when the census was taken, there were 840 inhabitants, A social library has
lately been established here. It is in its infancy; but bids fair to be
something considerable in a little time. Upon the whole, if this be not so
pleasant a place as some others, the people are industrious and prosperous, and
there are sure indications of wealth and independence among them; and they may
be happy if it be not their own fault.

GERRY.
THIS was taken chiefly from Templeton, and as we said in our description of
that town, was set off as a separate, or distinct parish, on the 16th of
February, 1774. It lies on the westerly side of Templeton, and between that and
Petersham. This parish, together with the southeasterly part of Athol, was
incorporated with distinct town privileges October 20th, 1786, and had the name
Gerry given it, out of respect to the Hon. Elbridge Gerry, Esquire a representative
of this Commonwealth, in the Congress of the United States. The settlement of
the gospel ministry, with all the ordinances and institutions of Jesus Christ,
in this place, was greatly retarded by the unhappy controversy between
Greatbritain and the then American colonies, and the war which (...) in 1775
and lasted nearly ^ight years. However, on the 16th of November, 1785, a church
was gathered here. ^n the presence and under the direction of an ecclesiastical
council; and the Rev. Ebenezer Tucker was ordained as the spiritual watchm^n
and overseer of the church and flock of God in this place, November 5th, 1788.

The town of Gerry is pretty uneven, consisting of hills and valleys, but in
general, an excellent and rich soil, but especially good for grass and
pastur^ge. Two miles west of the meetinghouse is situated a very fertile hill,
large in extent, called Prospect Hill, from the extensive view it affords of
the adjacent towns and country. There is an eminence on this hill which
overlooks all the high lands for many miles round: And from hence are seen in a
clear air, without the help of glasses, the meetinghouses in eight or nine
different towns. On this hill, there are many noble farms. The inhabitants of
this town except the usual mechanics, subsist by farming, and the lands richly
repay their labor. It is now in a flourishing state; and capable of becoming
numerous and wealthy, and contains 14,000 acres of land. The number of the
people, when the census was taken, was 740.

It is well wooded and timbered, bearing oak of various sorts, chestnut, white
and pitch pine, birch, beech, ash, and some walnut. Here also are potash works.
This town is exceedingly well watered by perennial streams and rivulets. About
a mile east of the meetinghouse, is situated a large and fine pond, abounding
with the various sorts of fresh water small fish. This has no observable inlet;
but from the northeast end of this pond there is an outlet running through
meadows, to the southeast, which takes the name of Burnshirt in Templeton, as
mentioned in the description of that town, and is the west branch of Ware River.

From three springs arise streams, which soon unite and form New Brook, or
Beaver Brook, near the middle of the town, which running northerly, soon
becomes ^ boundary line between Templeton and Gerry as much as three or four
miles, then entering into Royalston, there empties its waters into Miller's
River.

In the westerly part of Gerry, from springs, rises a stream which forms the
main branch of Swift River, running southwesterly through Petersham.

Moccousin Brook, so called, rises likewise from springs in Gerry, runs through
the easterly part of Petersham, and there empties into Swift River.

On these several streams and rivulets there are large bodies of excellent
meadow and interval lands, which were a peculiar advantage to the people in
beginning their new settlements.

This town is finely supplied with mills, having three corn mills, and four saw
mills.

Gerry is situated about 65 miles a ^le to the northwest from Boston, and about
30 from the courthouse in Worcester; bounded, by Petersham and Athol, on the
west; by Royalston, on the north; by Templeton, on the east; and by Hubberdston
and Bar, on the south.

WOODSTOCK. [Formerly belonging to the County of Worcester.]
HAVING completed our account of the several towns in the County of Worcester,
we must suppose that the attentive reader observed the town of Woodstock was
particularly named in the act for the e^ecting of this county, yet it has not
been described in this history. In order to give full satisfaction upon this
subject, the following account must be subjoined. The settlement of the line of
jurisdiction between Massachusetts and Connecticut, though diverse times
attempted, was never fully adjusted until the year 1713. As early as the year
1636, the first settlers upon Connecticut river removed from Massachusetts, and
took possession of the country upon, and near the river on both sides, from
Springfield as low as Wethersfield, inclusive of both, and managed their
affairs by virtue of authority from the General Court of Massachusetts.
However, these lands were claimed by the patentees of Connecticut. But, in
1638, the inhabitants of Springfield (which included what was afterward called
Suffield, below on one side the river, and Enfield on the other side) having no
doubt they were within the limits of the Massachusetts patent, petitioned the
General Court that they might be separated from the other towns below, and be
received and continued as part of the colony, which was granted, and
jurisdiction exercised accordingly. In the year 1642, by order of the General
Court, two persons, Woodward and Saffery run the then province line. This line
seems to have been, for several years, acquiesced in. And in 1662, Mr. Wi^throp
obtained from king Charles II, a charter for the colonies of Connecticut and
Newhaven united; the north line whereof is intended to be the same with the
south line of Massachusetts. From this time, until after the incorporation of
Massachusetts by a new charter in 1691, we hear nothing about bounds. In the
year 1686, many of the inhabitants of Roxbury pitched upon a tract of land to
settle upon, which was bounded on the south by Woodward and Saffery's line, and
it was granted to them by the Massachusetts government, and took the name of
Woodstock. After the new charter, Connecticut made a more serious affair of
what was called the Massachusetts encroachments. After various unsuccessful
attempts to compromise this matter, commissions passed the seals of each
government with ample powers to settle the controversy. The Massachusetts were
intent upon securing the property to such persons to whom they had granted
lands and the jurisdiction of those towns which had been settled by them.
Suffield, Enfield and Woodstock were the only towns which could be affected.
Connecticut was also apprehensive that part of the town of Simsbury, which had
been settled by that government, might fall within the Massachusetts. It was
therefore settled as a preliminary, that the towns should remain to the
governments by which they had been settled, and the property of as many acres,
as should appear upon a balance to have been gained by one government from the
other, should be conveyed out of other unimproved lands as a satisfaction or
equivalent; only, as there were about two miles which Windsor claimed upon the
town of Suffield, there having been a long contest between these two towns
concerning the validity of the respective grants, it was agreed those two miles
should belong to Connecticut if they fell within their line.

"Nothing could be more equitable; nor tend more to the future peace and
content of the inhabitants of the contested borders.

"It appeared, by the report of the commissioners, that 107,793 acres of land
were due from the Massachusetts, who accordingly made a grant thereof to
Connecticut. They accepted, and made sale of the same; and applied the produce
to the support of Yale College, and other public uses: And the controverted
towns, for many years after, continued without molestation under the
jurisdiction by which they were first settled."

The foregoing account is given upon the authority and, chiefly, in the words
of Governor Hutchinson, in his History of Massachusetts.

The lands granted to Connecticut were what are now called Pelham, Belchertown,
etc. in the county of Hampshire.

Though the lands were granted to Connecticut, the jurisdiction thereof was to
remain to Massachusetts.

After this equitable and amicable settlement in 1713, Suffield and Enfield, in
the county of Hampshire, and Woodstock, in the county of Worcester, were
considered as belonging to Massachusetts, were taxed by, and paid their taxes
to this Commonwealth, and sent representatives to our legislature until the
year 1748, when they revolted, and their representatives were, by a bare
majority, admitted to seats in the General Assembly of Connecticut.
Massachusetts, however, continued to tax them, (though they paid nothing) until
the late revolution, when this Commonwealth ceased to claim them.

The lands of these three towns, undoubtedly, fell within Connecticut patent;
and Massachusetts had no right to grant them away: Yet, after so fair and
equitable an agreement as was made between the two then colonies, and actual
satisfaction made by Massachusetts to Connecticut, it may be questioned,
whether the inhabitants of those towns acted generously and fairly in
revolting, or the colony acted honorably in receiving them. Be these questions
answered as they may, by their revolt the line between the two States is now a
straight line, running due west, from the northwest corner of Rhodeisland,
until it meets Newyork State line. -- Thus ends the history of Woodstock.

RIVERS.
HAVING given an account of each town, I will subjoin a particular description
of the several rivers, beginning at their sources, and following them to the
Atlantic ocean.

Beginning at the north part of the county, the first is Miller's River, or
Payquage River. -- This has, properly, two sources; the principal source of it
is a large pond, called Monomenock Pond, lying mostly in Rindge, in the state
of Newhampshire, partly in Winchendon. The other source is a pond in
Ashburnham, called Naukheag. These two branches, with various streams and
rivulets from the adjacent country, which fall into them, unite in the
northeasterly part of Winchendon, and form Miller's River, which runs an almost
westerly course through the southeasterly part of Royalston, Athol, and between
Wendell and Erving's land, and falls into Connecticut River between the towns
of Northfield and Montague. Part of the waters of Ashburnham, Templeton and
Gerry, and all of Gardner, Winchendon, Royalston and Athol, pass into this
river. It is a large and beautiful stream, though in some places very rapid.
This Mrs. Rowlandson crossed while a captive with the Indians. In her narrative
she calls it Bayquage River. By a late act of cour^ a number of gentlemen are
made a body corporate, for the purpose of building a bridge over this river
near its mouth.

In the next place, a large branch of Souheagan River originates in Ashburnham;
this runs northeasterly through Ashby, at the northwest angle of the county of
Middlesex; then into Newipswich in the State of Newhampshire, through Mason,
Amherst, and between the towns of Merrimack and Litchfield is emptied into
Merrimack River. This is a large stream, having its waters continually
augmenting, by various streams, before it falls into the river Merrimack.

The third in our course is the river Nashaway. This is formed by the junction
of two main branches. The north branch comes, partly, by a stream from springs
in Ashburnham, and runs southeasterly into Fitchburg; and, partly, from
Watchusett Pond on the north side of that mountain, which stream runs
northerly, through the easterly part of Westminster, into Fitchburg, and there
unites with the stream from Ashburnham; then turns and runs southeasterly
through Leominster into the middle of the town of Lancaster within a few rods
of the meetinghouse. The south branch of the Nashaway is also composed of two
streams: One from the east side of Watchusett Mountain runs southeasterly,
through the southwesterly part of Sterling, into the edge of Boylston; this is
called Still River. The other comes from Quinepoxet Pond, partly in Holden, and
runs northeasterly into Boylston, and uniting with Still River, on the westerly
side of Boylston, constitutes the south branch of Nashaway. This continues an
easterly course until it comes within a mile and a half of Boylston
meetinghouse; then it takes a northeasterly direction, through the southerly
part of Lancaster, and there, in about half a mile east of the meetinghouse,
forms a junction with the north branch. After the confluence of these two main
branches, the river Nashaway runs northeasterly, between Lancaster and Harvard,
and between Harvard and Shirley, into Groton and Pepperell in the county of
Middlesex, then into Hollis, in the State of Newhampshire, and through
Dunstable, and there falls into the river Merrimack. Nashaway is the largest
and finest river which originates in the county of Worcester, and has the most
rich and valuable interval and meadow lands upon its borders.

The next river we shall describe is Ware River; this originates in Gerry from
a pond, and running easterly into Templeton, joins another stream, and runs
south into Hubbardston, from thence into Bar; and then it becomes a boundary
between Hardwick and Newbraintree, and receiving Swift River from Petersham, it
passes through the towns of Ware and Belchertown, and Kingston, and receiving
Quaboag River, which comes from Brookfield, it thence takes the name of
Chicabee, and falls into Connecticut River in the north part of the town of
Springfield. The waters of Gerry, part of the waters of Templeton and
Princeton, all the waters of Hubbardston and Petersham; of Bar and
Newbraintree; part of the waters of Rutland, Paxton, Leicester and Spencer; and
all of Brookfield, are emptied into Connecticut River, in the town of
Springfield.

The river Quinebaug rises in the town of Brimfield, in the county of
Hampshire, and runs east into the county of Worcester, through Sturbridge and
Charlton, and then, southeast, through the westerly part of Dudley, and so on
into the State of Connecticut, where it joins French River.

French River has its principal source in Holden, and runs southerly through
Worcester and Oxford, and the easterly part of Dudley, then passes into the
State of Connecticut, through Killingsley, Pomfret, Canterbury to Norwich,
where joining other rivers, it takes the name of Thames River, and falls into
the sea, or Longisland Sound, at Newlondon. Hence, the waters of Sturbridge,
Charlton, Dudley, Oxford, and part of the waters of Holden, Worcester,
Leicester, and Spencer, are emptied into the sea at Newlondon.

Blackstone River rises in the town of Sutton, and first runs northwest through
Ward into Worcester, and takes in various streams and rivulets in its course,
then it turns and runs southeast, and receiving the river which comes from
Shrewsbury Long Pond, it passes through Grafton, Northbridge and Uxbridge, into
Rhodeisland State, where with its various accessions of Swift River, West
River, and Mumford's River, it takes the name of Pawtucket, or Narragansett
River, and passes to Providence. All the waters of Sutton, Ward, Douglass,
Northbridge, Uxbridge, Upton, and part of the waters of Worcester, Shrewsbury,
Milford Mendon and Grafton, pass to Providence, and so on to the sea below
Rhodeisland.

The river Assabet has its source in Grafton, and running across the northwest
angle of Westborough, enters Northborough in the southwest part of the town,
and running about half of a mile east of the meetinghouse, passes off through
the northwest angle of Marlborough, and running through the southeasterly part
of Stow, and the south part of Action it enters the westerly part of Concord,
receiving various streams and rivulets in its progress, and there is called the
north branch of Concord River. All the waters of Northborough, and part of
those of Grafton and Westborough, and of Shrewsbury, Boylston and Berlin, pass
in this river Assabet. The south branch, or Sudbury River, rises from a pond,
and a large Cedar Swamp, in the southeast part of Westborough, runs into
Hopkinton, is the boundary between Southborough and Hopkinton, then passes
through the middle of the town of Framingham into Sudbury, and so to Concord,
running a northeasterly course, and about one mile northwest from Concord
meetinghouse, joins the north branch, then taking the name of Concord River, it
passes through the northwest part of Bedford, and through the town of
Billerica, about half of a mile west from the meetinghouse, and between
Chelmsford and Tewksbury, falls into the river Merrimack. On the north side of
Merrimack, are part of Tyngsborough, the towns of Dracut, Methuen, Haverhill,
Almsbury, and Salisbury: On the south side, are the other part of Tyngsborough,
and the towns of Chelmsford, Tewksbury, Andover, Bradford, Newbury and
Newburyport, where this river falls into the sea.

Charles's River has its proper source in Hopkinton, and runs south into
Milford and Mendon, then turning, runs southeast, through a part of Bellingham,
then takes a northeasterly course through the other part of Bellingha^, and
Medway, and is the boundary between Franklin and Medway, as also between
Medfield and Sherburne, and then passes through Natick and Needham, and between
Weston and Waltham, on the north, and Newtown on the south; it also runs
through Watertown, about half of a mile south of the meetinghouse, then into
Cambridge, about half of a mile south of the College, and separating Roxbury
from Cambridge, and Boston from Charlestown, it falls into the sea in Boston
harbor. Thus all the waters of the county fall into the rivers Merrimack,
Connecticut, Newlondon, Providence and Charles's River. The height of land is
in the towns of Ashburnham, Westminster, Princeton, Holden, Paxton, Leicester,
Spencer and Sturbridge; on the west of these towns, all the water runs into
Connecticut River only. In Ashburnham the water runs three ways, west,
northeast, and southeast: In Westminster and Princeton the water runs east and
west; from Shrewsbury and Grafton, the water runs to Providence and Merrimack
Rivers; very little passes out of this county into Charles's River.

IT may be gratifying and satisfactory to the Reader to have a LIST of the
TOWNS of the COUNTY in ALPHABETICAL ORDER, with an EPITOME of their HISTORY
respecting the DATES of INCORPORATION, when the Ministers of each were Settled,
and when they Died, or were Dismissed; and the Number of Inhabitants agreeably
to the Census in 1791.

Towns. Dates of Incorporation. Ministers Settled and Removed. Number of
Inhabitants. Ashburnham, February 22, 1765. Jonathan Winchester, Settled, April
23, 1760. 970 -- Died, November 27, 1767. -- John Cushing, Settled, November 2,
1768. Athol, March 6, 1762. James Humphrey, Settled, November 7, 1750. 850 --
Dismissed, February 13, 1782. -- Joseph Estabrook, Settled, November 21, 1787.
Bar, June 14, 1774. Thomas Frink, Settled, October ^, 1753. 1613 --
Dismissed, July 17, 1766. -- Josiah Dana, Settled, October 7, 1767. Berlin, or
south parish of Bolton, March 16, 1784. Reuben Puffer, Settled, September 26,
1781. 51^ Bolton, June 24, 1738. Thomas Goss, Settled, November 4, 1741. 861 --
Died, January 17, 1780. -- John Walley, Settled, -- Dismissed, -- Phineas
Wright, Settled, October 26, 1785. Boylston, or second Parish of Shrewsbury,
March 1, 1786. Ebenezer Morse, Settled, October 26, 1743. 840 Dismissed,
November 10, 1775. -- Eleazer Fairbank Settled March 27, 1777. -- Dismissed,
April 23, 1793. Brookfield, October 15, 1673. Thomas Cheney, Settled, October,
1717. 3100 -- Died, December 11, 1747. -- Elisha Harding, Settled, September
13, 1749. -- Dismissed, May 8, 1755. -- Joseph Parsons, Settled, November 23,
1757. -- Died, January 17, 1771. -- Ephraim Ward, Settled, October 23, 1771. --
Second parish, March 29, 1750. Eli Forbes, Settled, June 3, 1752. -- Dismissed,
March 1, 1775. -- Joseph Appleton, Settled, October 30, 1776. -- Third parish,
November 8 1754. Nathan Fiske, Settled, May 24, 1758. Cha^lton. November, 2,
1754. Caleb Curtis, Settled, October 15, 1761. 1965 -- Dismissed, October 29,
1776. -- Archibald Campbell, Settled, January 8, 1783. -- Dismissed, April 9,
1793. Douglass. 1746. William Phipps, Settled, December 16, 1717. 1080 --
Dismissed, July 10, 1765. -- Isaac Stone, Settled, October 30, 1771. Dudley.
February 2, 1731. Perley How, Settled, 1735. 1114 -- Dismissed, 1743. --
Charles Gleason, Settled, October 31, 174^. -- Died, May 7, 1790. -- Joshua
Johnson, Settled, December 1, 1790. Fitchburg, February 3, 1764. John Payson,
Settled, January 27, 1768 1151 Gardner, June 27, 1785. Jonathan Osgood,
Settled, October 19, 1791 530 Gerry, October 20, 1786. Ebenezer Tucker,
Settled, November 5, 1788. 740 Grafton, April 18, 1735. Solomon Prentice,
Settled, December 29, 1731. 88^ -- Dismissed, July 8, 1747. -- Aaron
Hutchinson, Settled, June 6, 1750. -- Dismissed, November 18, 1774. -- Daniel
Grosvenor, Settled, October 19, 1774. -- Dismissed, January 1, 1788. ^ardwick,
January 10, 1738. David White, Settled, November 17, 1736. 1725 -- Died,
January 6, 1784. -- Thomas Holt, Settled, June 25, 1789. Harvard, June 29,
1732. John Seccombe, Settled, October 10, 1733. 1400 -- Dismissed, September 7,
1757. -- Joseph Wheeler, Settled, December 12, 1759. -- Dismissed, July 28,
1768. -- Daniel Johnson, Settled, November 1, 1769. -- Died, September 23,
1777. -- Ebenezer Grosvenor, Settled, June 19, 1782. -- Died, May 28, 1788. --
William Emerson, Settled, May 23, 1792. H^den. January 9, 1740. Joseph Davis,
Settled, December 22, 1742. 1080 -- Dismissed, October 18, 1772. -- Joseph
Avery, Settled, December 21, 1774. Hubbardston, June 13, 1767. Nehemiah Parker,
Settled, June 13, 1770. 100^ Lancaster, May 18, 1653. Joseph Rowlandson,
Settled, 1658. 14^0 -- Removed, 1676. -- John Whiting, Settled, probably, 169^.
-- Killed by Indians, September 11, 1697. Lancaster, John Prentice, Settled,
March 29, 1708. -- Died, January 6, 1748. -- Timothy Harrington, Settled,
November 16, 1748. -- Nathaniel Thayer, Settled, October 9, 1793. ^ster, 1720,
^^ 1721. David Parsons, Settled, 1721. 1100 -- Dismissed, -- David Goddard
Settled, June 30, 1736. -- Died, January 19, 1754. -- Joseph Roberts, Settled,
October 23, 1754. -- Dismissed, 1762. -- Benjamin Conklin, Settled, November
23, 1763. (...) June 23, 1740. John Rogers, Settled, September 14, 1743. 1190
-- Dismissed, 1757. -- Francis Gardner, Settled, December 22, 1762. -- Second
parish, About 1760. John Rogers, Second parish d^sto^. Died, October, 1789.
Lunenburg, August 1, 1728. Andrew Gardner, Settled, May 15, 1728. 13^0 --
Dismissed, February 22, 1732. -- David Stearns, Settled, April 18, 1733. --
Died, March 9, 1761. -- Samuel Payson, Settled, September 8, 1762 -- Died,
February 14, 176^. -- Zabdiel Adams, Settled, September 5, 1764. Mendon. May
^5, 1667. Joseph Emerson, Settled, probably, 1667. 1655 -- Removed, 1675. --
Mendon, Grindall Rawson, Settled, probably, 1680. -- Died, February 6, 1715. --
Joseph Dorr, Settled, 1716. -- Died, March 9, 1768. -- Joseph Willard, Settled,
April 19, 1769. -- Dismissed, December 4, 1782. -- Caleb Alexander, Settled,
April 12, 1786. -- Second parish. 1766. Benjamin Balch, Settled, 1768. --
Removed, March ^7, 1772. Mi^ord, called 2d April 11, 1780. Amariah Frost,
Settled, December 21, 1748. 840 parish of Mendon, 1741. Died, March 14, 1792.
Newbraintree, January 31, 1751. Benjamin Ruggles, Settled, April 18, 1754. 940
-- Died, May 12, 1782. -- Daniel Foster, Settled, October 29, 1778.
Northborough, or February 24, 1766. John Martyn, Settled, May 21, 1746. Second
parish of Died, April 30, 1767. 620 Westborough, October 20, 1744. Peter
Whitney, Settled, November 4, 1767. Northbridge, July 14, 1772. John Crane,
Settled, June 25, 1783. 570 Oakham. June 7, 1762. John Strickland, Settled,
April 1, 1768. 772 -- Dismissed, June 2, 1773. -- Daniel Tomlinson, Settled,
June 22, 1786. Oxford, May 16, 1683. John Campbell, Settled, March 11, 1721.
1000 -- Died, May 25, 1761. -- Joseph Bowman, Settled, November 14, 1764. --
Dismissed, August 28, 1782. -- Elias Dudley, Settled, April 13, 1791. (...),
February 24, 1765. Silas Biglow, Settled, October 21, 1767. 56^ -- Died,
November 16, 1769. -- Alexander Thayer, Settled, November 28, 1770. --
Dismissed, August 14, 1782. -- John Foster, Settled, September 8, 1785. --
Dismissed, April, 178^. Petersham, April 20, 1754. Aaron Whitney, Settled,
December, 1738. ^52^ -- Died, September 8, 1779. -- Solomon Reed, Settled,
October 25, 1780. Princet^n, October 20, 1759. Timothy Fuller, Settled,
September 9, 1767. 101^ -- Dismissed, April 19, 1776. -- Thomas Crafts,
Settled, June 28, 1786. -- Dismissed, March 14, 1791. R^n, February 16, 1765.
Joseph Lee, Settled, October 19, 1768. 113^ Rutland, June or July, 1722. Thomas
Frink, Settled, November ^, 1727. 1072 -- Dismissed, September 8, 1710. --
Joseph Buckminster, Settled, September 15, 1742. -- Died, November 3, 1792. --
Hezekiah Goodrich, Settled, June 19, 1793. Shrewsb^, December 19, 1727. Job
Cushing, Settled, December 4, 1723. ^ -- Died, August 6, 1760. -- Joseph
Sumner, Settled, June 25, 1762. So^thboroug^, July 6, 1727. Nathan Stone,
Settled, October 24, 17^0. 84^ -- Died, May 31, 1781. -- Samuel Sumner,
Settled, June 1, 1791. -- Spencer, or April 3, 1753. Joshua Eaton, Settled,
November 7, 1744. Second parish of Died, April 2, ^77^ 32^ Lercester, In 1744.
Joseph Pope, Settled, October 20, 1773. Sterling, or April 2^, 1781. John
Mellen, Settled, December 19, 1744. Second parish of Dismissed, December 14,
1778. 1428 Lan^ster, 1743. Reuben Holcomb, Settled, June ^, 1779. S^urb^ge,
June 24, 1738. Caleb Rice, Settled, September 29, 17^. 800 -- Died, September
2, 1759. -- Joshua Pain, Settled, June ^7, 1761. Sutton, 1718. John
MacK^nstry, Settled, November 9, 17^0. 20^2 -- Dismissed September 2, 1728. --
David Hall, Settled, October 13, 17^. -- Died, May 8, 178^. -- Edmund Mills,
Settled, June 23, 17^. -- Second parish, October 28, 1743. James Welman,
Settled, October 7, 17^. -- Dismissed, July 22, 1760. -- Ebenezer Chaplain,
Settled, November 14, 1764. Yempleton, March 6, 1762. Daniel Pond, Settled,
December 10, 1^55. 950 -- Dismissed, August 2, 1759. -- Ebenezer Sparhawk.
Settled, November 18, 1761. ^pton, June 14, 1735. Thomas Weld, Settled, 900 --
Dismissed, -- Elisha Fish, Settled, June 5, 175^. Uxbridge, June 27, 1727.
Nathan Webb, Settled, February 3, 1731. 1310 -- Died, March 1^, 1772. ^xbridge,
H^ki^h Chapman, Settled, January 17, 1^. -- Dismissed, April ^, ^8^. -- Jo^ah
Spald^ng, Settled, September 11, 17^. -- Dismissed, Oct^ber ^3. ^. -- Samuel
Judson, Settled, October 17, 17^4. W^rd, April 1^, 1778. Isaac Bailey, Settled,
November 3, ^84. ^ Westborough, November 18, ^717. Eb^nezer Parkman, Settled,
October 28, 17^4. ^ -- Died, December ^, 178^. -- John Robinson, Settled,
January 24, ^789. Western, January. 16, 1741. Isaac Jones, Settled, Jan^ 31,
174^. ^ -- D^ed. July, 178^. -- Stephen Baxter, Settled. March 9. 179^.
Westminster. Oct^ber 20, 1759. Elisha Marsh. Settled, October 20, 17^. 117^ --
Dismissed, 1757. -- Asaph Rice, Settled. October, 17^6. W^do^, June 14, ^764.
Daniel Stimpson, Settled, December 15, ^762. ^50 -- Died, July 20, 17^8. --
Joseph Brown, Settled, May 24, 17^0. W^rcester October 15, 1684. Andrew
Gardner, Settled, in Au^, 1719. ^1^0 -- Dismissed, October ^ 2^. -- Isaac Burr,
Settled, October ^5, ^. -- Dismissed. Novemb^r ^, ^ -- Thaddeus Maccury,
Settled, (...). -- Died, July ^, ^784 -- Samuel Austin, Settled, September 2^,
^. -- Second parish, November 13, 1787. Aaron Bencroft, Settled, (...).

VALUATION LISTS.
THE history of the County shall be closed with presenting the five last
Valuations, whereby the reader may behold each town in a comparative view. The
towns are arranged according to the proportion they paid to a tax of a thousand
pounds upon the whole State.

VALUATION for 1772.
Towns. On the thous. L s. d. q. Lancaster, 7 19 2 1 Brookfield, 7 13 1 3
Sutton, 7 12 1 3 Worcester, 6 7 8 3 Mendon, 5 18 1 3 Shrewsbury, 5 7 10 1
Hardwick, 4 5 1 1 Lunenburg, 3 18 9 3 Harvard, 3 17 4 1 Uxbridge, 3 16 6 3
Bolton, 3 14 2 0 Rutland, 3 13 7 3 Sturbridge, 3 9 4 3 Bar. 3 4 7 3
Leominster. 2 18 3 0 Westborough, 2 18 1 1 Pet^ham. 2 17 0 1 Grafton, 2 17 3 0
Southborough, 2 1^ 11 0 Leicester, 2 16 2 1 C^ton, 2 15 6 3 Ox^ 2 15 2 1
Western, 2 13 8 3 Newbraintree, 2 10 9 1 Dudley, 2 9 8 3 Westminster, 2 9 1 0
Spencer, 2 8 10 1 Holden, 2 0 7 0 Northborough, 1 19 3 0 Templeton, 1 18 9 0
Princeton, 1 16 4 0 Douglass, 1 13 5 3 Paxton, 1 12 2 3 Athol, 1 11 8 1 Upton,
1 10 5 0 Fitchburg, 1 6 10 3 Oakham. 1 2 3 0 Ashburn^am, 0 17 5 1 Winchendon, 0
14 4 1 Hubbardston, 0 12 9 3 Rovalston, 0 12 4 3 41 Towns. Total sum. L. 125 14
2 1

VALUATION for 1778.
Towns. On the thous. L. s. d. Brookfield, 7 15 0 Lancaster, 7 8 4 Worcester, 7
7 0 Sutton, 7 6 0 Mendon, 5 17 0 Shrewsbury, 5 5 0 Bar, 4 3 0 Hardwick, 4 0 0
Harvard, 3 14 6 Charlton, 3 13 6 Bolton, 3 10 6 Lunenbur^, 3 10 0 Rutland, 3 9
0 Sturbridg^, 3 9 0 Uxbridge, 3 6 6 Petersham, 3 2 0 Leominster, 3 0 0 Spencer,
3 0 0 Westborough, 2 16 7 Grafton, 2 15 3 Newbraintree, 2 15 0 Southb^r^h, 2 14
0 Westm^n^, 2 ^3 6 Templeton, 2 13 6 Western, 2 11 0 Oxford, 2 8 0 Dudley, 2 8
0 Athol, 2 3 0 Princeton, 2 1 0 Holden, 2 0 0 Fitchburg, 2 0 0 Faxton, 2 0 0
Leicester, 1 18 0 Northborough, 1 17 0 Royalston, 1 16 1 Upton, 1 11 0
Douglass, 1 10 6 Winchendon, 1 9 0 Oakham, 1 8 6 Hubbardston, 1 8 6 Ashburnham,
1 6 0 Ward, 1 3 5 Northbridge, 1 0 0 43 Towns. Total sum. L 133 13 2

VALUATION for 1782.
Towns. On ^e thous. L. s. d. Brookfield, 8 5 0 Sutton, 7 ^9 ^ Shrewsbury, 6 5
6 Worcester, 5 13 10 Hardwick, 4 19 0 Bar, 4 18 1 Petersham, 4 1 10
Sturbridge, 4 0 0 Lancaster, 3 17 11 Sterling, 3 17 9 Charlton, 3 16 4 Harvard,
3 15 1 Rutland, 3 14 6 Bolton, 3 14 2 Spencer, 3 13 10 Mendon, 3 12 6 Uxbridge,
3 7 5 Lunenburg, 3 6 0 Westminster, 3 4 6 Templeton, 3 0 0 Westborough, 2 19 9
Leicester, 2 17 0 Leominster, 2 17 0 Western, 2 15 0 Princeton, 2 15 0
Southborough, 2 14 0 Athol, 2 13 4 Dudley, 2 13 0 Milford, 2 13 0 Holden, 2 12
4 Oxford, 2 12 3 Grafton 2 10 5 Fitchburg, 2 7 5 Newbraintree, 2 6 5 Upton, 2 6
0 Douglass, 2 1 0 Northborough, 2 0 0 Paxton, 1 18 7 Hubbardston, 1 16 0 Ward,
1 16 0 Royalston, 1 15 5 Winchendon, 1 12 6 Ashburnham, 1 10 0 Oakham, 1 8 0
Northbridge, 1 8 0 45 Towns. Total Sum. L 146 4 9

VALUATION for 1786.
Towns. On the thous. L. s. d. q. Brookfield, 7 17 5 1 Sutton, 7 2 9 0
Worcester, 5 15 6 0 Shrewsbury, 5 14 9 0 Bar, 4 13 8 3 Hardwick, 4 7 7 0
Sterling, 3 16 8 3 Charlton, 3 15 5 0 Petersham, 3 14 3 0 Lancaster, 3 13 3 0
Sturbridge, 3 12 11 0 Rutland, 3 11 9 0 Mendon, 3 11 8 0 Spencer, 3 8 2 0
Lunenburg, 3 6 4 1 Harvard, 3 6 1 3 Uxbridge, 3 5 6 0 Westminster, 3 4 0 0
Leicester, 2 19 10 0 Templeton, 2 18 3 0 Westborough, 2 13 11 1 Leominster, 2
12 9 2 Grafton, 2 12 6 0 Princeton, 2 11 6 0 Western, 2 9 2 0 Bolton, 2 8 5 3
Milford, 2 8 5 0 Holden, 2 8 0 0 Dudley, 2 7 10 0 Southborough, 2 5 2 0 Oxford,
2 4 11 6 Newbraintree, 2 4 7 0 Fitchburg, 2 4 5 1 Athol, 2 2 8 0 Winchendon, 2
1 0 0 Upton, 2 0 6 1 Douglass, 1 19 0 0 Northborough, 1 15 9 0 Royalston, 1 15
0 0 Paxton, 1 14 11 0 Hubbardston, 1 14 3 1 Ashburnham, 1 13 1 0 Oakham, 1 13 0
0 Ward, 1 8 1 0 Berlin, 1 5 2 3 Northbridge, 1 2 0 0 46 Towns. Total Sum. L138
0 0 2

VALUATION for 1793.
Towns. On the tho. Polls. L. s. d q. Brookfield, 675 6 13 4 3 Worcester, 540 6
8 3 ^ Sutton, 660 5 18 6 3 Bar, 466 4 9 7 1 Petersham, 390 3 16 0 0
Sturbridge, 454 3 15 10 2 Charlton, 385 3 13 4 3 Hardwick, 399 3 9 3 3
Sterling, 364 3 6 6 1 Princeton, 245 3 4 1 3 Lancaster, 356 3 3 5 0 Rutland,
298 3 2 3 ^ Mendon, 328 3 2 3 0 Harvard, 359 3 1 9 3 Spencer, 349 3 1 7 1
Uxbridge, 306 3 0 2 0 Westminster, 318 2 14 8 1 Leicester, 262 2 11 11 1
Shrewsbury, 252 2 11 10 3 Lunenburg, 273 2 10 10 0 Leominster, 313 ^ 10 10 1
Westborough, 2^ 2 9 2 0 Grafton, 237 2 8 3 3 H^lden, 254 2 7 8 2 Boylston, 219
2 4 5 3 Western, 229 2 4 2 3 Newbraintree, 229 2 4 0 2 Templeton, 241 2 3 5 ^
Bolton, 220 2 1 4 ^ Dudley, 248 2 0 5 0 Fitchburg, 268 2 0 2 1 Winchendon, 234
1 19 11 2 Oxford, 265 1 19 11 1 Milford, 180 1 17 11 1 Hubbardston, 219 1 17 4
0 Royalston, 263 1 16 9 0 Southborough, 184 1 16 7 0 Douglass, 248 1 15 9 0
Athol, 206 1 14 7 0 Upton, ^11 1 13 9 2 Northborough, 156 1 12 6 2 Gerry, 177 1
12 5 3 Paxton, 133 1 9 2 ^ Ashburnham, 226 1 9 0 ^ Oakham, 204 1 8 5 3 Ward,
119 1 6 8 0 Gardner, 135 1 2 8 0 Berlin, 127 1 2 6 3 Northbridge, 113 0 18 5 0
49 Towns. 13762 L127 502

FINIS



