THE AMERICAN PRECEPTOR; BEING A NEW SELECTION OF LESSONS FOR READING AND
SPEAKING. DESIGNED FOR THE USE OF SCHOOLS.

BY CALEB BINGHAM, A. M. Author of the Young Lady's Accidence, and Child's
Companion.

"TRAIN UP A CHILD IN THE WAY HE SHOULD GO." Published according to Act of
Congress.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY MANNING AND LORING, FOR THE AUTHOR, AND FOR S. HALL, NO.
53, CORNHILL. -- 1794.

PREFACE.
IN making selections for the following work, a preference has been given to
the productions of American genius. The Compiler, however, has not been wholly
confined to America; but has extracted from approved writers of different ages
and countries. Convinced of the impropriety of instilling false notions into
the minds of children, he has not given place to romantic fiction. Although
moral essays have not been neglected; yet pleasing and interesting stories,
exemplifying moral virtues, were judged best calculated to engage the attention
and improve the heart. Tales of love have not gained admission.

The Compiler pledges himself, that, while this book contains nothing offensive
to the most rigid moralist, neither a word nor sentiment shall be sound, which
would "raise a blush on the cheek of modesty."

In the arrangement of pieces, the usual order has not been observed. But, with
design to render it more pleasing to children, dialogues, orations, historical
anecdotes, etc. with the different kinds of reading in prose and verse, are
variously interspersed through the whole work.

For the convenience of large classes, the several pieces are divided into
paragraphs of a moderate length; the utility of which, those conversant in the
instruction of youth will readily discover. Instructors are assured, that the
inconveniency arising from the frequent alterations in the different editions
of school-books will never be experienced in this.

The Compiler is far from wishing to establish the merits of this, by making
objections to other performances. Improvement has been his object. How far he
has succeeded, a candid public will decide.

Boston, May, 1794.
CONTENTS.
GENERAL Directions, etc. BLAIR Page 5 Select Sentences Page 7 A Hint to
Parents KNOX Page 12 On the Duty of Schoolboys ROLLIN Page 13 The History of
Joseph, abridged PERCIVAL Page 14 A short System of Virtue and Happiness KNOX
Page 18 The Child trained up for the Gallows LAVINGSTON Page 23 Character of
Fidelia ADDISON Page 25 History of Jerusalem Encyclopedia Page 27 The faithful
American Dog HITCHCOCK Page 29 Filial Duty and Affection Page 30 The Be Page
31 On the starry Heavens ADDISON Page 32 Of Queen Mary and the Martyrs Page 33
Story of Logan, a Mingo Chief JEFFERSON Page 35 The aged Prisoner released from
the Bastile MERCIER Page 36 Account of Columbus Page 39 Columba DWIGHT Page 43
Description of Babylon MIDDLETON Page 45 The Sailor and the Monkies Page 46 The
brave Soldier's Revenge Page 47 Oration on Female Education Page 47 Fernando
Cortez and William Penn LYTTLETON Page 52 The Whistle FRANKLIN Page 55 True
Patriotism, displayed at the Siege of Calais HUME Page 56 Sublimity of the
Scriptures HABAKKUK, St. JOHN Page 58 Anecdote of Montesquieu Page 60 The
Benevolent Pair Page 61 The unfortunate Philanthropist SPARMAN Page 62 St.
Paul's Speech before King Agrippa Page 63 Cruelty to Animals JENYNS Page 65
Speech of Nicolaus Page 66 Integrity Page 68 The little Girl's Address to the
Visitants Mrs. MORTON Page 70 Advice to a young Tradesman FRANKLIN Page 72
Parental Affection. Story of the Bear Page 73 The Victim. An Indian Story BOSSU
Page 75 The Art of Pleasing KNOX Page 77 Example of Justice and Magnanimity
Page 80 The Duellists. Scene between Edward and Henry Page 81 Speech of Mr.
Pit, on the Slave Trade Page 84 The Slaves. An Elegy MERRY Page 86 The humane
Indian Page 88 The Mammoth JEFFERSON Page 89 Dialogue upon Female Education
LAVINIA Page 90 Singular Adventure of Genesis Putnam HUMPHREY Page 94 Extract from
Dr. Warren's Oration Page 96 Self Interest BERQUIN Page 97 On Profane Sweating
Page 101 The Triumph of Virtue Page 102 Female Industry Page 104 The Lap-Dog
Page 105 Extract from Mr. Dawes' Oration Page 107 General Washington's
Resignation Page 108 Speech of a Scythian Ambassador Page 109 The Revenge of a
great Soul Page 110 C^djoe, the faithful African Page 112 The African Chief
Mrs. MORION Page 113 Mercury and a modern fine Lady LYI^LFION Page 115 Speech
of Publius Scipio Page ^17 Speech of Hannibal Page ^19 Address to the Inhab. of
New Hampshire BELKNAP Page 120 Cicero and Lord Chesterfield KNOX Page 124 Of
the Elephant BUFFON Page ^28 Speech of Mr. Walpole Page 129 Speech of Mr. Pit
Page 131 Story of a second Joseph SAVARY Page 132 Scene between Cato and Decius
ADDISON Page 134 The Beggar's Petition Page 136 The Test of Goodness Page 137
Description of Mount Aetna BRYDONE Page 13^ Dialogue between two Schoolboys
Page 14^ Extract from Mr. J. Q. Adams' Oration Page 14^ On knowing the World at
an early Age KNOX Page 14^ History of Pocahontas CHATTELLEUX Page 14^ Speech of
Caius Marius to the Romans Page 151 Fraternal Affection Page 153 The Importance
of studying the English Language Page 156 The Hottentot and the Lion SPARMAN
Page 159 Gustavus Vasa and Cristiern BROOK Page 160 Narrative of four Sailors
Page 163 Speech of Canuleius Page 167 Description of the Falls of Niagara
ELLICOTT Page 169 Benevolent Affections REID Page 171 Messiah POPE Page 173
Narrative of Mrs. Howe's Captivity GAY Page 176 Mr. Pitt's Speech, 1775 Page
185 The Lion HARRIS Page 187 Story of the grateful Turk Page 190 Brutus and
Cassius Page 198 Speech of Demosthenes Page 201 A Father's Advice to his
Children HALE Page 203 On the Pulpit and Preachers COWPER Page 208 Brutus'
Speech on the Death of Caesar Page 210 Juba and Syphax ADDISON Page 210 General
Wolfe's Address to his Army Page 214 Foscari, the unfortunate Venetian MOORE
Page 216 Cicero's Oration against Verres Page 219 Dialogue between a Tutor and
Pupil Page 221 A short Address to Parents SECKER Page 223 The Preceptor's
Address to his Scholars KNOX Page 225
GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR READING AND SPEAKING. EXTRACTED FROM BLAIR'S LECTURES.
THE first object of a reader or speaker, is, to be clearly understood by his
hearers. In order for this, it is necessary that he should pronounce his words
distinctly, and deliberately; that he should carefully avoid the two extremes
of uttering either too fast, or too slow; and that his tone of voice should be
perfectly natural.

2. A reader or speaker should endeavor to acquire a perfect command of his
voice; so as neither to stun his hearers by pitching it upon too high a key;
nor tire their patience by obliging them to listen to sounds which are scarcely
audible. It is not the loudest speaker, who is always the best understood; but
he who pronounces upon that key which fills the space occupied by the audience.
That pitch of voice, which is used in ordinary conversation, is usually the
best for a public speaker.

3. Early attention ought to be paid to the pauses; but the rules for these are
so indefinite and arbitrary, and so difficult to be comprehended, that long
experience is necessary in order to acquire a perfect knowledge of their use.
With regard to the length of the several pauses, no precise rules can be given.
This, together with the variety of tones which accompany them, depends much
upon the nature of the subject.

4. Perhaps nothing is of more importance to a reader or speaker, than a proper
attention to accent, emphasis, and cadence. Every word in our language, of more
than one syllable, has, at least, one accented syllable. This syllable ought to
be rightly known, and the word should be pronounced by the reader or speaker in
the same manner as he would pronounce it in ordinary conversation.

5. By emphasis we distinguish those words in a sentence which we esteem the
most important, by laying a greater stress of voice upon them than we do upon
the others. And it is surprising to observe how the sense of a phrase may be
altered by varying the emphasis. The following example will serve as an
illustration.

6. This short question, "Will you ride to town today*' may be understood in
four different ways, and, consequently, may receive four different answers,
according to the placing of the emphasis.

7. If it be pronounced thus; Will you ride to town today? the answer may
properly be, no; I shall send my son. If thus; Will you ride to town today?
Answer, no; I intend to walk. Will you ride to town today? No; I shall ride
into the country. Will you ride to town today? No; but I shall tomorrow.

8. This shows how necessary it is that a reader or speaker should know where
to place his emphasis. And the only rule for this is, that he study to attain a
just conception of the force and spirit of the sentiments which he delivers.
There is as great a difference between one who lays his emphasis properly, and
one who pays no regard to it, or places it wrong, as there is between one who
plays on an instrument with a masterly hand, and the most bungling performer.

9. Cadence is the reverse of emphasis. It is a depression or lowering of the
voice; and commonly falls upon the last syllable in a sentence. It is varied,
however, according to the sense. When a question is asked, it seldom falls upon
the last word; and many sentences require no cadence at all.

10. In addition to what has ^^en said, it is of great importance to attend
particularly to tones and gestures. To almost every sentiment we utter, more
especially, to every strong emotion, nature has adapted some peculiar tone of
voice. And we may observe, that every man, when he is much in earnest in common
discourse, when he is speaking on some subject which interests him nearly, has
an eloquent or persuasive tone and manner.

11. If one were to tell another that he was very angry, or very much grieved,
in a tone which did not suit such emotions, instead of being believed, he would
be laughed at. The best direction which can be given, is, to copy the proper
tones for expressing every sentiment from those which nature dictates to us in
conversation with others.

12. With respect to gesture, the few following hints may be of some service.
When speaking in public, one should endeavor to preserve as much dignity as
possible in the whole attitude of the body. An erect posture is generally to be
chosen; standing firm so as to have the fullest command of all his motions. Any
inclination which is used, should be forwards toward the hearers, which is a
natural expression of earnestness.

13. As for the countenance, the chief rule is, that it should correspond with
the nature of the discourse; and when no particular emotion is expressed, a
serious and manly look is always the best. The eyes should never be fixed close
on any one object, but move easily round upon the whole audience.

14. In the motions made with the hands, consists the chief part of gesture in
speaking. The right hand should be used more frequently than the left. Warm
emotions demand the motion of both hands corresponding together. All the
gestures should be free and easy. Perpendicular movements with the hands, that
is, in a straight line up and down, are seldom good. Oblique motions are, in
general, the most graceful.

15. Motions made with the hands should proceed rather from the shoulders than
from the elbows; for they appear much more easy. Too sudden and nimble motions
should be avoided. Earnestness can be fully expressed without them. Above all
things, a speaker should guard against affectation, which is always disgustful.

SELECT SENTENCES.
TIME is more valuable to young people than to any others. They should not lose
an hour in forming their taste, their manners, and their minds; for whatever
they are, to a certain degree, at eighteen, they will be more or less so all
the rest of their lives.

2. Nothing can be of greater service to a young man who has any degree of
understanding, than an intimate conversation with one of riper years, who is
not only able to advise, but who knows the manner of advising. By this mean,
youth can enjoy the benefit of the experience of age; and that, at a time of
life when such experience will be of more service to a man* than when he has
lived long enough to acquire it of himself.

3. The kindnesses which most men receive from others, are like traces drawn in
the sand. The breath of every passion sweeps them away, and they are remembered
no more. But injuries are like inscriptions on monuments of brass or pillars of
marble, which endure, unimpaired, the revolutions of time.

4. View the groves in autumn, and observe the constant succession of falling
leaves; in like manner the generations of men silently drop from the stage of
life, and are blended with the dust from whence they sprang.

5. Perfect happiness is not the growth of a terrestrial soil; it buds in the
gardens of the virtuous on earth, but blooms with unfading verdure only in the
celestial regions.

6. He who would pass the latter part of his life with honor and decency must,
when he is young, consider that he shall one day be old; and remember, when he
is old, that he has once been young.

7. He who governs his passions does more than he who commands armies.
Socrates, being one day offended with his servant, said, "I would beat you, if
I were not angry."

8. We too often judge of men by the splendour, and not by the merit of their
actions. Alexander demanded of a pirate whom he had taken, by what right he
infested the seas? By the same right, replied he boldly, that you enslave the
world. I am called a robber, because I have only one small vessel; but you are
styled a conqueror, because you command great fleets and armies.

9. Beauty, as the flowery blossom, soon fades; but the divine excellencies of
the mind, like the medicinal virtues of the plant, remain in it when all those
charms are withered.

10. There are two considerations which always embitter the heart of an
avaricious man; the one is a perpetual thirst after more riches; the other, the
prospect of leaving what he has already acquired.

11. There cannot be a more glorious object in creation, than a human being
replete with benevolence, meditating in what manner he may render himself most
acceptable to his Creator, by doing most good to his creatures.

12. A man should never be ashamed to own he has been in the wrong; which is
but saying, in other words, that he is wiser today than he was yesterday.

13. Knowledge will not be acquired without pains and application. It is
troublesome digging for deep, pure waters; but when once you come to the
spring, they rise up and meet you.

14. The most unhappy effect of fashionable politeness is, that it teaches us
the art of dispensing with virtues which it imitates. Let us be educated to
cherish the principles of benevolence and humanity, and we shall have
politeness enough, or shall stand in no need of it.

15. If we should not have that which is accompanied by the graces, we should
have that which bespeaks the honest man, and the good citizen. We should stand
in no need of having recourse to the falsehood of appearances.

16. Man is the only being endowed with the power of laughter, and perhaps he
is the only one who deserves to be laughed at.

17. It is the great privilege of poverty to be happy unenvied, to be healthful
without physic, and secure without a guard: to obtain from the bounty of nature
what the great and wealthy are compelled to procure by the help of artists, and
the attendance of flatterers and spies.

18. Prudence is a duty which we owe ourselves, and if we will be so much our
own enemies as to neglect it, we are not to wonder if the world is deficient in
discharging their duty to us; for when a man lays the foundation of his own
ruin, others too often are apt to build upon it.

19. There are no principles but those of religion to be depended on in cases
of real distress; and these are able to encounter the worst emergencies, and to
bear us up under all the changes and chances to which our lives are subject.

20. Riches without charity are worth nothing. They are a blessing only to him
who makes them a blessing to others.

21. The tongue of a viper is less hurtful than that of a slanderer; and the
gilded scales of a rattlesnake less dreadful than the purse of the oppresior.

22. As benevolence is the most sociable of all the virtues, so it is of the
largest extent; for there is not any man either so great or so little, but he
is yet capable of giving and of receiving benefits.

23. When thou do good, do it because it is good; not because men esteem it
so. When thou avoidest evil, flee from it because it is evil; not because men
speak against it. Be honest for the love of honesty, and thou shall be
uniformly so. He, who does it without principle, is wavering.

24. Wish rather to be reproved by the wise, than to be applauded by him who
has no understanding. When they tell thee of a fault, they suppose thou can
improve; the other, when he praises thee, thinks thee like unto himself.

25. Set not thy judgment above that of all the earth; neither condemn, as
falsehood, what agrees not with thine own apprehension. Who gave thee the
power of determining for others? or who took from the world the right of choice?

26. How many things have been rejected, which now are received as truth; how
many, now received as truths, will in their turn be despised? Of what then can
man be certain?

27. An immoderate desire of riches is a poison lodged in the soul. It
contaminates and destroys every thing which was good in it. It is no sooner
rooted there, than all virtue, all honesty, all natural affection, fly before
the face of it.

28. Drunkenness is but voluntary madness; it emboldens men to do all sorts of
mischiefs; it both irritates wickedness and discovers it; it does not merely
make men vicious, but it shows them to be so.

29. Every man should mind his own business; for he who torments himself with
other people's good or ill fortune, will never be at rest.

30. To set about acquiring the habit of meditation and study late in life, is
like getting into a go-cart with a gray beard, and learning to walk when we
have lost the use of our legs. In general, the foundation of a happy old age
must be laid in youth; and he, who has not cultivated his reason young, will be
utterly unable to improve it when old.

31. Endeavor to be first in your profession, and let no one go before you in
doing well. Nevertheless, do not envy the merits of another; but improve your
own talents.

32. Never reveal your secrets to any, except it be as much their interest to
keep them, as it is yours they should be kept. Entrust only thyself, and thou
can not be betrayed.

33. Glory, like a shadow, flies him who pursues it; but it follows at the
heels of him who would fly from it. If thou court it without merit, thou shall
never attain unto it; if thou deserve it, though thou hide thyself, it will
never forsake thee.

34. Pursue that which is honorable, do that which is right; and the applause
of thine own conscience will be more joy to thee, than the shouts of millions
who know not that thou deservest them.

35. Love labor. If you do not want it for food, you may for physic. The idle
man is more perplexed to know what to do, than the industrious, in doing what
he ought. There are few who know how to be idle, and innocent. By doing
nothing, we learn to do ill.

36. Honor thy father with thy whole heart, and forget not the sorrows of thy
mother. How can thou recompense them the things which they have done for thee*

37. It is a mark of a depraved mind, to sneer at decrepid old age, or to
ridicule any one who is deformed in his person, or lacks understanding. Who
makes one to differ from another?

38. The merciful man is merciful to his beast; and he, who takes pleasure in
tormenting any of God's creatures, although ever so inferior, ought to be
banished from human society, and ranked among the brutes.

39. Admonish thy friend; it may be he has not done it; and if he has, that
he do it no more. Admonish thy friend; it may be he has not said it; or if he
has, that he speak it not again. Admonish a friend; for many times it is a
slander; and believe not every tale.

40. Be not forward in leading the convers^tion. This belongs to the oldest
persons in company. Display your learning only on particular occasions. Never
oppose the opinion of another, but with great modesty.

41. On all occasions, avoid speaking of yourself, if possible. Nothing that we
can say ourselves will varnish our defects, or add luster to our virtues; on
the contrary, it will often make the former more visible, and the latter
obscure.

42. Without a friend, the world is but a wilderness. A man may have a thousand
intimate acquaintances, and not a friend among them all. If you have one
friend, think yourself happy.

43. There is but one way of fortifying the soul against all gloomy presages
and terrors of the mind; and that is, by securing to ourselves the friendship
and protection of that Being who disposes of events, and governs futurity.

A HINT TO PARENTS.
IT is to be wished that parents would consider what a variety of circumstances
tend to render the evil reports of their children, respecting their teachers,
false and exaggerated.

2. They judge hastily, partially, imperfectly, and improperly, from the
natural defects and weakness of their age. They, likewise, too often
intentionally misrepresent things. They hate those who restrain them; they feel
resentment for correction; they love change; they love idleness, and the
indulgencies of their home.

3. Like all human creatures, they are apt not to know when they are well, and
to complain. Let parents then consider these things impartially, and be
cautious of aspersing the character, and disturbing the happiness of those who
may probably deserve thanks rather than ill usage; whose office is at best full
of care and anxiety; and, when it is interrupted by the injudicious
interference or complaints of the parents, becomes intolerably burdensome.

4. If a father suspect his confidence to have been misplaced, it is best to
withdraw it immediately, without altercation and without reproaches. It would
also be an excellent method of consulting their own peace, and the welfare of
their other scholars, if masters made a rule to exclude from their schools the
children of those parents who are unjustly discontented.

5. I have often heard old and experienced instructors declare, that the whole
business of managing a large school, and training the pupils to learning and
virtue, was nothing in comparison with the trouble which was given by
whimsical, ignorant, and d^scontented parents.

ON THE DUTY OF SCHOOLBOYS.
QUINTILIAN says, that he has included almost all the duty of scholars in this
one piece of advice which he gives them; to love those who teach them, as they
love the sciences they learn of them; and to look upon them as fathers, from
whom they derive not the life of the body, but that instruction which is in a
manner the life of the soul.

2. Indeed this sentiment of affection and respect suffices to make them apt to
learn during the time of their studies, and full of gratitude all the rest of
their lives. It seems to ^e to include a great part of what is to be expected
from them.

3. Do^ility, which consists in submitting to directions, in readily receiving
the instructions of their master, and reducing them to practice, is properly
the virtue of scholars, as that of masters is to teach well.

4. The one can do nothing without the other. As it is not sufficient for a
laborer to fow the food, unless the earth, after having opened its bosom to
receive it, in a manner warms and moistens it; so likewise the whole fruit of
instruction depends upon a good correspondence between the master and the
scholars.

5. Gratitude for those who have labored in our education, is the character of
an honest man, and the mark of a good heart. Who is there among us, says
Cicero, who has been instructed with any care, and is not highly delighted with
the sight, or even the bare remembrance of his preceptors, and the place where
he was taught and brought up?

6. Seneca exhorts young men to preserve always a great respect for their
teachers, to whose care they are indebted for the amendment of their faults,
and for having imbibed sentiments of honor and probity.

7. Their exactness and severity displease sometimes, at an age when we are not
in a condition to judge of the obligations we owe them; but, when years have
ripened our understanding and judgment, we then discern, that what made us
dislike them, is exactly the very thing which should make us esteem and love
them.

THE HISTORY OF JOSEPH ABRIDGED.
ISRAEL loved Joseph more than all his children, because he was the son of his
old age; and he gave him a coat of many colors. But when his brethren saw
their father's partiality to him, they hated him, and would not speak peaceably
unto him. And Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it to his brethren.

2. Behold, he said, we were binding sheaves in the field; and lo! my sheaf
arose and stood upright; and your sheaves stood round about, and made obeisance
to my sheaf. And his brethren said unto him, Shall thou indeed have dominion
over us? and they hated him the more for his dreams, and for his words.

3. It happened that his brethren went to feed their father's flock at Dothan.
And Joseph went after his brethren; but, when they saw him afar off, they
conspired against him to slay him; and they said one to another, We will tell
our father that some evil beast has devoured him.

4. But Reuben wished to deliver him out of their hands: and he said, Let us
not kill him, but cast him into this pit, that is in the wilderness. And they
followed his counsel, and cast him into the pit, which then contained no water.

5. A company of Ishmaelites from Gilead passed by, at this time, with their
camels, bearing spicery, balm, and myrrh, which they were carrying into Egypt.
And Judah said unto his brethren, Let us sell Joseph to the Ishmaelites, and
let not our hands be upon him, for he is our brother and our flesh. And Joseph
was sold for twenty pieces of silver.

6. And his brethren killed a kid, and dipped his coat in the blood thereof.
And they brought it unto their father, and said, This have we found. And Jacob
knew it; and believing that Joseph was devoured by an evil beast, he rent his
clothes, and put sackcloth on his loins, and refused all comfort, saying, I
will go down into the grave to my son, mourning.

7. Thus wept his father for him. But Joseph was carried into Egypt, and sold
to Potiphar, the captain of Pharaoh's guard. And the Lord was with him, and
prospered him; and he found favor in the sight of his master. But by the
wickedness of Potiphar's wife, he was cast into the prison, where the king's
prisoners were bound.

8. Here also the Lord continued to show him mercy, and gave him favor in the
sight of the keeper of the prison. And all the prisoners were committed to his
care; amongst whom were two of Pharaoh's officers, the chief of the butlers,
and the chief of the bakers.

9. And Joseph interpreted the dreams of the king's servants; and his
interpretation being true, the chief butler recommended him to Pharaoh, who had
dreamed a dream, which Joseph thus showed unto him. Behold there shall come
seven years of great plenty, throughout all the land of Egypt. And there shall
arise after them seven years of famine; and all the plenty shall be forgotten
in the land of Egypt, and the famine shall consume the land.

10. And the king said unto Joseph, Forasmuch as God has shown you all this,
thou shall be over mine house; and according to thy word shall all my people be
ruled. And Joseph gathered up all the food of the seven years, and laid up the
food in store houses. Then the seven years of dearth began to come, as Joseph
had foretold.

11. But in all the land of Egypt there was bread; and people from all
countries came unto Joseph to buy corn, because the famine was sore in all the
lands. Now, amongst those who came, were the ten sons of Jacob, from the land
of Canaan.

12. And Joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, but made himself strange
unto them, and spoke roughly to them, saying, Ye are spies. And they said, Thy
servants are twelve brethren, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan; and
behold the youngest is this day with our father, and one is not.

13. But Joseph said unto them, Ye shall not go forth hence, except your
youngest brother come hither. Let one of your brethren be bound in prison, and
go ye to carry corn for the famine of your houses, and bring your youngest
brother unto me.

14. And their consciences reproached them; and they said one to another, We
are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear. Therefore is this distress
come upon us.

15. And they knew not that Joseph understood them, for he spoke unto them by
an interpreter. And he turned himself about from them, and wept; and returned
to them again, and commoned with them; and took from them Simeon, and bound him
before their eyes. And they returned unto Jacob, their father, in the land of
Canaan, and told him all that had befallen them.

16. And Jacob, their father, said unto them, Me ye have bereaved of my
children. Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin away
also. But my son shall not go down with you; for his brother is dead, and he is
left alone. If mischief befall him in the way in which ye go, then shall ye
bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.

17. But the famine continued sore in the land; and when they had eaten up the
corn, which they had brought out of Egypt, Jacob said unto them, Go again and
buy us food. And if it must be so, now take also your brother Benjamin, and
arise, and go unto the man. And they brought presents unto Joseph, and bowed
themselves to him to the earth.

18. And he asked them of their welfare; and said, Is your father well? Is he
alive? And he lifted up his eyes and saw Benjamin his brother; and he was moved
with compassion; and he sought where to weep, and he entered his chamber and
wept there. And he washed his face, and went out, and refrained himself.

19. Then he commanded the steward of his house, saying, Fill the men's sacks
with food, as much as they can carry, and put my cup, the silver cup, into the
sack of Benjamin the youngest. And the steward did according to the word that
Joseph had spoken. As soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away,
they and their asses.

20. But Joseph commanded his steward to follow them, and to search their
sacks, and to bring them back. And when Judah and his brethren were returned
into the city, Joseph said unto them, What deed is this ye have done? the man,
in whose hands the cup is found, shall be my servant; and as for you, get you
in peace unto your father.

21. But they said, Our father will surely die, if he sees that the lad is not
with us; and we shall bring down the gray hairs of thy servant, our father,
with sorrow to the grave. Then Joseph could not refrain himself before all them
that stood by him; and he cried, Cause every man to go out from me; and there
stood no man with him, whilst Joseph made himself known unto his brethren.

22. And he wept aloud, and said unto his brethren, I am Joseph; does my father
yet live? and his brethren could not answer him, for they were troubled at his
presence. And Joseph said to his brethren, Come near to me, I pray you; and
they came near. And he said, I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt.

23. Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me
hither; for God did send me before you, to save your lives by a great
deliverance. Haste you, and go up to my father; and say unto him, thus says
thy son Joseph, God has made me lord over all Egypt. Come down unto me; tarry
not.

24 And thou shall dwell in the land of Goshen; and thou shall be near unto me,
thou, and thy children, and thy children's children, and thy flocks, and thy
herds, and all that thou have. And there will I nourish thee; for yet there are
five years of famine; lest thou and thy household, and all that thou have come
to poverty.

25. And behold your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is
my mouth which speaks unto you. And you shall tell my father of all my glory
in Egypt, and all which you have seen; and ye shall haste, and bring down my
father hither.

26. And he fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck and wept; and Benjamin wept
upon his neck. Moreover, he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them; and
after that, his brethren talked with him. And the fame thereof was heard in
Pharaoh's house; and it pleased Pharaoh well, and his servants.

27. And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Invite hither thy father, and his household;
and I will give them the good of the land of Egypt; and they shall eat the fat
of the land.

28. And the spirit of Jacob was revived when he heard these tidings; and he
said, My son is yet alive; I will go and see him before I die. And he took his
journey, with all that he had. And Joseph made ready his chariot, and went up
to meet Israel, his father, to Goshen; and presenting himself before him, he
fell on his neck, and wept for some time.

29. And Joseph placed his father, and his brethren, and gave them possessions
in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, as Pharaoh had commanded.

30. This interesting story contains a variety of affecting incidents; is
related with the most beautiful simplicity; and furnishes many important
lessons for instruction.

31. It displays the mischiefs of parental partiality; the fatal effects of
envy, jealousy, and discord amongst brethren; the blessings and honors with
which virtue is rewarded; the amiableness of forgetting injuries; and the
tender joys which flow from fraternal love, and filial piety.

A SHORT SYSTEM OF VIRTUE AND HAPPINESS.
I WILL suppose a virtuous young man forming in his mind the principles of his
future conduct, and uttering the result of his reflections in the following
soliloquy.

2. At the age when I am approaching to maturity of reason, I perceive myself
placed in a world abounding with external objects; and I also perceive within
me powers and passions formed to be powerfully excited and affected by them. I
am naturally tempted to interrogate myself, What am I? whence came I? and
whither am I going?

3. With a view to satisfy my own inquiries, I consider others who appear to be
just like myself; I listen to the instruction of those who have obtained a
reputation for wisdom: and I examine, with serious attention, the volumes in
which are written the words of the wise.

4. The result of the whole inquiry is a sincere conviction, that I am placed
here to perform many duties; that I originate from a supreme Creator; and that
I am going on in the journey of life, to accomplish some of his gracious
purposes at the close of it, as well as in its progress.

5. I divide my duty into three parts, according to the suggestions of my own
reason, and the instruction of books. They consist of the obligations which I
owe to myself, to others, and to Him, in whose hands are both they and myself,
the great Lord of the universe.

6. With respect to myself, as I consist of two parts, a body and a mind, my
duty to myself again separates itself into two correspondent subdivisions. My
body is a machine curiously organized, and easily deranged by excess and
irregularity.

7. When disturbed in its economy, it subjects me to pain, and disables me from
all necessary and pleasant exertion. I owe it therefore to myself, to taste the
cup, and partake the banquet, and gratify all my senses, no further than those
limits which are obviously prescribed by reason and experience.

8. I further learn from the religion of my country, that my body is the temple
of the holy Spirit. To pollute it with presumptuous transgression cannot but be
blasphemy; to devote myself to gluttony, drunkenness, and debauchery, is at
once to deaden the growing energies of spiritual life, and to weaken and
destroy the subordinate, yet necessary parts of me, my animal and material
fabric; it is to shorten life, and to disable me from performing its duties
while it continues.

9. But I have also a mind capable of rising to high improvements by culture,
and of sinking to a brutal stupidity by neglect. I will make use of all the
advantages of education. I will devote my hours of leisure to reading and
reflection.

10. Elegant letters, as well as useful sciences, shall claim my attention; for
all which tends to polish the mind, tends also to sweeten the temper, and to
mitigate the remains of natural ferocity.

11. My mind, as well as my body, is greatly concerned in avoiding
intemperance. Eating to excess clouds its brightness, blunts its edge, and
drags it down to all the grossness of materiality. Intemperate drinking not
only reduces it, at the time of its immediate influence, to a star^ of
brutality, but gradually destroys all its vigor.

12. The sensual indulgencies in general, when they are inordinate and
excessive, debase, corrupt, and brutalize. Their delights are transient, their
pains severe and of long duration.

13. Instead then of running into the danger of temptation, during the ardor of
youth, I will fly from the conflict, in which my own passions are sure to fight
against me, and will probably betray me to the enemy.

14. I see, indeed, thousands pursuing pleasure, and professing to have found
it in perfection in the haunts of debauchery. But I see them but for a little
while. Like the silly insect which flutters with delight around the taper, they
soon receive some fatal injury in their minds, their persons or their fortunes,
and drop into irrecoverable ruin.

15. Alas! I am too much inclined to vice, from the depravity of my nature, and
the violence of my passions. I will not add fuel to the fire, nor increase the
violence of that natural tempest within me, which of itself is sufficient to
accomplish my destruction.

16. But, at the same time, I will not be a cynic. The world abounds with
innocent enjoyments. The kind God of nature intended that I should taste them.
But moderation is essential to true pleasure.

17. My own experience, and the experience of mankind from their origin, has
declared, that whenever pleasure exceeds the bo^nds of moderation, it is not
only highly injurious, but disgustful. In order to enjoy pleasure, I see the
necessity of pursu^ng some business with attention.

18. The vicissitude is necessary to excite an appetite and give a relish. Nay,
the very performance of business with skill and success, is attended with a
delightful satisfaction, which few of the most boasted pleasures are able to
confer.

19. While I take care of myself, of my health, of my improvement in morals and
understanding, I will not harbor pride, or look down with superciliousness or
ill nature on those who live, as it were, at random, and who acknowledge no
other guide of their conduct, but the sudden impulse of a temporary inclination.

20. With all my improvements and endeavors, I shall still feel imperfections
enough to humble me. Candor and humility are some of the least fallible marks
of sound sense and sincere virtue. I shall have sufficient employment in
correcting myself; nor shall I presume to censure others, unless my profession
or relative situation render it my duty.

21. My duty to myself is, indeed, intimately connected with my duty to oth^^s.
By preserving the faculties of my mind and body, and by improving them to the
utmost, I am enabled to exert them with effect in the service of society. I am
connected with others by the ties of consanguinity and friendship, and by the
common bond of partaking in the same humanity.

22. As a son, I shall be tender and dutiful; as a brother, uniformly
affectionate; as a husband, faithful and friendly; as a father, kind and
provident; as a man, benevolent to men in whatever circumstances, and however
separated from me by country, religion, or government.

23. But universal benevolence must not be an inactive principle. If it proceed
not to real beneficence, I fear it will have more in it of ostentation than of
sincerity. I will then prove its sincerity by doing good, and removing evil of
every kind, as far as my abilities allow me, and my influence extends.

24. But before I pretend to generosity, I will be strictly just. Truth shall
regulate my words, and equity my actions. If I am engaged in a profession, I
will do the duties of it; if in merchandise, I will take no advantage of the
ignorant, nor debase my character, nor wound my conscience, for the sake of
gain.

25. In all my intercourse with society, I will recollect that heavenly precept
of doing to others as I wish they should do to me; and will endeavor to obey
it. I may, I certainly shall offend from the violence of my passions, the
weakness of my judgment, the perverseness of my will, and from mistake and
misapprehension.

26. But while I keep the evangelical rule in view, and sincerely labor to
conform to it, I shall seldom commit such offenses against others, as will be
either permanently or deeply injurious.

27. With respect to my duty to my Creator, I derive an argument in favor of
religion, from the feelings of my own bosom, superior to the most elaborate
subtilties of human ingenuity. In the hour of distress, my heart as naturally
flies for succor to the Deity, as when hungry and thirsty, I seek food and
water; or when weary, repose.

28. In religion I look for comfort, and in religion I always find it. Devotion
supplies me with a pure and exalted pleasure. It elevates my soul, and teaches
me to look down with proper contempt upon many objects which are eagerly
sought, but which end in misery.

29. In this respect, and in many others, it effects in the best and most
compendious method, what has been in vain pretended to by proud philosophy. And
in selecting a mode or peculiar system of religion, I shall consider what that
was in which my father lived and died.

30. I find it to have been the religion of Christ. I examine it with
reverence. I encounter many difficulties; but, at the same time, I feel within
me an internal evidence, which, uniting its force with the external, forbids me
to disbelieve.

31. When involuntary doubts arise, I immediately silence their importunity by
recollecting the weakness of my judgment, and the vain presumption of hastily
deciding on the most important of all subjects, against such powerful evidence,
and against the major part of the civilized world.

32. I will learn humility of the humble Jesus, and gratefully accept the
beneficial doctrines and glorious offers, which his benign religion reaches out
to all who sincerely seek him by prayer and penitence.

33. In vain shall the conceited philosophers, whom fashion and ignorance
admire, attempt to weaken my belief, or undermine the principles of my
morality. Without their aid, I can be sufficiently wicked, and sufficiently
miserable.

34. Human life abounds with evil. I will seek balsams for the wounds of the
heart in the sweets of innocence, and in the consolations of religion. Virtue,
I am convinced, is the noblest ornament of humanity, and the source of the
sublimest, and the sweetest pleasure; and piety leads to that peace, which the
world, and all it possesses, cannot bestow.

35. Let others enjoy the pride and pleasure of being called philosophers,
deists, skeptics; be mine the real, unostentatious qualities of the honest,
humble, and charitable Christian. When the gaudy glories of fashion and vain
philosophy shall have withered like a short-lived slower, sincere piety and
moral honesty shall flourish as the cedar of Lebanon.

36. But I repress my triumphs. After all my improvements, and all my pantings
for perfection, I shall still be greatly defective. Therefore, to whatever
degree of excellence I advance, let me never forget to show to others that
indulgence, which my infirmities, my errors, and my voluntary misconduct, will
require both from them, and from mine and their Almighty and most merciful
Father.

THE CHILD TRAINED UP FOR THE GALLOWS.
IS any father so unnatural as to wish to have his son hanged, let him bring
him up in idleness, and without putting him to any trade. Let him particularly
inure him to spend the Lord's day in play and liversion, instead of attending
on public worship; and instead of instructing him, on that day, in the
principles of the Christian religion, let him rob a neighboring hen-roost,
while the proprietor of it is gone to divine service.

2. Astonishing it is to see so many of our young people growing up without
being apprenticed to any business for procuring their future livelihood! The
Jews had a proverb, "That whoever was not bred to a trade, was bred for the
gallows." Every mussulman is commanded by the Koran to learn some handicraft or
other; and to this precept, even the family of the grand Signior so far
conform, as to learn as much about the mechanism of a watch, as to be able to
take it in pieces, and to put it together again.

3. Are Christians the only people in the world, who are to live in idleness,
when one of the injunctions of the decalogue is, to labor six days in the week;
and an inspired apostle has commanded us to work, under the express penalty of
not eating in default of it? "This we commanded you," says he, "that if any
would not work, neither should he eat." "Train up a child," says king Solomon,
"in the way he should go; and when he is old, he will not depart from it."

4. But if you intend him for the gallows, train him up in the way he would go;
and before he is old, he will probably be hanged. In the age of vanity,
restrain him not from the follies and allurements of it. In the age proper for
learning and instruction, give him neither. As to catechizing him, it is an old
fashioned, puritanical, useless formality. Never heed it, lest his mind be
^nhappily biassed by the influence of a religious education.

5. Moses indeed, after saying to the children of Israel, "Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
might," thought proper to subjoin, "and those words which I command thee this
day, thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children." But we know that
Moses did not intend those children to be trained up for the gallows. His
advice therefore is not to the purpose.

6. Mine, which is immediately directed to the object in view, must
consequently be very different. And paramount to any other direction which I
can possibly give, I would particularly advise, as an essential part of the
course of this education, by which a child, when he arrives to manhood, is
intended to make so exalted a figure, that his parents should suffer him every
sabbath day, during summer and autumn, to patrol about the neighborhood, and to
steal as much fruit as he can carry off.

7. To encourage him more in this branch of his education, in case the poor
scrupulous lad should show any compunctions of conscience about it, I would
have his mother partake of the stolen fruit; and eat it with keener appetite
than she does any of her own, or her husband's lawfully acquired earnings. For
his further encouragement, both his parents should always take his part,
whenever the proprietor of the stolen fruit prefers to them his complaint
against him; and by all means refuse to chastise him for his thievery.

8. They should say, "Where is the harm of taking a little fruit? The gentleman
does not want it all for his own use. He doubtless raised part of it for poor
people." This will greatly smooth his way to more extensive, and more
profitable robberies.

9. He will soon persuade himself, that many rich men have more wealth than
they really want; and as they owe part of their affluence to the poor, upon the
principle of charity, why should not the poor take their share without the
formality of asking consent? He will now become a thief in good earnest; and
finding it easier, at least as he imagines, to support himself by theft than by
honest industry, he will continue the practice until he is detected,
apprehended, convicted, condemned, and gibbetted.

10. Then he will have exactly accomplished the destined end of his education;
and proved himself to have been an apt scholar. Under the gallows, and in his
last dying speech, he will say, "Had my father whipped me for breaking the
sabbath; and had not my mother encouraged me to rob orchards, and gardens, and
hen-roosts on that holy day, I should not have been brought to this ignominious
punishment.

11. "But they have been the cause, by encouraging me i^ my early youth in the
ways of sin, of this my awful catastrophe, and probably, of the eternal ruin of
my immortal soul." Parents, believe and tremble! and resolve to educate your
children in opposition to the gallows.

CHARACTER OF FIDELIA.
BEFORE I enter upon the particular parts of Fidelia's character, it is
necessary to preface, that she is the only child of a decrepid father, whose
life is bound up in hers. This gentleman has used Fidelia from her infancy with
all the tenderness imaginable; and has viewed her growing perfections with the
partiality of a parent, who soon thought her accomplished above the children of
all other men; but never thought she was come to the highest improvement of
which she herself was capable.

2. This fondness has had very pleasing effects upon his own happiness; for she
reads, she dances, she sings, uses her spinet and guitar to the utmost
perfection. And the young lady's use of all these excellencies, is to divert
the old man in his easy chair, when he is out of the pangs of a chronical
distemper.

3. Fidelia is now in the twenty-third year of her age; but the application of
many admirers, her quick sense of all that is truly elegant and noble in the
enjoyment of a plentiful fortune, are not able to draw her from the side of her
good old father. Certain it is, that there is no kind of affection so pure and
angelic, as that of a father to a daughter.

4. Fidelia on her part, as I was going to say, as accomplished as she is, with
all her beauty, wit, air and mien, employs her whole time in care and
attendance upon her father. How have I been charmed to see one of the most
beauteous women the age has produced, kneeling to help on an old man's slipper!
Her filial regard to him is what she makes her diversion, her business, and her
glory.

5. When she was asked by a friend of her deceased mother, to admit of the
courtship of her son, she answered, that she had a great respect and gratitude
to her for the overture in behalf of one so near to her, but that during her
father's life, she would admit into her heart no value for any thing which
should interfere with her endeavors to make his remains of life as happy and
easy as could be expected in his circumstances.

6. The happy father has her declaration, that she will not marry during his
life, and the pleasure of seeing that resolution not uneasy to her. Were one to
paint filial affection in its utmost beauty, he could not have a more lively
idea of it than in beholding Fidelia serving her father at his hours of rising,
meals, and rest.

7. When the general crowd of female youth are consulting their glasses,
preparing for balls, assemblies, or plays; for a young lady, who could be
rega^^ed among the foremost in those places, either for her person, wit,
fortune, or conversation, and yet contemn all th^se entertainments, to sweeten
the heavy hours of a decrepid parent, is a resignation truly heroic.

8. Fidelia performs the duty of a nurse with all the beauty of a bride; nor
does she neglect her person, because of her attendance upon him, when he is too
ill to receive company, to whom she may make an appearance.

9. Fidelia, who gives him up her youth, does not think it any great sacrifice
to add to it the spoiling of her dress. Her care and exactness in her habit
convince her father of the alacrity of her mind; and she has of all women the
best foundation for affecting the praise of a seeming negligence.

10. Those who think themselves the pattern of good breeding, and refinement,
would be astonished to hear, that, in those intervals, when the old gentleman
is at ease, and can bear company, there are at his house in the most regular
order, assemblies of people of the highest merit; where there is conversation
without mention of the absent, and the highest subjects of morality treated of
as natural and accidental discourse.

11. All of which is owing to the genius of Fidelia, who at once makes her
father's way to another world easy, and herself capable of being an honor to
his name in this.

HISTORY OF JERUSALEM.
ACCORDING to Manetho, an Egyptian historian, Jerusalem was founded by the
shepherds who invaded Egypt in an unknown period of antiquity. According to
Josephus, it was the capital of Melchizedeck's kingdom, and built in honor of
that prince, by twelve neighboring kings.

2. We know nothing of it with certainty, however, till the time of king David,
who took it from the Jebusites, and made it the capital of his kingdom. It was
first taken in the days of Jehoash, by Hazael, king of Assyria, who slew all
the nobility, but did not destroy their city.

3. It was afterward taken by Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, who destroyed
it, and carried away the inhabitants. Seventy years after, permission was
granted by Cyrus king of Persia to the Jews to rebuild their city, which was
done; and it continued the capital of Judea till the time of Vespasian, emperor
of Rome, by whose son Titus it was totally destroyed.

4. It was, however, rebuilt by Adrian, and seemed likely to recover its former
grandeur; but it flourished for a short time only. When the empress Helena,
mother of Constantine the great, came to visit it, she found it in a most
forlorn and ruinous situation.

5. Having formed a design of restoring it to its ancient ^^stre, she caused,
with a great deal of cost and labor, all the rubbish which had been thrown upon
those places where our Savior had suffered, been buried, etc. to be removed.

6. In doing this, they found the cross on which he died, as well as those of
the two malefactors who suffered with him. She then caused a magnificent church
to be built, which enclosed as many scenes of our Savior's sufferings as could
conveniently be done.

7. This church, which stands on mount Calvary, is still in good repair, being
supported by the donations of pilgrims who are constantly resorting to it. Here
is to be seen our Savior's sepulcher, hewn out of a solid rock; and the very
hole in the rock in which it is said the foot of the cross was fixed, with many
other curiosities.

8. On mount Moriah stood the celebrated temple of Solomon, which was seven
years in building, and employed no less than 163,300 men. The height of this
building on one side was at least 960 feet; and the stones employed about the
ramparts, were, according to Josephus, 40 cubits long, 12 thick, and 8 high,
all of polished marble, and so well joined as to appear like one solid rock.

9. After the destruction of this temple, it is said that the emperor Julian
attempted to rebuild it, in order to give the lie to our Savior's prophecy,
namely, that it should be totally destroyed without one stone's being left upon
another. In this, however, he was defeated by earthquakes, fiery eruptions,
etc. which destroyed his materials, and killed many of his workmen.

10. At present, Jerusalem is but a poor, thinly inhabited town, about three
miles in circumference, surrounded with mountains on all sides except the
north, with steep ascents and deep valleys.

THE FAITHFUL AMERICAN DOG.
AN officer in the late American army, on his station at the westward, went out
in the morning with his dog and gun, in quest of game. Venturing too far from
the garrison, he was fired upon by an Indian, who was lurking in the bushes,
and instantly fell to the ground.

2. The Indian running to him, struck him on the head with his tomahawk in
order to dispatch him; but the button of his hat fortunately warding off the
edge, he was only stunned by the blow. With savage brutality he applied the
scalping knife, and hastened away with this trophy of his horrid cruelty,
leaving the officer for dead, and none to relieve or console him, but his
faithful dog.

3. The afflicted creature gave every expression of his attachment, fidelity,
and affection. He licked the wounds with inexpressible tenderness, and mourned
the fate of his beloved master. Having performed every office which sympathy
dictated, or sagacity could invent, without being able to remove his master
from the fatal spot, or procure from him any signs of life, or his wonted
expressions of affection to him, he ran off in quest of help.

4. Bending his course toward the river, where two men were fishing, he urged
them by all the powers of native rhetoric to accompany him to the woods. The
men were suspicious of a decoy to an ambuscade, and dared not venture to follow
the dog; who, finding all his caresses fail, returned to the care of his
master; and, licking his wounds a second time, renewed all his tendernesses;
but with no better success than before.

5. Again he returned to the men; once more to try his skill in alluring them
to his assistance. In this attempt he was more successful than in the other.
The men seeing his solicitude, began to think the dog might have discovered
some valuable game, and determined to hazard the consequences of following him.

6. Transported with his success, the affectionate creature hurried them along
by every expression of ardor. Presently they arrive at the spot, where behold
-- an officer wounded, scalped, weltering in his own gore, and faint with the
loss of blood.

7. Suffice it to say, he was yet alive. They carried him to the fort, where
the first dressings were performed. A suppuration immediately took place, and
he was soon conveyed to the hospital at Albany, where in a few weeks, he
entirely recovered, and was able to return to his duty.

8. This worthy officer owed his life, probably, to the fidelity of this
sagacious dog. His tongue, which the gentleman afterward declared gave him the
most exquisite pleasure, clarified the wound in the most effectual manner, and
his perseverance brought that assistance, without which he must soon have
perished.

9. "My dog, the trustiest of his kind,
With gratitude inflames my mind;
I mark his true, his faithful way,
And in my service copy Tray."


FILIAL DUTY AND AFFECTION.
THE Stork is generally esteemed an emblem of filial love; insomuch, that it
has ever acquired the name of pious, from the just regard it is said to pay to
acts of filial piety and duty.

2. Storks live to a very advanced age; the consequence of which is, that their
limbs grow feeble, their feathers fall off, and they are no ways capable of
providing for their own food or safety. Being birds of passage, they are under
another inconvenience also, which is, that they are not able to remove
themselves from one country to another at the usual season.

3. In all these circumstances it is reported that their young ones assist
them, covering them with their wings, and nourishing them with the warmth of
their bodies; even bringing them provisions in their beaks, and carrying them
from place to place on their backs, or supporting them with their wings.

4. In this manner they return, as much as lies in their power, the care which
was bestowed on them when they were young ones in the nest. A striking example
of filial piety, inspired by instinct; from which reason itself needs not be
ashamed to take example.

5. "Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee," was an express commandment, and the only
one to which a promise was annexed. Among the Israelites, the slightest offense
against a parent was punished in the most exemplary manner.

6. Certainly nothing can be more just or reasonable, than that we should love,
honor, and succor those who are the very authors of our being, and to whose
tender care (under Heaven) we owe the continuance of it, during the helpless
state of our infancy.

7. Love, charity, and an intercourse of good offices, are what we undoubtedly
owe to all mankind; and he who omits them is guilty of such a crime as
generally carries its punishment with it.

8. But to our parents, more, much more than all this, is due; and, when we are
serving them, we ought to reflect, that whatever difficulties we go through for
their sakes, we cannot do more for them than they have done for us; and that
there is no danger of our over-paying the vast debt of gratitude they have laid
us under.

9. In fine, we should consider that it is a duty most peculiarly insisted on
by Heaven itself; and, if we obey the command, there is no doubt but we shall
also receive the reward annexed to it.

THE BE.
THE Be is a noble pattern of industry and prudence. She settles upon every
plant and flower, and makes the most insignificant, nay, even the most hurtful
of them, useful to her purpose. Thus she toils all the summer, while the days
are fair, in order to get a stock, which she lays by to serve for winter, when
the herbs and flowers are dead, the trees deprived of their leaves, and the
weather unfavorable.

2. Then the Bees retire to their hive, which is formed like a little state,
and governed by a Queen, who dispenses justice to her subjects. It is said they
bury their dead, punish criminals, and drive the drones from their hive. They
keep a regular order, whether in war or peace; and, as soon as their Queen
dies, appoint another to succeed her, and rule their little state, which may
serve as a pattern for a well ordered community.

3. The Be is one of the aptest emblems of industry, and the art of extracting
good out of evil, that can be found in nature. It is endued with an instinct,
which justly excites our admiration; and its perseverance is an admirable
example for the wisest of us to follow.

4. As the Be, in the summer, provides for itself that which may serve for its
support in winter, so should we, in the summer of our days, take care to lay in
a store of profitable virtues, and good qualities, which may render us justly
admired in age, and enable us to set a good example to posterity.

5. Like that industrious insect, likewise, we should learn to make every
occurrence of life serviceable to us; for nothing is so small ^r minute but it
may be made of use; nothing so bad in nature, but we may draw from it some
profit or instruction And thus, by choosing the good, and avoiding the evil, we
may purchase to ourselves peace here, and the hopes of a brighter reward
hereafter.

ON THE S^A^RY HEAVENS.
WHEN we survey the whole earth at once, and the several planets which lie
within its neighborhood, we are filled with a pleasing astonishment, to see so
many worlds hanging one above another; and sliding round their axles in such an
amazing pomp and solemnity.

2. If, after this, we contemplate those wild fields of either, that reach in
height as far as from Saturn to the fixed stars, and run abroad almost to an
infinitude, our imagination finds its capacity filled with so immense a
prospect, and puts itself upon the stretch to comprehend it.

3. But if we rise yet higher, and consider the sixed stars as so many vast
oceans of flame, which are each of them attended with a different set of
planets, and still discover new firmaments and new lights which are sunk
farther in those unfathomable depths of either, so as not to be seen by the
largest of our telescopes, we are lost in such a labyrinth of suns and worlds,
and confounded with the immensity and magnificence of nature.

OF QUEEN MARY, AND THE MARTYRS.
MARY possessed few qualities either estimable or amiable. Her person was as
little engaging as her manner. And, amidst the complication of vices which
en^ered into her composition, obstinacy, bigotry, violence, cruelty, we
scarcely find any virtue but sincerity; unless we add vigor of mind, a quality,
which seems to have been inherent in her family.

2. During this queen's reign, persecution for religion was carried to the most
terrible height. The mild counsels of cardinal Pole, who was inclined to
toleration, was overruled by Gardner and Bonner; and multitudes of all
conditions, ages, and sexes, were committed to the flames.

3. The persecutors began with Rogers, prebendary of St. Paul's; a man equally
distinguished by his p^^ty and learning; but whose domestic situation, it was
hoped, would bring him to compliance.

4. He had a wife, whom he tenderly loved, and ten children; yet did he
continue firm in his principles. And such was his serenity after condemnation,
that the jailers, it is said, awaked him from a sound sleep, when the hour of
his execution approached. He suffered at Smithfield.

5. Hooper, bishop of Gloucester, was condemned at the same time with Rogers,
but was sent to his own diocese to be punished, in order to strike the greater
terror into his flock. His constancy at his death, however, had a very contrary
effect.

6. It was a scene of consolation to Hooper, to die in their sight, bearing
testimony to that doctrine which he had f^rmerly ^aught among them. And he
continued to exhort them, till his tongue, swollen by the violence of his
agony, denied him utterance.

7. Ferrar, bishop of St. David's, also suffered this terrible punishment in
his own diocese; and Ridley, bishop of London, and Latimer, formerly bishop of
Worcester, two prelates venerable by their years, their learning, and their
piety, perished together in the same fire at Oxford, supporting each other's
constancy by their mutual exhortations.

8. Latimer, when tied to the stake, called to his companion, "Be of good
cheer, my brother; we shall this day kindle such a flame in England, as I trust
in God will never be extinguished."

9. Sanders, a respectable clergyman, was committed to the flames at Coventry.
A pardon was offered him, if he would recant; but he rejected it with disdain,
and embraced the stake, saying, "Welcome, cross of Christ! welcome, everlasting
life!"

10. Cranmer had less courage at first. Terrified by the prospect of those
tortures which awaited him, or overcome by the fond love of life, and by the
flattery of artful men, who pompously represented the dignities to which his
character still entitled him, if he would merit them by a recantation, he
agreed, in an unguarded hour, to subscribe to the doctrines of the papal
supremacy, and the real presence.

11. But the court, no less perfidious than cruel, determined that this
recantation should avail him nothing; that he should acknowledge his errors in
the church before the people, and afterward be led to execution.

12. Whether Cranmer received secret intelligence of their design, or repented
of his weakness, or both, is uncertain; but he surprised the audience by a
declaration, very different from what was expected.

13. After explaining his sense of what he owed to God and his sovereign,
"There is one miscarriage in my life, said he, of which, above all others, I
severely repent; and that is, the insincere declaration of faith, to which I
had the weakness to subscribe.

14. "But I take this opportunity of atoning for my error, by a sincere and
open recantation; and am willing to seal with my blood that doctrine, which I
firmly believe to be communicated from heaven."

15. As his hand, he added, had erred, by betraying his heart, it should first
be punished by a severe, but just doom. He accordingly stretched it out, as
soon as he came to the stake; and without discovering, either by his looks or
motions, the least sign of weakness, or even feeling, he held it in the flames
till it was entirely consumed.

16. His thoughts, to use the words of an elegant and learned historian,
appeared to be totally occupied in reflecting on his former fault; and he
called aloud several times, "This hand has offended! This wicked hand has
offended!"

17. When it dropped off, he discovered a serenity in his countenance, as if
satisfied with sacrificing to divine justice the instrument of his crime. And
when the fire attacked his body, his soul, totally collected within itself,
seemed superior to every external accident, and altogether inaccessible to pain.

STORY OF LOGAN, A MINGO CHIEF.
IN the spring of the year 1774, a robbery and murder were committed on an
inhabitant of the frontiers of Virginia by two Indians, of the Shawanese tribe.
The neighboring whites, according to their custom, undertook to punish this
outrage in a summary way. Colonel Cresap, a man infamous for the many murders
he had committed on those much injured people, collected a party, and proceeded
down the Kanhaway in quest of vengeance.

2. Unfortunately, a canoe of women and children, with one man only, was seen
coming from the opposite shore, unarmed, and unsuspecting any hostile attack
from the whites. Cresap and his party concealed themselves on the bank of the
river; and the moment the canoe reached the shore, singled out their objects,
and, at one fire, killed every person in it.

3. This happened to be the family of Logan, who had long been distinguished as
the friend of the whites. This unworthy return provoked his vengeance. He
accordingly signalized himself in the war which ensued.

4. In the autumn of the same year, a decisive battle was fought at the mouth
of the Great Kanhaway, between the collected forces of the Shawanese, Mingoes,
and Delawares, and a detachment of the Virginia militia. The Indians were
defeated, and sued for peace.

5. Logan, however, disdained to be seen among the suppliants; but, lest the
sincerity of a treaty should be distrusted, from which so distinguished a chief
absented himself, he sent by a messenger, the following speech, to be delivered
to Lord Dunmore.

6. "I appeal to any white man to say if ever he entered Logan's cabin hungry,
and he gave him no meat; if ever he came cold and naked, and he clothed him
not. During the last long and bloody war, Logan remained idle in his cabin, an
advocate for peace."

7. "Such was my love for the whites, that my countrymen pointed as they passed
by, and said, Logan is the friend of white men. I had even thought to have
lived with you, had it not been for the injuries of one man. Colonel Cresap,
the last spring, in cold blood, and unprovoked, murdered all the relations of
Logan, not even sparing my women and children."

8. "There runs not a drop of my blood in the veins of any living creature.
This called on me for revenge. I have sought it; I have killed many; I have
fully glutted my vengeance. For my country, I rejoice at the beams of peace;
but do not harbor a thought that mine is the joy of fear. Logan never felt
fear. He will not turn on his heel to save his life. Who is there to mourn for
Logan? Not one."

THE AGED PRISONER, RELEASED FROM THE BASTILE.
NOWHERE else on earth, perhaps, has human misery, by human means, been
rendered so lasting, so complete, or so remediless as in that despotic prison,
the Bastile. This the following case may suffice to evince; the particulars of
which are translated from that elegant and energetic writer Mr. Mercier.

2. The heinous offense which merited an imprisonment surpassing torture, and
rendering death a blessing, was no more than some unguarded expressions,
implying disrespect toward the late Gallic monarch, Louis fifteenth.

3. Upon the accession of Louis sixteenth to the throne, the ministers then in
office, moved by humanity, began their administration with an act of clemency
and justice. They inspected the registers of the Bastile, and set many
prisoners at liberty.

4. Among those, there was an old man who had groaned in confinement for forty
seven years, between four thick and cold stone-walls. Hardened by adversity,
which strengthens both the mind and constitution, when they are not overpowered
by it, he had resisted the horrors of his long imprisonment with an invincible
and manly spirit.

5. His locks, white, thin, and scattered, had almost acquired the rigidity of
iron; whilst his body, environed for so long a time by a coffin of stone, had
borrowed from it a firm and compact habit. The narrow door of his tomb, turning
upon its grating hinges, opened not as usual by halves, and an unknown voice
announced his liberty, and bade him depart.

6. Believing this to be a dream, he hesitated; but at length rose up and
walked forth with trembling steps, amazed at the space he traversed. The stairs
of the prison, the halls, the court seemed to him vast, immense, and almost
without bounds.

7. He stopped from time to time, and gazed around like a bewildered traveller.
His vision was with difficulty reconciled to the clear light of day. He
contemplated the heavens as a new object. His eyes remained fixed, and he could
not even weep.

8. Stupefied with the newly acquired power of changing his position, his
limbs, like his tongue, refused in spite of his efforts, to perform their
office. At length he got through the formidable gate.

9. When he felt the motion of the carriage, which was prepared to transport
him to his former habitation, he screamed out, and uttered some inarticulate
sounds; and as he could not bear this new movement, he was obliged to descend.
Supported by a benevolent arm, he sought out the street where he had formerly
resided; he found it, but no trace of his house remained; one of the public
edifices occupied the spot where it had stood.

10. He now saw nothing which brought to his recollection, either that
particular quarter, the city itself, or the objects with which he was formerly
acquainted. The houses of his nearest neighbors, which were fresh in his
memory, had assumed a new appearance.

11. In vain were his looks directed to all the objects around him; he could
discover nothing of which he had the smallest remembrance. Terrified, he
stopped and fetched a deep sigh. To him what did it import, that the city was
peopled with living creatures? None of them were alive to him; he was unknown
to all the world, and he knew nobody; and whilst he wept, he regretted his
dungeon.

12. At the name of the Bastile, which he often pronounced and even claimed as
an asylum, and the sight of his clothes which marked his former age, the crowd
gathered around him; curiosity, blended with pity, excited their attention. The
most aged asked him many questions, but had no remembrance of the circumstances
which he recapitulated.

13. At length accident brought to his way an ancient domestic, now a
superannuated porter, who, confined to his lodge for fifteen years, had barely
sufficient strength to open the gate. Even he did not know the master he had
served; but informed him that grief and misfortune had brought his wife to the
grave thirty years before; that his children were gone abroad to distant
climes, and that of all his relations and friends, none now remained.

14. This recital was made with the indifference which people discover for
events long passed and almost forgotten. The miserable man groaned, and groaned
alone. The crowd around, offering only unknown features to his view, made him
feel the excess of his calamities even more than he would have done in the
dreadful solitude which he had left.

15. Overcome with sorrow, he presented himself before the minister, to whose
humanity he owed that liberty which was now a burden to him. Bowing down, he
said, "Restore me again to that prison from which you have taken me. I cannot
survive the loss of my nearest relations; of my friends; and in one word, of a
whole generation. Is it possible in the same moment to be informed of this
universal destruction, and not to wish for death?

16. "This general mortality, which to others comes slowly and by degrees, has
to me been instantaneous, the operation of a moment. Whilst secluded from
society, I lived with myself only; but here I can neither live with myself, nor
with this new race, to whom my anguish and despair appear only as a dream."

17. The minister was melted; he caused the old domestic to attend this
unfortunate person, as only he could talk to him of his family.

18. This discourse was the single consolation which he received; for he
shunned intercourse with the new race, born since he had been exiled from the
world; and he passed his time in the midst of Paris in the same solitude as he
had done whilst confined in a dungeon for almost half a century.

19. But the chagrin and mortification of meeting no person who could say to
him, "We were fomerly known to each other," soon put an end to his existence.

ACCOUNT OF COLUMBUS.
TO Christopher Columbus, a native of Genoa, is deservedly ascribed the first
discovery of America: an event, which opened to mankind a new region of
science, commerce, and enterprise; and stamped with immortality the name of its
projector.

2. He was born in the year 1447. He early showed a capacity and inclination
for a seafaring life, and received an education which qualified him to pursue
it. At the age of fourteen, he went to sea, and began his career on that
element, where he was to perform exploits, which should astonish mankind.

3. He made a variety of voyages to almost every part of the globe, with which
any intercourse was then carried on by sea; and became one of the most skilful
navigators in Europe. But his active and enterprizing genius would not suffer
him to rest in the decisions, and tamely follow the track of his predecessors.

4. It was the great object in view at this time in Europe, to find out a
passage by sea to the East Indies. The Portuguese, among whom he now resided,
sought a new route to these desirable regions, by sailing round the southern
extremity of Africa.

5. They had consumed half a century in making various attempts, and had
advanced no farther on the western shore of Africa than just to cross the
equator, when Columbus conceived his great design of finding India in the west.
The spherical figure of the earth, which he understood, made it evident to him,
that Europe, Asia and Africa formed but a small proportion of the globe.

6. It was an impeachment of the wisdom and beneficence of the Author of
nature, to suppose that the vast space, yet unexplored, was a waste,
unprofitable ocean; and it appeared necessary that there should be anoth^^
continent in the west to counterpoise the immense quantity of land, which was
known to be in the east.

7. In the sea, near the western islands, pieces of carved wood, and large
joints of cane had been discovered; and branches of pine trees and the bodies
of two men with features different from the Europeans, had been found on the
shores of those islands after a course of westerly winds.

8. These reasonings and facts, with some others, convinced Columbus that it
was possible to find the desired land by sailing in a westerly direction. He
had a genius of that kind, which makes use of reasoning only as an excitement
to action. No sooner was he satisfied of the truth of his system than he was
anxious to bring it to the test of experiment; and set out on a voyage of
discovery.

9. His first step was to secure the patronage of some of the considerable
powers of Europe, capable of undertaking such an enterprise. Excited by the
love of his country, he laid his scheme before the Senate of Genoa, offering to
sail under their banners. But they, ignorant of the principles on which it was
formed, rejected it as the dream of a visionary projector.

10. He next applied to John II. king of Portugal. But he, being deeply engaged
in prosecuting discoveries along the coast of Africa, was not inclined to
encourage the undertaking of Columbus; yet he meanly sought to rob him of the
glory and advantages of his scheme, by privately dispatching a ship to make a
discovery in the west.

11. When Columbus was acquainted with this perfidious transaction, he quitted
the kingdom with indignation, and landed in Spain in 1484. Here, after seven
years painful solicitation at court, and surmounting every obstacle, which
ignorance, timidity, jealousy and avarice could lay before him, he obtained his
request; and Ferdinand and Isabella, who then reigned together, agreed to be
patrons of his enterprise.

12. It was stipulated between him and them, that he should be admiral in all
those islands and continents he should discover, and have the office hereditary
in his family; that he should be viceroy of the same for life, and enjoy a
tenth of all the merchandise which should be found.

13. Three small vessels were fitted out and victualled for twelve months,
furnished with ninety men, and placed under his command. With this little fleet
he set sail from Palos on Friday the 3d of August, 1492; and taking a westerly
course, boldly ventured into the unknown ocean.

14. He soon found that he had unforeseen hardships and difficulties to
encounter from the inexperience and fears of his men. To go directly from home
into a boundless ocean, far from any hope of relief, if any accident should
befall them, and where no friendly port nor human being were known to exist,
filled the boldest seamen with apprehension.

15. What greatly added to their terror, was a new and extraordinary
phenomenon, which occurred on the 14th of September. The magnetic needle varied
from the pole, and as they advanced, the variation increased. Nature seemed to
be changed; and their only guide through the trackless waters, to prove
unfaithful.

16. After twenty days, the impatient sailors began to talk of throwing their
commander into the sea, and of returning home. Their murmurs reached his ears;
but his fertile mind suggested an expedient in every extremity. By soothing,
flattery, and artifice; by inventing reasons for every uncommon appearance, and
deceiving them in the ship's reckoning, he kept them on sixteen days longer.

17. On the night of the 11th of October, he himself discovered a light, which
appeared to move, and the next morning gave them the joyful sight of land. It
proved to be the island Guanahana, one of the cluster, called Bahamas. Thus, in
the space of thirty six days, and the forty fifth year of his age, Columbus
completed a voyage, which he had spent twenty years in projecting; which opened
to the Europeans a new world, and made the name of Columbus immortal.

18. With tears of joy and transports of congratulation, the crews of the ships
sang a hymn of thanksgiving to God. After touching at several islands, and
leaving a small colony, he returned to Spain. On his return he was overtaken by
a storm, which became so furious that his destruction seemed inevitable. The
crews abandoned themselves to despair, and expected every moment to be
swallowed up in the ^aves.

19. In this extremity, he gave an admirable proof of his calmness and
foresight. He wrote a short account of his voyage on parchment, enclosed it in
a cake of wax, which he put into a tight cask, and threw into the sea, in hopes
that some fortunate accident would preserve a deposit of so much importance to
the world. The storm however subsided, and he arrived at Palos in Spain on the
15th of March, 1493.

20. The populace received him with acclamations, and the King and Queen, no
less astonished than delighted with his success, had him conducted to court
with a pomp suitable to the event, which added such distinguished luster to
their reign. His family was ennobled; and his former privileges and offices
confirmed to him.

21. He soon sailed on a second expedition to the new world, with a fleet of
seventeen ships, having on board 1500 people, and all things necessary for
establishing plantations. After discovering many islands of the West Indies,
and submitting to every labor and vexation in attempting to settle his colony,
he returned to Spain in 1498, to counteract the intrigues and efforts of his
enemies in the Spanish court.

22. He made two more voyages, in which he touched at most parts of the West
Indies, discovered the continent, and coasted on its shores for 400 leagues.
But the last part of his life was made wretched by the persecutions of his
enemies.

23. Their pride and jealousy could not endure that a foreigner should attain
so high a rank as to be viceroy for life, and have the office of admiral
hereditary in his family, to the exclusion of the Spanish nobles. They were,
therefore, indefatigable in their endeavors to depreciate his merits, and ruin
his fortune.

24. He was once carried home in irons; and in violation of gratitude,
humanity, and justice, basely deprived of all the offices and possessions in
the new world, to which he had a right by the solemn stipulations of Ferdinand.
When he returned from his last voyage in 1505, Queen Isabella, his only friend
and patroness in the court of Spain, was dead.

25. Worn out with sickness and fatigue, disgusted with the insincerity of his
Sovereign and the haughtiness of his courtiers, he lingered out a year in
fruitless solicitations for his violated rights, till death relieved him from
his sorrows. He ended his useful and active life at Valladolid on the 10th of
May, 1506, in the 59th year of his age.

26. In the life of this remarkable man, there was no deficiency of any
quality, which can constitute a great character. He was grave, though courteous
in his deportment, circumspect in his words and actions, irreproachable in his
morals, and exemplary in all the duties of religion.

27. The court of Spain were so just to his memory, that, notwithstanding their
ingratitude toward him during his life, they buried him magnificently in the
Cathedral of Seville, and erected a tomb over him with this inscription,
COLUMBUS HAS GIVEN A NEW WORLD TO THE KINGDOMS OF CASTILE AND LEON.

COLUMBA.
COLUMBA, Columba, to glory arise,
The queen of the world, and the child of the skies;
Thy genius commands thee; with rapture behold,
While ages on ages thy splendors unfold.
Thy reign is the last, and the noblest of time,
Most fruitful thy soil, most inviting thy clime;
Let the crimes of the east never encrimson thy name,
Be freedom, and science, and virtue, thy fame.
2.
To conquest and slaughter let Europe aspire;
Whelm nations in blood, and wrap cities in fire;
Thy heroes the rights of mankind shall defend,
And triumph pursue them, and glory attend.
A world is thy realm: for a world be thy laws,
Enlarged as thine empire, and just as thy cause;
On freedom's broad basis thy empire shall rise,
Extend with the main, and dissolve with the skies.
3.
Fair science her gates to thy sons shall unbar,
And the east see thy morn hide the beams of her star;
New bards, and new sages, unrivaled shall soar
To fame unextinguish'd, when time is no more;
To thee, the last refuge of virtue designed,
Shall fly from all nations the best of mankind:
Here, grateful to Heaven, with transport shall bring
Their incense, more fragrant than odors of spring.
4.
Nor less shall thy fair ones to glory ascend,
And genius and beauty in harmony blend;
The graces of form shall awake pure desire,
And the charms of the soul ever cherish the sire:
Their sweetness unmingled, their manners refined,
And virtue's bright image, instamp'd on the mind,
With peace, and soft rapture, shall teach life to glow,
And light up a smile in the aspect of woe.
5.
Thy fleets to all regions thy power shall display,
The nations admire, and the ocean obey;
Each shore to thy glory its tribute unfold,
And the east and the south yield their spices and gold.
As the dayspring unbounded, thy splendour shall flow,
And earth's little kingdoms before thee shall bow,
While the ensigns of union, in triumph unfurled,
Hush the tumult of war, and give peace to the world.
6.
Thus, as down a lone valley, with cedars overspread,
From war's dread confusion I pensively strayed;
The gloom from the face of fair Heaven retired;
The winds ceased to murmur; the thunders expired;
Perfumes, as of Eden, flowed sweetly along,
And a voice, as of angels, enchantingly sung:
"Columba, Columba, to glory arise,
The queen of the world, and the child of the skies."
DESCRIPTION OF BABYLON.
THE first foundation of Babylon, is, by some authors, ascribed to Semiramis,
and by others to Belus. Who the founder was, is not so material; but it is
certain that Nebuchadnezzar was the person who raised it to such a pinnacle of
glory, as that it became one of the principal wonders of the world.

2. The walls of this city were 60 miles in circumference, 350 feet high, and
87 feet thick. The city was exactly square, measuring 15 miles upon every side.
The walls were built with large bricks, cemented together with a kind of
glutinous slime, superior to any lime, and which grows harder than the bricks
themselves.

3. They were encompassed by a vast ditch lined with bricks, cemented with the
same kind of bitumen, and filled with water. The earth which was dug from the
ditch served to make the bricks for the walls: it must, therefore, have been of
great depth and width.

4. On every side of the city were 25 brazen gates, exactly opposite to each
other. Between every two of these gates were three towers, and four more at the
angles, and three between each of the angles and the next gate on every side.

5. The towers were all ten feet higher than the walls. Streets intersected
each other at right angles from all the gates on every side, being 15 miles in
length, and 50 in number. Thus was the city cut into 676 squares.

6. The hanging gardens were a great curiosity. They contained a square of 400
feet, and were carried to the height of the wall of the city by several large
terraces. This vast pile was sustained by arches built upon arches, and
strengthened by a wall 22 feet thick on every side.

7. These gardens contained all kinds of flowers and plants, and even large
trees. On the upper terrace was an aqueduct, which served to water the whole.

8. The Tigris, a branch of the river Euphrates, ran through the city from
north to south. After Cyrus had besieged the city two years, he found means to
turn the course of this river, and marched his army under the walls through its
channel. This was done on the night in which Belshazzar and his nobles were
revelling at the banquet; who were all slain, and the city taken.

THE SAILOR AND THE MONKIES.
PERHAPS no animal, below the human species, resembles man more in the
imitative faculty than the monkey. It is said that a sailor, having a number of
red woollen caps to dispose of, went on shore in South America to trade with
the natives.

2. In his way to a settlement, lying through a wood very thickly inhabited by
monkies, it being in the heat of the day, he put a cap on his head, and laying
the others by his side, determined to take a little repose under the shade of a
large tree.

3. To his utter astonishment, when he awoke, from the specimen he had given
his imitative observers of the use of his caps, he beheld a number of them upon
the heads of the monkies in the trees round about him; while the wearers were
chattering in the most unusual manner.

4. Finding every attempt to regain his caps fruitless, he at length in a fit
of rage and disappointment, and under the supposition that the one he retained
on his head was not worth taking away, pulled it off, and throwing it upon the
ground, exclaimed, "Here, you little thieving rogues, if you will keep the
rest, you are welcome to this also."

5. He had no sooner done this, than, to his great surprise, the little
observing animals very readily imitated him. They all threw down their caps
upon the ground; by which means the sailor regained his property, and marched
off in triumph. Happy would it be for mankind, if they resembled monkies only
in imitating the virtues of those whom they consider their superiors, while
they avoided their vices.

THE BRAVE SOLDIER'S REVENGE.
WHEN the great Conde commanded the Spanish army, and laid siege to one of the
French towns in Flanders, a soldier being ill treated by a general officer, and
struck several times with a cane, for some disrespectful words he had let fall,
answered very coolly, that he should soon make him repent of it.

2. Fifteen days afterward, the same general officer ordered the colonel of
the trenches to find a bold and intrepid fellow, to execute an important
enterprise, for which he promised a reward of a hundred pistoles.

3. The soldier we are speaking of, who passed for the bravest in the regiment,
offered his service, and going with thirty of his comrades, which he had the
liberty to make choice of, he discharged a very hazardous commission with
incredible courage and good fortune. Upon his return, the general officer
highly commended him, and gave him the hundred pistoles which he had promised.

4. The soldier presently distributed them among his comrades, saying, he did
not serve for pay; and demanded only, that, if his late action deserved any
recompense, they would make him an officer. And now, sir, adds he to the
general, who did not know him, I am the soldier whom you so much abused fifteen
days ago, and I then told you, I would make you repent of it.

5. The general, in great admiration, and melting into tears, threw his arms
around his neck, begged his pardon, and gave him a commission that very day.

AN ORATION UPON FEMALE EDUCATION, PRONOUNCED BY A MEMBER OF ONE OF THE PUBLIC
SCHOOLS IN BOSTON, SEPTEMBER, 1791.
WHILE the great and the rich are contributing from their abundance, to the
stock which supports our youth in knowledge, we come, ambitious to contribute
our mite.

2. The education of youth has ever been considered by all civilized nations as
an object of the highest consequence. But, while they have paid flattering
attention to the strength, they have doubtless too much neglected the beauty
and ornament of creation.

3. Too long has the pride of man suffered female genius, like the unpolished
diamond, to lie buried in its native rubbish. A few, of every age, have broken
over all restraint, and shone, as it were, with their own native light,
evincive of the genius of their sex.

4. The illustrious women, both of ancient and of modern days, will ever fill a
distinguished page in history. The names of MACAULAY, ROW, MOORE, CHAPONE, and
others, will live as long as time shall last.

5. And how pleasing is the thought, that here on this western shore, we can
justly boast of a WARREN, a MORTON, an ADAMS, with many others; whose talents
and virtues ornament their sex, and excite emulation.

6. Happy for the fair daughters of America, the thick mists of superstition
and bigotry are vanishing away; and the sun of science begins to beam upon our
land, and to irradiate the female mind.

7. Let infant choirs, composed of male and female voices, join in praise of
our political fathers, and all patrons of science. They have, doubtless,
reflected on the vast importance of female education to a rising country.

8. They have considered how much the sons and daughters of every age, are
indebted to their mothers for the seeds of virtue and knowledge; that schools
and colleges can but cultivate and mature the plants, which owe their origin to
the seeds sown in infancy; that from maternal lips, our first accents are
formed; and, that from them, our words, our actions, nay, our every thought
proceeds.

9. What an argument this, that they should well be taught, from whom our
virtues are, and from whom our vices may be derived! And may we not indulge an
honest pride, that this metropolis has been one of the foremost in exertions to
promote female improvement?

10. While the sons of our citizens are cultivating their minds, and preparing
them for the arduous, important, and manly employments, which America offers to
the industrious, their daughters are gaining that knowledge, which will enable
them to become amiable sisters, virtuous children; and, in the event, to assume
characters, more interesting to the public, and more endearing to themselves
than both.

11. How transporting are the prospects of America! With what justice can it
challenge the reality of that prophetic eulogy? "Blessed is that nation, whose
sons and daughters are trained to virtue, honor, and usefulness; whose schools
are as broad rivers and streams. Yea, blessed is that people, whose daughters
wear the robes of innocence, and whose young Elishas rise up in succession, and
wear with dignity the mantles of their departed Elijahs."

12. If parents wish to guard their children against an undue attention to
external ornaments, against extravagance in dress and gaudy equipage, what
better expedient will they find, than to replenish their minds with such a fund
of useful knowledge, as shall enable them suitably to contemn all worthless
things; to discern where real merit lies, and what constitutes the dignity of
their sex?

13. Then they will not easily be captivated with glittering trappings,
trifling toys, and tasteless amusements; but extend their views to more noble
objects. What greater barrier against vice of every kind than useful knowledge?

14. Is it not a melancholy truth, that man too often prostitutes his boasted
faculties to the destruction of female happiness? How necessary then, to
fortify their minds against the attacks of such vile seducers? Blemishes in
female characters seldom are effaced. Not so with man. He tarnishes his name,
and brightens it again.

15. But if woman chance to swerve from the strictest rules of virtue, "Ruin
ensues, reproach and endless shame,
And one false step forever blasts her fame.
In vain, with tears, the loss she may deplore,
In vain look back to what she was before,
She sets, like stars that fall, to rise no more."


16. Let other nations boast a superiority in the productions of fruits and
flowers; " Man is the nobler growth our realms supply." And, happily, we do not
limit merit or knowledge to either sex. Both, we consider, as the natural
growth of the human mind; and sure of flourishing, where moistened with the dew
of wisdom, and warmed with the sun of science.

17. In the dawn of life, I hail the dawn of my country's hopes! Lo, a Phoenix
of empire rises from the ashes of the old world! Lo, a sun, more radiant than
the fountain of heat, beams from the eastern horizon, pouring its rays among
the vapors and clouds, which have been gathering through centuries of nights!

18. Every natural, civil, and religious right is ours, by the legacy of
Heaven. Here science has opened her treasures; and here liberty has erected her
standard, and bids defiance to despotism.

19. With such singular advantages, we need but the active mind, the honest
heart, and the diligent hand. Thus shall our schools become as pure, enriching
streams; our churches flourish as the palm tree, and our land become as the
garden of God.

20. While the tender hearts of those, who are enjoying the advantages of
school education, are offering a tribute of respect and gratitude to their
parents, their patrons, and fathers of the town, for their exertions on this
interesting subject, all hearts should unite in praise to our common Parent,
from whom are all our blessings.

21. Could the first settlers of this town now stand in the midst of you, how
would they lift their hands in admiration! These, would they say, are the
blessed fruits of our zeal, our labors and hard^hips. We traversed the
wilderness in want of all things; but these, our children, are enjoying the
milk and honey of the land.

22. The thought is interesting. And while we cherish the remembrance of our
worthy ancestors, let us be emulous to copy their laudable examples.

23. To the pleasure derived from the anticipation of future days, under the
present improved system of education, much may be added from a reflection on
the past.

24. There was a time, in the infancy of our country, when less attention was
paid to the early improvement of the mind. When the advantage of schooling was
limited to a few, and those principally of one sex; while the other was devoted
to domestic toils.

25. And even now, in some parts of united America, as well as among several
other nations who call themselves civilized, women are considered but a little
better than slaves to unfeeling parents, and to idle, lordly husbands.

26. Our lot has fallen in a more favored spot. We live in an age and country,
where we see children of both sexes acquiring, at school, all the necessary,
convenient, and many of the ornamental branches of education.

27. Spelling, reading, grammar and geography, they acquire at an early age.
Writing and arithmetic are taught with great propriety and expedition.

28. That zeal, which seems to prevail among all ranks of people, gives
encouragement to teachers; and we have a fair prospect, that, if equal
exertions are elsewhere made, good and valuable learning will be disseminated
throughout our country.

29. Then shall we see, from year to year, the productions of American
ingenuity. Our young men will be emulous to exceed the geniuses of the east;
our daughters will shine as bright constellations in the sphere where nature
has placed them.

30. "They will open their mouths with wisdom, and in their tongues will be the
law of kindness. They will look well to the ways of their household, and eat not
the bread of idleness."

31. "They will stretch out their hands to the poor; y^^, they will reach forth
their hands to the needy. Their own works will praise them in the gates; and
their children shall rise up and call them blessed."

32. "How bright the scene to fancy's eye appears,
Through the perspective of long distant years;
When this, this mingled group, their country calls
From academic shades and learned halls,
To fix her laws, her spirit to sustain,
And light up glory through he wide domain.
Their various tastes in different arts displayed,
Like tempered harmony of light and shade,
With friendly union in one mass shall blend,
And this adorn the state, and that defend."


DIALOGUE BETWEEN FERNANDO CORTEZ, AND WILLIAM PENN.
Cortez. IS it possible, William Penn, that you should seriously compare your
glory with mine! The planter of a small colony in North America presume to vie
with the conqueror of the great Mexican empire!


Penn. Friend, I pretend to no glory; far be it from me to glory. But this I
say, that I was instrumental in executing a more glorious work than that
performed by thee; incomparably more glorious.


Cort. Do t^ou not know, William Penn, that with less than six hundred
Spanish foot, eighteen horse, and a few small pieces of cannon, I fought and
defeated innumerable armies of very brave men; dethroned an emperor, who
excelled all his countrymen in the science of war, as much as they excelled the
rest of the West Indian nations? That I made him my prisoner in his own
capital; and, after he had been deposed and slain by his subjects, vanquished
and took Guatemozin, his successor, and accomplished my conquest of the whole
Mexican empire, which I loyally annexed to the Spanish crown? Do thou not
know, that, in doing these wonderful acts, I showed as much courage as
Alexander the great, and as much prudence as Caesar?


Penn. I know very well that thou wast as fierce as a lion, and as subtle as a
serpent. The prince of darkness may, perhaps, place thee as high upon his black
list of heroes as Alexander or Caesar. It is not my business to interfere with
him in settling thy rank. But hark thee, friend Cortez; what right had thou,
or had the king of Spain himself, to the Mexican empire? Answer me that, if
thou can.


Cort. The pope gave it to my master.


Penn. Suppose the high priest of Mexico had taken it into his head to give
Spain to Montezuma; would his right have been good?


Cort. These are questions of casuistry, which it is not the business of a
soldier to decide. We leave that to gownsmen. But pray, Mr. Penn, what right
had you to the colony you settled?


Penn. An honest right of fair purchase. We gave the native Indians a variety
of articles which they wanted; and they, in return, gave us lands which they
did not want. All was amicably agreed on; and not a drop of blood shed to stain
our acquisition.


Cort. I am afraid there was a little fraud in the purchase. Thy followers,
William Penn, are said to think that cheating, in a quiet and sober way, is no
moral sin.


Penn. The righteous are always calumniated by the wicked. But it was a sight
which an angel might contemplate with delight, to behold the colony which I
settled! To see us living with the Indians like innocent lambs, and taming the
ferocity of their manners by the gentleness of ours! To see the whole country,
which before was an uncultivated wilderness, rendered as fair and as fertile as
the garden of Eden! O Fernando Cortez! Fernando Cortez! did thou leave the
great Mexican empire in that state? No, thou did turn those delightful and
populous regions into a desert, a desert flooded with blood. Do thou not
remember that most infernal scene, when the noble emperor Guatemozin was
stretched out by thy soldiers upon hot burning coals, to make him discover into
what part of the lake of Mexico he had thrown the royal treasures? Are not his
groans ever sounding in the ears of thy conscience? Do they not rend thy hard
heart, and strike thee with more horror than the yells of the furies?


Cort. Alas, I was not present when that direful act was done! Had I been
there, the mildness of my nature never would have suffered me to endure the
sight. I certainly should have forbidden it.


Penn. Thou wast the captain of that band of robbers, who did this horrid deed.
The advantage they had drawn from thy counsels and conduct enabled them to
commit it; and thy skill saved them afterward from the vengeance which was due
to so enormous a crime. The enraged Mexicans would have properly punished them
for It, if they had not had thee for their general, thou hard-hearted,
blood-thirsty wretch.


Cort. The righteous I find can rail, William Penn. But how do you hope to
preserve this admirable colony you have settled? Your people, you tell me, live
like innocent lambs. Are there no wolves in America to devour those lambs? Do
you expect the natives will always continue in peace with your successors? Or,
if they should make war, do you expect to oppose them by prayers and presents?
If this be your policy, your devoted colony will soon become an easy prey to
the savages of the wilderness.


Penn. We leave that to the wise Disposer of events, who governs all nations at
his will. If we conduct with strict justice toward the Indians, He will
doubtless defend us against all their invasions.


Cort. Is this the wisdom of a great legislator! I have heard some of your
countrymen compare you to Solon! Did Solon, think you, give laws to a people,
and leave those laws and that people to the mercy of every invader? The first
business of a legislature is to provide a military strength which may defend
the whole system. The world, William Penn, is a land of robbers. Any state or
commonwealth erected therein must be well fenced and secured by good military
institutions; or, the happier it is in all other respects, the greater will be
its danger, the more speedy its destruction. Your plan of government must be
changed; these Indian nations must be extirpated, or your colony will be lost.


Penn. These are suggestions of human wisdom. The doctrines I held were
inspired. They came from above.


Cort. It is blasphemy to say that any folly could come from the fountain of
wisdom. Whatever is inconsistent with the great laws of nature cannot be the
effect of inspiration. Self-defence is as necessary to nations as to men. And
shall individuals have a right which nations have not? True religion, William
Penn, is never inconsistent with reason and the great laws of nature.


Penn. Though what thou say should be true, it does not come well from thy
mouth. A tyrant talk of reason! Go to the inquisition, and tell them of reason,
and the great laws of nature. They will broil thee, as thy soldiers broiled the
unhappy Guatemozin. -- Why do thou turn pale? Is it the name of the
inquisition, or the name of Guatemozin, which troubles and affrights thee? O
wretched man! I wonder not that thou do tremble and shake, when thou think
of the many murders thou have committed, the many thousands of those innocent
Indians thou have butchered, without an accusation of a crime! Remember there
is a day coming when thou must answer for all thy barbarities! What would
thou give to part with the renown of thy conquests, and to have a conscience as
pure and undisturbed as mine?


Cort. I feel the force of thy words. They pierce me like daggers. I can never,
never be happy while I retain any memory of the ills I have caused!


THE WHISTLE.
WHEN I was a child, at seven years old, says Dr. Franklin, my friends on a
holiday filled my little pockets with coppers. I went directly to a shop where
they sold toys for children; and being charmed with the sound of a Whistle,
which I met by the way, in the hands of another boy, I voluntarily offered, and
gave all my money for one.

2. I then came home, and went whistling all over the house, much pleased with
my Whistle; but disturbing all the family. My brothers and sisters, and
cousins, understanding the bargain I had made, told me, I had given four times
as much for it, as it was worth.

3. This put me in mind of what good things I might have bought with the rest
of the money. And they laughed at me so much for my folly, that I cried with
vexation; and the reflection gave me more chagrin than the Whistle gave me
pleasure.

4. This, however, was afterward of use to me; the impression continuing on my
mind, so that often when I was tempted to buy some unnecessary thing, I said to
myself, Don't give too much for the Whistle. And so I saved my money.

5. As I grew up and came into the world, and observed the actions of men, I
thought I met with many, very many, who gave too much for the Whistle.

6. When I saw one too ambitious of court favors, sacrificing his time in
attendance at levees, his repose, his liberty, his virtue, and perhaps his
friends, to attain it, I have said to myself, This man gives too much for his
Whistle.

7. When I saw another fond of popularity, constantly employing himself in
political bustles, neglecting his own affairs, and ruining them by that
neglect, He pays indeed, said I, too much for his Whistle.

8. If I knew a miser, who gave up every kind of comfortable living, all the
pleasure of doing good to others, all the esteem of his fellow citizens, and
the joys of benevolent friendship, for the sake of accumulating wealth, Poor
man, said I, you do indeed, pay too much for the Whistle.

9. When I meet with a man of pleasure, sacrificing every laudable improvement
of the mind, or of his fortune, to mere corporal sensations, and ruining his
health in the pursuit; Mistaken man, say I, you are providing pain for yourself
instead of pleasure; you give too much for your Whistle.

10. If I see one fond of fine clothes, fine furniture, fine houses, fine
equipage, all above his fortune, for which he contracts debts, and ends his
career in prison; Alas! say I, he has paid dear, very dear, for his Whistle.

11. In short, I conceived that great part of the miseries of mankind were
brought upon them by the false estimates they had made of the value of things,
and by their giving too much for their Whistles.

TRUE PATRIOTISM, DISPLAYED AT THE SIEGE OF CALAIS.
IN 1347, the town of Calais in France was besieged by Edward III. of England,
and reduced to the last extremity by famine and the fatigue of the inhabitants.
John of Vienna, the governor, foreseeing the necessity of surrendering his
fortress, appeared upon the walls and desired a parley.

2. Sir Walter Manny was sent to him by Edward, whom the governor addressed in
the following words. "I have been entrusted by my sovereign with the command of
this town. It is almost a year since you besieged me; and I have endeavored, as
well as those under me, to do my duty. But you are acquainted with our present
condition. We are perishing with hunger, and have no hopes of relief. I am
willing, therefore, to surrender; and desire, as the sole condition, that you
would ensure the lives and liberties of these brave men, who have so long
shared with me every danger and fatigue."

3. Manny replied, that the king was so incensed against the townsmen of Calais
for their obstinate resistance, he was determined to take exemplary vengeance
on them; and would receive no terms which should restrain him in the punishment
of the offenders.

4. "Consider," replied the governor, "that this is not the treatment to which
brave men are entitled. If any English knight had been in my situation, your
king would have expected the same conduct from him. The inhabitants of Calais
have done for their sovereign what merits the esteem of every prince; much
more, of so gallant a prince as Edward.

5. But I inform you, that, if we must perish, we shall not perish unrevenged;
and that we are not yet so reduced, but we can sell our lives at a high price
to the victors. It is the interest of both sides to prevent these desperate
extremities; and I expect that you yourself, brave knight, will interpose your
good offices with your prince in our behalf."

6. Manny was struck with the justness of the sentiment, and represented to the
king the danger of reprisals, if he should offer such treatment to the
inhabitants. Edward was at last persuaded to mitigate the rigor of the
conditions demanded.

7. He only insisted that six of the most respectable citizens should be sent
to him, to be disposed of as he thought proper. They were to come to his camp,
carrying the keys of the city in their hands, ba^^^eaded and barefooted, with
ropes about their necks. And on these conditions, he promised to spare the
lives of all the remainder.

8. When this intelligence was conveyed to Calais, it struck the inhabitants
with new consternation. To sacrifice six of their fellow-citizens to certain
destruction for signalizing their valor in a common cause, appeared to them
even more severe than that general punishment with which they were before
threatened; and they found themselves incapable of coming to any resolution in
so cruel and distressful a situation.

9. At last one of the principal inhabitants, called Eustace de St. Pierre,
whose name deserves to be recorded, stepped forth, and declared himself willing
to encounter death for the safety of his friends and companions. Another,
animated by his example, made a like generous offer. A third and fourth
presented themselves to the same fate; and the whole number was soon completed.

10. These six heroic citizens appeared before Edward in the guise of
malefactors, laid at his feet the keys of their city, and were ordered to be
led to execution. It is surprising that so generous a prince should ever have
entertained such a barbarous purpose against such men; and still more, that he
should seriously persist in the resolution of executing it.

11. But the entreaties of his queen saved his memory from that infamy. She
prostrated herself before him, and, with tears in her eyes, begged the lives of
these unhappy men. Having obtained her request, she carried them into her tent,
ordered a repast to be set before them, and, after making them a present of
money and clothes, dismissed them in safety.

SUBLIMITY OF THE SCRIPTURES.
GOD came from Teman, and the Holy One from mount Paran. Selah. His glory
covered the heavens, and the earth was full of his praise. And his brightness
was as the light; he had horns coming out of his hand; and there was the hiding
of his power.

2. Before him went the pestilence; and burning coals went forth at his feet.
He stood and measured the earth; he beheld and drove asunder the nations, and
the everlasting mountains were scattered; the perpetual hills did bow; his ways
are everlasting.

3. I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction; and the curtains of the land of
Midian did tremble. Was the Lord displeased against the rivers? Was thy wrath
against the sea, that thou did ride upon thy horses, and thy chariots of
salvation? Thy bow was made quite naked, according to the oaths of the tribes,
even thy sword. Selah.

4. Thou did cleave the earth with rivers. The mountains saw thee and they
trembled; the overflowing of the water passed by; the deep uttered his voice,
and lifted up his hands on high. The sun and moon stood still in their
habitation. At the light of thine arrows they went, and at the shining of thy
glittering spear.

5. Thou did march through the land in indignation; thou did thresh the
heathen in anger. Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for
salvation with thine anointed. Thou woundedst the head out of the house of the
wicked, by discovering the foundation unto the neck. Selah.

6. Thou did strike through with his staves the head of his villages; they
came out as a whirlwind to scatter me; their rejoicing was as to devour the
poor secretly. Thou did walk through the sea with thine horses, through the
heap of great waters.

7. When I heard, I trembled; and my lips quivered at the voice. Rottenness
entered into my bones, and I trembled in myself, that I might rest in the day
of trouble. When he comes up unto the people, he will invade them with his
troops.

REVELATION. CHAP. X.
AND I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven, clothed with a cloud;
and a rainbow was upon his head, and his face was as it were the sun, and his
feet as p^llars of fire. And he had in his hand a little book open; and he set
his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot on the earth, and cried with a
loud voice, as when a lion roareth; and when he had cried, seven thunders
uttered their voices.

2. And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write;
and I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Seal up those things which the
seven thunders uttered, and write them not.

3. And the angel, whom I saw stand upon the sea and upon the earth, lifted up
his hand to heaven, and swear by him who lives forever and ever, who created
heaven, and the things which therein are, and the earth, and the things which
therein are, and the sea, and the things which are therein, that there should
be time no longer. But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he
shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he has
declared to his servants the prophets.

ANECDOTE OF MONTESQUIEU.
A GENTLEMAN, being at Marseilles, hired a boat, with an intention of sailing
for pleasure. He entered into conversation with the two young men who owned the
vessel, and learned, that they were not watermen by trade, but silver-smiths;
and that when they could be spared from their usual business, they employed
themselves in that way to increase their earnings.

2. On expressing his surprise at their conduct, and imputing it to an
avaricious disposition; Oh! sir, said the young men, if you knew our reasons,
you would ascribe it to a better motive.

3. Our father, anxious to assist his family, scraped together all he was
worth; purchased a vessel for the purpose of trading to the coast of Barbary;
but was unfortunately taken by a pirate, carried to Tripoli, and sold for a
slave.

4. He writes word, that he is luckily fallen into the hands of a master who
treats him with great humanity; but that the sum which is demanded for his
ransom is so exorbitant that it will be impossible for him ever to raise it. He
adds that we must, therefore, relinquish all hope of ever seeing him again, and
be contented that he has as many comforts as his situation will admit.

5. With the hopes of restoring to his family a beloved father, we are
striving, by every honest mean in our power, to collect the sum necessary for
his ransom; and we are not ashamed to employ ourselves in the occupation of
watermen. The gentleman was struck with this account, and on his departure,
made them a handsome present.

6. Some months afterward, the young men being at work in their shop, were
greatly surprised at the sudden arrival of their father, who threw himself into
their arms; exclaiming, at the same time, that he was fearful they had taken
some unjust method to raise the money for his ransom, for it was too great a
sum for them to have gained by their ordinary occupation.

7. They professed their ignorance of the whole affair, and could only suspect
they owed their father's release to that stranger, to whose generosity they had
been before so much obliged. After Montesquieu's death, an account of this
affair was found among his papers, and the sum actually remitted to Tripoli for
the old man's ransom.

8. It is a pleasure to hear of such an act of benevolence performed even by a
person totally unknown to us; but the pleasure is greatly increased, when it
proves the union of virtue and talents in an author so renowned as Montesquieu.

THE BENEVOLENT PAIR.
A POOR man and his wife at Vienna, who had six small children, finding
themselves unable to support them all, were reduced to the necessity of turning
the youngest upon the public. The husband carried it reluctantly to the
foundling hospital, deposited it in the basket which was placed near the gate
for the reception of the foundlings, and anxiously waited till the arrival of
the inspector, that he might take a farewell view of his child.

2. When the inspector came at the usual time to examine the basket, he
perceived two children therein; observing the laborer who stood at a small
distance, he supposed that he had brought them both; and compelled the poor
man, notwithstanding all his protestations to the contrary, to return with two
children instead of one, which was already more than he knew how to maintain.

3. His wife, as well as himself, was exceedingly dejected at this increase of
their expenses; but, unwilling to expose the little stranger in the street,
they determined to use all their endeavors to support themselves and the seven
children, and they hoped Providence would assist them.

4. On undressing the child, the woman found a paper sowed to its clothes,
containing an order upon a banker for five crowns a month, to be paid to the
person who took care of it. The good people were not a little rejoiced at their
happy fortune.

5. But the story being circulated, and coming to the knowledge of the managers
of the hospital, they claimed the child as their property. The laborer refused
to relinquish it, and was assisted by some persons of distinction.

6. The cause being tried in a court of justice, it was decreed, that, as the
foundling hospital had at first declined receiving the child, it of right
belonged to the poor man who had shown such humanity in keeping it, when he was
so ill able to afford any additional expense.

THE UNFORTUNATE PHILANTHROPIST.
IN the year 1775, a ship lying at anchor in Table-Bay at the Cape of Good
Hope, was driven on shore in a violent storm, and the crew reduced to the
utmost distress and danger. Their cries for assistance were distinctly heard by
the inhabitants; but at first there appeared no prospect of relief from any
quarter.

2. The swell of the sea, which broke over the ship with the greatest violence,
made it impossible for them to save themselves in boats, and highly dangerous
to attempt it by swimming. Some of those, who ventured to swim to the shore,
were thrown against the rocks and dashed to pieces; others, as soon as they had
arrived at the shore, were carried back by another wave and drowned.

3. A Dutchman by the name of VOLTEMAD, who happened to be a spectator of this
distressing scene, was touched with compassion of so noble a kind, and at the
same time so operative, that, mounting a high spirited horse, he swam him over
to the ship; encouraged some of the crew to lay hold of the end of a rope,
which he threw out to them for that purpose, and others to fasten themselves to
the horse's tail; then turned about, and carried them safe on shore.

4. This animal's natural aptness for swimming, the great size of his body, the
firmness and strength of his limbs, prevented him from being easily overpowered
by the swell of the sea. But, unfortunately, this generous and active veteran
himself became a victim to death.

5. Fourteen young persons he had actually saved; and while endeavoring to
preserve more than it was possible for him to do in so short a time, he and his
horse were both drowned. The occasion of this was as follows.

6. After the seventh turn, having staid a little longer than usual to rest
himself, the poor wretches on board were afraid that he did not intend to
return; for this reason, being impatient, they redoubled their prayers and
cries for assistance; upon which, his tenderest feelings being wrought upon, he
again hastened to their relief ere his horse was sufficiently rested.

7. The poor animal, almost spent, now sunk the sooner under his burden,
inasmuch as too many sought to be saved at one time; and one of them, as it was
thought, happened unluckily to catch hold of the horse's bridle, and by that
mean drew his head under water.

8. This bold and enterprizing philanthropist commands our esteem and
admiration the more, as he had put himself into this danger for the relief of
others, without himself being able to swim. The Dutch East India company caused
a monument to be erected to the memory of this unfortunate philanthropist.

ST. PAUL'S SPEECH BEFORE KING AGRIPPA.
I THINK myself happy, king Agrippa, because I shall answer for myself this day
before thee, touching all the things whereof I am accused of the Jews;
especially, as I know thee to be expert in all customs and questions which are
among the Jews. Wherefore I beseech thee to hear me patiently.

2. My manner of life from my youth, which was at the first among my own nation
at Jerusalem, know all the Jews; who knew me from the beginning, if they would
testify, that, after the straitest sect of our religion, I lived a Pharisee.

3. And now I stand and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God unto
our fathers. Unto which promise, our twelve tribes, instantly serving God day
and night, hope to come; for which hope's sake, king Agrippa, I am accused of
the Jews.

4. Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise
the dead? I verily thought with myself, that I ought to do many things contrary
to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.

5. Which thing I also did in Jerusalem; and many of the saints did I shut up
in prison, having received authority from the chief priests. And when they were
put to death, I gave my voice against them. And I punished them often in every
synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme. And being exceedingly mad against
them, I persecuted them even unto strange cities.

6. Whereupon, as I went to Damascus with authority and commission from the
chief priests, at mid day, O king, I saw in the way a light from heaven, above
the brightness of the sun, shining round about me, and them who journeyed with
me.

7. And, when we were all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice speaking unto
me, and saying in the Hebrew tongue, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? It is
hard for thee to kick against the pricks. And I said, Who art thou Lord? And he
said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest.

8. But rise, and stand upon thy feet; for I have appeared unto thee for this
purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness, both of these things which thou
have seen, and of those things in the which I will appear unto thee; delivering
thee from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom I now send thee, to open
their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
satan unto God; that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance
among them who are sanctified by faith which is in me.

9. Whereupon, O king Agrippa, I was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision;
but showed first unto them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout all
the coasts of Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn
to God, and do works meet for repentance. For these causes, the Jews caught me
in the temple, and went about to kill me.

10. Having, therefore, obtained help from God, I continue unto this day,
witnessing both to small and great; saying no other things than those which
Moses and the prophets did say should come; that Christ should suffer, and that
he should be the first who should rise from the dead, and should show light
unto the people, and to the Gentiles.

CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
MONTAIGNE thinks it some reflection upon human nature itself, that few people
take delight in seeing beasts caress or play together; but almost every one is
pleased to see them lacerate and worry one another.

2. I am sorry this temper is become almost a distinguishing character of our
own nation, from the observation which is made by foreigners of our beloved
pastimes, bear-baiting, cock-fighting, and the like.

3. We should find it hard to vindicate the destroying of any thing that has
life, merely out of wantonness; yet in this principle our children are bred up;
and one of the first pleasures we allow them, is the license of inflicting pain
upon poor animals.

4. Almost as soon as we are sensible what life is ourselves, we make it our
sport to take it from other creatures. I cannot but believe a very good use
might be made of the fancy which children have for birds and insects.

5. Mr. Lock takes notice of a mother who often procured these animals for her
children, but rewarded or punished them as they treated them well or ill. This
was no other than entering them betimes into a daily exercise of humanity, and
improving their very diversion to a virtue.

6. The laws of self-defence undoubtedly justify us in destroying those animals
which would destroy us, which injure our properties, or annoy our persons; but
not even these, whenever their situation incapacitates them from hurting us.

7. I know of no right which we have to shoot a bear on an inaccessible island
of ice; or an eagle on the mountain's top; whose lives cannot injure, nor
deaths procure us any benefit. We are unable to give life, and therefore ought
not wantonly to take it away from the meanest insect, without sufficient
reason. They all receive it from the same benevolent hand as ourselves, and
have therefore an equal right to enjoy it.

8. God has been pleased to create numberless animals intended for our
sustenance; and that they are so intended, the agreeable flavor of their flesh
to our palates, and the wholesome nutriment which it administers to our
stomachs, are sufficient proofs.

9. These, as they are formed for our use, propagated by our culture, and fed
by our care, we have certainly a right to deprive of life, because it is given
and preserved to them on that condition.

10. But this should always be performed with all the tenderness and compassion
which so disagreeable an office will permit; and no circumstances ought to be
omitted, which can render their executions as quick and easy as possible.

SPEECH OF NICOLAUS.
THE Athenians, having made war upon the Syracusians, the army of the former,
under the command of Nicias and Demosthenes, was totally defeated; and the
generals obliged to surrender at discretion. The victors, having entered their
capital in triumph, the next day a council was held to deliberate what was to
be done with the prisoners.

2. Diocles, one of the leaders of the greatest authority among the people,
proposed, that all the Athenians who were born of free parents, and all such
Sicilians as had joined with them, should be imprisoned, and be maintained on
bread and water only; that the slaves, and all the Atticks, should be publicly
sold; and that the two Athenian generals should be first scourged with rods,
and then put to death.

3. This last article exceedingly disgusted all wise and compassionate
Syracusians. Hermocrates, who was very famous for his probity and justice,
attempted to make some remonstrances to the people; but they would not hear
him; and the shouts which echoed from all sides prevented him from continuing
his speech.

4. At that instant, Nicolaus, a man venerable for his great age and gravity,
who in this war had lost two sons, the only heirs to his name and estate, made
his servants carry him to the tribunal for harangues; and the instant he
appeared, a profound silence ensued, when he addressed them in the following
manner.

5. "You here behold an unfortunate father, who has felt more than any other
Syracusian the fatal effects of this war, by the death of two sons, who formed
all the consolation, and were the only supports of my old age.

6. "I cannot, indeed, forbear admiring their patriotism in sacrificing to
their country's welfare a life which they would one day have been deprived of
by the common course of nature; but then, I cannot but be sensibly affected
with the cruel wound which their death has made in my heart; nor forbear
detesting the Athenians, the authors of this unhappy war, as the murderers of
my children.

7. "But, however, there is one circumstance which I cannot conceal, that I am
less sensible for my private afflictions, than for the honor of my country,
which I see exposed to eternal infamy, by the barbarous advice which is now
given you. The Athenians, I own, for declaring war so unjustly against us,
merit the severest treatment which could be inflicted on them; but have not the
Gods, the just avengers of wrongs, sufficiently punished them and avenged us?

8. "When their generals laid down their arms and surrendered, did not they do
this in hopes of having their lives spared? And will it be possible for us, if
we put them to death, to avoid the just reproach of having violated the law of
nations, and dishonored our victory by unheard of cruelty!

9. "What, will you suffer your glory to be thus sullied in the face of the
whole world? And will you hear it said that a nation, who first dedicated a
temple to clemency, had found none in Syracuse? Surely, victories and triumphs
do not give immortal glory to a city; but the exercising of mercy toward a
vanquished enemy, moderation in the greatest prosperity, and the fearing to
offend the Gods by a haughty and insolent pride, are glories far more permanent
than the most splendid conquests.

10. "You doubtless have not forgotten, that this Nicias, whose fate you are
going to pronounce, was the very man who pleaded your cause in the assembly of
the Athenians, and who employed all his credit, and the whole power of his
eloquence, to dissuade his country from embarking in this war.

11. "Should you therefore pronounce sentence of death on this worthy general,
would it be a just reward for the zeal he showed for your interest? With regard
to myself, death would be less grievous to me, than the sight of so horrid an
injustice committed by my countrymen and fellow-citizens."

INTEGRITY.
THE Spanish historians relate a memorable instance of honor and regard to
truth. A Spanish cavalier in a sudden quarrel slew a Moorish gentleman, and
fled. His pursuers soon lost sight of him; for he had, unperceived, thrown
himself over a garden wall.

2. The owner, a Moor, happening to be in his garden, was addressed by the
Spaniard on his knees, who acquainted him with his case, and implored
concealment. Eat this, said the Moor, giving him half a peach; you now know
that you may confide in my protection.

3. He then locked him up in his garden apartments, telling him as soon as it
was night, he would provide for his escape to a place of greater safety. The
Moor then went into his house, where he had but just seated himself, when a
great crowd, with loud lamentations, came to his gate, bringing the corpse of
his son, who had just been killed by a Spaniard.

4. When the first shock of surprise was a little over, he learned from the
description given, that the fatal deed was done by the very person then in his
power. He mentioned this to no one; but, as soon as it was dark, retired to his
garden, as if to grieve alone, giving orders that none should follow him.

5. Then accosting the Spaniard, he said, Christian, the person you have killed
is my son; his body is now in my house. You ought to suffer; but you have eaten
with me, and I have given you my faith, which must not be broken.

6. He then led the astonished Spaniard to his stables, and mounted him on one
of his fleetest horses, and said, Fly far, while the night can cover you; you
will be safe in the morning. You are indeed guilty of my son's blood; but God
is just and good, and I thank Him I am innocent of yours, and that my faith
given is preserved.

7. This point of honor is most religiously observed by the Arabs and Saracens,
from whom it was adopted by the Moors of Africa, and by them was brought into
Spain; the effects of which remain to this day; so that when there is any fear
of a war's breaking out between England and Spain, an English merchant there,
who apprehends the confiscation of his goods as those of an enemy, thinks them
safe if he can get a Spaniard to take charge of them.

8. The Spaniard secures them as his own, and faithfully re-delivers them, or
pays the value, whenever the Englishman demands them. One instance of Spanish
honor cannot but still be fresh in the memory of many now living; and deserves
to be handed down to the latest posterity.

9. In the year 1746, when the English were at open war with Spain, the
Elizabeth of London, captain William Edwards, coming through the gulf from
Jamaica, richly laden, met with a most violent storm, in which the ship sprung
a leak, that obliged them, for the saving of their lives, to run into the
Havannah, a Spanish port.

10. The captain went on shore, and directly waited on the governor, told the
occasion of his putting in, and that he surrendered the ship as a prize, and
himself and his men as prisoners of war, only requesting good quarter.

11. No, Sir, replied the Spanish governor, if we had taken you in fair war at
sea, or approaching our coast with hostile intentions, your ship would then
have been a prize, and your people prisoners; but when, distressed by a
tempest, you come into our ports for the safety of your lives, we the enemies,
being men, are bound as such by the laws of humanity to afford relief to
distressed men who ask it of us.

12. We cannot, even against our enemies, take advantage of an act of God. You
have leave therefore to unload your ship, if that be necessary to stop the
leak; you may refit her here, and traffic so far as shall be necessary to pay
the charges; you may then depart, and I will give you a pass to be in force
till you are beyond Bermuda.

13. If after that you are taken, you will then be a lawful prize; but now you
are only a stranger, and have a stranger's right to safety and protection. The
ship accordingly departed, and arrived safe in London.

AN ADDRESS TO THE VISITANTS.
[The following Lines were composed by PHILENIA, with a design that they should
be spoken by a little Girl at one of the public schools in Boston, on the
annual visitation.]

ON the Spring's breast the rose's Gem is laid
By some fond florist, or some sylvan maid;
Round the green sod the pliant stems expand,
Propp'd by the skilful cult'rers fostr'ing hand;
Till, reared by care, the blushing EMBLEM towers,
The grace of gardens, and the queen of flowers;
Even at the cheerless hour of faded prime,
Regales the sense, and scorns the frost of time.
2.
Thus the young Buds, which form this bright parterre,
Raised by affection, and improved by care,
Gave to the view a powerless, formless band,
Till the wise Artist, with a master's hand,
Drew forth each latent worth, each mental grace,
And poured expression over the vacant face;
Bade the dark eye with sense and softness roll,
And lips of roses breathe the feeling soul;
The damask cheek with kind affections glow,
And the mind's whiteness light the skin of snow.
3.
Here the fair form, by nobler views refined,
Shines the bright mirror of the faultless mind.
No sullen weed attracts the glance of scorn,
No blooming charm conceals the envious thorn.
With pity's dew the eye of radiance flows,
With LEARNING's gem the breast of beauty glows.
4.
Happy the child whose green unpracticed years
The guiding hand of parent-fondness rears,
To rich instruction's ample field removes,
Prunes every fault, and every worth improves;
Till the young mind unfolds each secret charm,
With genius bright, with cherished virtue warm;
Like the Spring's Boast, the lovely plant shall rise
In grateful odors to the nurturing skies.
5.
But the neglected being of a day,
Who careless wastes the morn of life away,
Though decked in lavish nature's blooming dies,
The scorn of WISDOM, and of fools the prize,
Glares in disgrace, in powerless beauty mourns,
While from her view the eye of JUDGMENT turns.
6.
So the light Poppy fills the flowery scene,
Vain of her streaked robe, and painted mien;
In life's short spring each transient grace displays,
And flaunts enamored of the coxcomb's gaze.
Yet should THE WISE approach her tawdry bower,
And lend his bosom to the phantom flower,
No latent sweets refreshing powers dispense,
But drowsy dullness veils the sickening sense;
Till in disgust he spurns her lifeless charms,
And flings them rifled from his loathing arms.
ADVICE TO A YOUNG TRADESMAN.
REMEMBER that time is money. He who can earn ten shillings a day by his labor,
and goes abroad, or sits idle one half of that day, though he spend but
sixpence during his diversion or idleness, ought not to reckon that the only
expense; he has really spent, or rather thrown away, five shillings besides.

2. Remember that credit is money. If a man lets his money lie in my hands
after it is due, he gives me the interest, or so much as I can make of it
during that time. This amounts to a considerable sum where a man has good and
large credit, and makes good use of it.

3. Remember that money is of a prolific, generating nature. Money can beget
money, and its offspring can beget more, and so on. Five shillings turned is
six; turned again, it is seven and threepence; and so on till it becomes a
hundred pounds. The more there is of it, the more it produces every turning, so
that the profits rise quicker and quicker.

4. Remember that six pounds a year is but a groat a day. For this little sum
(which may be daily wasted either in time or expense, unperceived) a man of
credit may, on his own security, have the constant possession and use of a
hundred pounds. So much in stock, briskly turned by an industrious man,
produces great advantage.

5. Remember this saying, "The good paymaster is lord of another man's purse."
He who is known to pay punctually and exactly at the time he promises, may at
any time, and on any occasion, raise all the money his friends can spare. This
is sometimes of great use.

6. After industry and frugality, nothing contributes more to the raising of a
young man in the world, than punctuality and justice in all his dealings;
therefore never keep borrowed money an hour beyond the time you promised, lest
a disappointment shut up your friend's purse forever.

7. The most trifling actions which affect a man's credit are to be regarded.
The sound of your hammer at five in the morning, or nine at night, heard by a
creditor, makes him easy six months longer.

8. But if he sees you at a billiard table, or hears your voice at a tavern,
when you should be at work, he sends for his money the n^^t day; demands it
before he can receive it in a lump.

9. It shows, besides, that you are mindful of what you owe; it makes you
appear a careful, as well as an honest man, and that still increases your
credit.

10. Beware of thinking all your own that you possess, and of living
accordingly. It is a mistake that many people who have credit fall into. To
prevent this, keep an exact account, for some time, both of your expenses and
your income.

11. If you take the pains at first to mention particulars, it will have this
good effect; you will discover how wonderfully, small, trifling expenses mount
up to large sums, and will discern what might have been, and may for the future
be saved, without occasioning any great inconvenience.

12. In short, the way to wealth, if you desire it, is as plain as the way to
market. It depends chiefly on two words, industry and frugality; that is, waste
neither time nor money, but make the best use of both. Without industry and
frugality, nothing will do, and with them, every thing will do.

13. He, who gets all he can honestly, and saves all he gets (necessary
expenses excepted) will certainly become rich; if that Being, who governs the
world, to whom all should look for a blessing on their honest endeavors, does
not, in his wise providence, otherwise determine.

PARENTAL AFFECTION. STORY OF THE BEAR.
THE white bear of Greenland and Spitsbergen is considerably larger than the
brown bear of Europe, or the black bear of America. This bear is often seen on
floats of ice, several leagues at sea. The following is copied from the journal
of a voyage, for making discoveries toward the North Pole.

2. Early in the morning, the man at the mast-head, gave notice that three
bears were making their way very fast over the ice, and directing their course
toward the ship. They had probably been invited by the blubber of a sea horse,
which the men had set on fire, and which was burning on the ice at the time of
their approach.

3. They proved to be a she bear and her two cubs; but the cubs were nearly as
large as the dam. They ran eagerly to the fire, and drew out from the flames
part of the flesh of the sea horse, which remained unconsumed, and ate it
voraciously.

4. The crew from the ship threw great pieces of the flesh, which they had
still left, upon the ice, which the old bear carried away singly, laid every
piece before her cubs; and, dividing them, gave each a share, reserving but a
small portion to herself. As she was carrying away the last piece, they
levelled their muskets at the cubs, and shot them both dead; and in her
retreat, they wounded the dam, but not mortally.

5. It would have drawn tears of pity from any but unfeeling minds, to have
marked the affectionate concern manifested by this poor beast, in the moments
of her expiring young. Though she was sorely wounded, and could but just crawl
to the place where they lay, she carried the lump of flesh she had fetched
away, as she had done the others before, tore it in pieces, and laid it down
before them; and when she saw they refused to eat, she laid her paws first upon
one, and then upon the other, and endeavored to raise them up.

6. All this while it was piteous to hear her moan. When she found she could
not stir them, she went off; and when at some distance, looked back and moaned;
and that not availing to entice them away* she returned, and smelling around
them, began to lick their wounds.

7. She went off a second time, as before; and having crawled a few paces,
looked again behind her, and for some time stood moaning. But still her cubs
not rising to follow her, she returned to them again, and with signs of
inexpressible fondness, went round one, and round the other, pawing them, and
moaning.

8. Finding at last that they were cold and lifeless, she raised her head
toward the ship, and growled her resentment at the murderers; which they
returned with a volley of musket balls. She fell between her cubs, and died
licking their wounds.

9. What child can read this interesting story, and not feel in his heart the
warmest emotions of gratitude, for the stronger and more permanent tenderness
he has experienced from his parents; while, at the same time, he feels his
displeasure arising toward those who treat with wanton barbarity any of the
brute creation?

THE VICTIM. AN INDIAN STORY.
THE tragical death of an Indian of the Collapissa nation, (says a gentleman)
who sacrificed himself for his country and son, I have always admired, as
displaying the greatest heroism, and placing human nature in the noblest point
of view.

2. A Chactaw Indian, having one day expressed himself in the most reproachful
terms of the F^ench, and called the Collapissas their dogs and their slaves,
one of this nation, exasperated at his in^ous expressions, laid him dead upon
the spot.

3. The Chactaws, the most numerous and the most warlike tribe on the
continent, immediately flew to arms. They sent deputies to New-Orleans to
demand from the French governor the head of the savage who had fled to him for
protection.

4. The governor offered presents as an atonement, but they were rejected with
disdain; and they threatened to exterminate the whole tribe of the Collapissas.
To pacify this fierce nation, and prevent the effusion of blood, it was at
length found necessary to deliver up the unhappy Indian.

5. The Sieur Ferrand, commander of the German posts, on the right of the
Missisippi, was charged with this melancholy commission. A rendezvous was, in
consequence, appointed between the settlement of the Collapissas and the German
posts, where the mournful ceremony was conducted in the following manner.

6. The Indian victim, whose name was Mingo, was produced. He rose up, and,
agreeably to the custom of the people, harangued the assembly to the following
purpose.

7. "I am a true man; that is to say, I fear not death; but I lament the fate
of my wife and four infant children, whom I leave behind in a very tender age.
I lament too my father and my mother, whom I have long maintained by hunting.
Them, however, I recommend to the French, since, on their account, I now fall a
sacrifice."

8. Scarce had he finished this short and pathetic harangue, when the old
father, struck with the filial affection of his son, arose, and thus addressed
himself to his audience.

9. "My son is doomed to death; but he is young and vigorous, and more capable
than I, to support his mother, his wife, and four infant children. It is
necessary, then, that he remain upon the earth to protect and provide for them.
As for me who draw toward the end of my career, I have lived long enough. May
my son attain to my age, that he may bring up my tender infants. I am no longer
good for any thing; a few years more or less are to me of small importance. I
have lived as a man. I will die as a man. I therefore take the place of my son."

10. At these words, which expressed his paternal love and greatness of soul in
the most touching manner, his wife, his son, his daughter-in-law, and the
little infants, melted into tears around this brave, this generous old man. He
embraced them for the last time, exhorted them to be ever faithful to the
French, and to die rather than betray them by any mean treachery, unworthy of
his blood. "My death," concluded he, "I consider necessary for the safety of
the nation, and I glory in the sacrifice."

11. Having thus delivered himself, he presented his head to the kinsman of the
deceased Chactaw; and they accepted it. He then extended himself over the trunk
of a tree, when, with a hatchet, they severed his head from his body.

12. The French, who assisted at this tragedy, could not contain their tears,
whilst they admired the heroic constancy of this venerable old man; whose
resolution bore a resemblance to that of the celebrated Roman orator, who, in
the time of the triumvirate, was concealed by his son.

13. The young man was most cruelly tortured in order to force him to discover
his father, who, not being able to endure the idea, that a son so virtuous and
so generous, should thus suffer on his account, went and presented himself to
the murderers, and begged them to kill him and save his son.

14. The son conjured them to take his life, and spare the age of his father;
but the soldiers, more barbarous than the savages, butchered them both on the
spot.

THE ART OF PLEASING.
I HAVE often lamented, that they, who have taken the most pains to recommend
an attention to the art of pleasing, have urged it only on the mean motives of
self-interest.

2. In order to attain the power of pleasing, they have recommended flattery
and deceit; and though they have required in their pupils the appearances of
many good qualities, they have not insisted on any substantial or consistent
virtue.

3. It is my wish to exalt this amiable talent of pleasing to the rank of a
virtue founded on principle, and on the best dispositions of human nature. I
would separate it from those varnished qualities, which, like whited
sepulchers, are but a disguise for internal deformity.

4. A student of the art of pleasing, as it is taught in the school of fashion,
is all softness and plausibility, all benevolence and generosity, all attention
and assiduity, all gracefulness and gentility. Such is the external appearance;
but compare it with his private life, with those actions which pass unseen, and
you will find it by no means correspondent.

5. You will usually find a hard heart, meanness, selfishness, avarice, and a
total want of those principles from which alone true benevolence, sincere
friendship, and gentleness of disposition can originate. You will, indeed, find
even the appearances of friendship and benevolence proportioned to the supposed
riches and rank of him whose favor and patronage are cultivated.

6. It is a favorite maxim with those who teach the art of pleasing, that if
you desire to please, you can scarcely fail to please. But what motive,
according to their doctrine, is to excite this desire? A wish to render all
with whom you converse subservient to your interested purposes of avarice or
ambition.

7. It is a mean and despicable motive, when made the sole and constant
principle of conversation and behavior. If this life is the whole of our
existence; if riches and civil honors, are the chief good; if truth, honor, and
generosity, are but names to adorn declamation; then, indeed, they who practice
the art of pleasing, according to the vulgar idea of it, are, after all, the
truly, and the only wise.

8. But let us not think so meanly of the world and its Creator; and if our
favorable opinion of things be an error, it is not only pardonable but
glorious; and a generous man will say, like the noble ancient, he had rather
err with a Socrates and a Plato, than be right with a Machiavel.

9. But, indeed, the virtues and the graces are much nearer allied, than they
who are strangers to the virtues are willing to acknowledge. There is something
extremely beautiful in all the moral virtues, clearly understood and properly
reduced to practice.

10. Religion is also declared to be full of pleasantness, in that volume in
which its nature is described with the greatest authenticity. It must indeed be
allowed, that he who is actuated in his desire of pleasing by morality and
religion, may very properly add all the embellishments of external
gracefulness; and he may rest assured, that the sincerity of his principles,
and the goodness of his character, will insure a degree of success in his
attempts to please, which a false pretender, with all his duplicity, can never
obtain.

11. If true politeness consists in yielding some of our own pretensions to the
self-love of others, in repressing our pride and arrogance, and in a gentleness
of sentiment and conduct, surely nothing can be more conducive to it than a
religion which every where recommends brotherly love, meekness, and humility.

12. I know not how paradoxical my opinion might appear to the fashionable
clubs at St. James', or to the professed men of the world, or to the proficient
in what I call the insincere art of pleasing; but I cannot help thinking, that
a true Christian, one who thinks and acts, as far as the infirmity of his
nature will permit, consistently with the principles of his religion, possesses
qualities more capable of pleasing, than any of those which are said so
eminently to have distinguished a Marlborough and a Bollingbroke.

13. The pious and amiable Mr. N -- seems to me to have deserved the epithet of
all-accomplished, much better than he to whom it has been so often applied; and
if we may judge of his writings, and the accounts given of his life, as on the
one hand, there never was a better Christian, so, on the other, there never
appeared a more polite gentleman.

14. It is evident he derived his art of pleasing, not from a study of the
world, or practicing the tricks of the little worldling, but from the lovely
qualities recommended in the gospel, and from an imitation of the humble Jesus.

15. They who study the art of pleasing would perhaps smile, were an instructor
to refer them, for the best rules which have ever been given, to the sermon on
the mount.

16. It is however certain, that the art of pleasing, which is founded on
sincere principles, derived from religion and morality, is as far superior to
that false art, which consists only in simulation and dissimulation, as the
fine brilliancy of the real diamond excels the luster of French paste; or as
the roseate hue on the cheek of Hebe, the painted visage of a haggard courte^an.

17. The insincere art of pleasing resembles the inferior species of timber in
a building, which, in order to please the eye, requires the assistance of
paint: but the art which is founded on sincerity, is more like that which
displays far greater beauty in the variety and richness of its own native veins
and color.

18. A short time, or a slight touch, destroys the superficial beauty of the
one; while the other acquires new graces from the hand of time.

19. The rules and doctrines of religion and morality tend to correct all the
malignant qualities of the heart; such as envy, malice, pride, and resentment.
In doing this, they cut off the very source of disagreeable behavior.

20. Morality and religion inculcate whatever is just, mild, moderate, candid,
and benevolent. In doing this, they effectually promote a system of manners,
which, without any sinister design in the person who possesses them, cannot
fail of being agreeable.

21. If to these substantial powers of pleasing are added the last polish of a
graceful deportment, the habits acquired in good company, an acquaintance with
men and manners, a taste for polite arts and polite books, no other requisites
will be wanting to perfect the art, and form an all-accomplished character.

22. A man will not be under the necessity of hurting his conscience and
reputation in cultivating, I know not what, of a deceitful and affected
behavior. He may be at once pleasing and respectable, and grow in favor with
men, without offending God.

EXAMPLE OF JUSTICE AND MAGNANIMITY.
AMONG the several virtues of Aristides, that for which he was most renowned
was justice; because this virtue is of most general use, its benefits extending
to a greater number of persons, as it is the foundation, and in a manner the
soul, of every public office and employment.

2. Themistocles having conceived the design of supplanting the Lacedaemonians,
and of taking the government of Greece out of their hands, in order to put it
into those of the Athenians, kept his eye and his thoughts continually fixed
upon that great project; and as he was not very nice or scrupulous in the
choice of his measures, whatever tended toward accomplishing the end he had in
view, he looked upon as just and lawful.

3. On a certain day he declared in a full assembly of the people, that he had
a very important design to propose; but that he could not communicate it to the
people, because its success required it should be carried on with the greatest
secresy; he therefore desired they would appoint a person to whom he might
explain himself upon the matter in question.

4. Aristides was unanimously fixed upon by the whole assembly, who referred
themselves entirely to his opinion of the affair; so great a confidence had
they both in his probity and prudence.

5. Themistocles, therefore, having taken him aside, told him the design which
he had conceived was to burn the fleet belonging to the rest of the Grecian
states, which then lay in a neighboring port; and by this mean Athens would
certainly become mistress of all Greece.

6. Aristides hereupon returned to the assembly, and only declared to them,
that indeed nothing could be more advantageous to the commonwealth than
Themistocles' project; but at the same time, nothing in the world could be more
unjust. All the people unanimously ordained that Themistocles should entirely
desist from his project.

THE DUELLISTS. SCENE BETWEEN EDWARD AND HENRY.
Edward. HARRY, at your request, I meet you here, and ask an explanation.


Henry. My business with you is of such a nature as needs no prologue. I demand
of you in direct terms, and expect a categorical answer, whether you wrote the
piece signed Horatio in yesterday's gazette?


Ed. I did.


Hen. It is said by some that your pointed satire was aimed at me. I next
demand, whether that be true or not?


Ed. My satire was not pointed but at a vice which every where prevails. And
whoever says I aimed at you, or any individual, asserts an impious falsehood.
However, if you think that any part is applicable to yourself, you are welcome
to receive it. Or, according to the proverb, "If the garment fits you, you may
wear it."


Hen. From various circumstances, it appears evident you aimed at me. And give
me leave to tell you, you have touched a tender point; I mean my honor. You
have fixed a stain upon my character which nothing but blood has power to wash
away. I therefore request that you choose your weapon, appoint your place, and
meet me before we sleep.


Ed. I am ready to fight you, boasting hero, with any weapon, and at any time
and place you choose.


Hen. Go then and prepare, and meet me here with your second, in half an hour.
[Exit Henry.]


Ed. [Alone.] Where has my courage fled? In spite of all my efforts, the blood
chills in my ^eins, and my trembling limbs will scarce support me. Am I a
coward then? No, heaven forbid it. Shame, honor, manhood forbid it. When my
country called me to the field of battle, when I faced the cannon's mouth and
heard its thunder, never did I suffer a joint to tremble. Why then do I tremble
now? and what gave courage in such scenes of danger? That was a righteous
cause, and if I fell, I fell where duty called me. If my present cause be good,
why tremble? if bad, why am I engaged in it? Some secret whisperer tells me to
forbear. But, ah! it is too late. I have accepted the challenge, and now I
cannot go back. O heaven direct me! Heaven, did I say? I have already renounced
heaven. Must I perish then? No; I will have courage to be called a coward. I
will refuse to fight, and hazard the consequence. All the ignominious epithets
the world can heap upon me will never half equal the tormenting stings of a
wounded conscience. [Enter Henry.]


Hen. You are come in time; but where is your second, Sir, and where your arms?


Ed. Arms and a second I need not. Cannot this cause be settled on some
friendly terms? Shall we presumptuously dare to strike a blow which endless
ages never can retrieve?


Hen. Coward, dastard; poor faint-hearted wretch! I despise you from my soul,
and spurn you from my presence.


Ed. Had I not reasons of eternal weight to keep my temper, I fear you would
stand in danger. But you have nothing to fear; for I have resolved to lay aside
revenge and fly to reason. You may call me what you please, dastard or coward.
I condemn myself in terms the most severe, for being so weak, so base, as to
accept your mad proposal. It is not courage, my friend, to dare Omnipotence; it
is downright presumption. True courage is never to be found in rash adventures;
nor can that be called honor which arms one friend against another in a private
quarrel. I tremble when I think what a precipice I have escaped.


Hen. Edward, you have touched me in the nicest point. You have disgraced my
name, and I will not bear it. My heart is fixed upon revenge, and I am resolved
to have it.


Ed. If I have wronged you, the law is open; take what satisfaction that will
give you.


Hen. The law seldom does justice in such a case as this.


Ed. I yield to the law, and shall be content with whatever satisfaction that
will give you. But if you are not suited with that, and still are bent upon
revenge, strike at this heart; plunge your dagger into this bosom. My heart's
blood shall run freely; but my conscience I cannot violate.


Hen. Go, scoundrel; if you will not give me satisfaction ^ the only way which
honor dictates, expect to feel the ^orsewhip, when there are none to help you,
or be your witnesses.


Ed. That we defend ourselves, when we are assaulted, is nature's law. Be it
known to you, I heed not your threats; nor shall I ever take one step more or
less to avoid you. And if you, like a russian, attack me, and I do not manfully
defend myself, then call me coward.


Hen. Edward, you must be sensible that you have injured me, and ought to make
me satisfaction. I ask for nothing but what is honorable. And, since we have
gone thus far, if we now refuse to fight, the world will call us both cowards;
and who can endure it?


Ed. Is this your courage then! What, afraid to bear, for a few days, the
scoffs and sneers of knaves and fools! How will you dare to meet your final
Judge; to be tried by Him before assembled worlds, and then condemned to
everlasting woe? I am not conscious of the least design to do you wrong; but
this I own with shame and deepest sorrow, that I listened in the least degree
to your desperate proposal of arming myself to shed your blood. But I now
declare, that I hold in utter detestation, and soul abhorrence, the savage
custom of deciding quarrels by murderous duelling.


Hen. My friend, you have convinced me. Give me your hand. I own my fault, and
must acknowledge you to be a man of real courage. I admire your firmness, and
confess that it is a barbarous custom which stamps this cruel practice with the
name of honor. My friend, you have preserved my life; and language is too
feeble to express the grateful sensations of my heart for such a kindness.


SPEECH OF MR. PIT IN THE BRITISH PARLIAMENT, ON THE SUBJECT OF THE SLAVE
TRADE.
SIR,
WHILE I regret the ill success which has hitherto attended my efforts on this
subject, I am consoled with the thought that the house has now come to a
resolution declarative of the infamy of the slave trade.

2. The only question now is, on the continuance of this traffic, a traffic of
which the very thought is beyond all human endurance; a traffic which even its
friends think so intolerable that it ought to be crushed. Yet the abolition of
it is to be resolved into a question of expediency.

3. Its advocates, in order to continue it, have deserted even the principles
of commerce; so that, it seems, a traffic in the liberty, the blood, the life
of human beings, is not to have the advantages of the common rules of
arithmetic, which govern all other commercial dealings.

4. The point now in dispute is the continuance for one year. As to those who
are concerned in this trade, a year will not be of any consequence; but will it
be of none to the unhappy slaves? It is true, that in the course of commercial
concerns in general, it is said sometimes to be beneath the magnanimity of a
man of honor to insist on a scrupulous exactness, in his own favor, upon a
disputed item in accounts.

5. But does it make any part of our magnanimity to be exact in our own favor
in the traffic of human blood? If I could feel that any calculation upon the
subject were to be made in this way, the side on which I should determine,
would be in favor of the unhappy sufferers; not of those who oppressed them.

6. But this one year is only to show the planters that Parliament is willing
to be liberal to them! Sir, I do not understand complimenting away the lives of
so many human beings. I do not comprehend the principle on which a few
individuals are to be complimented, and their minds set at rest, at the expense
and total sacrifice of the interest, the security, the happiness of a whole
quarter of this world, which, from our foul practices, has, for a vast length
of time, been a scene of misery and horror.

7. I say, because I feel, that in continuing this trade, you are guilty of an
offense beyond your power to a^one for; and by your indulgence to the planters,
thousands of human beings are to be consigned to misery.

8. Every year in which you continue this trade, you add thousands to the
catalogue of misery, which, if you could behold in a single instance, you would
revolt with horror from the scene; but the size of the misery prevents you from
beholding it. Five hundred out of one thousand who are obtained in this traffic
perish in this scene of horror; and are brought miserable victims to their
graves.

9. The remaining part of this wretched group are tainted both in body and
mind, covered with disease and infection, carrying with them the seeds of
pestilence and insurrection to your islands.

10. Let me then ask the house, whether they can derive any advantage from
these doubtful effects of a calculation on the continuance of the traffic: and
whether two years will not be better than three for its continuance?

11. For my part, I feel the infamy of the trade so heavily, the impolicy of it
so clearly, that I am ashamed not to have been able to have convinced the house
to abandon it altogether at an instant; to pronounce with one voice the
immediate and total abolition. There is no excuse for us. It is the very death
of justice to utter a syllable in support of it.

12. I know, Sir, I state this subject with warmth. I feel it is impossible for
me not to do so; or if it were, I should detest myself for the exercise of
moderation. I cannot, without suffering every feeling and every passion that
ought to rise in the cause of humanity to sleep within me, speak coolly upon
such a subject. And did they feel as I think they ought, I am sure the decision
of the house would be with us for a total and immediate abolition of this
abominable traffic.

13. In short, unless I have misunderstood the subject, and unless some reasons
should be offered, much superior to any I have yet heard, I shall think it the
most singular act that ever was done by a deliberative assembly, to refuse to
assent to the proposed amendment. It has been by a resolution declared to be
the first object of their desire, the first object of their duty, and the first
object of their inclination.

THE SLAVES. AN ELEGY.
IF late I paused upon the twilight plain
Of Fontenoy, to weep the freeborn brave;
Sure fancy now may cross the western main,
And melt in sadder pity for the slave.
2.
Lo! where to you plantation drooping goes
A sable herd of human kind; while near
Stalks a pale despot, and around him throws
The scourge, that wakes, that punishes the tear.
3.
Over the far beach the mournful murmur strays,
And joins the rude yell of the tumbling tide,
As faint they labor in the solar blaze,
To feed the luxury of British pride!
4.
Even at this moment, on the burning gale
Floats the weak wailing of the female tongue;
And can that sex's softness naught avail?
Must feeble woman shriek amid the throng?
5.
O cease to think, my soul! what thousands die
By suicide, and toil's extreme despair;
Thousands, who never raised to heaven the eye,
Thousands, who feared no punishment, but here.
6.
Are drops of blood the horrible manure,
That fills with luscious juice the teeming cane?
And must our fellow creatures thus endure,
For traffic vile, the indignity of pain?
7.
Yes, their keen sorrows are the sweets we blend
With the green bev'rage of our morning meal,
The while to love meek mercy we pretend,
Or for fictitious ills affect to feel.
8.
Yes, it is their anguish mantles in the bowl,
Their sighs excite the Briton's drunken joy;
Those ignorant suff'rers know not of a soul,
That we, enlightened, may its hopes destroy.
9.
And there are men, who, leaning on the laws,
What they have purchased, claim a right to hold.
Cursed be the tenure, cursed its cruel cause;
Freedom's a dearer property than gold!
10.
And there are men, with shameless front have said,
"That nature formed the negroes for disgrace;
"That on their limbs subjection is displayed;
"The doom of slavery stamped upon their face."
11.
Send your stern gaze from Lapland to the line,
And every region's natives fairly scan,
Their forms, their force, their faculties combine,
And own the vast variety of man!
12.
Then why suppose yourselves the chosen few,
To deal oppression's poisoned arrows round;
To gall, with iron bonds, the weaker crew,
Enforce the labor, and inflict the wound?
13.
It Is sordid interest guides you. Bent on gale,
In profit only can ye reason find;
And pleasure too; but urge no more in vain,
The selfish subject, to the social mind.
14.
Ah! how can he, whose daily lot is grief,
Whose mind is vilify'd beneath the rod,
Suppose his Maker has for him relief?
Can he believe the tongue that speaks of God?
15.
For when he sees the female of his heart,
And his loved daughters, torn by lust away,
His sons, the poor inheritors of smart --
-- Had he religion, think ye, he could pray?
16.
Alas! he steals him from the loathsome shed,
What time moist midnight blows her venomed breath,
And musing, how he long has toiled and bled,
Drinks the dire balsam of consoling death!
17.
Haste, haste, ye winds, on swiftest pinions fly,
Ere from this world of misery he go,
Tell him his wrongs bedew a nation's eye,
Tell him Britannia blushes for his woe!
18.
Say, that in future, negroes shall be blessed,
Ranked even as men, and men's just rights enjoy;
Be neither sold, nor purchased, nor oppressed,
No griefs shall wither, and no stripes destroy!
19.
Say that fair freedom bends her holy flight
To cheer the infant, and console the sire;
So shall he, wondering, prove, at last, delight,
And in a throb of ecstacy expire.
20.
Then shall proud Albion's crown, where laurels twine,
Torn from the bosom of the raging sea,
Boast, 'midst the glorious leaves, a gem divine,
The radiant gem of pure humanity!
THE HUMANE INDIAN.
AN Indian, who had not met with his usual success in hunting, wandered down to
a plantation among the back settlements in Virginia; and seeing a planter at
his door, asked for a morsel of bread, for he was very hungry. The planter bid
him begone, for he would give him none.

2. Will you give me a cup of your beer? said the Indian. No, you shall have
none here, replied the planter. But I am very faint, said the savage. Will you
give me only a draught of cold water? Get you gone, you Indian dog; you shall
have nothing here, said the planter.

3. It happened some months after, that the planter went on a shooting party up
into the woods, where, intent upon his game, he missed his company, and lost
his way; and night coming on, he wandered through the forest, till he espied an
Indian wigwam.

4. He approached the savage's habitation, and asked him to show him the way to
a plantation on that side the country. It is too late for you to go there this
evening, Sir, said the Indian; but if you will accept of my homely fare, you
are welcome.

5. He then offered him some venison, and such other refreshment as his store
afforded, and having laid some bearskins for his bed, he desired that he would
repose himself for the night, and he would awake him early in the morning, and
conduct him on his way.

6. Accordingly in the morning they set off, and the Indian led him out of the
forest, and put him into the road which he was to pursue; but just as they were
taking leave, he stepped before the planter, and turning round, staring full in
his face, asked him, whether he recollected his features. The planter was now
struck with shame and confusion, when he recognized in his kind protector, the
Indian whom he had so harshly treated.

7. He confessed that he knew him, and was full of excuses for his brutal
behavior; to which the Indian only replied; When you see poor Indians fainting
for a cup of cold water, don't say again, "Get you gone, you Indian dog." The
Indian then wished him well on his journey, and left him. It is not difficult
to say which of these two had the best claim to the name of Christian.

THE MAMMOTH.
OF all the quadrupeds which have hitherto been described, the Mammoth is
undoubtedly much the largest. This animal is not known to have an existence any
where at present. We judge of it only from its bones and skeletons, which are
of an unparalleled size, and are found in Siberia, Russia, Germany, and
North America.

2. On the Ohio, and in many places farther north, tusks, grinders, and
skeletons, which admit of no comparison with any other animal at present known,
are found in vast numbers; some lying on the surface of the earth, and some a
little below it.

3. A Mr. Stanley, taken prisoner by the Indians near the mouth of the Tenesee,
relates, that, after being transferred from one tribe to another, he was at
length carried over the mountains west of the Missouri to a river which runs
westwardly; that these bones abounded there; and that the natives said the
animal was still existing in the northern parts of their country.

4. A delegation of warriors from the Delaware tribe having visited the
governor of Virginia, during the late revolution, on matters of business; after
these had been discussed and settled in council, the governor asked them some
questions relative to their country, and, among others, what they knew or had
heard of the animal whose bones were found at the saltlicks on the Ohio.

5. The chief speaker immediately put himself into an attitude of oratory, and
with a pomp suited to what he conceived the elevation of his subject, informed
him, that it was a tradition handed down from their fathers, "That in ancient
times, a herd of these tremendous animals came to the Big-bonelicks, and began
a universal destruction of the bears, deer, elks, buffaloes, and other animals,
which had been created for the use of the Indians."

6. "That the Great Man above, looking down and seeing this, was so enraged
that he seized his lightning, descended to the earth, seated himself on a
neighboring mountain, on a rock, on which his seat and the print of his feet
are still to be seen, and hurled his bolts among them, till the whole were
slaughtered, except the big bull, who, presenting his forehead to the shafts,
shook them off as they fell; but missing one at length, it wounded him in the
side; whereon, springing round, he bounded over the Wabash, the Illinois, and
finally over the great lakes, where he is living at this day."

DIALOGUE BETWEEN MRS. CARELESS AND MRS. FRIENDLY, UPON FEMALE EDUCATION.
Mrs. Careless. GOOD morning, my dear Mrs. Friendly. I came to request your
company in a walk; but I see you are engaged with a book; pray what is it?


Mrs. Friendly. It is a treatise on female education, which pleases me much;
and will, with domestic avocations, deprive me of the pleasure of walking with
you this morning.


Mrs. Care. And what have you to do with treatises on education? I seldom read
any thing, and never books of that kind. I should as soon think of plodding
through a volume of old sermons.


Mrs. Fr. I assure you, I consider the education of youth, females in
particular, to be a matter of the first importance; and I take great pleasure
in reading the observations of ingenious writers on the subject. I have
children, in whose welfare, I need not tell you, I am deeply interested; and
their happiness or misery, their honor or infamy, entirely depend, in my
opinion, on the principles and habits they acquire in youth, whilst the mind is
tender, and the voice of instruction sinks deep.


Mrs. Care. But cannot children be educated, unless their parents read books on
the subject?


Mrs. Fr. Certainly they can, if the parents are themselves qualified for the
task. But I find it a difficult and delicate business, and therefore I have
recourse to the wise and experienced for assistance in conducting it.


Mrs. Care. The assistance of the dancing, music, and drawing masters is all I
require for my children. They shall indeed know something of reading, writing,
and needle work; but to give them a polite education and make them accomplished
is my aim.


Mrs. Fr. I fear, my dear Mrs. Careless, you do not distinguish the advantages,
which arise from a useful rather than a polite education; since you speak with
so much indifference of the former, and with such raptures of the latter.


Mrs. Care. Pray what are the mighty advantages of educating children in what
you style a useful manner? I never yet saw them.


Mrs. Fr. Then you are no very strict observer. (I beg your pardon for speaking
thus freely.) But surely each day brings instances of its advantages; and each
day shows the mischief of a contrary mode. The kind of education I mention is
that which tends to give females well regulated minds and agreeable manners;
and render them beloved, esteemed, and admired. For it is by no means necessary
in order to this, that a young lady should be mistress of all polite
accomplishments. They often belong to some of the most disgusting and
insignificant of the sex. No, let parents form the growing mind to virtue,
religion, and the calm pleasures of domestic life, at the same time endeavoring
that cheerfulness play round the heart, and innocent gaiety enliven the
behavior. Let the habit of self-government be early produced; for all the world
conspiring cannot make a woman happy who does not govern her passions. Let the
first appearance of stubbornness in them be checked and resisted; and let them
be taught cheerfully to deny themselves every object of desire, inconsistent
with reason, prudence, or virtue. Thus cultured, their tempers will be sweet
and placid, and their manners gentle and engaging. If they be put under the
care of tutors abroad; they will not be unteachable and refractory; and the
presence of their parents will not be necessary to make them behave with
discretion and propriety.


Mrs. Care. Well, after their minds are thus taken care of, how would you have
them further accomplished.


Mrs. Fr. They should be well versed in reading, writing, arithmetic, and
English grammar. If their natural genius strongly led them to poetry, painting,
or music, and easy fortune admitted, it should be indulged and cultivated; but
by no means to such a degree as to interrupt or supersede domestic employments.
For these require attention in a greater or less degree from every woman; and
unless she understand and discharge them according to her circumstances, she is
contemptible and useless.


Mrs. Care. Fine accomplishments, truly! a perfect skill in handling the broom
and duster! Mrs. Friendly, if you educate your children in this way, they will
be ruined; they will be strangers to the charms of dancing, dress and company.
The graces will never condescend to adorn those who are accustomed to the
kitchen.


Mrs. Fr. My friend, I have no objection to dancing, dress and company, when
they form not the chief object of solicitude and attention, and are cultivated
merely as the recreation and ornaments of life, and not as the business and end
of it. Be assured, a well furnished mind, a well governed temper, love of
domestic pleasures, and an inclination and capacity to pursue domestic
employments, are the first requisites in a woman, and the foundation of her
respectability and enjoyment. Without these, though her graceful mien and
dancing charm every eye, and her music be sweeter than the harp of Gabriel, she
must be unhappy in herself, and a vexation and torment to her friends. Let us
view a person educated in the school of dissipation, and furnished with merely
polite accomplishments. Engrossed by the desire of leading a life of amusement
before she can even spell a sentence, and unfurnished with just sentiments and
industrious habits, she is sent to the dancing academy that her manners may
become graceful. Here she sees gayer dresses than her own, which inflame with
vanity and envy her giddy, unoccupied mind. She is determined to b^ outdone by
none in elegance. She disputes with Mama about fashion and fine clothes; and if
her extravagant desires are not indulged, murmurs and repines at her cruel
fate; becomes confirmed in the detestable habit of fretting; and knows not
content but by the name. A fondness for those phantoms, which lure to ruin,
called pleasures, and a passion for show and parade, which perhaps through life
she can never indulge, gain entire possession of her heart. All her joys are in
gay parties and assemblies, where, like the butterfly of summer, she pleases by
the brilliance of her colors only; which, however, is no sooner familiar to the
eye, than it is beheld with indifference; yet alas! this is all the attraction
which this child of vanity can boast. Maturer years steal on; her mind is so
uncultivated that she is incapable of the rational pleasures of thinking and
conversation; her love of dissipation and amusement grows with her growth; she
sighs for new pleasures; but alas! she has so often traveled the circle, that
their novelty is destroyed. With all her apparent gaiety, she is probably more
wretched than the miscreant, who begs the morsel that sustains his being. If
she be ever placed at the head of a family, she disgusts her husband, neglects
her children, and order, peace and industry are strangers in her house. Her
company is ever uninteresting or disagreeable, her name is synonimous with
folly, and her memory is lost with her life.


Mrs. Care. What a picture, my dear Mrs. Friendly, have you drawn. I turn from
it with horror. I assure you my chief care shall be to form my children to
reflection, self-government, and industry; and they and I shall have reason to
rejoice in the change you have made in my sentiments.


Mrs. Fr. I rejoice to hear you express yourself in such a manner. Believe me,
when I say, the best fortune which can be bestowed on a child is a good
education. It secures her honor and happiness through life, whatever be her
station; and it leads her to the exercise of those noble and virtuous
dispositions which are an indispensable preparation for the enjoyments of the
future state.


SINGULAR ADVENTURE OF GENERAL PUTNAM.
WHEN General Putnam first moved to Pomfret, in Connecticut, in the year 1739,
the country was new and much infested with wolves. Great havoc was made among
the sheep by a she-wolf, which, with her annual whelps, had for several years
continued in that vicinity. The young ones were commonly destroyed by the
vigilance of the hunters; but the old one was too sagacious to be ensnared by
them.

2. This wolf, at length, became such an intolerable nuisance, that Mr. Putnam
entered into a combination with five of his neighbors to hunt alternately until
they could destroy her. Two, by rotation, were to be constantly in pursuit. It
was known, that, having lost the toes from one foot, by a steel trap, she made
one track shorter than the other.

3. By this vestige, the pursuers recognized, in a light snow, the route of
this pernicious animal. Having followed her to Connecticut river, and found she
had turned back in a direct course toward Pomfret, they immediately returned,
and by ten o'clock the next morning the bloodhounds had driven her into a den,
about three miles distant from the house of Mr. Putnam.

4. The people soon collected with dogs, guns, straw, fire and sulphur, to
attack the common enemy. With this apparatus, several unsuccessful efforts were
made to force her from the den. The hounds came back badly wounded, and refused
to return. The smoke of blazing st^^w had no effect. Nor did the fumes of burnt
brimstone, with which the cavern was filled, compel her to quit the retirement.

5. Wearied with such fruitless attempts (which had brought the time to ten
o'clock at night) Mr. Putnam tried once more to make his dog enter, but in
vain; he proposed to his negro man to go down into the cavern and shoot the
wolf. The negro declined the hazardous service.

6. Then it was that their master, angry at the disappointment, and declaring
that he was ashamed of having a coward in his family, resolved himself to
destroy the ferocious beast, lest she should escape through some unknown
fissure of the rock.

7. His neighbors strongly remonstrated against the perilous enterprise; but
he, knowing that wild animals were intimidated by fire, and having provided
several strips of birch bark, the only combustible material which he could
obtain, which would afford light in this deep and darksome cave, prepared for
his descent.

8. Having, accordingly, divested himself of his coat and waistcoat, and having
a long rope fastened round his l^g^, by which he might be pulled back, at a
concerted signal, he entered, head foremost, with the blazing torch in his hand.

9. Having groped his passage till he came to a horizontal part of the den, the
most terrifying darkness appeared in front of the dim circle of light afforded
by his torch. It was silent as the house of death. None but monsters of the
desert had ever before explored this solitary mansion of horror.

10. He cautiously proceeding onward, came to an ascent; which he slowly
mounted on his hands and knees until he discovered the glaring eyeballs of the
wolf, who was sitting at the extremity of the cavern. Startled at the sight of
fire, she gnashed her teeth and gave a sullen growl.

11. As soon as he had made the necessary discovery, he kicked the rope as a
signal for pulling him out. The people, at the mouth of the den, who had
listened with painful anxiety, hearing the growling of the wolf, and supposing
their friend to be in the most imminent danger, drew him forth with such
celerity that he was stripped of his clothes, and severely bruised.

12. After he had adjusted his clothes, and loaded his gun with nine buck shot,
holding a torch in one hand and the musket in the other, he descended a second
time. When he drew nearer than before, the wolf assuming a still more fierce
and terrible appearance, howling, rolling her eyes, snapping her teeth, and
dropping her head between her legs, was evidently in the attitude and on the
point of springing at him.

13. At this critical instant, he levelled and fired at her head. Stunned with
the shock, and suffocated with the smoke, he immediately found himself drawn
out of the cave. But having refreshed himself and permitted the smoke to
dissipate, he went down the third time.

14. Once more he came within sight of the wolf, who appearing very passive, he
applied the torch to her nose; and perceiving her dead, he took hold of her
ears, and then kicking the rope (still tied round his legs) the people above,
with no small exultation, dragged them both out together.

EXTRACT FROM DR. JOSEPH WARREN's ORATION, DELIVERED AT BOSTON, MARCH 5, 1772.
THE voice of your fathers' blood cries to you from the ground, "My sons, scorn
to be SLAVES!" In vain, we met the frowns of tyrants; in vain, we crossed the
boisterous ocean, found a new world, and prepared it for the happy residence of
Liberty; in vain we toiled; in vain we fought; we bled in vain, if you our
offspring want valor to repel the assaults of her invaders!

2. Stain not the glory of your worthy ancestors; but like them resolve never
to part with your birthright. Be wise in your deliberations, and determined in
your exertions for the preservation of your liberty.

3. Follow not the dictates of passion; but enlist yourselves under the sacred
banner of reason; use every method in your power to secure your rights; at
least prevent the curses of posterity from being heaped upon your memories.

4. If you, with united zeal and fortitude, oppose the torrent of oppression;
if you feed the true fire of patriotism burning in your breasts; if you, from
your souls, despise the most gaudy dress which slavery can wear; if you really
prefer the lonely cottage whilst blessed with liberty, to gilded palaces,
surrounded with the ensigns of slavery, you may have the fullest assurance that
tyranny, with her whole accursed train, will hide her hideous head in
confusion, shame and despair.

5. If you perform your part, you must have the strongest confidence, that the
same Almighty Being, who protected your pious and venerable forefathers, who
enabled them to turn a barren wilderness into a fruitful field, who so often
made bare his arm for their salvation, will still be mindful of their offspring.

6. May this ALMIGHTY BEING graciously preside in all our councils. May he
direct us to such measures as he himself shall approve, and be pleased to
bless. May we ever be favored of God. May our land be a land of liberty, the
seat of virtue, the asylum of the oppresse^, a name and a praise in the whole
earth, until the last shock of time shall bury the empires of the world in
undistinguished ruin!

SELF-INTEREST. DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO NEIGHBORS.
Derby. GOOD morning, neighbor Scrapewell. I have half a dozen miles to ride to
day, and should be extremely obliged if you would lend me your gray mare.


Scrapewell. I should be happy, friend Derby, to oblige you; but am under a
necessity of going immediately to the mill with three bags of corn. My wife
wants the meal this very morning.


Der. Then she must want it still, for I can assure you the mill does not go to
day. I heard the miller tell Will Davis that the water was too low.


Scrape. You don't say so? That is quite unlucky; for in that case, I shall be
obliged to gallop off to town for the meal. My wife would comb my head for me,
if I should neglect it.


Der. I can save you this journey. I have a plenty of meal at home, and will
lend your wife as much as she wants.


Scrape. Ah! neighbor Derby, I am sure your meal will never suit my wife. You
cannot conceive how whimsical she is.


Der. If she were ten times more whimsical than she is, I am certain she would
like it; for you sold it to me yourself, and you assured me it was the best you
ever had.


Scrape. Yes, yes, that is true, indeed; I always have the best of every thing.
You know, neighbor Derby, that no one is more ready to oblige than I am; but I
must tell you the mare this morning refused to eat hay; and truly I am afraid
she will not carry you.


Der. Oh, never fear! I will feed her well with oats on the road.


Scrape. Oats! neighbor; oats are very dear.


Der. They are so, indeed; but no matter for that. When I have a good job in
view, I never stand for trifles.


Scrape. It is very slippery; and I am really afraid she will fall and break
your neck.


Der. Give yourself no uneasiness about that. The mare is certainly
sure-footed; and, besides, you were just now talking yourself of galloping her
to town.


Scrape. Well then, to tell you the plain truth, though I wish to oblige you
with all my heart, my saddle is torn quite in pieces, and I have just sent my
bridle to be mended.


Der. Luckily, I have both a bridle and a saddle hanging up at home.


Scrape. Ah, that may be! but I am sure your saddle will never fit my mare.


Der. Why then I Will borrow neighbor Clodpole's.


Scrape. Clodpole's! his will no more fit than yours does.


Der. At the worst, then, I Will go to my good friend Squire Jones. He has half a
score of them; and I am sure he will lend me one that will fit her.


Scrape. You know, friend Derby, that no one is more willing to oblige his
neighbors than I am. I do assure you the beast should be at your service with
all my heart; but she has not been curried, I believe, for three weeks past.
Her foretop and mane want combing and cutting very much. If any one should see
her in her present plight, it would ruin the sale of her.


Der. O! a horse is soon curried; and my son Sam shall dispatch her at once.


Scrape. Yes, very likely; but I this moment recollect the creature has no
shoes on.


Der. Well, is there not a blacksmith hard by?


Scrape. What, that tinker of a Dobson! I would not trust such a bungler to
shoe a goat. No, no; none but uncle Tom Thumper is capable of shoeing my mare.


Der. As good luck will have it then, I shall pass right by his door.


Scrape. [Calling to his son.] Timothy, Timothy. Here Is neighbor Derby, who
wants the loan of the gray mare to ride to town to day. You know the skin was
rubbed off her back last week a hand's breadth or more. [He gives Tim. a wink.]
However, I believe she is well enough by this time. You know, Tim, how ready I
am to oblige my neighbors. And, indeed, we ought to do all the good we can in
this world. We must certainly let neighbor Derby have her, if she will possibly
answer his purpose. Yes, yes; I see plainly by Tim's countenance, neighbor
Derby, that he is disposed to oblige you. I would not have refused you the mare
for the worth of her. If I had, I should have expected you would have refused
me in your turn. None of my neighbors can accuse me of being backward in doing
them a kindness. Come, Timothy, what do you say?


Tim. What do I say, father! Why I say, Sir, that I am no less ready than you
are to do a neighborly kindness. But the mare is by no means capable of
performing the journey. About a hand's breadth did you say, Sir! Why the skin
is torn from the poor creature's back, of the bigness of your great brimm'd
hat. And, besides, I have promised her, as soon as she is able to travel, to
Ned Saunders, to carry a load of apples to the market.


Scrape. Do you hear that, neighbor? I am very sorry matters turn out thus. I
would not have disobliged you for the price of two such mares. Believe me,
neighbor Derby, I am really sorry for your sake, that matters turn out thus.


Der. And I as much for yours, neighbor Scrapewell; for to tell you the truth,
I received a letter this morning from Mr. Griffin, who tells me if I will be in
town this day, he will give me the refusal of all that lot of timber which he
is about cutting down upon the back of cobblehill; and I intended you should
have shared half of it, which would have been not less than fifty dollars in
your pocket. But --


Scrape. Fifty dollars, did you say!


Der. Ay, truly did I; but as your mare is out of order, I Will go and see if I
can get old Roan the blacksmith's horse.


Scrape. Old Roan! My mare is at your service, neighbor. Here, Tim, tell Ned
Saunders he cannot have the mare. Neighbor Derby wants her; and I will not refuse
so good a friend any thing he asks for.


Der. But what are you to do for meal?


Scrape. My wife can do without it this fortnight, if you want the mare so long.


Der. But then your saddle is all in pieces.


Scrape. I meant the old one. I have bought a new one since; and you shall have
the first use of it.


Der. And you would have me call at Thumper's and get her shod?


Scrape. No, no, I had forgotten to tell you, that I let neighbor Dobson shoe
her last week by way of trial; and to do him justice, I must own he shoes
extremely well.


Der. But if the poor creature has lost so much skin from off her back --


Scrape. Poh, poh! That is just one of our Tim's large stories. I do assure
you, it was not at first bigger than my thumb nail; and I am certain it has not
grown any since.


Der. At least, however, let her have something she will eat, since she refuses
hay.


Scrape. She did, indeed, refuse hay this morning; but the only reason was that
she was crammed full of oats. You have nothing to fear, neighbor; the mare is
in perfect trim; and she will skim you over the ground like a bird. I wish you
a good journey and a profitable job.


ON PROFANE SWEARING.
FEW evil habits are of more pernicious consequence, or overcome with more
difficulty, than that very odious one of profane cursing and swearing. It
cannot be expected that the force of moral principles should be very strong
upon any one who is accustomed, upon every trivial occasion, and frequently
without any occasion at all, to slight the precepts and the character of the
Supreme Being.

2. When we have lost any degree of respect for the Author of our existence,
and the concerns of futurity, and can bring the most awful appellations into
our slightest conversation, merely by way of embellishing our foolish* and
perhaps fallacious narratives, or to give a greater force to our little
resentments, conscience will soon lose its influence upon our minds.

3. Nothing but the fear of disgrace, or a dread of human laws, will restrain
any person, addicted to common sweating, from the most detestable perjury.

4. For if a man can be brought to trifle with the most sacred things in his
common discourse, he cannot surely consider them of more consequence when his
interest leads him to swear falsely for his own defense or emolument.

5. It is really astonishing how imperceptibly this vice creeps upon a person,
and how rootedly he afterward adheres to it. People generally begin with using
only slight exclamations, and which seem hardly to carry the appearance of any
thing criminal; and so proceed on to others, till the most shocking oaths
become familiar.

6. And when once the habit is confirmed, it is rarely (...) eradicated. The
swearer loses the ideas which are attached to the words he makes use of, and
therefore execrates his friend when he means to bless him; and calls God to
witness his intention of doing things, which he knows he has no thoughts of
performing in reality.

7. A young gentleman with whom I am intimately acquainted, and who possesses
many excellent qualifications, but unhappily in a declining state of health,
and evidently tending rapidly to the chambers of death, has been from his
childhood so addicted to the practice of swearing in his common conversation,
that even now I am frequently shocked by his profaning the name of that sacred
Being before whom he, most probably, will soon be obliged to appear.

8. It must surely be exceedingly painful to a sensible heart, feeling for the
best interests of a valuable friend, and otherwise, excellent acquaintance, to
observe the person he so highly regards confirmed in such a shocking habit,
even while standing in the most awful situation in which it is possible for a
human creature to be placed.

9. Almost every other vice affords its votaries some pretenses of excuse, from
its being productive of present pleasure, or affording a prospect of future
advantage; but the profane swearer cannot even say that he feels any
satisfaction, or that he hopes to meet with any benefit, from this foolish
habit.

10. Let those then, who are addicted to this vice, seriously consider how
aggravated a guilt it is to offend the Deity continually, without having the
least shadow of an excuse for so doing; and determine at once to regulate their
conversation and conduct in such a manner as to assure to themselves the
permanent satisfaction which will result, at the close of life, from the
reflection that they have erred no farther from the rules of eternal justice,
than the common condition of humanity in its present state renders unavoidable;
and that they have endeavored, to the utmost of their power, to correct every
error in their conduct, when they have felt it condemned by the dictates of
conscience.

THE TRIUMPH OF VIRTUE.
A MERCHANT of Provence, in France, of a most amiable character, but of narrow
circumstances, met with some considerable losses in trade, and became a
bankrupt. Being reduced to penury and want, he went to Paris to seek some
assistance.

2. He waited on all his old customers in trade, represented to them his
misfortunes, which he had taken every method to avoid, and begged them to
enable him to pursue his business, assuring those to whom he was indebted, that
his only wish was to be in a condition to pay them, and that he should die
contentedly, could he but accomplish that wish.

3. Every one he had applied to felt for his misfortunes, and promised to
assist him, excepting one, to whom he owed a thousand crowns, and who, instead
of pitying his misfortunes, threw him into prison.

4. The unfortunate merchant's son, who was about twenty-two years of age,
being informed of the sorrowful situation of his father, hastened to Paris,
threw himself at the feet of the unrelenting creditor, and, drowned in tears,
besought him in the most affecting expressions, to condescend to restore him
his father, protesting to him, that, if he would not throw obstacles in the way
to his father's re-establishing his affairs, of the possibility of which they
had great reason to hope, he should be the first man paid.

5. He implored him to have pity on his youth, and to have some feelings for
the misfortunes of an aged mother, encumbered with eight children, reduced to
want, and nearly on the point of perishing. Lastly, that if these
considerations were not capable of moving him to pity, he entreated him, at
least, to permit him to be confined in prison instead of his father, in order
that he might be restored to his family.

6. The youth uttered these expressions in so affecting a manner, that the
creditor, struck with so much virtue and generosity, at once softened into
tears, and raising the youth from his humble posture, Ah! my son, said he, your
father shall be released. So much love and respect, which you have shown for
him, makes me ashamed of myself. I have carried this matter too far; but I will
endeavor forever to efface the remembrance of it from your mind.

7. I have an only daughter, who is worthy of you; she would do as much for me,
as you have done for your father. I will give her to you, and with her, all my
fortune. Accept the offer I make you, and let us hasten to your father to
release him, and ask his consent.

FEMALE INDUSTRY.
WHAT a happy simplicity prevailed in ancient times, when it was the custom for
ladies, though of the greatest distinction, to employ themselves in useful, and
sometimes laborious works! Every one knows what is told us in scripture to this
purpose concerning Rebecca, Rachel, and several others.

2. We read in Homer of princesses drawing themselves water from springs, and
washing with their own hands the finest of the linen of their respective
families. The sisters of Alexander the Great, who were the daughters of a
powerful prince, employed themselves in making clothes for their brothers. The
celebrated Lucretia used to spin in the midst of her female attendants.

3. Augustus, who was sovereign of the world, wore for several years together,
no other clothes but what his wife and sister made him. It was a custom in the
northern parts of the world, not many years ago, for the princesses, who then
sat upon the throne, to prepare several of the dishes at every meal.

4. In a word, needle work, the care of domestic affairs, and a serious and
retired life, is the proper function of women, and for this they were designed
by Providence. The depravity of the age has indeed affixed to these customs,
which are very near as old as the creation, an idea of meanness and contempt;
but then, what has it substituted in the room of them? A soft indolence, a
stupid idleness, frivolous conversation, vain amusements, and a strong passion
for public shows.

5. Let us compare these two characters, and pronounce which of them may justly
boast its being founded on good sense, solid judgment, and a taste for truth
and nature.

6. It must, nevertheless, be confessed, in honor of the fair sex, and of the
American ladies in particular, that many among them, and those of the highest
stations in life, have made it not only a duty, but a pleasure, to employ
themselves in needle work, not of a trifling, but of the most serviceable kind;
and to make part of their furniture with their own hands. I might also add,
that great numbers of them adorn their minds with agreeable, and at the same
time, serious and useful studies.

THE LAP-DOG. A DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO YOUNG LADIES.
Eliza. MISS Nancy, what child was that your aunt had in her arms this morning,
as she was walking in the mall?


Nancy. A child! Miss Eliza; a child! You don't think my aunt would be seen
walking in public with a child in her arms!


Eli. Pray, Miss, where would be the harm? I know she has a beautiful pair of
twins; and I thought it might be one of them, as it was partly covered with her
cloak.


Nan. No indeed -- it was her lap-dog.


Eli. Upon my word, Nancy, you have mended the matter mightily! Your aunt is
ashamed to be seen walking with a child in her arms; but is not ashamed to be
seen carrying a paltry puppy through the streets! Pray how much more valuable
is a puppy than a child?


Nan. Why, as to the real value, Eliza, I don't know but a child should be
prized the highest. Though my aunt says she had rather part with both her twins
than lose her dear little Trip. But, you know, she would be taken for one of
the lower sort of women, if she were to lug a child about with her; whereas
nothing makes her appear more like a lady than to be seen gallanting her little
dog. And Trip is none of your common curs, I assure you. His mother was
imported from Europe; and it is said she once belonged to a lady of nobility.
You cannot think what a sweet little creature he is. My aunt nursed him wholly
herself ever since he was a week old.


Eli. And who nursed the twins?


Nan. They were put into the country with a very good woman. They have never
been at home but once since they were born. But their mama visits them as
often, at least, as once a month.


Eli. Would she be willing to be as long absent from her dear little Trip, as
you call him?


Nan. O no, indeed! She would run crazy, if she were to lose him but for one
day. And no wonder; for he is the most engaging little animal you ever saw. You
would be diverted to see him drink tea out of the ladies' cups. And he kisses
his mistress delightfully! My aunt says she would not sleep a night without him
for his weight in gold.


Eli. It is very noble in your aunt to pay such attention to an object of so
much consequence. He is certainly more valuable than half a dozen children.
Does your aunt expect to learn him to talk?


Nan. Talk! why he talks already. She says she perfectly understands his
language. When he is hungry, he can ask for sweet meats. When he is dry, he can
ask for drink. When he is tired of running on foot, he can ask to ride; and my
aunt is never more happy than when she has him in her arms!


Eli. And yet she would not be seen with one of her own children in her arms!


Nan. Why, that would be very vulgar; and all her acquaintance would laugh at
her. Children, you know, are always crying; and no ladies of fashion will ever
admit them into their company.


Eli. If children are always crying, little dogs are often barking, and which
is the most disagreeable noise?


Nan. Oh, the barking of Trip is music to all who hear him! Mr. Fribble, who
often visits my aunt, says he can raise and fall the eight notes to perfection;
and he prefers the sound of his voice to that of the harpsichord. It was he who
brought his mother from London; and he says there was not a greater favorite
among all the dogs, in possession of the fine ladies of court. And, more than
all that, he says Trip greatly resembles a spaniel which belongs to one of the
royal family. Mr. Fribble and my aunt almost quarrelled last night, to see
which should have the honor of carrying the dear little favorite to the play.


Eli. After hearing so many rare qualifications of the little quadruped, I do
not wonder at your aunt's choice of a companion. I am not surprised she should
set her affections upon a creature so deserving of all her care. It is to be
wished her children might never come in competition with this object of her
affections. I hope she will continue to maintain the dignity of her sex; and
never disgrace the fashionable circle to which she belongs, by neglecting her
lap-dog for the more vulgar employment of attending to her own offspring!


EXTRACT FROM THE ORATION OF THOMAS DAWES, ESQUIRE. DELIVERED AT BOSTON, JULY 4,
1787.
THAT Education is one of the deepest principles of independence, need not be
labored in this assembly. In arbitrary governments, where the people neither
make the law nor choose those who legislate, the more ignorance the more peace.

2. But in a government where the people fill all the branches of the
sovereignty, intelligence is the life of liberty. An American would resent his
being denied the use of his musket; but he would deprive himself of a stronger
safeguard, if he should want that learning which is necessary to a knowledge of
his constitution.

3. It is easy to see that our agrarian law and the law of education were
calculated to make republicans; to make men. Servitude could never long consist
with the habits of such citizens. Enlightened minds and virtuous manners lead
to the gates of glory. The sentiment of independence must have been connatural
in the bosoms of Americans; and, sooner or later, must have blazed out into
public action.

4. Independence fits the soul of her residence for every noble enterprise of
humanity and greatness. Her radiant smile lights up celestial ardor in poets
and orators, who sound her praises through all ages; in legislators and
philosophers, who fabricate wise and happy governments as dedications to her
fame; in patriots and heroes, who shed their lives in sacrifice to her divinity.

5. At this idea, do not our minds swell with the memory of those whose godlike
virtues have founded her most magnificent temple in America? It is easy for us
to maintain her doctrines, at this late day, when there is but one party on the
subject, an immense people. But what tribute shall we bestow, what sacred paean
shall we raise over the tombs of those who dared, in the face of unrivalled
power, and within the reach of majesty, to blow the blast of freedom throughout
a subject continent?

6. Nor did those brave countrymen of ours only express the emotions of glory:
the nature of their principles inspired them with the power of practice; and
they offered their bosoms to the shafts of battle. Bunker's awful mount is the
capacious urn of their ashes; but the flaming bounds of the universe could not
limit the flight of their minds.

7. They fled to the union of kindred souls; and those who fell at the
streights of Thermopylae, and those who bled on the heights of Charlestown, now
reap congenial joys in the fields of the blessed.

GENERAL WASHINGTON'S RESIGNATION.
MR. PRESIDENT,
THE great events on which my resignation depended having at length taken
place, I have now the honor of offering my sincere congratulations to Congress,
and of presenting myself before them to surrender into their hands the trust
committed to me, and to claim the indulgence of retiring from the service of my
country.

2. Happy in the confirmation of our independence and sovereignty, and pleased
with the opportunity afforded the United States of becoming a respectable
nation, I resign, with satisfaction, the appointment I accepted with
diffidence; a diffidence in my abilities to accomplish so arduous a task,
which, however was superseded by a confidence in the rectitude of our cause,
the support of the supreme power of the Union, and the patronage of Heaven.

3. The successful termination of the war has verified the most sanguine
expectations; and my gratitude for the interposition of Providence, and the
assistance I have received from my countrymen, increases with every review of
the momentous contest.

4. While I repeat my obligations to the army in general, I should do injustice
to my own feelings not to acknowledge, in this place, the peculiar services and
distinguished merits of the gentlemen who have been attached to my person
during the war.

5. It was impossible the choice of confidential officers to compose my family
should have been more fortunate. Permit me, Sir, to recommend in particular
those who have continued in the service to the present moment, as worthy of the
favorable notice and patronage of Congress.

6. I consider it as an indispensable duty to close this last solemn act of my
official life, by commending the interests of our dearest country to the
protection of Almighty God, and those who have the superintendence of them, to
his holy keeping.

7. Having now finished the work assigned me, I retire from the great theater
of action; and bidding an affectionate farewell to this august body, under
whose orders I have so long acted, I here offer my commission, and take my
leave of all the employments of public life.

G. WASHINGTON.
Dec. 23, 1783.
SPEECH OF A SCYTHIAN AMBASSADOR TO ALEXANDER.
WHEN the Scythian ambassadors waited on Alexander the Great, they gazed on him
a long time without speaking a word, being very probably surprised, as they
formed a judgment of men from their air and stature, to find that his did not
answer the high idea they entertained of him from his fame.

2. At last the oldest of the ambassadors addressed him thus. "Had the gods
given thee a body proportionable to thy ambition, the whole universe would have
been too little for thee. With one hand thou would touch the East, and with
the other the West; and, not satisfied with this, thou would follow the sun,
and know where he hides himself.

3. But what have we to do with thee? We never set foot in thy country. May not
those who inhabit woods be allowed to live, without knowing who thou art, and
whence thou come? We will neither command over, or submit to any man.

4. And that thou may be sensible what kind of people the Scythians are,
know, that we received from Heaven, as a rich present, a yoke of oxen, a
plowshare, a dart, a javelin, and a cup. These we make use of, both with our
friends and against our enemies.

5. To our friends we give corn, which we procure by the labor of our oxen;
with them we offer wine to the gods in our cup; and with regard to our enemies,
we combat them at a distance with our arrows, and near at hand with our
javelins.

6. But thou, who boastest thy coming to extirpate robbers, art thyself the
greatest robber upon earth. Thou have plundered all nations thou overcamest;
thou have possessed thyself of Lybia, invaded Syria, Persia, and Bactriana;
thou art forming a design to march as far as India, and now thou come hither
to seize upon our herds of cattle.

7. The great possessions thou have, only make thee covet the more eagerly what
thou have not. If thou art a god, thou ought to do good to mortals, and not
deprive them of their possessions.

8. If thou art a mere man, reflect always on what thou art. They whom thou
shall not molest will be thy true friends; the strongest friendships being
contracted between equals; and they are esteemed equals who have not tried
their strengh against each other. But do not suppose that those whom thou
conquerest can love thee."

THE REVENGE OF A GREAT SOUL.
DEMETRIUS Poliorcetes, who had done singular services for the people of the
city of Athens, on setting out for a war in which he was engaged, lest his wife
and children to their protection. He lost the battle, and was obliged to seek
security for his person in flight.

2. He doubted not, at first, but that he should find a safe asylum among his
good friends the Athenians; but those ungrateful people refused to receive him,
and even sent back to him his wife and children, under pretense, that they
probably might not be safe in Athens, where the enemy might come and take them.

3. This conduct pierced the heart of Demetrius; for nothing is so affecting to
an honest mind, as the ingratitude of those we love, and to whom we have done
singular services. Some time afterward, this prince recoverd his affairs, and
came with a large army to lay siege to Athens.

4. The Athenians, persuaded that they had no pardon to expect from Demetrius,
determined to die sword in hand, and passed a decree, which condemned to death
those who should first propose to surrender to that prince; but they did not
recollect, that there was but little corn in the city, and that they would in a
short time be in want of bread.

5. Want soon made them sensible of their error: and, after having suffered
hunger for a long time, the most reasonable among them said, "It would be
better that Demetrius should kill us at once, than for us to die by the
lingering death of famine. Perhaps he will have pity on our wives and
children." They then opened to him the gates of the city.

6. Demetrius, having taken possession of the city, ordered, that all the
married men should assemble in a spacious place appointed for the purpose, and
that the soldiery, sword in hand, should surround them. Cries and lamentations
were then heard from every quarter of the city; women embracing their husbands,
children their parents, and all taking an eternal farewell of each other.

7. When the married men were all thus collected, Demetrius, for whom an
elevated situation was provided, reproached them for their ingratitude in the
most feeling manner, insomuch that he himself could not help shedding tears.
Demetrius for some time remained silent, while the Athenians expected, that the
next words he uttered would be to order his soldiers to massacre them all.

8. It is hardly possible to say what must have been their surprise, when they
heard that good prince say, "I wish to convince you how ungenerously you have
treated me; for it was not to an enemy you have refused assistance, but to a
prince who loved you, who still loves you, and who wishes to revenge himself
only by granting your pardon, and by being still your friend. Return to your
own homes: while you have been here, my soldiers have been filling your houses
with provisions."

CUDJOE, THE FAITHFUL AFRICAN.
A NEW ENGLAND sloop, trading on the coast of Guinea, in 1752, left a second
mate, William Murray. sick on shore, and sailed without him. Murray was at the
house of a black man named Cudjoe, with whom he had contracted an acquaintance
during their trade.

2. He recovered; and the sloop being gone, he continued with his black friend
till some other opportunity should offer of his getting home. In the mean time
a Dutch ship came into the road, and some of the blacks coming on board her,
were treacherously seized and carried off as their slaves.

3. The relations and friends, transported with sudden rage, ran to the house
of Cudjoe, to take revenge by killing Murray. Cudjoe stopped them at the door,
and demanded what they wanted. The white men, said they, have carried away our
brothers and sons, and we will kill all white men.

4. Give us the white man you have in your house, for we will kill him. Nay,
said Cudjoe, the white men who carried away your relations are bad men; kill
them when you can take them; but this white man is a good man, and you must not
kill him. But he is a white man, they cried; and the white men are all bad men;
we must kill them all. Nay, says he, you must not kill a man who has done no
harm, only for being white.

5. This man is my friend, my house is his post, I am his soldier, and must
fight for him; you must kill me before you can kill him. What good man will
ever come again under my roof, if I let my floor be stained with a good man's
blood?

6. The negroes seeing his resolution, and being convinced by his discourse
that they were wrong, went away ashamed. In a few days Murray ventured abroad
again with his friend Cudjoe, when several of them took him by the hand, and
told him, they were glad they had not killed him; for as he was a good meaning,
innocent man, their god would have been very angry, and would have spoiled
their fishing.

THE AFRICAN CHIEF. Captured in arms, fighting for his FREEDOM, and inhumanly
murdered by his conquerors, in the island of Hispaniola, 1^91*

SEE how the black ship cleaves the main,
High-bounding over the violet wave,
Remurmuring with the groans of pain,
Deep freighted with the PRINCELY SLAVE!
2.
Did all the gods of Afric sleep,
Forgetful of their guardian love,
When the white traitors of the deep
Betrayed him in the palmy grove!
3.
A Chief of Gambia's golden shore,
Whose arm the band of warriors led,
Perhaps the lord of boundless power,
By whom the foodless poor were fed.
4.
Does not the voice of reason cry,
"Claim the first right which nature gave;
From the red scourge of bondage fly,
Nor deign to live a burdened SLAVE."
5.
Has not his suff'ring^ offspring clung
Desponding round his fettered knee,
On his worn shoulder weeping hung,
And urged one effort to be free!
6.
His wife by nameless wrongs subdued,
His bosom's friend to death resigned,
The flinty pathway bathed in blood,
Poured tortures on his frantic mind!
7.
Stung by DESPAIR, he sought the plain,
To heaven uprais'd his starting eye,
Claimed freedom from the crushing chain,
Or mid the battle's rage to die.
8.
First of his race, he led the band,
Guardless of dangers floating round,
Till by his bold, avenging hand,
Full many a despot stained the ground.
9.
When erst Messenia's sons oppressed,
Flew desperate to the sanguine field,
With iron clothed each injured breast,
And bade the haughty SPARTAN yield.
10.
Did not the soul to heaven allied,
Feel the full heart as greatly swell,
As when the Roman Cato di'd,
Or when the Grecian victim LEONIDAS.
fell!
11.
If later deeds quick raptures raise,
The boon Bata^ia's patriots won,
Paoli's time-enduring praise,
Or the far greater WASHINGTON.
12.
If these command thy generous zeal,
Who scorned a tyrant's mad control,
For bleeding Gambia learn to feel,
Whose Chieftain claimed a kindred soul.
13.
Oh! mourn the lost disastrous hour;
Lift the red eye of speechless grief,
While NUMBERS throng the sultry shore,
And tear from hope the captive chief.
14.
While the hard race of pallid hue,
Unpracticed in the power to feel,
Resign him to the murderous crew,
The horrors of the quivering wheel.
15.
Let sorrow bathe each blushing cheek;
Bend piteous over the tortured slave,
Whose wrongs COMPASSION cannot speak;
Whose only refuge is the grave.
DIALOGUE BETWEEN MERCURY AND A MODERN FINE LADY; SHOWING THE FUTILE
ENGAGEMENTS AND PURSUITS OF A MODISH WOMAN.
Mrs. Modish. INDEED, Mr. Mercury, I cannot have the pleasure of waiting upon
you now. I am engaged, absolutely engaged.


Mercury. I know you have an amiable, affectionate husband, and several fine
children. But you need not be told, that neither conjugal attachments, maternal
affections, nor even the care of a kingdom's welfare, can excuse a person who
has received a summons to the realms of death. If the grim messenger were not
as peremptory as unwelcome, Charon would not get a passenger once in a century.
You must be content to leave your husband and family, and pass the Styx.


Mrs. M. I did not mean to insist on any engagements with my husband and
children. I never thought myself engaged to them. I had no engagements but such
as were common to women in high life. Look at my memorandum, and you will see I
was engaged to the play on Mondays, balls on Tuesdays, routs on Saturdays, and
to card assemblies the rest of the week for two months to come; and it would be
the rudest thing in the world not to keep my appointments. If you will stay for
me till the summer season, I will wait on you with all my heart. Perhaps the
elysian fields may be less detestable than the country in our world. Pray have
you a fine theater, pleasant gardens, and elegant assemblies there? I think I
should not dislike drinking the Lethe waters when you have a full season.


Mer. Surely you could not like to drink the waters of oblivion, who have made
pleasure the business, end, and aim of your life! It is good to drown cares;
but who would wash away the remembrance of a life of gaiety and pleasure?


Mrs. M. Diversion was indeed the business of my life; but as to pleasure, I
have enjoyed none since the novelty of my amusements has worn off. Can one be
pleased with seeing the same thing over and over again? Late hours and fatigue
gave me the vapors, spoiled the natural cheerfulness of my temper, and even in
youth wore away my youthful vivacity.


Mer. If this mode of life did not give you pleasure, why did you continue in
it? I suppose you did not think it very meritorious.


Mrs. M. I was too much engaged to think at all. Thus far indeed my manner of
life was agreeable enough. My friends always told me diversions were necessary;
and my doctor assured me dissipation was good for my spirits; my husband
insisted that it was not. And you know one loves to oblige one's friends,
comply with one's doctor, and contradict one's husband. And, besides, I was
ambitious to be thought du bon ton.


Mer. Bon ton! What is that, madam, pray define it?


Mrs. M. O Sir, excuse me; it is one of the privileges of the bon ton never to
define or be defined. It is the child and parent of jargon. It is -- I can
never tell you what it is; but I will try to tell you what it is not. In
conversation it is not wit; in manners it is not politeness; in behavior it is
not address; but it is a little like them all. It can only belong to people of
a certain rank, who live in a certain manner, with certain persons, and who
have not certain virtues, and who have certain vices, and who inhabit a certain
part of the town. Now, Sir, I have told you as much as I know of it, though I
have admired and aimed at it all my life.


Mer. Then, madam, you have wasted your time, faded your beauty, and destroyed
your health, for the laudable purposes of contradicting your husband, and being
this something and this nothing called the bon ton.


Mrs. M. What would you have had me do?


Me^. I will follow your own mode of instructing. I will tell you what I would
not have had you do. I would not have had you sacrifice your time, your reason,
and your duties, to fashion and folly. I would not have had you neglect your
husband's happiness, and your children's education.


Mrs. M. As to the education of my daughters, I spared no expense. They had a
dancing master, music master, drawing master, and a French governess to teach
them politeness and the French language.


Mer. So their religion, sentiments and manners were to be learned from a
dancing master, music master, and a chamber maid! Perhaps they might prepare
them to catch the bon ton. Your daughters must have been so educated as to fit
them to be wives without conjugal affection, and mothers without maternal care.
I am sorry for the sort of life they are commencing, and for that which you
have just concluded. Minos is a sour old gentleman, without the least
smattering of the bon ton, and I am in a fright for you. The best thing I can
advise you, is to do in this world as you did in the other; keep happiness in
your view, but never take the road that leads to it. Remain on this side Styx;
wander about without end or aim; look into the elysian fields, but never
attempt to enter into them, lest Minos should push you into Tartarus. For
duties neglected may bring on a sentence not much less severe than crimes
committed.


PART OF THE SPEECH OF PUBLIUS SCIPIO TO THE ROMAN ARMY, BEFORE THE BATTLE OF
THE TICIN.
THAT you may not be unapprized, soldiers, of what sort of enemies you are
about to encounter, or what is to be feared from them, I tell you they are the
very same, whom, in a former war, you vanquished both by land and sea; the same
from whom you took Sicily and Sardinia; and who have been th^se twenty years
your tributaries.

2. You will not, I presume, march against these men with only that courage
with which you are wont to face other enemies; but with a certain anger and
indignation, such as you would feel if you saw your slaves on a sudden rise up
in arms against you.

3. But you have heard, perhaps, that, though they are few in number, they are
men of stout hearts and robust bodies; heroes of such strength and vigor as
nothing is able to resist. Mere effigies! nay, shadows of men! wretches,
emaciated with hunger and benumbed with cold! bruised and battered to pieces
among the rocks and craggy cliffs! their weapons broken, and their horses weak
and foundered!

4. Such are the cavalry, and such the infantry, with which you are going to
contend; not enemies, bu^ the fragments of enemies. There is nothing which I
more apprehend, than that it will be thought Hannibal was vanquished by the
Alps before we had any conflict with him.

5. I need not be in any fear that you should suspect me of saying these things
merely to encourage you, while inwardly I have different sentiments. Have I
ever shown any inclination to avoid a contest with this tremendous Hannibal?
and have I now met with him only by accident and unawares? or am I come on
purpose to challenge him to the combat?

6. I would gladly try, whether the earth, within these twenty years, has
brought forth a new kind of Carthagenians; or whether they be the same sort of
men who fought at the Aegates, and whom at Eryx you suffered to redeem
themselves at eighteen denarii per head. Whether this Hannibal, for labors and
journies, be as he would be thought, the rival of Hercules; or whether he be
what his father left him, a tributary, a vassal, a slave to the Roman people.

7. Did not the consciousness of his wicked deed at Saguntum torment him and
make him desperate, he would have some regard, if not to his conquered country,
yet surely to his own family, to his father's memory, to the treaty written
with Amilcar's own hand. We might have starved them in Eryx; we might have
passed into Africa with our victorious fleet, and in a few days have destroyed
Carthage.

8. At their humble supplication, we pardoned them. We released them when they
were closely shut up without a possibility of escaping. We made peace with them
when they were conquered. When they were distressed by the African war, we
considered them, and treated them as a people under our protection.

9. And what is the return they make us for all these favors! Under the conduct
of a hair-brained young man, they come hither to overturn our state, and lay
waste our country.

10. I could wish, indeed, that it were not so; and that the war we are now
engaged in concerned our glory only, and not our preservation. But the contest
at present is not for the possession of Sicily and Sardinia, but of Italy
itself. Nor is there behind us another army, which, if we should not prove the
conquerors, may make head against our victorious enemies.

11. There are no more Alps for them to pass, which might give us leisure to
raise new forces. No, soldiers; here you must take your stand, as if you were
just now before the walls of Rome. Let every one reflect, that he is now to
defend, not his own person only, but his wife, his children, his helpless
infants.

12. Yet, let not private considerations alone possess our minds. Let us
remember that the eyes of the senate and people of Rome are upon us; and that,
as our force and courage shall now prove, such will be the fortune of that
city, and of the Roman empire.

PART OF HANNIBAL'S SPEECH TO THE CARTHAGENIAN ARMY, ON THE SAME OCCASION.
ON what side soever I turn my eyes, I behold all full of courage and strength.
A veteran infantry; a most gallant cavalry; you, my allies, most faithful and
valiant; you, Carthagenians, whom, not only your country's cause, but the
justest anger, impels to battle. The hope, the courage of assailants, is always
greater than that of those who act upon the defensive.

2. With hostile banners displayed, you are come down upon Italy. You bring the
war. Grief, injuries, indignities, fire your minds, and spur you forward to
revenge. First, they demanded me; that I, your general, should be delivered up
to them; next, all of you who had fought at the siege of Saguntum; and we were
to be put to death by excruciating tortures.

3. Proud and cruel nation! Every thing must be yours, and at your disposal!
You are to prescribe to us with whom we are to make war, with whom to make
peace! You are to set us bounds; to shut us up between hills and rivers; but
you are not to observe the limits which yourselves have fixed!

4. "Pass not the Iberus." What next? "Touch not the Saguntines; Saguntum is
upon the Iberus; move not a step toward that city." Is it a small matter,
then, that you have deprived us of our ancient possessions, Sicily and
Sardinia? You would have Spain too!

5. Well, we shall yield Spain, and then -- you will pass into Africa. Will
pass, did I say? This very year, they ordered one of their consuls into Africa,
the other into Spain. No, soldiers, there is nothing left for us but what we
can vindicate with our swords.

6. Come on, then. Be men. The Romans may, with more safety, be cowards. They
have their own country behind them; have places of refuge to flee to; and are
secure from danger in the roads thither. But for you, there is no middle
fortune between death and victory. Let this be but well fixed in your minds;
and, once again, I say you are conquerors.

EXTRACT FROM DR. BELKNAP'S ADDRESS TO THE INHABITANTS OF NEW HAMPSHIRE, AT THE
CLOSE OF HIS HISTORY OF THAT STATE.
CITIZENS OF NEW HAMPSHIRE,
HAVING spent above twenty years of my life with you, and passed through
various scenes of peace and war within that time; being personally acquainted
with many of you, both in your public and private characters; and having an
earnest desire to promote your true interest, I trust you will not think me
altogether unqualified to give you a few hints by way of advice.

2. You are certainly a rising State; your numbers are rapidly increasing; and
your importance in the political scale will be augmented, in proportion to your
improving the natural advantages which your situation affords you, and to your
cultivating the intellectual and moral powers of yourselves and your children.

3. The first article on which I would open my mind to you is that of
education. Nature has been as bountiful to you as to any other people, in
giving your children genius and capacity; it is then your duty and your
interest to cultivate their capacities, and render them serviceable to
themsel^es and the community.

4. It was the saying of a great orator and statesman of antiquity, that "The
loss which the Commonwealth sustains, by a want of education, is like the loss
which the year would suffer by the destruction of the spring."

5. If the bud be blasted, the tree will yield no fruit. If the springing corn
be cut down, there will be no harvest. So if the youth be ruined through a
fault in their education, the community sustains a loss which cannot be
repaired; "for it is too late to correct them when they are spoiled."

6. Notwithstanding the care of your legislators in enacting laws, and
en^^^cing them by severe penalties; notwithstanding the wise and liberal
provision which is made by some towns, and some private gentlemen in the State;
yet there is still, in many places, "A great and criminal neglect of education."

7. You are indeed a very considerable degree better, in this respect, than in
the time of the late war; but yet much remains to be done. Great care ought to
be taken, not only to provide a support for instructors of children and youth;
but to be attentive in the choice of instructors; to see that they be men of
good understanding, learning and morals; that they teach by their example as
well as by their precepts; that they govern themselves, and teach their pupils
the art of self-government.

8. Another source of improvement which I beg leave to recommend, is the
establishment of social libraries. This is the easiest, the cheapest and most
effectual mode of diffusing knowledge among the people. For the sum of six or
eight dollars at once, and a small annual payment besides, a man may be
supplied with the means of literary improvement, during his life, and his
children may inherit the blessing.

9. A few neighbors, joined together in setting up a library, and placing it
under the care of some suitable person, with a very few regulations, to prevent
carelessness and waste, may render the most essential service to themselves and
to the community.

10. Books may be much better preserved in this way, than if they belonged to
individuals; and there is an advantage in the social intercourse of persons who
have read the same books, by their conversing on the subjects which have
occurred in their reading, and communicating their observations one to another.

11. From this mutual intercourse another advantage may arise; for the persons
who are thus associated may not only acquire but originate knowledge. By
studying nature and the sciences; by practicing arts, agriculture and
manufactures, at the same time that they improve their minds in reading, they
may be led to discoveries and improvements, original and beneficial; and being
already formed into society, they may diffuse their knowledge, ripen their
plans, correct their mistakes, and promote the cause of science and humanity in
a very considerable degree.

12. The book of nature is always open to our view, and we may study it at our
leisure. "'It Is elder scripture; writ by God's own hand." The earth, the air,
the sea, the rivers, the mountains, the rocks, the caverns, the animal and
vegetable tribes are fraught with instruction. Nature is not half explored; and
in what is partly known there are many mysteries, which time, observation and
experience must unfold.

13. Every social library, among other books, should be furnished with those of
natural philosophy, botany, zoology, chemistry, husbandry, geopraphy and
astronomy; that inquiring minds may be directed in their inquiries; that they
may see what is known and what still remains to be discovered; and that they
may employ their leisure and their various opportunities in endeavoring to add
to the stock of science, and thus enrich the world with their observations and
improvements.

14. Suffer me to add a few words on the use of spirituous liquor, that bane of
society, that destroye^ of health, morals and property. Nature indeed has
furnished her vegetable productions with spirit; but she has so combined it
with other substances, that unless her work be tortured by fire, the spirit is
not separated, and cannot prove pernicious. Why should this force be put on
nature, to make her yield a noxious draught, when all her original preparations
are salutary?

15. The juice of the apple, the fermentation of barley, and the decoction of
spruce are amply sufficient for the refreshment of man, let his labor be ever
so severe, and his perspiration ever so expensive. Our forefathers, for many
years after the settlement of the country, knew not the use of distilled
spirits.

16. Malt was imported from England, and wine from the Western or Canary
Islands, with which they were refreshed, before their own fields and orchards
yielded them a supply. An expedition was once undertaken against a nation of
Indians, when there was but one pint of strong water (as it was then called) in
the whole army, and that was reserved for the sick; yet no complaint was made
for want of refreshment.

17. Could we but return to the primitive manners of our ancestors, in this
respect, we should be free from many of the disorders, both of body and mind,
which are now experienced. The disuse of ardent spirits would also tend to
abolish the infamous traffic in slaves, by whose labor this baneful material is
procured.

18. Divine Providence seems to be preparing the w^y for the destruction of
that detestable commerce. The insurrections of the blacks in the West Indies
have already spread desolation over the most fertile plantations, and greatly
raised the price of those commodities which we have been used to import from
thence.

19. If we could check the consumption of distilled spirits, and enter with
vigor into the manufacture of maple sugars, of which our forests would afford
an ample supply, the demand for West-India-productions might be diminished; the
plantations in the islands would not need fresh recruits from Africa; the
planters would treat with humanity their remaining blacks; the market for
slaves would become less inviting; and the navigation which is now employed in
the most pernicious species of commerce which ever disgraced humanity, would be
turned into some other channel.

20. Were I to form a picture of happy society, it would be a town consisting
of a due mixture of hills, valleys, and streams of water. The land well fenced
and cultivated; the roads and bridges in good repair; a decent inn for the
refreshment of travelers, and for public entertainments. The inhabitants
mostly husbandmen; their wives and daughters domestic manufacturers; a suitable
proportion of handicraft workmen, and two or three traders; a physician and
lawyer, each of whom should have a farm for his support.

21. A clergyman of good understanding, of a candid disposition and exemplary
morals; not a metaphysical, nor a polemic, but a serious and practical
preacher. A schoolmaster who should understand his business, and teach his
pupils to govern themselves. A social library, annually increasing, and under
good regulation.

22. A club of sensible men, seeking mutual improvement. A decent musical
society. No intriguing politician, horse jockey, gambler or sot; but all such
characters treated with contempt. Such a situation may be considered as the
most favorable to social happiness of any which this world can afford.

DIALOGUE BETWEEN CICERO AND LORD CHESTERFIELD.
Cicero. MISTAKE me not. I know how to value the sweet courtesi^s of life.
Affability, attention, decorum of behavior, if they have not been ranked among
the virtues, are certainly related to them, and have a powerful influence in
promoting social happiness. I have recommended them as well as yourself. But I
contend, and no sophistry shall prevail upon me to give up this point, that, to
be truly amiable, they must proceed from goodness of heart. Assumed by the
artful, to serve the purposes of private interest, they degenerate to
contemptible grimace, and detestable hypocrisy.


Chesterfield. Excuse me, my dear Cicero; I cannot enter farther into the
controversy at present. I have a hundred engagements at least; and see yonder
my little elegant French Comtesse. I promised her and myself the pleasure of a
promenade. Pleasant walking enough in these elysian groves. So much good
company too, that if it were not that the canaille are apt to be troublesome, I
should not much regret the distance from the Thuillerics. But adieu, mon cher
ami, for I see Madame B. is joining the party. Adieu, adieu!


Cic. Contemptible wretch!


Chest. Ah! what do I hear? Recollect that I am a man of honor, unused to the
pity or the insults of an upstart. But perhaps your exclamation was not meant
of me. If it were, I demand an explanation.


Cic. I am as little inclined to insult as to flatter you. Your levity excited
my indignation; but my compassion for the degeneracy of human nature, exhibited
in your instance, absorbs my contempt.


Chest. I could be a little angry, but, as bienseance forbids it, I will be a
philosopher for once. -- A-propos, pray how do you reconcile your -- what shall
I call it -- your unsmooth address to those rules of decorum, that gentleness
of manners, of which you say you know and teach the propriety as well as myself?


Cic. To confess the truth, I would not advance the arts of embellishment to
extreme refinement. Ornamental education, or an attention to the graces, has a
connection with effeminacy. In acquiring the gentleman, I would not lose the
spirit of a man. There is a gracefulness in a manly character, a beauty in an
open, an ingenuous disposition which all the professed teachers of the art of
pleasing know not how to infuse.


Chest. You and I lived in a state of manners, as different as the periods at
which we lived were distant. You Romans -- pardon me, my dear -- you Romans had
a little of the brute in you. Come, come, I must overlook it. You were obliged
to court plebeians for their suffrages; and if similis simili gaudet, it must
be owned, that the greatest of you were secure of their favor. Why, Beau Nash
would have handed your Catos and your Brutuses out of the ballroom, if they had
shown their unmanly heads in it; and my Lord Modish, animated with the (...)
merit of the largest or smallest buckles in the (...) according to the
temporary too, would have laug^^d Pompey the Great out of countenance. Oh,
Cicero, (...) ^ou lived in a modern European court, you would have ^aught a
degree of that undescribable grace, which (...) not only the orn^t, but may be
the substitute (...) labored attainm^ which fools call solid merit. But (...)
^ot your good ^^^^ne, and I make allowances.


Cic. The vivacity you have acquired in studying the writings and the manners
of the degenerate Ga^^, has led you to set too high a value on qualifications
which dazzle the lively perceptions with a momentary blaze, and to depreciate
that kind of worth which can neither be obtained nor understood without serious
attention, and sometimes painful efforts. But I will not contend with you about
the propriety or impropriety of the outward modes which delight a showy nation.
I will not spend arguments in proving that gold is more valuable than tinsel,
though it glitter^ less. But I must censure you, and with an asperity too,
which, perhaps* your graces may not approve, for recommending vice as graceful,
i^ your memorable letters.


Chest. That the great Cicero should know so little of the world, really
surprises me. A little libertinism* m^ dear, that is all; how can one be ^
gentleman without (...) libertinism?


Cic. I ever thought, to be a gentleman, (...) ^isite to be a moral man. And
surely (...) who (...) enjoyed the benefit of a light to (...) which (...)
^^anted, were blameable in omitting (...) virtue (...) system.


Chest. What! superstitious too! You have ^ot then con^sed with your superior,
the philosopher of ^erney. I thank Heaven, I was born in the same age with that
great luminary. Prejudice had else, perhaps, chained me in the thraldom of my
great grandmother. T^ are enlightened days, and I find I have contributed
something to the general illumination, by my posthumous letters.


Cic. Boast not of them. Remember you were a father.


Chest. And did I not endeavor most effectually to serve my son, by pointing
out the qualifications necessary for a foreign ambassador, for which department
I always designed him? Few fathers have taken more pains to accomplish a son
than myself. There was nothing I did not condescend to point out to him.


Cic. True; your condescension was great indeed. You were the pander of your
son. You not only taught him the mean arts of dissimulation, the petty tricks
which degrade nobility; but you corrupted his principles, fomented his
passions, and even pointed out objects for their gratification. You might have
left the task of teaching him fashionable vice, to a vicious world. Example,
and the corrupt affections of human nature, will ever be capable of
accomplishing this unnatural purpose. But a parent, the guardian appointed by
nature for an uninstructed offspring introduced into a dangerous world, who
himself takes upon him the office of seduction, is a monster indeed. I also had
a son. I was tenderly solicitous for the right conduct of his education. I
entrusted him indeed to Cratippus at Athens; but, like you, I could not help
transmitting instructions dictated by paternal love. Those instructions are
contained in my book of Offices, a book which has ever been cited by the world
as a proof, to what a height the morality of the heathens was advanced without
the light of revelation. I own, I feel a conscious pride in it; not on account
of the ability which it may display, but for the principles it teaches, and the
good, I flatter myself, it has diffused. You did not indeed intend your
instructions for the world; but as you gave them to a son you loved, it may be
concluded that you thought them true wisdom, and withheld them only because
they were contrary to the professions of the unenlightened. They have been
generally read; and their uniform tendency has been to introduce vice and
immorality.


Chest. Spare me, Cicero. I have never been accustomed to the rough
conversation of an old Roman. I feel myself little in his company. I seem to
shrink in his noble presence. I never felt my insignificance so forcibly as
now. French philosophers and French courtiers have been my models; and amid the
dissipation of pleasure, and the hurry of affected vivacity, I never considered
the gracefulness of virtue, and the beauty of an open, sincere and manly
character.


OF THE ELEPHANT.
THE Elephant is not only the most tractable, but the most intelligent of
animals; sensible of benefits, resentful of injuries, and endued even with a
sense of glory.

2. In India, they were once employed in the launching of ships. One was
directed to force a very large ship into the water; the work proved superior to
his strength; his master, with a sarcastic tone, bid the keeper take away this
lazy beast and bring another; the poor animal instantly repeated his efforts,
fractured his skull, and died on the spot.

3. In Delhi, an elephant passing along the streets put his trunk into a
taylor's shop, where several people were at work; one of them pricked the end
of it with a needle; the beast passed on; but, in the next dirty puddle, filled
his trunk with water, returned to the shop, and spurting every drop among the
people who had offended him, spoiled their work.

4. An elephant in Adsmeer, which often passed through the market, as he went
by a certain herb woman, always received from her a mouthful of greens. At
length he was seized with one of his periodical fits of rage, broke his
fetters, and running through the market, put the crowd to flight; among others,
this woman, who, in her haste, forgot a little child she had brought with her.

5. The animal recollecting the spot where his benefactress was wont to sit,
took up the infant gently in his trunk, and placed it in safety on a stall
before a neighboring house. Another, in his madness, killed his governor; the
wife seeing the misfortune, took her two children and flung them before the
elephant, saying, "Now you have destroyed their father, you may as well put an
end to their lives and mine."

6. He instantly stopped, relented, took the greatest of the children, placed
it on his neck, adopted it for his cornac or governor, and never afterward
would permit any body else to mount him.

7. A soldier at Pondicherry, who was accustomed, whenever he received the
portion that came to his share, to carry a certain quantity of it to one of
these animals, having one day drank rather too freely, and finding himself
pursued by the guards, who were going to take him to prison, took refuge under
the elephant's body, and fell asleep.

8. In vain did the guard try to force him from this asylum, as the elephant
protected him with his trunk. The next morning the soldier recovering from his
drunken fit, shuddered with horror to find himself stretched under the belly of
this huge animal.

9. The elephant, which without doubt perceived the man's embarrassment,
caressed him with his trunk, in order to inspire him with courage, and make him
understand that he might now depart in safety.

10. A painter was desirous of drawing the elephant which was kept in the
menagerie at Versailles in an uncommon attitude, which was that of holding his
trunk raised up in the air with his mouth open. The painter's boy, in order to
keep the animal in this posture, threw fruit into his mouth.

11. But, as the lad frequently deceived him, and made an offer only of
throwing him the fruit, he grew angry; and, as if he had known that the
painter's intention of drawing him was the cause of the affront that was
offered him, instead of revenging himself on the lad, he turned his resentment
on the master, and taking up a quantity of water in his trunk, threw it on the
paper on which the painter was drawing, and spoiled it.

SPEECH OF MR. WALPOLE IN THE BRITISH PARLIAMENT IN OPPOSITION TO MR. PIT,
LATE EARL OF CHATHAM.
SIR,
I WAS unwilling to interrupt the course of this debate while it was carried on
with calmness and decency, by men who do not suffer the ardor of opposition to
cloud their reason, or transport them to such expressions as the dignity of
this assembly does not admit.

2. I have hitherto deferred to answer the gentleman who declaimed against the
bill with such fluency of rhetoric, and such vehemence of gesture; who charged
the advocates for the expedients now proposed, with having no regard to any
interost but their own, and with making laws only to consume paper; and
threatened them with the defection of their adherents, (...) the loss of their
influence, upon this new discovery of ^^eir folly and ignorance.

3. Nor, Sir, do I now answer him for any other purpose than to remind him how
little the clamors of rage, and petulancy of invective, contribute to the
purposes for which this assembly is called together; how little the discovery
of truth is promoted, and the security of the nation established by pompous
diction and theatrical emotions.

4. Formidable sounds and furious declamations, confident assertions, and lofty
periods, may affect the young and unexperienced; and perhaps the gentleman may
have contracted his habits of oratory by conversing more with those of his own
age than with such as have had more opportunities of acquiring knowledge, and
more successful methods of communicating their sentiments.

5. If the heat of his temper, Sir, would suffer him to attend to those whose
age and long acquaintance with business give them an indisputable right to
deference and superiority, he would learn, in time, to reason rather than
declaim, and to prefer justness of argument, and an accurate knowledge of
facts, to sounding epithets and splendid superlatives, which may disturb the
imagination for a moment, but leave no lasting impression on the mind.

6. He will learn, Sir, that to accuse and prove are very different, and that
reproaches, unsupported by evidence, affect only the character of him who
utters them. Excursions of fancy and flights of oratory are indeed pardonable
in young men, but in no other; and it would surely contribute more, even to the
purpose for which some gentlemen appear to speak; that of depreciating the
conduct of the administration, to prove the inconveniences and injustice of
this bill, than barely to assert them, with whatever magnificence of language
or appearance of zeal, honesty, or compassion.

Mr. PITT'S ANSWER TO THE FOREGOING.
SIR,
THE atrocious crime of being a young man, which the honorable gentleman has,
with such spirit and decency, charged upon me, I shall neither attempt to
palliate nor deny; but content myself with wishing, that I may be one of those
whose follies may cease with their youth, and not of that number who are
ignorant in spite of experience.

2. Whether youth can be imputed to any man as a reproach, I will not, Sir,
assume the province of determining; but surely age may become justly
contemptible, if the opportunities which it brings have passed away without
improvement, and vice appears to prevail, when the passions have subsided.

3. The wretch, who, after having seen the consequences of a thousand errors,
continues still to blunder, and whose age has only added obstinacy to
stupidity, is surely the object of either abhorrence or contempt, and deserves
not that his gray head should secure him from insults.

4. Much more, Sir, is he to be abhorred, who, as he has advanced in age, has
receded from virtue, and becomes more wicked with less temptation; who
prostitutes himself for money which he cannot enjoy, and spends the remains of
his life in the ruin of his country.

5. But youth, Sir, is not my only crime; I have been accused of acting a
theatrical part. A theatrical part may either imply some peculiarities of
gesture, or a dissimulation of my real sentiments, and an adoption of the
opinions and language of another man.

6. In the first sense, Sir, the charge is too trifling to be confuted, and
deserves only to be mentioned that it may be despised. I am at liberty, like
every other man, to use my own language; and though I may perhaps have some
ambition to please this gentleman, I shall not lay myself under any restraint,
not very solicitously copy his diction or his mien, however matured by age, or
modelled by experience.

7. If any man shall, by charging me with theatrical behavior, imply, that I
utter any sentiments but my own, I shall treat him as a calumniator and a
villain; nor shall any protection shelter him from the treatment which he
deserves.

8. I shall, on such an occasion, without scruple, trample upon all those forms
with which wealth and dignity entrench themselves; nor shall any thing but age
restrain my resentment. Age, which always brings one privilege, that of being
insolent and supercilious without punishment.

9. But with regard, Sir, to those whom I have offended, I am of opinion, that
if I had acted a borrowed part, I should have avoided their censure. The heat
which offended them is the ardor of conviction, and that zeal for the service
of my country, which neither hope nor fear shall influence me to suppress.

10. I will not sit unconcerned while my liberty is invaded, nor look in
silence upon public robbery. I will exert my endeavors, at whatever hazard, to
repel the aggressor and drag the thief to justice, whoever may protect them in
their villainy, and whoever may partake of their plunder.

STORY OF A SECOND JOSEPH.
THE following relation proves, that incidents somewhat similar to those in the
times of Jacob are still renewed in Egypt. In 1776, the plains of Syria were
ravaged by clouds of locusts, which devoured the corn to the very root.

2. A famine followed, and a farmer near Damascus felt the effects of the
general distress. To supply the wants of a numerous family, he sold his cattle;
which resource being soon exhausted, the unhappy father, wretched at present,
but foreseeing greater wretchedness to come, pressed by hunger, sold his
instruments of husbandry at Damascus.

3. Led by the invisible hand of Providence, as formerly Tobias was by the
angel, while he bargained for corn, lately arrived from Damietta, he heard
speak of the success of Mourad Bey, who had entered Grand Cairo victorious, and
in triumph.

4. The shape, character, and origin of the warrior were described, and how he
had risen from slavery to power supreme. The astonished farmer found the
description accorded with a son, who had been stolen from him at twelve years
old; hope palpitated in his heart, he hastened home with his provisions, told
his family what he had heard, and determined immediately to depart for Egypt.

5. His weeping wife and sons offered up prayers for his safe return. Going to
the port of Alexandretta, he embarked there, and came to Damietta. One
continued fear tormented him; his son, forsaking the religion of his fathers,
had embraced Mahometanism; and now, surrounded as he was by splendour, would be
acknowledge his parents?

6. The thought lay heavy on his heart; yet, the wish to snatch his family from
all the horrors of famine; the hope of finding a long lamented son, gave him
fortitude. He continued his journey, came to the capital, repaired to the
palace of Mourad, applied to the officers of the prince, and most ardently
solicited admission.

7. His dress and appearance bespoke poverty and misfortune, and were poor
recommendations; but his great age, so respectable in the East, pleaded in his
behalf. One of the attendants went to the B^y, and told him an aged man,
apparently miserable, requested an audience.

8. Let him enter, replied Mourad; and the farmer proceeded, with trembling
steps, over the rich carpet which bespread the hall of the Divan, and
approached the Bey, who reclined on a sofa, embroidered with silk and gold.
Crouding sensations deprived him of the use of speech.

9. At last, after attentively looking, the voice of nature vanquishing fear,
he fell, and embracing his knees, exclaimed, You are my son! The Bey raised
him, endeavored to recollect, and, after explanation, finding him to be his
father, made him sit down by his side, and caressed him most affectionately.

10. The first gush of nature over, the sire described in what a deplorable
state he had left his mother, and brethren, and the prince proposed to send
for, and with them divide his riches and power, if they would embrace Islamism.

11. This the generous Christian had foreseen, and fearing youth might be
dazzled, took not one of his sons with him. He, therefore, firmly rejected
Mourad's offer, and even remonstrated with him on his own change of religion.

12. The Bey, finding his father determined, and that his family's distress
demanded immediate succor, sent him back to Syria, with a large sum of money,
and a vessel loaded with corn. The happy husbandman immediately returned to the
plains of Damascus, where his arrival banished misery and tears from his homely
roof, and brought joy, ease, and felicity.

SCENE BETWEEN CATO AND DECIUS.
Decius. CAESAR sends health to Cato --

Cato. Could he send it
To Cato's slaughtered friends, it would be welcome.
Are not your orders to address the senate?

Dec. My business is with Cato; Caesar sees the
Straits to which you're driven, and, as he knows
Cato's high worth, is anxious for your life.

Cato. My life is grafted on the fate of Rome.
Would he save Cato, bid him spare his country.
Tell your dictator this; and tell him, Cato
Disdains a life which he has power to offer.

Dec. Rome and her senators submit to Caesar;
Her generals and her consuls are no more,
Who checked his conquests, and denied his triumphs.
Why will not Cato be this Caesar's friend?

Cato. Those very reasons thou have urged forbid it.

Dec. Cato, I Have orders to expostulate,
And reason with you, as from friend to friend;
Think on the storm that gathers over your head,
And threatens every hour to burst upon it;
Still may you stand high in your country's honors;
Do but comply, and make your peace with Caesar.
Rome will rejoice, and cast its eyes on Cato,
As on the second of mankind.

Cato. No more;
I must not think of life on these conditions.

Dec. Caesar is well acquainted with your virtues,
And therefore sets this value on your life.
Let him but know the price of Cato's friendship,
And name your terms.

Cato. Bid him disband his legions,
Restore the commonwealth to liberty,
Submit his actions to the public censure,
And stand the judgment of a Roman senate.
Bid him do this, and Cato is his friend.

Dec. Cato, the world talks loudly of your wisdom --

Cato. Nay, more, though Cato's voice was never employed
To clear the guilty, and to varnish crimes,
Myself will mount the rostrum in his favor,
And strive to gain his pardon from the people.

Dec. A style like this becomes a conqueror.

Cato. Decius, a style like this becomes a Roman.

Dec. What is a Roman, who is Caesar's foe?

Cato. Greater than Caesar; he is a friend to virtue.

Dec. Consider, Cato, you're in Utica,
And at the head of your own little senate;
You don't now thunder in the capitol,
With all the mouths of Rome to second you.

Cato. Let him consider that who drives us hither.
It Is Caesar's sword has made Rome's senate little,
And thinn'd its ranks. Alas! thy dazzled eye
Beholds this man in a false glaring light,
Which conquest and success have thrown upon him*
Did thou but view him right, thou would see him black
With murder, treason, sacrilege and crimes,
That strike my soul with horror but to name 'em.
I know thou look on me, as on a wretch
Beset with ills, and covered with misfortunes;
But, be it known to thee, millions of worlds
Should never buy me to be like that Caesar.

Dec. Does Cato send this answer back to Caesar
For all his generous cares and proffered friendship?

Cato. His cares for me are insolent and vain;
Presumptuous man; the gods take care of Cato.
Would Caesar show the greatness of his soul,
Bid him employ his care for these my friends,
And make good use of his ill-gotten power,
By sheltering men much better than himself.

Dec. Your high, unconquered heart makes you forget
You are a man. You rush on your destruction.
But I have done. When I relate hereafter
The tale of this unhappy embassy,
All Rome will be in tears.

THE BEGGAR'S PETITION.
PITY the sorrows of a poor old man,
Whose trembling limbs have borne him to your door,
Whose days are dwindled to the shortest span,
Oh! give relief, and Heaven will bless your store.
2.
These tattered clothes my poverty bespeak,
These hoary locks proclaim my lengthened years;
And many a furrow in my grief-worn cheek
Has been the channel to a flood of tears.
3.
Yon house, erected on the rising ground,
With tempting aspect drew me from my road;
For plenty there a residence has found,
And grandeur a magnificent abode.
4.
Hard is the fate of the infirm and poor!
Here, as I craved a morsel of their bread,
A pampered menial drove me from the door,
To seek a shelter in a humbler shed.
5.
Oh! take me to your hospitable dome;
Keen blows the wind, and piercing is the cold!
Short is my passage to the friendly tomb,
For I am poor and miserably old.
6.
Should I reveal the sources of my grief,
If soft humanity ever touched your breast,
Your hands would not withhold the kind relief,
And tears of pity would not be repressed.
7.
Heaven sends misfortunes; why should we repine?
It Is Heaven has brought me to the state you see;
And your condition may be soon like mine,
The child of sorrow, and of misery.
8.
A little farm was my paternal lot,
Then like the lark I sprightly hailed the morn;
But ah! oppression forced me from my cot,
My cattle di'd, and blighted was my corn.
9.
My daughter, once the comfort of my age,
Lured by a villain from her native home,
Is cast abandoned on the world's wide stage,
And doomed in scanty poverty to roam.
10.
My tender wife, sweet soother of my care!
Struck with sad anguish at the stern decree,
Fell, lingering fell, a victim to despair,
And left the world to wretchedness and me.
11.
Pity the sorrows of a poor old man,
Whose trembling limbs have borne him to your door,
Whose days are dwindled to the shortest span,
Oh! give relief, and Heaven will bless your store.
THE TEST OF GOODNESS.
REAL goodness consists in doing good to our enemies. Of this truth the
following apologue may serve for an illustration. A certain father of a family,
advanced in years, being desirous of settling his worldly matters, divided his
property between his three sons.

2. Nothing now remains, said he to them, but a diamond of great value; this I
have determined to appropriate to whichever of you shall, within three months,
perform the best actions.

3. His three sons accordingly departed different ways, and returned by the
limited time. On presenting themselves before their judge, the eldest thus
began.

4. Father, said he, during my absence, I found a stranger so circumstanced,
that he was under a necessity of entrusting me with the whole of his fortune.

5. He had no written security from me, nor could he possibly bring any proof,
any evidence whatever of the deposit. Yet I faithfully returned to him every
shilling. Was there not something commendable in this action?

6. Thou have done what was incumbent upon thee to do, my son, replied the old
man. The man who could have acted otherways were unworthy to live; for honesty
is a duty; thy action is an action of justice, not of goodness.

7. On this, the second son advanced. In the course of my travels, said he, I
came to a lake in which I beheld a child struggling with death; I plunged into
it and saved his life in the presence of a number of the neighboring villagers,
all of whom can attest the truth of what I assert.

8. It was well done (interrupted the old man); you have only obeyed the
dictates of humanity. At length the youngest of the three came forward.

9. I happened, said he, to meet my mortal enemy, who having bewildered himself
in the dead of night, had imperceptibly fallen asleep upon the brink of a
frightful precipice. The least motion would infallibly have plunged him
headlong into the abyss; and though his life was in my hands, yet with every
necessary precaution, I awaked him, and removed him from his danger.

10. Ah, my son! exclaimed the venerable good man with transport, while he
pressed him to his heart; to thee belongs the diamond; well have thou deserved
it.

DESCRIPTION OF MOUNT AETNA.
THERE is no point on the surface of this globe, which unites so many awful and
sublime objects, as the summit of mount Aetna. The immense elevation from the
surface of the earth, drawn as it were to a single point, without any
neighboring mountain for the senses and imagination to rest upon, and recover
from their astonishment in their way down to the world:

2. This point or pinnacle, raised on the brink of a bottomless gulf, as old
as the world, often discharging rivers of fire, and throwing out burning rocks,
with a noise which shakes the whole island:

3. Add to this, the unbounded extent of the prospect, comprehending the
greatest diversity, and the most beautiful scenery in nature; with the rising
sun, advancing in the East, to illuminate the wondrous scene.

4. The whole atmosphere by degrees kindled up, and showed dimly and faintly
the boundless prospect around. Both sea and land looked dark and confused, as
if only emerging from their original chaos; and light and darkness seemed still
undivided; till the morning, by degrees advancing, completed the separation.

5. The stars are extinguished, and the shades disappear. The forests, which
but now seemed black and bottomless gulphs, from whence no ray was reflected to
show their form or colors, appear a new creation rising to the sight, catching
life and beauty from every increasing beam.

6. The scene still enlarges, and the horizon seems to widen and expand itself
on all sides; till the sun, like the great Creator, appears in the East, and
with his plastic ray completes the mighty scene.

7. All appears enchantment; and it is with difficulty we can believe we are
still on earth. The senses, unaccustomed to the sublimity of such a scene, are
bewildered and confounded; and it is not till after some time, that they are
capable of separating and judging of the objects which compose it.

8. The body of the sun is seen rising from the ocean, immense tracts both of
sea and land intervening; the islands of Lipari, Panari, Alicudi, Strombolo,
and Volcano, with their smoking summits, appear under your feet; and you look
down on the whole of Sicily as on a map; and can trace every river through all
its windings, from its source to its mouth.

9. The view is absolutely boundless on every side; nor is there any one object
within the circle of vision, to interrupt it; so that the sight is every where
lost in the immensity.

10. The circumference of the visible horizon on the top of Aetna cannot be
less than 2000 miles. At Malta, which is nearly 200 miles distant, they
perceive all the irruptions from the second region; and that island is often
discovered from about one half of the elevation of the mountain; so that at the
whole elevation, the horizon must extend to nearly double that distance.

11. But this is by much too vast for our senses, not intended to grasp so
boundless a scene. I find by some of the Sicilian authors, that the African
coast, as well as that of Nap^es, with many of its islands, has been discovered
from the top of Aetna. Of this, however, we cannot boast, though we can very
well believe it.

12. But the most beautiful part of the scene is certainly the mountain itself,
the island of Sicily, and the numerous islands lying round it. All these, by a
kind of magic in vision, seem as if they were brought close round the skirts of
Aetna; the distances appearing reduced to nothing.

13. The present crater of the volcano is a circle of about three miles and a
half in circumference. It goes shelving down on each side, and forms a regular
hollow, like a vast amphitheatre.

14. From many places of this space, issue volumes of smoke, which, being much
heavier than the circumambient air, instead of rising in it, as smoke generally
does, rolls down the side of the mountain like a torrent, till coming to that
part of the atmosphere of the same specific gravity with itself, it shoots off
horizontally, and forms a large tract in the air, according to the direction of
the wind.

15. The crater is so hot, that it is very dangerous, if not impossible to go
down into it. Besides, the smoke is very incommodious; and, in many places, the
surface is so soft, that there have been instances of people's sinking down
into it, and paying for their temerity with their lives.

16. Near the center of the crater is the great mouth of the volcano. And when
we reflect on the immensity of its depth, the vast caverns whence so many lavas
have issued; the force of its internal fire, sufficient to raise up those lavas
to so great a height; the boiling of the matter, the shaking of the mountain,
the explosions of flaming rocks, etc. we must allow, that the most enthusiastic
imagination, in the midst of all its terrors, can hardly form an idea more
dreadful.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN TWO SCHOOL BOYS, ON DANCING.
Harry. TOM, when are you going to begin your dancing? You will be so old in a
short time as to be ashamed to be seen taking your five positions.


Thomas. I don't know as I shall begin at all. Father says he don't care a fig
whether I learn to jump any better than I do now; and, as I am to be a
tradesman, he is determined, at present, to keep me at the reading and writing
schools.


Har. That must be very dull and dry for you. And what good will all such
learning do you, so long as you make the awkward appearance you do at present.
I am surprised at your father^s folly. So, because you are to be a tradesman,
you are not to learn the graces! I expect to learn a trade too. But my papa
says I shall first learn the dancing trade; and then, if I never learn any
other, I shall make my way through the world well enough.


Tom. I don't know which discovers the most folly your father or mine. Old
folks certainly know more than young ones; and my father is much the oldest man.


Har. I don't believe that doctrine. There Is Jack Upstart knows more than his
father and mother both. And he is but nineteen yet. And he says the present
generation, under five and twenty years of age, knows more than fifteen
generations that have gone before us.


Tom. I don't know how that is. But father early taught me this proverb, "Young
folks think old folks are foo^s; but old folks know young ones to be so." But
to return to schools. -- Pray how far have you gone in your arithmetic?


Har. Arithmetic! I have not begun that yet; nor shall I till I have completed
dancing. That is a nurly study; I know I never shall like it.


Tom. Writing I suppose you are fond of.


Har. I cannot say I am, Tom. I once had a tolerable fondness for it. But since
I began dancing, I have held it in utter contempt. It may be well enough for a
person to write a legible hand; but it is no mark of a gentleman to write
elegantly.


Tom. You would have a gentleman spell well I suppose.


Har. I would have him spell so well as to be understood; and that is enough
for any man.


Tom. What say you to grammar, and geography?


Har. Don't name them, I entreat you. There is nothing I so much abhor, as to
hear your learned school boys jabbering over their nouns, their pronouns, their
werbs, their parables, their congregations, their imperfections, and
confluctions. I Will tell you what, Tom, I had rather be master of one hornpipe,
than to understand all the grammars which have been published since the art of
printing was discovered.


Tom. I am sorry, friend Harry, to hear you speak so contemptuously of the
solid sciences. I hope you don't mean to neglect them entirely. If you do, you
must expect to live in poverty; and die, the scorn and derision of all wise men.


Har. Never fear that, Tom. I shall take care of myself, I warrant you. You are
much mistaken in your prognostications. Why, there is Tim Fiddlefaddle -- he
cannot even write his name; and as for reading, he scarcely knows B from a
broomstick; and yet he can dance a minuet with any master of the art in
Christendom. And the ladies all love him dearly. He is invited to their balls,
routs, assemblies, card-parties, etc. etc. and he diverts them like any monkey.


Tom. And does he expect it will be the same through life? How is he to be
maintained when he becomes old? and how is he to amuse himself after he is
unable to dance; as you say he can neither read nor write?


Har. Why, in fact, I never thought of these things before. I confess there
appears to be some weight in these queries. I don't know but it will be best
for me to spare a day or two in a week from my dancing, to attend to the
branches you are pursuing.


Tom. You will make but little progress in that way. My master always told me
that the solid sciences ought to be secured first; and that dancing might come
in by the bye. He says when his scholars have once entered the dancing school,
their heads, in general, are so full of balls, assemblies, minuets and
cotillions, that he never can find much room for any thing else.


Har. I will still maintain it, notwithstanding all you can say in favor of
your solid sciences, as you call them, that the art of dancing is the art of
all arts. It will, of itself, carry a man to the very pinnacle of fame.
Whereas, without it, all your writing, arithmetic, grammar, and geography, will
not raise one above the common level of a clown.


Tom. I am no enemy to dancing, I assure you, friend Harry. It is an
accomplishment suitable enough for those to learn who expect to have but little
else to do. But for you and me, who are destined to get our living by some
mechanical profession, there are doubtless many pursuits more advantageous. I
think we ought to employ but a very small part of our time, in learning to
dance. We will suppose, for instance, that you learn the trade of a carpenter,
I would ask you, if it would not be necessary to understand figures; so that
you might be able to keep your own accounts; and so much geometry as to be able
to measure heights and distances, superficies and solids? Would it not be very
convenient to know a little of history, in order to acquaint yourself with the
various orders of architecture, and where they had their origin? If you were
shown a picture of St. Peter's Church, or a plan of Grand Cairo, would you not
like to know enough of geography to tell in what part of the world they are
situated?


Har. These are subjects which cousin Tim says never are agitated in the
fashionable circles which he visits. And so I bid you good bye.


EXTRACT FROM MR. JOHN Q. ADAMS'S ORATION, DELIVERED AT BOSTON, JULY 4, 1793.
AMERICANS! let us pause for a moment to consider the situation of our country,
at that eventful day when our national existence commenced. In the full
possession and enjoyment of all those prerogatives for which you then dared to
adventure upon "all the varieties of untried being," the calm and settled
moderation of the mind is scarcely competent to conceive the tone of heroism,
to which the souls of freemen were exalted in that hour of perilous magnanimity.

2. Seventeen times has the sun, in the progress of his annual revolutions,
diffused his prolific radiance over the plains of Independent America. Millions
of hearts which then palpitated with the rapturous glow of patrio^ism, have
already been translated to brighter worlds; to the abodes of more than mortal
freedom. Other millions have arisen to receive from their parents and
benefactors, the inestimable recompense of their achievements.

3. A large proportion of the audience, whose benevolence is at this moment
listening to the speaker of the day, like him were at that period too little
advanced beyond the threshold of life to partake of the divine enthusiasm which
inspired the American bosom; which prompted her voice to proclaim defiance to
the thunders of Britain; which consecrated the banners of her armies; and
finally erected the holy temple of American Liberty, over the tomb of departed
tyranny.

4. It is from those who have already passed the meridian of life; it is from
you, ye venerable assertors of the rights of mankind, that we are to be
informed, what were the feelings which swayed within your breasts, and impelled
you to action; when, like the stripling of Israel, with scarce a weapon to
attack, and without a shield for your defense, you met, and, undismayed,
engaged with the gigantic greatness of the British power.

5. Untutored in the disgraceful science of human butchery; destitute of the
fatal materials which the ingenuity of man has combined, to sharpen the scythe
of death; unsupported by the arm of any friendly alliance, and unfortified
against the powerful assaults of an unrelenting enemy, you did not hesitate at
that moment, when your coasts were infested by a formidable fleet, when your
territories were invaded by a numerous and veteran army, to pronounce the
sentence of eternal separation from Britain, and to throw the gauntlet at a
power, the terror of whose recent triumphs was almost co-extensive with the
earth.

6. The interested and selfish propensities, which, in times of prosperous
tranquillity have such powerful dominion over the heart, were all expelled, and
in their stead, the public virtues, the spirit of personal devotion to the
common cause, a contempt of every danger in comparison with the subserviency of
the country, had assumed an unlimited control.

7. The passion for the public had absorbed all the rest; as the glorious
luminary of heaven extinguishes in a flood of refulgence the twinkling splendour
of every inferior planet. Those of you, my countrymen, who were actors in those
interesting scenes, will best know, how feeble and impotent is the language of
this description to express the impassioned emotions of the soul, with which
you were then agitated.

7. Yet it were injustice to conclude from thence, or from the greater
prevalence of private and personal motives in these days of calm serenity, that
your sons have degenerated from the virtues of their fathers. Let it rather be
a subject of pleasing reflection to you that the generous and disinterested
energies, which you were summoned to display, are permitted by the bountiful
indulgence of Heaven to remain latent in the bosoms of your children.

8. From the present prosperous appearance of our public affairs, we may admit
a rational hope that our country will have no occasion to require of us those
extraordinary and heroic exertions which it was your fortune to exhibit.

9. But from the common versatility of all human destiny, should the prospect
hereafter darken, and the clouds of public misfortune thicken to a tempest;
should the voice of our country's calamity ever call us to her relief, we
solemnly affirm by the precious memory of the sages who toiled, and of the
heroes who bled in her defense, that we will prove ourselves not unworthy of
the prize which they so dearly purchased; that we will act as the faithful
disciples of those who so magnanimously taught us the instructive lesson of
republican virtue.

ON KNOWING THE WORLD AT AN EARLY AGE.
THE knowledge of the world, in its comprehensive sense, is a knowledge greatly
to be desired. To understand the human heart, to know human manners, laws,
languages, and institutions of every kind, and in various nations, and to be
able to reflect on all these with moral and political improvement, is an
attainment worthy of the greatest statesman and the wisest philosopher.

2. But there is a knowledge of the world of a very inferior kind, but which
many parents value at a high price. Greek and Latin are always mentioned with
contempt, on a comparison with this. In compliance with custom, indeed, and to
get him out of the way, the boy is placed at school; but the knowledge to be
gained there is little esteemed by the empty votaries of fashion.

3. Men and things, not words, are magisterially pointed out as the proper
objects of study, by those who know little of men, things, or words. It is not
the knowledge of books, (say they) which he is to pursue, but the knowledge of
the world; ignorant that the knowledge of books is necessary to gain a valuable
knowledge of the world.

4. The parents, who give such directions to their children, are themselves
merely people of the world, as it is called; persons for the most part of very
moderate understandings, who have never made any solid improvements in
learning, and, consequently, never felt its pleasures, or its advantages.

5. They have perhaps raised themselves by dint of worldly policy, by the
little arts of simulation and dissimulation; and, having seen the effects of
dress, address, and an attention to exterior accomplishments, but at the same
time being totally unacquainted with real and solid seize, they are
naturally led to wish to give their children the most useful education, which,
according to their ideas, is a knowledge of the world.

6. But what is this knowledge of the world? A knowledge of its follies and
vices; a knowledge of them at a time of life, when they will not appear in
their true light, contemptible in themselves, and the sources of misery; but
flattering and pleasurable. To see these at a boyish age, before the mind is
properly prepared, will not cause an abhorrence, but an imitation of them.

7. To introduce boys to scenes of immoral and indecent behavior is to educate
them in vice, and to give the young mind a foul stain, which it will never
lose. And yet I have known parents in the metropolis suffer boys of fourteen or
fifteen to roam wheresoever they pleased; to frequent theaters, and other
places of public diversions, by themselves; to return home late at night; and
all this with plenty of money, and without giving any account of the manner of
consuming that or their time.

8. The parents were pleased with their son's proficiency in the knowledge of
the world; the son was pleased with liberty. All for a short time, went on to
their mutual satisfaction. But after a few years, a sad reverse usually
appeared. The boy became a spendthrift and a debauchee; alienated his father's
affections by incurring debt, and ruined his constitution by every species of
excess.

9. What remained after his money and his health were dissipated? No learning,
no relish for the works of literary taste. The spring of life, when the seeds
of these should have been sown, was employed in another manner. Nothing
remained but a wretched and a painful old age, devoted to cards, dice, and
illiberal conviviality.

10. He, who is attending to his books, and collecting ideas which will one day
render him a blessing and an honor to all with whom he is connected, will
appear dull, awkward, and unengaging to many, in comparison with the p^^t
^^^ipling, who has been plunged into vice and dissipation before he knows the
meaning of the words.

11. The reception which the latter meets with in company gives him additional
spirits; and the poor parents usually ^^iumph ^^hile in the conscious
superiority of their judgment. In four or five years, they commonly see and
feel the (...) their folly.

12. Their conduct, as it often undoubtedly proceeds from ignorance, is to be
compassionated; but if ever it arise from affectation of singularity, pride,
vicious principles, or carelessness concerning their offspring, it deserves the
severest reprehension.

13. It is obvious to observe in the world multitudes of bea^dless boys
assuming ai^s of manhood, and practicing manly vices, to obtain a title to the
appellation of men. The present age abounds with such examples.

14. A most fatal mistake is made by parents of all classes in the present age.
Many of them seem to think vice and irregularity the ma^ks of sense and spirit,
in a boy; and that innocence, modesty, submission to superiors, application to
study, and to every thing laudable, are the signs of stupidity. They often
smile at the tricks of a young villa^n, and ever seem pleased with boyish
profligacy.

15. Hence it happens, that their offspring frequently prove a scourge to them,
and that they feel that sting, which, to use Shakespeare's expression, is
sharper than a serpent's tooth; the sting inflicted by a thankless, an immoral,
an ignorant, an extravagant, and an infidel child.

HISTORY OF POCAHONTAS.
PERHAPS they who are not particularly acquainted with the history of Virginia,
may be ignorant that Pocahontas was the protectress of the English, and often
f^re^ned them from the cruelty of her father.

2. She was but twelve years old, when Captain Smith, the bravest, the most
intelligent, and the most humane of the first colonists, ^ll into the hands of
the savages. He already understood their language, had traded with them several
times, and often appeased the quarrels between the Europeans and them. Often
had he been obliged also to fight them, and to punish their perfidy.

3. At length, however, under the (...) of commerce, he was drawn into an
ambush, and the only two companions who accompanied him, fell before his eyes;
but though alone, by his dexterity he extricated himself from the troop which
surrounded him; until, unfortunately, imagining he could save himself by
crossing a morass, he stuck fast, so that the savages, against whom he had no
means of defending himself, at last took and bound him, and conducted him to
Powhatan.

4. The king was so proud of having Captain Smith in his power, that he sent
him in triumph to all the tributary princes, and ordered that he should be
splendidly treated, till he returned to suffer that death which was prepared
for him.

5. The fatal moment at last arrived. Captain Smith was laid upon the hearth of
the savage king, and his head placed upon a large stone to receive the stroke
of death; when Pocahontas, the youngest and darling daughter of Powhatan, threw
herself upon his body, clasped him in her arms, and declared, that if the cruel
sentence was executed, the first blow should fall on her.

6. All savages (absolute sovereigns and tyrants not excepted) are invariably
more affected by the tears of infancy, than the voice of humanity. Powhatan
could not resist the tears and prayers of his daughter.

7. Captain Smith obtained his life, on condition of paying for his ransom a
certain quantity of muskets, powder, and iron utensils; but how were they to be
obtained? They would neither permit him to return to James-Town, nor let the
English know where he was, lest they should demand him sword in hand.

8. Captain Smith, who was as sensible as courageous, said, that if Powhatan
would permit one of his subjects to carry to James Town a leaf which he took
from his pocketbook, he should find under a tree, at the day and hour
appointed, all the articles demanded for his ransom.

9. Powhatan consented; but without having much faith in his pr^mises,
believing it to be only an artifice of the Captain to prolong his life. But he
had written on the leaf a few lines, sufficient to give an account of his
situation. The messenger returned. The king sent to the place fixed upon, and
was greatly astonished to find every thing which had been demanded.

10. Powhatan could not conceive this mode of transmitting thoughts; and
Captain Smith was henceforth looked upon as a great magician, to whom they
could not show too much respect. He left the savages in this opinion, and
hastened to return home.

11. Two or three years after, some fresh differences arising amidst them and
the English, Powhatan, who no longer though^ them sorcerers, but still feared
their power, laid a horrid plan to get rid of them altogether. His project was
to attack them in profound peace, and cut the throats of the whole colony.

12. The night of this intended conspiracy, Pocahontas took advantage of the
obscurity; and in a terrible storm which kept the savages in their tents,
escaped from her father's house, advised the English to be on their guard, but
conjured them to spare her family; to appear ignorant of the intelligence she
had given, and terminate all their differences by a new treaty.

13. It would be tedious to relate all the services which this angel of peace
rendered to both nations. I shall only add, that the English, I know not from
what motives, b^^ certainly against all faith and equity, thought proper to
carry her off. Long and bitterly did she deplore her fate; and the only
consolation she had was Captain Smith, in whom she found a second father.

14. She was treated with great respect, and married to a planter by the name
of Rolfe, who soon after took her to England. This was in the reign of James
the First; and it is said, that this monarch, pedantic and ridiculous in every
point, was so infatuated with the prerogatives of royalty, that he expressed
his displeasure, that one of his subjects should dare to marry the daughter
even of a savage king.

15. It will not perhaps be difficult to decide on this occasion, whether it
was the sa^age king who derived honor from finding himself placed upon a level
with the European prince, or the English monarch, who by his pride and
prejudices reduced himself to a level with the chief of the savages.

16. Be that as it will, Captain Smith, who had returned to London before the
arrival of Pocahontas, was extremely happy to see her again; but dared not
treat her with the same familiarity as at James-Town. As soon as she saw him,
she threw herself into his arms, calling him her father; but finding that he
neither returned her caresses with equal warmth, nor the endearing title of
daughter, she turned aside her head and wept bitterly; and it was a long time
before they could obtain a single word from her.

17. Captain Smith inquired several times what could be the cause of her
affliction. "What! said she, did I not save thy life in America? When I was
torn from the arms of my father, and conducted amongst thy friends, did thou
not promise to be a father to me? Did^t thou not assure me, that if I went into
thy country, thou would be my father, and that I should be thy daughter? Thou
have deceived me, and behold me, now here, a stranger and an orphan."

18. It was not difficult for the Captain to make his peace with this charming
creature, whom he tenderly loved. He presented her to several people of the
first quality; but never dared to take her to court, from which, however, she
received several favors.

19. After a residence of several years in England, an example of virtue and
piety, and attachment to her husband, she died, as she was on the point of
embarking for America. She left an only son, who was married, and left none but
daughters; and from these are descended some of the principal characters in
Virginia.

SPEECH OF CAIUS MARIUS TO THE ROMANS; SHOWING THE ABSURDITY OF THEIR
HESITATING TO CONFER ON HIM THE RANK OF GENERAL, MERELY ON ACCOUNT OF HIS
EXTRACTION.
IT is but too common, my countrymen, to observe a material difference between
the behavior of those who stand candidates for places of power and trust,
before and after their obtaining them. They solicit them in one manner, and
execute them in another.

2. They set out with a great appearance of activity, humility, and moderation;
but they quickly fall into sloth, pride and avarice. It is undoubtedly no easy
matter to discharge, to general satisfaction, the duty of a supreme commander
in troublesome times.

3. You have committed to my conduct the war against Jugurtha. The patricians
are offended at this. But, where would be the wisdom of giving such a command
to one of their honorable body? a person of illustrious birth, of ancient
family, of innumerable statues, but -- of no experience!

4. What service would his long line of dead ancestors, or his multitude of
motionless statues, do his country in the day of battle? What could such a
general do, but, in his trepidation and inexperience, have recourse to some
inferior commander for direction in difficulties to which he was not himself
equal? Thus, your patrician general would in fact have a general over him; so
that the acting commander would still be a plebeian.

5. So true is this, my countrymen, that I have, myself, known those who have
been chosen consuls, begin then to read the history of their own country, of
which, till that time, they were totally ignorant; that is, they first obtained
the employment, and then bethought themselves of the qualifications necessary
for the proper discharge of it.

6. I submit to your judgment, Romans, on which side the advantage lies, when a
comparison is made between patrician haughtiness and plebeian experience. The
very actions which they have only read, I have partly seen, and partly myself
achieved. What they know by reading, I know by action. They are pleased to
slight my mean birth; I despise their mean characters.

7. Want of birth and fortune is the objection against me; want of personal
worth, against them. But are not all men of the same species? What can make a
difference between one man and another, but the endowments of the mind? For my
part, I shall always look upon the bravest man as the noblest man.

8. If the patricians have reason to despise me, let them likewise despise
their ancestors, whose nobility was the fruit of their virtue. Do they envy the
honors bestowed upon me? let them envy, likewise, my labo^^, my abstinence, and
the dangers I have undergone for my country, by which I have acquired them.

9. But those worthless men lead such a life of inactivity, as if they despised
any honors you can bestow; while they aspire to honors as if they had deserved
them by the most industrious virtue. They lay claim to the rewards of activity,
for their having enjoyed the pleasures of luxury. Yet none can be more lavish
than they are in praise of their ancestors.

10. And they imagine they honor themselves by celebrating their forefathers;
whereas they do the very contrary; for, as much as their ancestors were
distinguished for their virtues, so much are they disgraced by their vices.

11. The glory of ancestors casts a light, indeed, upon their posterity; but it
only serves to show what the descendants are. It alike exhibits to public view
their degeneracy and their worth. I own I cannot boast of the deeds of my
forefathers; but I hope I may answer the cavils of the patricians by standing
up in defense of what I have myself done.

12. Observe now, my countrymen, the injustice of the patricians. They arrogate
to themselves honors on account of exploits done by their forefathers, whilst
they will not allow me due praise for performing the very same sort of actions
in my own person.

13. He has no statues, they cry, of his family. He can trace no venerable line
of ancestors. What then? is it matter of more praise to disgrace one's
illustrious ancestors, than to become illustrious by one's own good behavior?

14. What if I can show no statues of my family? I can show the standards, the
armor, and the trappings, which I have myself taken from the vanquished; I can
show the scars of those wounds, which I have received by facing the enemies of
my country.

15. These are my statues. These are the honors I b^ast of. Not left me by
inheritance, as theirs; but earned by toil, by abstinence, by valor; amidst
clouds of dust and seas of blood; scenes of action, where those effeminate
patricians, who endeavor by indirect means to depreciate me in your esteem,
have never dared to show their faces.

FRATERNAL AFFECTION.
IN the beginning of the sixteenth century, the Portuguese carracks failed from
Lisbon to Goa, a very great, rich, and flourishing colony of that nation in the
East Indies. There were no less than twelve hundred souls, mariners,
passengers, priests, and friars, on board one of these vessels.

2. The beginning of their voyage was prosperous; they had doubled the southern
extremity of the great continent of Africa, called the Cape of Good Hope, and
were steering their course Northeast, to the great continent of India, when
some gentlemen on board, who, having studied geography and navigation, found in
the latitude in which they were then sailing, a large ridge of rocks laid down
in their sea-charts.

3. They no sooner made this discovery, than they acquainted the captain of the
ship with the affair, desiring him to communicate the same to the pilot; which
request he immediately granted, recommended him to lie by in the night, and
slacken sail by day, until they should be past the danger.

4. It is a custom always among the Portuguese absolutely to commit the sailing
part, or the navigation of the vessel to the pilot, who is answerable with his
head for the safe conduct or carriage of the king's ships, or those belonging
to private traders; and he is under no manner of direction from the captain,
who commands in every other respect.

5. The pilot being one of those self-sufficient men, who think every hint
given them from others in the way of their profession derogatory from their
understandings, took as an affront to be taught his art, and instead of
complying with the captain's request, actually crowded more sail than the
vessel had carried before.

6. They had not sailed many hours, when, just about the dawn of day, a
terrible disaster befell them, which would have been prevented if they had lain
by. The ship struck upon a rock. I leave to the reader's imagination, what a
scene of horror this dreadful accident must occasion among twelve hundred
persons, all in the same inevitable danger; beholding, with fearful
astonishment, that instantaneous death which now stared them in the face.

7. In this distress, the captain ordered the pinnace to be launched, into
which, having tossed a small quantity of biscuit, and some boxes of marmalade,
he jumped in himself, with nineteen others, who, with their swords, prevented
the coming in of any more, lest the boat should sink.

8. In this condition they put off into the great Indian ocean, without a
compass to steer by, or any fresh water but what might fall f^^^ the heavens,
whose mercy alone could deliver them. (...) they had rowed four days in this
miserable condition, the captain, who had been for some time very sick and
weak, died.

9. This added, if possible, to their misery; for as they now fell into
confusion, every one would govern, and none would obey. This obliged them to
elect one of their own company to command them, whose orders they implicitly
agreed to follow. This person proposed to the company to draw lots, and to cast
every fourth man overboard; as their small stock of provisions was so far
spent, as not to be able at a very short allowance to sustain life above three
days longer.

10. They were now nineteen persons in all; in this number were a friar and a
carpenter, both of whom they would exempt, as the one was useful to absolve and
comfort them in their last extremity, and the other to repair the pinnace in
case of a leak or other accident.

11. The same compliment they paid to their new captain, he being the odd man,
and his life of much consequence. He refused their indulgence a great while;
but at last they obliged him to acquiesce; so that there were four to die out
of the sixteen remaining persons.

12. The three first submitted to their fate. The fourth was a Portuguese
gentleman who had a younger brother in the boat, who, seeing him about to be
thrown overboard, most tenderly embraced him, and with tears in his eyes
besought him to let him die in his room; enforcing his arguments by telling him
that he was a married man, and had a wife and children at Goa, besides the care
of three sisters, who absolutely depended upon him; that, as for himself, he
was single, and his life of no great importance; he therefore conjured him to
suffer him to supply his place.

13. The elder brother, astonished, and melting with this generosity, replied,
that, since the divine providence had appointed him to suffer, it would be
wicked and unjust to permit any other to die for him, especially a brother, to
whom he was so infinitely obliged. The younger, persisting in his purpose,
would take no denial; but throwing himself on his knees, held his brother so
fast, that the company could not disengage them.

14. Thus they disputed for a while, the elder brother bidding him to be a
father to his children, and recommended his wife to his protection; and as he
would inherit his estate, to take care of their common sisters; but all he
could say could not make the younger desist. This was a scene of tenderness
that must fill every breast, susceptible of generous impressions, with pity. At
last the constancy of the elder brother yielded to the piety of the other.

15. He acquiesced, and suffered the gallant youth to supply his place, who
being cast into the sea, and a good swimmer, soon got to the stern of the
pinnace, and laid hold of the rudder with his right hand, which being perceived
by one of the sailors, he cut off the hand with his sword; then dropping into
the sea, he presently caught hold again with his left, which received the same
fate by a second blow.

16. Thus dismembered of both hands, he made a shift, notwithstanding, to keep
himself above water with his feet and two stumps, which he held bleeding
upwards.

17. This moving spectacle so raised the pity of the whole company, that they
cried out, "He is but one man, let us endeavor to save his life;" and he was
accordingly taken into the boat, where he ^ad his hands bound up as well as the
place and circumstances could permit.

18. They rowed all that night; and the next morning, when the sun arose, as if
Heaven would reward the piety of this young man, they descried land, which
proved to be the mountains of Mozambique, in Africa, not far from a Portuguese
colony. Thither they all safely arrived, where they remained until the next
ship from Lisbon passed by and carried them to Goa.

ON THE IMPORTANCE OF STUDYING THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE GRAMMATICALLY.
A RIGHT education of children has ever been esteemed by the best philosophers
and wisest legislators, as the most certain source of happiness, not only to
families, but to states and kingdoms; and is, on ^ll moral and civil
considerations, the first blessing in order and necessity, the highest in value
and importance, and, in these united republics, the grand basis on which their
future happiness and prosperity depend.

2. Of such inestimable worth was right education held by the ancients, that
when they were in all their glory, and long after, the tutorage of youth was
accounted the most honorable employment; and many of noble birth and easy
fortunes became preceptors, and took youth under their tuition.

3. It is well known that the Romans, as well as Greeks, carefully applied
themselves to the study of their own language, and were early able to speak and
write it in the greatest perfection. Masters taught them, betimes, the
principles, the difficulties, the subtilties and the depths of it. And to that
it was chiefly owing, that they made more early advances in the most useful
sciences, than any youth have since done.

4. The French have been beforehand with us in this important particular. They
have long imitated the Greeks and Romans, and have had the good policy to
prefer their own language to every other; disdaining the study of any foreign
tongues, unless driven by necessity into other countries. And the political
advantages they have derived from such a conduct are visible all over Europe.

5. Policy then, were there nothing else, cries aloud for our exerting
ourselves in the cause of a too long neglected English education; and for
wiping off that charge of barbarity, with which not only we, but those of
England, have been, on that account, so long stigmatized by the very nation
whom we so much venerate, and whose language we are so ridiculously fo^d of, to
the reproach and degradation of a better, even our own.

6. There is, perhaps, no language the grammatical knowledge of which can be
learned with so much ease, or with less difficulty than ours. And as the
freedom, the liberty, and the life of our country depend upon it, shall America
deprive her sons of this most valuable birthright, the right of nature?

7. It is to me the most unaccountable thing I ever heard, that masters, and
those who superintend public schools, should neglect this important part of an
education, and suffer youth to trifle away their time, when it might be
employed to so much advantage to themselves and to future generations. And what
is still more so, is, that parents, who love their children, should connive at
this unpardonable neglect.

8. Without a common school education, which is the anchor of liberty, the
supporter of our rights, we can be compared to nothing but a ship at sea,
deprived of sails, rudder, compass, and exposed to the billows and hurricanes
of the boisterous deep.

9. With it, we have a most substantial foundation laid, on which we can erect
a superb building, for public and private utility: with it, we can conduct the
ship of state, and regale ourselves under the tree of liberty; and unshackle
ourselves from ignorance, which is the origin of feuds and animosities in free
states.

10. Do not the arts and sciences, in every kingdom, participate to a great
degree the sat of its language? rise and flourish, or sink into disrepute, as
the latter is cultivated or neglected? How dear then ought the honor of the
English language to be to every American!

11. And, as grammar is the solid foundation on which all other science rests,
and as all human inquiry is divided into science and language; and further, as
under the latter, fall the ideas and subjects of the didactic style, oratory,
poetry, painting, and sculpture, judge ye, if it ought to be left to young
gentlemen to form their style by chance, or to begin the study of their mother
tongue, at a time of life which calls them forth to action.

12. You, who are entrusted with the education of our youth, and you, who
superintend our schools, have a glorious and joyful prospect before you, a
noble opportunity indeed of doing much good to mankind; of constituting real
merit, and securing the warmest returns of gratitude, by perfecting the flower
of our youth, in speaking and writing that language, in which alone they must
act the part of their fathers, serve their country, and become the mouths of
the people.

13. You will not fail, my beloved countrymen, to afford your children this
distinguishing, this necessary, this all important education, by which you
will, in a short time, nurse up a race of freemen, to the honor and never
fading glory of our country.

14. America will then increase in wealth, in commerce, agriculture and
manufactures; will as far surpass all other nations on the globe, in virtue,
learning and abilities; and will as much distinguish herself for humanity,
nobleness of sentiment, attachment to government, and love of liberty, as the
towering cedar among the trees of the wood, or the sun in the presence of the
stars.

15. All nations will look up unto her, call her blessed, and say, "In her, the
problem, which has been put for thousands of years, has been truly verified,
whether a nation can be governed, and yet be free."

THE HOTTENTOT AND THE LION.
AN elderly Hottentot in the service of a Christian, near the upper part of
Sunday river on the Cambdebo ^de, perceived a lion following him at a great
distance for two hours together. Thence he naturally concluded, that the lion
only waited for the approach of darkness, in order to make him a prey; and in
the mean time, could not expect any other than to serve for this fierce
animal's supper, inasmuch as he had no other weapon of defense than a stick,
and knew that he could not get home before it was dark.

2. But as he was well acquainted with the nature of the lion, and the manner
of its seizing upon its prey; and at the same time had leisure to ruminate on
the ways and means in which it was most likely that his existence would be
terminated, he at length hit on a method of saving his life.

3. For this purpose, instead of making the best of his way home, he looked out
for a precipice; and setting himself down on the edge of it, found to his great
joy, that the lion likewise made a halt, and kept at the same distance as
before.

4. As soon as it grew dark, the Hottentot sliding a little forwards, let
himself down below the upper edge of the precipice upon some projecting part or
cleft of the rock, where he could just keep himself from falling. But in order
to cheat the lion still more, he set his hat and cloak on the stick, making
with it a gentle motion just over his head, a little way from the edge of the
precipice.

5. This crafty expedient had the desired success. He did not stay long in that
situation, before the lion came creeping softly toward him like a cat, and
mistaking the skin-coat for the Hottentot himself, took his leap with such
exactness and precision, as to fall headlong down the pre^^pice, and was dashed
in pieces.

SCENE BETWEEN GUSTAVUS VASA AND CRISTIERN.
Crist. TELL me, Gustavus, tell me why is this,
That, as a stream diverted from the banks
Of smooth obedience, thou have drawn those men
Upon a dry unchannell'd enterprise,
To turn their inundation? Are the lives
Of my misguided people held so light,
That thus thou would push them on the keen rebuke
Of guarded majesty; where justice waits
All awful and resistless, to assert
The impervious rights, the sanctitude of kings;
And blast rebellion?

Gust. Justice, sanctitude,
And rights! O, patience! Rights! what rights, thou tyrant?
Yes, if perdition be the rule of power,
If wrongs give right, O then, supreme in mischief,
Thou were the lord, the monarch of the world!
Too narrow for thy claim. But if thou think
That crowns are vilely propertied, like coin,
To be the means, the specialty of lust,
And sensual attribution; if thou think
That empire is of titled birth or blood;
That nature, in the proud behalf of one,
Shall disenfranchise all her lordly race,
And bow her general issue to the yoke
Of private domination; then, thou proud one,
Here know me for thy king. However be told,
Not claim hereditary, not the trust
Of frank election,
Not even the high anointing hand of Heaven,
Can authorize oppression, give a law
For lawless power, wed faith to violation,
On reason build misrule, or justly bind
Allegiance to injustice. Tyranny
Absolves all faith; and who invades our rights,
However his own commence, can never be
But an usurper. But for thee, for thee
There is no name. Thou have abjured mankind,
Dashed safety from thy bleak, unsocial side,
And waged wild war with universal nature.

Crist. Licentious traitor! thou can talk it largely.
Who made thee umpire of the rights of kings,
And power, prime attribute -- as on thy tongue
The poise of battle lay, and arms of force,
To throw defiance in the front of duty?
Look round, unruly boy! thy battle comes
Like raw, disjointed, must'ring, feeble wrath,
A war of waters, borne against a rock
Of our firm continent, to fume, and chafe,
And shiver in the toil.

Gust. Mistaken man!
I come empowered and strengthened in thy weakness;
For though the structure of a tyrant's throne
Rise on the necks of half the suffering world,
Fear trembles in the cement; prayers, and tears,
And secret curses, sap its mouldering base,
And steal the pillars of allegiance from it;
Then let a single arm but dare the sway,
Headlong it turns, and drives upon destruction.

Crist. Profane, and alien to the love of Heaven!
Art thou still hardened to the wrath divine,
That hangs o'e thy rebellion? Know thou not
Thou art at enmity with grace, cast out,
Made an anathema, a curse enrolled
Among the faithful, thou and thy adherents,
Shorn from our holy church, and offered up
As sacred to perdition?

Gust. Yes, I know,
When such as thou, with sacrilegious hand,
Seize on the apostolic key of heaven,
It then becomes a tool for crafty knaves
To shut out virtue, and unfold those gates
That Heaven itself had barred against the lusts
Of avarice and ambition. Soft and sweet,
As looks of charity, or voice of lambs
That bleat upon the mountain, are the words
Of Christian meekness! mission all divine!
The law of love sole mandate. But your gall,
Ye Swedish prelacy, your gall has turned
The words of sweet but undigested peace,
To wrath and bitterness. Ye hallowed men,
In whom vice sanctifies, whose precepts teach
Zeal without truth, religion without virtue.
Sacked towns and midnight howlings, through the realm,
Receive your sanction. O, it is glorious mischief!
When vice turns holy, puts religion on,
Assumes the robe pontifical, the eye
Of saintly elevation, blesses sin,
And makes the seal of sweet offended Heaven
A sign of blood.

Crist. No more of this.
Gustavus, would thou yet return to grace,
And hold thy motions in the sphere of duty,
Acceptance might be found.

Gust. Imperial spoiler!
Give me my father, give me back my kindred,
Give me the fathers of ten thousand orphans,
Give me the sons in whom thy ruthless sword
Has left our widows childless. Mine they were,
Both mine and every Swede's, whose patriot breast
Bleeds in his country's woundings. O, thou can not!
Thou have outsinn'd all reckoning! Give me then
My all that is left, my gentle mother there,
And spare yon little trembler.

Crist. Yes, on terms
Of compact and submission.

Gust. Ha! with thee?
Compact with thee? and mean thou for my country,
For Sweeden? No, so hold my heart but firm,
Although it wring for it, though blood drop for tears,
And at the sight my straining eyes start forth --
They both shall perish first.

NARRATIVE OF THE EXTRAORDINARY ADVENTURES OF FOUR SAILORS, WHO WERE CAST AWAY
ON THE DESERT ISLAND OF SPITSBERGEN.
THESE northern seas, owing to the excessive cold of the climate, are
frequently so full of ice as to render it exceedingly hazardous to ships, which
are thereby exposed to the danger of being crushed between two bodies of
immense ice, or of being so completely surrounded, as to deprive them of every
power of moving from the spot.

2. In this latter alarming situation were the crew of a Russian ship. A
council was immediately held, when the mate mentioned what he recollected to
have heard, that a ship's crew from Mesen, some time before, had formed a
resolution of passing the winter upon this island, and for that purpose had
carried timber proper for building a hut at a little distance from the shore.

3. This information led the whole company to form the resolution of wintering
there, should the hut be fortunately remaining. They were induced to adopt this
measure from the certainty of perishing should they remain in the ship^ They
therefore deputized four of their crew to go in search of the hut, and make
what further discoveries they could.

4. As no human creature inhabited the shore on which they were to land, it was
absolutely necessary for them to carry some provisions with them for their
support. They had to make their way, for nearly two miles, over loose heaps of
ice, which the water had raised, and the wind had driven against each other;
and this made it equally difficult and dangerous.

5. From this consideration, they avoided loading themselves too much with
provisions, lest their weight might sink them between the pieces of ice, where
they must inevitably perish.

6. Having previously considered all these matters, they provided themselves
only with a musket and powder-horn, containing twelve charges of powder and
ball, an axe, a small kettle, a bag with about twenty pounds of flour, a knife,
a tinder-box and tinder, a bladder filled with tobacco, and every man his
wooden pipe.

7. Thus poorly equipped, these four sailors reached the island, little
thinking what they were to endure while they remained on it. After exploring
some small part of the country, they discovered the hut they were in pursuit
of, at the distance of about an English mile and a half from the shore.

8. Its length was thirty-six feet, and its height and breadth eighteen. It
consisted of a small antichamber about twelve feet broad, having two doors, the
one to exclude the outer air, and the other to form a communication with the
inner room. This contributed not a little to keep the larger room warm, when it
was once heated.

9. They found in the larger room an earthen stove, constructed in the Ruffian
manner. They rejoiced exceedingly at this discovery, though they found the hut
had suffered very much from the severity of the weather, it having been built a
considerable time. However, they contrived to make it supportable for that
night.

10. The next morning early they repaired to the shore; in order to acquaint
their comrades with their success, and also to get from the vessel such
provisions, ammunition, and other necessaries, as might in some measure enable
them to struggle with the approaching winter.

11. But what pen can properly describe the terrible situation of their minds,
when, coming to the place at which they landed, they discovered nothing but an
open sea, clear of all ice, though, but a day before, it had covered the ocean!
During the night, a violent storm had arisen, which had been the cause of this
change of appearance in the ocean.

12. Whether the ice, which had before surrounded the vessel, being put in
motion by the violence of the winds and waves, had crushed the ship to pieces,
or whether she had been carried by the current into the main ocean, it was
impossible for them to determine.

13. However, they saw the ship no more; and as she was never afterward heard
of, it is most likely that she went to the bottom with every soul on board.
This dreadful event deprived the poor unhappy wretches of all hopes of ever
again seeing their native country.

14. They returned to their hut, and there bewailed their deplorable lot, more
perhaps to be pitied than those who were buried in the bosom of the deep. Their
thoughts were, in course, first directed to procure subsistence, and to repair
their hut.

15. Their twelve charges of powder and shot soon produced them as many
reindeer, of which there fortunately happened to be many on the island. They
then set about repairing their hut, and filled up all the crevices, through
which the air found its way, with the moss that grew there in plenty.

16. As it was impossible to live in that climate without fire, and as no wood
grew upon the island, they were much alarmed on that account. However, in their
wanderings over the beach, they met with plenty of wood, which had been driven
on shore by the waves.

17. This principally consisted of the wrecks of ships; but sometimes whole
trees with their roots came on shore, the undoubted produce of some more
hospitable clime, which were washed from their native soil by the overflowings
of rivers, or some other accident.

18. As soon as their powder and shot were exhausted, they began to be in dread
of perishing with hunger; but good fortune, and their own ingenuity, to which
necessity always gives a spur, removed these dreadful apprehensions. In the
course of their traversing the beach, they one day discovered some boards, in
which were large hooks and nails in abundance.

19. By the assistance of these, they made spears and arrows* and, from a yew
tree, which had been thrown on shore by the waves, they formed plenty of bows.
With these weapons, during the time of their continuance on the island, they
killed upwards of two hundred and fifty reindeer, bend a great number of blue
and white foxes.

20. The flesh of these animals served them for food, and their skins were
equally useful in supplying them with warm clothing. The number of white bears
they killed were only ten; for these animals being very strong, defended
themselves with great vigor and fury, and even ventured to make their
appearance frequently at the door of their hut, from whence they were driven
with some difficulty and danger.

21. Thus these three different sorts of animals were the only food of these
miserable mariners, during their long and dreary abode on this island.

22. The intenseness of the cold, and the want of proper conveniences, rendered
it impossible for them to cook their victuals properly, so that they were
obliged to eat their provisions almost raw, and without bread or salt.

23. There was but one stove in the hut, and that being in the Russian manner,
was not proper for boiling. However, to remedy this inconvenience as much as
possible, they dried some of their provisions, during the summer, in the open
air, and then hung them up in the upper part of the hut, which being
continually filled with smoke, they thus became thoroughly dried.

24. This they used instead of bread, which made them relish their half boiled
meat the better. They procured their water in summer from the rivulets that
fell from the rocks; and in the winter, from snow and ice thawed. This was
their only drink; and their small kettle was the only convenience they had to
make use of for this and many other purposes.

25. As it was necessary to keep up a continual fire, they were particularly
cautious not to let the light be extinguished; for, though they had both steel
and flints, yet they had no tinder; and it would have been a terrible thing to
be without light in a climate where darkness reigns so many months during
winter.

26. They therefore fashioned a kind of lamp, which they filled with reindeer
fat, and stuck into it some twisted linen, shaped in the form of a wick. After
many trials, they at last brought their lamp to complete perfection, and kept
it burning, without intermission, from the day they first made it, till they
embarked for their native country.

27. They also found themselves in want of shoes, boots, and other necessary
articles of dress, for all which they found wonderful resources in that genius
to which necessity gives birth.

28. Having lived more than six years upon this dreary and inhospitable island,
a ship happened to arrive there, which took three of them on board, and carried
them back to their native country. The fourth man was seized with the scurvy,
and being naturally indolent, and not using proper exercise, he died, after
lingering for some time, when his companions buried him in the snow.

SPEECH OF CANULEIUS, A ROMAN TRIBUNE, TO THE CONSULS, IN BEHALF OF THE
PLEBEIANS.
WHAT an insult upon us is this! If we are not so rich as the patricians, are
we not citizens of Rome as well as they? inhabitants of the same country?
members of the same community? The nations bordering upon Rome, and even
strangers more remote, are admitted not only to marriages with us, but to what
is of much greater importance, the freedom of the city.

2. Are we, because we are commoners, to be worse treated than strangers? And,
when we demand that the people may be free to bestow their offices and
dignities on whom they please, do we ask any thing unreasonable or new? Do we
claim more than their original inherent right? What occasion, then, for all
this uproar, as if the universe was falling to ruin? They were just going to
lay violent hands upon me in the senate house.

3. What! must this empire, then, be unavoidably overturned? Must Rome of
necessity sink at once, if a plebeian, worthy of the office, should be raised
to the consulship? The patricians, I am persuaded, if they could, would deprive
you of the common light. It certainly offends them that you breathe, that you
speak, that you have the shapes of men.

4. Nay, but to make a commoner a consul, would be, say they, a most enormous
thing. Numa Pompilius, however, without being so much as a Roman citizen, was
made king of Rome. The elder Tarquin, by birth not even Italian, was
nevertheless placed upon the throne. Servius Tullius, the son of a captive
woman, (nobody knows who his father was) has obtained the kingdom as the reward
of his wisdom and virtue.

5. In those days, no man in whom virtue shone conspicuous was rejected or
despised on account of his race and descent. And did the state prosper the less
for that? Were not these strangers the very best of all our kings? And
supposing now, that a plebeian should have their talents and merit, must not he
be suffered to govern us?

6. But, "we find that, upon the abolition of the regal power, no commoner was
chosen to the consulate." And what of that? Before Numa's time, there were no
pontiffs in Rome. Before Servius Tullius' days, there was no census, no
division of the people into classes and centuries. Who ever heard of consuls
before the expulsion of Tarquin the proud? Dictators, we all know, are of
modern invention; and so are the offices of tribunes, aedilles, quaestors.

7. Within these ten years we have made decemvirs, and we have unmade them. Is
nothing to be done but what has been done before? That very law forbidding
marriages of patricians with plebeians, is not that a new thing? Was there any
such law before the decemvirs enacted it? and a most shameful one it is in a
free state. Such marriages, it seems, would taint the pure blood of the
nobility.

8. They talk to us of the confusion there will be in families* if this statute
should be repealed. I wonder they do not mak^ ^ law against a commoner's living
near a nobleman, ^ng the same road that he is going, or being present ^n the
same feast, or appearing in the same marketplace. They might as well pretend
that these things make confusion in families, as that intermarriages will do it.

9. Does not every one know, that the children will be ranked according to the
quality of their father, let him be a patrician or a plebeian? In short, it is
manifest enough that we have nothing in view but to be treated as men and
citizens; nor can they who oppose our demand have any motive to do it but the
love of domineering.

10. Hear me, consuls. Whether the news of the war you talk of be true, or
whether it be only a false r^mor spread ^broad for nothing but a color to send
the people out of the ^ity. I declare, as tribune, that this people, who have
already so often spilt their blood in our country's cause, are again ready to
arm for its defense and its glory, if they may be re^tored to their natural
rights, and you will no longer treat us like strangers in our own country.

11. But, if you account us unworthy of your alliance by intermarriages, if you
will not suffer the entrance to the chief offices in the state to be open to
all persons of merit indifferently, but will confine your choice of magistrates
to the senate alone; talk of wars as much as you please; paint, in your
ordinary discourses, the league and power of our enemies, ten times more
dreadful than you do now; I declare, that this people whom you so much despise,
and to whom you are nevertheless indebted for all your victories, shall never
more enlist themselves; not a man of them shall take arms; not a man of them
shall expose his life for imperious lords, with whom he can neither share the
dignities of the state, nor in private life have any alliance by marriage.

DESCRIPTION OF THE FALLS OF NIAGARA.
AMONG the many natural curiosities which this country affords, the cataract of
Niagara is infinitely the greatest. In order to have a tolerable idea of this
stupendous fall of water, it will be necessary to conceive that part of the
country in which Lake Erie is situated, to be elevated above that which
contains Lake Ontario, about three hundred feet.

2. The slope which separates the upper and lower country, is generally very
steep, and in many places almost perpendicular. It is formed by horizontal
strata of stone, great part of which is what we commonly call limestone. The
slope may be traced from the north side of Lake Ontario, near the bay of
Taronto, round the west end of the lake; thence its direction is generally
east, between Lake Ontario and Lake Erie; it crosses the strait of Niagara, and
the Cheneseco river, after which it becomes lost in the country toward the
Seneca Lake.

3. It is to this slope that our country is indebted, both for the cataract of
Niagara, and the great falls of the Cheneseco. The cataract of Niagara was
formerly down at the northern side of the slope, near to that place which is
now known by the name of the Landing; but from the great length of time, added
to the great quantity of water, and distance which it falls, the solid stone is
worn away, for about seven miles, up toward Lake Erie, and a chasm is formed
which no person can approach without horror.

4. Down this chasm the water rushes with a most astonishing velocity, after it
makes the great pitch. In going up the road near this chasm, the fancy is
constantly engaged in the contemplation of the most romantic and awful
prospects imaginable, until, at length, the eye catches the falls; the
imagination is instantly arrested, and you admire in silence! The river is
about one hundred and thirty-five poles wide, at the falls, and the
perpendicular pitch one hundred and fifty feet.

5. The fall of this vast body of water produces a sound, which is frequently
heard at the distance of twenty miles, and a sensible tremulous motion in the
earth for some poles round. A heavy fog, or cloud, is constantly ascending from
the falls, in which rainbows may always be seen, when the sun shines.

6. This fog, or spray, in the winter season, falls upon the neighboring trees,
where it congeals, and produces a most beautiful chrystalline appearance. This
remark is equally applicable to the falls of the Cheneseco.

7. The difficulty which would attend levelling the rapids in the chasm,
prevented my attempting it; but I conjecture the water must descend at least
sixty-five feet. The perpendicular pitch at the cataract is one hundred and
fifty feet; to these add fifty-eight feet, which the water falls in the last
half mile, immediately above the falls, and we have two hundred and
seventy-three feet, which the water falls, in a distance of about seven miles
and a half.

8. If either ducks, or geese, inadvertently, alight in the rapids, above the
great cataract, they are incapable of getting on the wing again, and are
instantly hurried on to destruction. There is one appearance at this cataract,
worthy of some attention, and which I do not remember to have seen noted by any
writer.

9. Just below the great pitch, the water and foam may be seen puffed up in
spherical figures, nearly as large as common cocks of hay; they burst at the
top, and project a column of spray to a prodigious height; they then subside,
and are succeeded by others, which burst in like manner. This appearance is
most conspicuous about half way between the island, that divides the falls, and
the west side of the strait, where the largest column of water descends.

BENEVO^ENT AFFECTIONS.
BENEVOLENCE, from its nature, composes the mind, warms the heart, enlivens the
whole frame, and brightens every feature of the countenance. It may justly be
said to be medicinal both to soul and body. We are bound to it by duty; we are
invited to it by interest; and because both these cords are often feeble, we
have natural kind affections to aid them in their operations, and supply their
defects; and these affections are joined with a manly pleasure in their
exertion.

2. They are amiable even in brute animals. We love the meekness of the lamb,
the gentleness of the dove, the affection of a dog to his master. We cannot,
without pleasure, observe the timid ewe, who never showed the least degree of
courage in her own defense, become valiant and intrepid in defense of her lamb,
and boldly assault those enemies, the very sight of whom was wont to put her to
flight.

3. How pleasant is it to see the family economy of a pair of little birds, in
rearing their tender offspring; the conjugal affection and fidelity of the
parents; their cheerful toil and industry in providing food to their family;
their sagacity in concealing their habitation; the arts they use, often at the
peril of their own lives, to decoy hawks and other enemies from their
dewlling place; and the affliction they feel, when some unlucky boy has robbed
them of the dear pledges of their affection, and frustrated all their hopes of
their rising family?

4. If kind affection be amiable in brutes, it is not less so in our own
species. Even the external signs of it have a powerful charm. Every one knows
that a person of accomplished good breeding, charms every one he converses
with. And what is this good breeding? If we analize it, we shall find it to be
made up of looks, gestures and speeches, which are the natural signs of
benevolence and good affection.

5. He who has the habit of using these signs with propriety, and without
meanness, is well bred and polite. What is that in the features of the face,
which all men admire? I believe it consists chiefly in the features which
indicate good affections.

6. Every indication of meekness, gentleness, and benignity, is a beauty. On
the contrary, every feature that indicates pride, passion, envy, and malignity,
is a deformity. Kind affections, therefore, are amiable in brutes. Even the
signs and shadows of them are highly attract^^e in our own species.

7. Indeed they are the joy and the comfort of human life, not to good men
only, but even to the vicious and dissolute. Without society, and the
intercourse of affection, man is a gloomy, melancholy, and joyless being.

8. His mind oppressed with cares and fears, he cannot enjoy the balm of sound
sleep. In constant dread of impending danger, he starts at the rustling of a
leaf. His ears are continually upon the stretch, and every zephyr brings some
sound that alarms him.

9. When he enters into society, and feels security in the good affection of
friends and neighbors, it is then only that his fear vanishes, and his mind is
at ease. His courage is raised, his understanding is enlightened, and his heart
dilates with joy.

10. Human society may be compared to a heap of embers, which, when placed
asunder, can retain neither their light nor heat, amidst the surrounding
elements; but when brought together, they mutually give heat and light to each
other; the flame breaks forth, and not only defends itself, but subdues every
thing around it.

11. The security, the happiness, and the strength of human society, spring
solely from the reciprocal benevolent affections of its members. The benevolent
affections, though they be all honorable and lovely, are not all equally so.
There is a subordination among them; and the honor we pay to them generally
corresponds to the extent of their object.

12. The good husband, the good father, the good friend, the good neighbor, we
honor as a good man, worthy of our love and affection. But the man in whom
these more private affections are swallowed up in zeal for the good of his
country, and of mankind, who goes about doing good, and seeks opportunities of
being useful to his species, we revere as more than a good man; we esteem him
as a hero.

MESSIAH. A SACRED ECLOGUE.
YE nymphs of Solyma! begin the song:
To heavenly themes sublimer strains belong.
The mossy fountains and the syl^an shades,
The dreams of Pindus and the Aonian maids
Delight no more -- O Thou my voice inspire,
Who touched Isaiah's hallowed lips with fire!
2.
Rapt into future times, the bard begun:
A Virgin shall conceive, a Virgin bear a Son!
From Jesse's root behold a branch arise,
Whose sacred flower with fragrance fills the skies:
The ethereal Spirit over its leaves shall move,
And on its top descend the mystic Dove.
3.
Ye heavens! from high the dewy nectar pour,
And in soft silence shed the kindly shower!
The sick and weak the healing plant shall aid,
From storms a shelter, and from heat a shade;
All crimes shall cease, and ancient fraud shall fail,
Returning justice lift aloft her scale,
Peace over the world her olive wand extend,
And white-rob'd innocence from heaven descend.
4.
Swift fly the years, and rise the expected morn!
Oh spring to light, auspicious Babe, be born!
See nature hastes her earliest wreaths to bring,
With all the incense of the breathing spring;
See lofty Lebanon his head advance,
See nodding forests on the mountains dance,
See spicy clouds from lowly Sharon rise,
And Carmel's flowery top perfumes the skies!
5.
Hark! a glad voice the lonely desert cheers;
Prepare the way! a God, a God appears!
A God, a God! the vocal hills reply,
The rocks proclaim the approaching Deity.
6.
Lo, earth receives him from the bending skies!
Sink down, ye mountains, and, ye valleys, rise!
With heads declined, ye cedars, homage pay;
Be smooth, ye rocks; ye rapid floods, give way!
The Savior comes! by ancient bards foretold;
Hear him, ye deaf! and, all ye blind, behold!
7.
He from thick films shall purge the visual ray,
And on the sightless eye-ball pour the day:
He the obstructed paths of sound shall clear,
And bid new music charm the unfolding ear;
The dumb shall sing, the lame his crutch forego,
And leap exulting like the bounding roe.
8.
No sigh, no murmur, the wide world shall hear;
From every face he wipes off every tear.
In adamantine chains shall death be bound,
And hell's grim tyrant feel the eternal wound.
9.
As the good shepherd tends his fleecy care,
Seeks freshest pasture and the purest air,
Explores the lost, the wandering sheep directs,
By day o'ersees them, and by night protects,
The tender lambs he raises in his arms,
Feeds from his hand, and in his bosom warms;
Thus shall mankind his guardian care engage,
The promised Father of the future age.
10.
No more shall nation against nation rise,
Nor ardent warriors meet with hateful eyes,
Nor fields with gleaming steel be covered over,
The brazen trumpets kindle rage no more;
But useless lances into scythes shall bend,
And the broad falchion in a plough-share end.
11.
Then palaces shall rise; the joyful son
Shall finish what his short-lived fire begun;
Their vines a shadow to their race shall yield,
And the same hand that sowed shall reap the field.
12.
The swain in barren deserts with surprise
See lilies spring, and sudden verdure rise;
And start, amidst the thirsty wilds, to hear
New falls of water murmuring in his ear.
13.
On rifted rocks, the dragon's late abodes,
The green reed trembles and the bulrush nods;
Waste, sandy valleys, once perplexed with thorn,
The spiry fir and shapely box adorn;
To leafless shrubs the flow'ring palm succeed,
And odorous myrtle to the noisome weed.
14.
The lambs with wolves shall graze the verdant mead,
And boys in flowery bands the tiger lead;
The steer and lion at one crib shall meet,
And harmless serpents lick the pilgrim's feet;
The smiling infant in his hand shall take
The crested basilisk and speckled snake,
Pleased, the green luster of their scales survey,
And with their forky tongue shall innocently play.
15.
Rise, crowned with light, imperial Salem, rise!
Exalt thy tow'ry head, and lift thy eyes!
See a long race thy spacious courts adorn;
See future sons and daughters, yet unborn,
In crowding ranks on every side arise,
Demanding life, impatient ^or the skies!
See barbarous nations at thy gates attend,
Walk in thy light, and in thy temple bend.
16.
See thy bright altars thronged with prostrate kings,
And heaped with products of Sabaean springs!
For thee Idume's spicy forests blow,
And seeds of gold in Ophir's mountains glow.
See heaven its sparkling portals wide display,
And break upon thee in a flood of day.
17.
No more the rising sun shall gild the morn,
Nor evening Cynthia fill her silver horn;
But loft, dissolved in thy superior rays,
One tide of glory, one unclouded blaze
Overflow thy courts: the Light himself shall shine
Revealed, and God's eternal day be thine!
18.
The seas shall waste, the skies in smoke decay,
Rocks fall to dust, and mountains melt away;
But fixed his word, his saving power remains:
Thy realm forever lasts, thy own Messiah reigns!
NARRATIVE OF THE CAPTIVITY OF MRS. JEMIMA HOW, TAKEN BY THE INDIANS AT
HINSDALE, NEW HAMPSHIRE, JULY 27, 1755.
AS Messrs. Caleb How, Hilkiah Grou^, and Benjamin Gaffield, who had been
hoeing corn in the meadow, west of the river, were returning home a little
before sunset, to a place called Bridgman's Fort, they were fired upon by
twelve Indian^, who had ambushed their path.

2. How was on horseback, with two young lads, his children, behind him. A
ball, which broke his thigh, brought him to the ground. His horse ran a few
rods and fell likewise, and both the lads were taken. The Indians in their
savage manner, coming up to How, pierced his body with a spear, tore off his
scalp, stuck a hatchet in his head, and left him in this forlorn condition.

3. He was found alive the morning after, by a party of men from Fort Hinsdale;
and being asked by one of the party whether he knew him, he answered, Yes, I
know you all. These were his last words, though he did not expire until after
his friends had arrived with him at Fort Hinsdale. Grout was so fortunate as to
escape unhurt.

4. But Gaffield, in attempting to wade through the river, at a certain place
which was indeed fordable at that time, was unfortunately drowned. Flushed with
the success they had met with here, the savages went directly to Bridgman's
Fort. There was no man in it, and only three women and some children, Mrs.
Jemima How, Mrs. Submit Grout, and Mrs. Eunice Gaffield.

5. Their husbands I need not mention again, and their feelings at this
juncture I will not attempt to describe. They had heard the enemies' guns, but
knew not what had happened to their friends.

6. Extremely anxious for their safety, they stood longing to embrace them,
until at length, concluding from the noise they heard without that some of them
were come, they unbarred the gate in a hurry to receive them; when lo! to their
inexpressible disappointment and surprise, instead of their husbands, in rushed
a number of hideous Indians, to whom they and their tender offspring became an
easy prey; and from whom they had nothing to expect, but either an immediate
death, or a long and doleful captivity.

7. The latter of these, by the favor of Providence, turned out to be the lot
of these unhappy women, and their still more unhappy, because more helpless
children. Mrs. Gaffield had but one, Mrs. Grout had three, and Mrs. How seven.
The eldest of Mrs. Howe's was eleven years old, and the youngest but six months.

8. The two eldest were daughters, which she had by her first husband, Mr.
William Phipps, who was also slain by the Indians, of which I doubt not but you
have seen an account in Mr. Doolittle's history. It was from the mouth of this
woman that I lately received the foregoing account. She also gave me, I doubt
not, a true, though, to be sure, a very brief and imperfect history of her
captivity, which I here insert for your perusal.

9. The Indians (she says) having plundered and put fire to the fort, we
marched, as near as I could judge, a mile and a half into the woods, where we
encamped that night.

10. When the morning came, and we had advanced as much farther, six Indians
were sent back to the place of our late abode, who collected a little more
plunder, and destroyed some other effects that had been left behind; but they
did not return until the day was so far spent, that it was judged best to
continue where we were through the night.

11. Early the next morning we set off for Canada, and continued our march
eight days successively, until we had reached the place where the Indians had
left their canoes, about fifteen miles from Crown Point. This was a long and
tedious march; but the captives, by divine assistance, were enabled to endure
it with less trouble and difficulty than they had reason to expect.

12. From such savage masters, in such indigent circumstances, we could not
rationally hope for kinder treatment than we received. Some of us, it is true,
had a harder lot than others; and, among the children, I thought my son Squire
had the hardest of any.

13. He was then only four years old, and when we stopped to rest our weary
limbs, and he sat down on his master's pack, the savage monster would often
knock him off; and sometimes too with the handle of his hatchet. Several ugly
marks, indented in his head by the cruel Indians, at that tender age, are still
plainly to be seen.

14. At length we arrived at Crown Point, and took up our quarters there, for
the space of near a week. In the mean time, some of the Indians went to
Montreal, and took several of the weary captives along with them, with a view
of selling them to the French. They did not succeed, however, in finding a
market for any of them.

15. They gave my youngest daughter to the governor, de Vaudreuil, had a
drunken frolic, and returned again to Crown Point, with the rest of their
prisoners. From hence we set off for St. John's, in four or five canoes, just
as night was coming on, and were soon surrounded with darkness.

16. A heavy storm hung over us. The sound of the rolling thunder was very
terrible upon the waters, which at every flash of expansive lightning seemed to
be all in a blaze. Yet to this we were indebted for all the light we enjoyed.
No object could we discern any longer than the flashes lasted.

17. In this posture we sailed in our open tottering canoes, almost the whole
of that dreary night. The morning indeed had not yet begun to dawn, when we all
went ashore; and having collected a heap of sand and gravel for a pi^low. I
laid myself down, with my tender infant by my side, not knowing where any of my
other children were, or what a miserable condition they might be in.

18. The next day, however, under the wing of that ever-present and
all-powerful Providence, which had preserved us through the darkness and
imminent dangers of the preceding night, we all arrived in safety at St. John's.

19. Our next movement was to St. Francois, the metropolis, if I may so call
it, to which the Indians, who led us captive, belonged. Soon after our arrival
at that wretched capital, a council, consisting of the chief Sachem, and some
principal warriors of the St. Francois tribe, was convened; and after the
ceremonies usual on such occasions were over, I was conducted and delivered to
an old squaw, whom the Indians told me I must call my mother.

20. My infant still continued to be the property of its original Indian
owners. I was nevertheless permitted to keep it with me a while longer, for the
sake of saving them the trouble of looking after it. When the weather began to
grow cold, shuddering at the prospect of approaching winter, I acquainted my
new mother, that I did not think it would be possible for me to endure it, if I
must spend it with her, and fare as the Indians did.

21. Listening to my repeated and earnest solicitations, that I might be
disposed of among some of the French inhabitants of Canada, she, at length, set
off with me and my infant, attended by some male Indians, upon a journey to
Montreal, in hopes of finding a market for me there. But the attempt proved
unsuccessful, and the journey tedious indeed.

22. Our provisions were so scanty as well as insipid and unsavory; the weather
was so cold, and the traveling so very bad, that it often seemed as if I must
have perished on the way.

23. While we were at Montreal, we went into the house of a certain French
gentleman, whose lady, being sent for, and coming into the room where I was, to
examine me, seeing I had an infant, exclaimed with an oath, "I will not buy a
woman who has a child to look after."

24. There was a swill-pail standing near me, in which I observed some crusts
and crumbs of bread swimming on the surface of the greasy liquor it contained.
Sorely pinched with hunger, I skimmed them off with my hands, and ate them; and
this was all the refreshment which the house afforded me.

25. Somewhere in the course of this visit to Montreal, my Indian mother was so
unfortunate as to catch the smallpox, of which distemper she died, soon after
our return, which was by water, to St. Francois. And now came on the season
when the Indians began to prepare for a winter's hunt.

26. I was ordered to return my poor child to those of them who still claimed
it as their property. This was a severe trial. The babe clung to my bosom with
all its might; but I was obliged to pluck it thence, and deliver it, shrieking
and screaming, enough to penetrate a heart of stone, into the hands of those
unfeeling wretches, whose tender mercies may be termed cruel.

27. It was soon carried off by a hunting party of those Indians, to a place
called Messiskow, at the lower end of Lake Champlain, whither, in about a month
after, it was my fortune to follow them. And here I found it, it is true, but
in a condition that afforded me no great satisfaction; it being greatly
emaciated, and almost starved.

28. I took it in my arms, put its face to mine, and it instantly bit me with
such violence, that it seemed as if I must have parted with a piece of my
cheek. I was permitted to lodge with it that, and the two following nights; but
every morning that intervened, the Indians, I suppose on purpose to torment me,
sent me away to another wigwam, which stood at a little distance, though not so
far from the one in which my distressed infant was confined, but that I could
plainly hear its incessant cries, and heart-rending lamentations.

29. In this deplorable condition, I was obliged to take my leave of it, on the
morning of the third day after my arrival at the place. We moved down the Lake
several miles the same day; and the night following was remarkable on account
of the great earthquake which terribly shook that howling wilderness.

30. Among the islands hereabouts, we spent the winter season, often shifting
our quarters, and roving about from one place to another* our family consisting
of three persons only, besides myself, viz. my late mother's daughter, whom
therefore I called my sister, her sanhop, and a pappoose.

31. They once left me alone two dismal nights; and when they returned to me
again, perceiving them smile at each other, I asked what is the matter? They
replied, that two of my children were no more. One of which, they said, died a
natural death, and the other was knocked on the head.

32. I did not utter many words, but my heart was sorely pained within me, and
my mind exceedingly troubled with strange and awful ideas. I often imagined,
for instance, that I plainly saw the naked carcasses of my deceased children
hanging upon the limbs of the trees, as the Indians are wont to hang the raw
hides of those beasts which they take in hunting.

33. It was not long, however, before it was so ordered by kind Providence,
that I should be relieved in a good measure from those horrid imaginations; for
as I was walking one day upon the ice, observing a smoke at some distance upon
the land, it must proceed, thought I, from the fire of some Indian hut; and who
knows but some one of my poor children may be there.

34. My curiosity, thus excited, led me to the place, and there I found my son
Caleb, a little boy between two and three years old, whom I had lately buried,
in sentiment a^ least; or rather imagined to have been deprived of life, and
perhaps also denied a decent grave.

35. I found him likewise in tolerable health and circumstances, under the
protection of a fond Indian mother; and moreover had the happiness of lodging
with him in my arms one joyful night. Again we shifted our quarters, and when
we had traveled eight or ten miles upon the snow and ice, came to a place
where the Indians manufactured sugar which they extracted from the maple trees.

36. Here an Indian came to visit us, whom I knew, and who could speak English.
He asked me why I did not go to see my son Squire. I replied that I had lately
been informed that he was dead. He assured me that he was yet alive, and but
two or three miles off, on the opposite side of the Lake.

37. At my request, he gave me the best directions he could to the place of his
abode. I resolved to embrace the first opportunity that offered of endeavoring
to search it out. While I was busy in contemplating this affair, the Indians
obtained a little bread, of which they gave me a small share.

38. I did not taste a morsel of it myself, but saved it all for my poor child,
if I should be so lucky as to find him. At length, having obtained of my
keepers leave to be absent for one day, I set off early in the morning, and
steering, as well as I could, according to the directions which the friendly
Indian had given me, I quickly found the place, which he had so accurately
marked out.

39. I beheld, as I drew nigh, my little son without the camp; but he looked,
thought I, like a starved and mangy puppy, that had been wallowing in the
ashes. I took him in my arms, and he spoke to me these words, in the Indian
tongue; "Mother, are you come?"

40. I took him into the wigwam with me, and observing a number of Indian
children in it, I distributed all the bread which I had reserved for my own
child, among them all; otherwise I should have given great offense.

41. My little boy appeared to be very fond of his new mother, kept as near me
as possible while I stayed; and when I told him I must go, he fell as though he
had been knocked down with a club.

42. But having recommended him to the care of Him who made him, when the day
was far spent, and the time would permit me to stay no longer, I departed, you
may well suppose, with a heavy load at my heart. The tidings I had received of
the death of my youngest child had, a little before, been confirmed to me
beyond a doubt; but I could not mourn so heartily for the deceased, as for the
living child.

43. When the winter broke up, we removed to St. John's; and through the
ensuing summer, our principal residence was at no great distance from the fort
at that place. In the mean time, however, my sister's husband having been out
with a scouting party to some of the English settlements, had a drunken frolic
at the fort, when he returned.

44. His wife, who never got drunk, but had often experienced the ill effects
of her husband's intemperance, fearing what the consequence might prove, if he
should come home in a morose and turbulent humor, to avoid his insolence,
proposed that we should both retire, and keep out of the reach of it, until the
storm abated.

45. We absconded accordingly; but so it happened, that I returned, and
ventured into his presence, before his wise had presumed to come nigh him. I
found him in his ^ig ^am, and in a surly mood; and not being able to revenge
upon his wife, because she was not at home, he laid hold of me, and hurried me
to the for^; and, for a trifling consideration, sold me to a French gentleman,
whose name was S^cca^ee.

46. It is an ill wind certainly that blows nobody any good. I had been with
the Indians a year lacking fourteen days; and, if not for my sister, yet for
me, it was a lucky circumstance indeed, which thus at last in an unexpected
moment, snatched me out of their cruel hands, and placed me beyond the reach of
their insolent power.

47. After my Indian master had disposed of me in the manner related above, and
the moment of sober reflection had arrived, perceiving that the man who bought
me had taken the advantage of him in an unguarded hour, his resentment began to
kindle, and his indignation rose so high, that he threatened to kill me if he
should meet me alone; or if he could not revenge himself thus, that he would
set fire to the fort.

48. I was therefore secreted in an upper chamber, and the fort carefully
guarded, until his wrath had time to cool. My service in the family to which I
was advanced, was perfect freedom, in comparison with what it had been among
the barbarous Indians.

49. My new master and mistress were both as kind and generous toward me as I
could reasonably expect. I seldom asked a favor of either of them, but it was
readily granted. In consequence of which I had it in my power, in many
instances, to administer aid and refreshment to the poor prisoners of my own
nation, who were brought into St. John's during my abode in the family of the
abovementioned benevolent and hospitable Saccapee.

50. Yet even in this family, such trials awaited me as I had little reason to
expect; but stood in need of a large stock of prudence, to enable me to
encounter them. In this I was greatly assisted by the governor, and Col.
Schuyler, who was then a prisoner.

51. I was moreover under unspeakable obligations to the governor on another
account. I had received intelligence from my daughter Mary, the purport of
which was, that there was a prospect of her being shortly married to a young
Indian of the tribe of St. Francois, with which tribe she had continued from
the beginning of her captivity. These were heavy tidings, and added greatly to
the poignancy of my other afflictions.

52. However, not long after I had heard this melancholy news, an opportunity
presented of acquainting that humane and generous gentleman, the commander in
chief, and my illustrious benefactor, with this affair also, who in compassion
for my sufferings, and to mitigate my sorrows, issued his orders in good time,
and had my daughter taken away from the Indians, and conveyed to the same
nunnery where her sister was then lodged, with his express injunction, that
they should both of them together be well looked after, and carefully educated,
as his adopted children.

53. In this school of superstition and bigotry, they continued while the war
in those days between France and Great Britain lasted. At the conclusion of
which war, the governor went home to France, took my oldest daughter along with
him, and married her there to a French gentleman, whose name is Cron Lewis.

54. He was at Boston with the fleet under Count de Estaing, (1778) and one of
his clerks. My other daughter still continuing in the nunnery, a considerable
time had elapsed after my return from captivity, when I made a journey to
Canada, resolving to use my best endeavors not to return without her.

55. I arrived just in time to prevent her being sent to France. She was to
have gone in the next vessel that sa^led for that place. And I found it
extremely difficult to prevail with her to quit the nunnery and go home with me.

56. Yea, she absolutely refused; and all the persuasions and arguments I could
use with her, were to no effect, until after I had been to the governor, and
obtained a letter from him to the superintendent of the nuns, in which he
threatened, if my daughter should not be delivered immediately into my hands,
or could not be prevailed with to submit to my parental authority, that he
would send a band of soldiers to assist me in bringing her away.

57. But so extremely bigoted was she to the customs and religion of the
place, that after all, she left it with the greatest reluctance, and the most
bitter lamentations, which she continued as we passed the streets, and wholly
refused to be comforted. My good friend, Major Small, whom we met with on the
way, tried all he could to console her; and was so very kind and obliging as to
bear us company, and carry my daughter behind him on horseback.

58. But I have run on a little before my story; for I have not yet informed
you of the means and manner of my own redemption, to the accomplishing of
which, the recovery of my daughter just mentioned, and the ransoming of some of
my other children, several gentlemen of note contributed not a little; to whose
goodness, therefore, I am greatly indebted, and sincerely hope I shall never be
so ungrateful as to forget it.

59. Col. Schuyler, in particular, was so very kind and generous as to advance
2700 livres to procure a ransom for myself and three of my children. He
accompanied and conducted us from Montreal to Albany, and entertained us in the
most friendly and hospitable manner a considerable time, at his own house, and
I believe entirely at his own expense.

EXTRACT FROM THE SPEECH OF MR. PIT IN THE BRITISH PARLIAMENT, JAN. 20, 1775.
MY LORDS,
I RISE with astonishment to see these papers brought to your table at so late
a period of this business; papers, to tell us what? Why, what all the world
knew before; that the Americans, irritated by repeated injuries, and stripped
of their inborn rights and dearest privileges, have resisted, and entered into
associations for the preservation of their common liberties.

2. Had the early situation of the people of Boston been attended to, things
would not have come to this. But the infant complaints of Boston were literally
treated like the capricious squalls of a child, who, it was said, did not know
whether it was aggrieved or not.

3. But full well I knew, at that time, that this child, if not redressed,
would soon assume the courage and voice of a man. Full well I knew, that the
sons of ancestors, born under the same free constitution, and once breathing
the same liberal air as Englishmen, would resist upon the same principles, and
on the same occasions.

4. What has government done? They have sent an armed force, cons^sting of
seventeen thousand men, to dragoon the Bostonians into what is called their
duty; and, so far from once turning their eyes to the policy and destructive
consequence of this scheme, are constantly sending out more troops. And we are
told, in the language of menace, that, if seventeen thousand men will not do,
fifty thousand shall.

5. It is true, my lords, with this force they may ravage the country; waste
and destroy as they march; but, in the progress of fifteen hundred miles, can
they occupy the places they have passed? Will not a country, which can produce
three millions of people, wronged and insulted as they are, start up like
hydras in every corner, and gather fresh strength from fresh opposition?

6. Nay, what dependence can you have upon the soldiery, the unhappy engines of
your wrath? They are Englishmen, who must feel for the privileges of
Englishmen. Do you think that these men can turn their arms against their
brethren? Surely no. A victory must be to them a defeat; and carnage, a
sacrifice.

7. But it is not merely three millions of people, the produce of America, we
have to contend with in this unnatural struggle; many more are on their side,
dispersed over the face of this wide empire. Every whig in this country and in
Ireland is with them.

8. Who, then, let me demand, has given, and continues to give, this strange
and unconstitutional advice? I do not mean to level at one man, or any
particular set of men; but thus much I will venture to declare, that, if his
Majesty continues to hear such counselors, he will not only be badly advised,
but undone.

9. He may continue indeed to wear his crown; but it will not be worth his
wearing. Robbed of so principal a jewel as America, it will lose its luster,
and no longer beam that effulgence which should irradiate the brow of majesty.

10. In this alarming crisis, I come with this paper in my hand to offer you
the best of my experience and advice, which is, that a humble petition be
presented to his Majesty, beseeching him, that, in order to open the way
toward a happy settlement of the dangerous troubles in America, it may
graciously please him, that immediate orders be given to general Gage for
removing his Majesty's forces from the town of Boston.

11. And this, my lords, upon the most mature and deliberate grounds, is the
best advice I can give you, at this juncture. Such conduct will convince
America that you mean to try her cause in the spirit of freedom and inquiry,
and not in letters of blood.

12. There is no time to be lost. Every hour is big with danger. Perhaps, while
I am now speaking, the decisive blow is struck, which may involve millions in
the consequence. And, believe me, the very first drop of blood which is shed,
will cause a wound which may never be healed.

THE LION.
THIS animal is produced in Africa, and the hottest parts of Asia. It is found
in the greatest numbers in the scorched and desolate regions of the torrid
zone, and in all the interior parts of the vast continent of Africa.

2. In these desert regions, from whence mankind are driven by the rigorous
heat of the climate, this animal reigns sole master. Its disposition seems to
partake of the ardor of its native soil. Enflamed by the influence of a burning
sun, its rage is most tremendous, and its courage undaunted.

3. Happily, indeed, the species is not numerous, and is said to be greatly
diminished; for, if we may credit the testimony of those who have traversed
those vast deserts, the number of lions is not nearly so great as formerly.

4. From numberless accounts, we are assured that, powerful and terrible as
this animal is, its anger is noble, its courage magnanimous, and its temper
susceptible of grateful impressions. It has often been seen to despise weak and
contemptible enemies, and even to pardon their insults when it was in its power
to punish them.

5. It has been known to spare the life of an animal that was thrown to be
devoured by it; to live in habits of perfect cordiality with it; to share its
subsistence, and even to give it a preference where its portion of food was
scanty.

6. The form of the lion is strikingly bold and majestic. His large and shaggy
mane, which he can erect at pleasure, surrounding his awful front; his huge
eyebrows; his round and fiery eye balls, which upon the least irritation seem
to glow with peculiar luster; together with the formidable appearance of his
teeth, exhibit a picture of terrific grandeur which no words can describe.

7. The length of the largest lion is between eight and nine feet; the tail
about four; and its height about four feet and a half. The female is about one
fourth part less, and without a mane.

8. As the lion advances in years its mane grows longer and thicker. The hair
on the rest of the body is short and smooth, of a tawny color, but whitish on
the belly. Its roaring is loud and dreadful. When heard in the night, it
resembles distant thunder. Its cry of anger is much louder and shorter.

9. The lion seldom attacks any animal openly, except when impelled by extreme
hunger; in that case no danger deters him. But, as most animals endeavor to
avoid him, he is obliged to have recourse to artifice, and take his prey by
surprise.

10. For this purpose, he crouches on his belly in some thicket, where he waits
till his prey approaches; and then, with one prodigious spring, he leaps upon
it at the distance of fifteen or twenty feet, and generally seizes it at the
first bound.

11. If he miss his object, he gives up the pursuit; and turning back toward
the place of his ambush, he measures the ground step by step, and again lies in
wait for another opportunity. The lurking places are generally chosen by him
near a spring, or by the side or a river, where he has frequently an
opportunity of catching such animals as come to quench their thirst.

12. The lion is a long-lived animal, although naturalists differ greatly as to
the precise period of its existence. Of some that have been trained in the
tower of London, one lived to the age of sixty three years, and another
exceeded seventy.

13. The aspect of the lion corresponds with the noble and generous qualities
of his mind; his figure is respectable; his looks are determined; his gait is
stately, and his voice tremendous. In a word, the body of the lion appears to
be the best model of strength joined to agility.

14. As a proof that he is capable of exercising a generous and friendly
disposition toward mankind, we have the following anecdote of one which was
kept in the tower of London.

15. When this lion was confined in the den alone, an accident happened to the
lower part of it, which so impaired the wood-work, that he could not be kept
with safety; the carpenter was therefore called to repair it, who wisely stood
at a distance, and would not approach the den for fear of the lion.

16. Upon this, one of the keepers stepped into the den, and engaged to keep
the lion at the upper part of his house, while the carpenter was at work
beneath. It happened, however, that the keeper, after playing some time with
the lion, fell fast asleep.

17. The carpenter continued his work, without knowing the danger to which he
was exposed; and when he had finished his work, called to the keeper to come
down and fasten the door; but received no answer.

18. He then ran out of the den, and was greatly surprised to see, through the
grate, both the keeper and the lion stretched upon the floor, and sleeping
together. He called to him again, but the keeper was too sound asleep to return
any answer.

19. The lion however reared up his frightful head, and after looking some time
at the carpenter, threw his huge paw over the keeper's breast, and laying his
nose upon his head, again composed himself to rest.

20. The carpenter already terrified with his own situation, was still more
alarmed when he saw the keeper thus encircled with the pa^s of the lion, and
ran into the house for aid.

21. Some of the people came out, and having bolted the den door, which the
carpenter had neglected in his precipitate retreat, they roused the keeper from
his sleep, who, shaking the lion by the paw, took his leave; but the lion was
too well-bred to suffer his friend to go without some little ceremony or marks
of esteem.

22. He first rubbed his great nose against the keeper's knees, then held him
by the coat, as if he would have said, "Do stay a little longer;" and when he
found that no entreaties could prevail, he courteously waited on him to the
door.

STORY OF THE GRATEFUL TURK.
IT is too much to be lamented, that different nations frequently make bloody
wars with each other; and when they take any of their enemies prisoners,
instead of using them well, and restoring them to liberty, they confine them in
prisons, or sell them as slaves. The enmity that there has often been between
many of the Italian states, particularly the Venetians and the Turks, is
sufficiently known.

2. It once happened that a Venetian ship had taken many of the Turks
prisoners, and, according to the barbarous custom I have mentioned, these
unhappy men had been sold to different persons in the city. By accident one of
the slaves lived opposite to the house of a rich Venetian, who had an only son,
of about the age of twelve years.

3. It happened that this little boy used frequently to stop as he passed near
Hamet, for that was the name of the slave, and gaze at him very attentively.
Hamet, who remarked in the face of the child the appearance of goodnature and
compassion, used always to salute him with the greatest courtesy, and testified
the greatest pleasure in his company.

4. At length the little boy took such a fancy to the slave, that he used to
visit him several times in the day, and brought him such little presents as he
had it in his power to make, and which he thought would be of use to his friend.

5. But though Hamet seemed always to take the greatest delight in the innocent
caresses of his little friend, yet the child could not help remarking that
Hamet was frequently extremely sorrowful; and he often surprised him on a
sudden, when tears were trickling down his face, although he did his utmost to
conceal them.

6. The little boy was at length so much affected with the repetition of this
sight, that he spoke of it to his father, and begged him, if he had it in his
power, to make poor Hamet happy. The father, who was extremely fond of his son,
and besides, had observed that he seldom requested any thing which was not
generous and humane, determined to see the Turk himself, and talk to him.

7. Accordingly he went to him the next day, and observing him for some time in
silence, was struck with the extraordinary appearance of mildness and honesty
which his countenance discovered. At length he said to him, Are you that Hamet
of whom my son is so fond, and of whose gentleness and courtesy I have so often
heard him talk?

8. Yes, said the Turk, I am that unfortunate Hamet, who have now been for
three years a captive: during that space of time, your son, if you are his
father, is the only human being that seems to have felt any compassion for my
sufferings; therefore, I must confess, he is the only object to which I am
attached in this barbarous country; and night and morning I pray that Power,
who is equally the God of Turks and Christians, to grant him every blessing he
deserves, and to preserve him from all the miseries I suffer.

9. Indeed, Hamet, said the merchant, he is much obliged to you, although from
his present circumstances, he does not appear much exposed to danger. But tell
me, for I wish to do you good, in what can I assist you? for my son informs me
that you are the prey of continual regret and sorrow.

10. Is it wonderful, answered the Turk, with a glow of generous indignation
that suddenly animated his countenance, is it wonderful that I should pine in
silence, and mourn my fate, who am bereft of the first and noblest present of
nature, my liberty? And yet, answered the Venetian, how many thousands of our
nation do you retain in fetters?

11. I am not answerable, said the Turk, for the cruelty of my countrymen, more
than you are for the barbarity of yours. But as to myself, I have never
practiced the inhuman custom of enslaving my fellow creatures: I have never
spoiled Venetian merchants of their property to increase my riches; I have
always respected the rights of nature, and therefore it is the more severe --

12. Here a tear started from his eye, and wetted his manly cheek: instantly,
however, he recollected himself, and folding his arms upon his bosom, and
gently bowing his head, he added, God is good, and man must submit to his
decrees. The Venetian was affected with this appearance of manly fortitude, and
said, Hamet, I pity your sufferings, and may perhaps be able to relieve them.
What would you do to regain your liberty?

13. What would I do! answered Hamet; I would confront every pain and danger
that can appal the heart of man. Nay, answered the merchant, you will not be
exposed to such a trial. The means of your deliverance are certain, provided
your courage does not belie your appearance.

14. Name them! name them! cried the impatient Hamet; place death before me in
every horrid shape, and if I shrink -- Patience, answered the merchant, we
shall be observed. But hear me attentively. I have in this city an inveterate
foe, who has heaped upon me every injury which can most bitterly sting the
heart of man.

15. This man is brave as he is haughty; and I must confess that the dread of
his strength and valor has hitherto deterred me from resenting his insults as
they deserve. Now, Hamet, your look, your form, your words, convince me that
you are born for manly daring.

16. Take this dagger; and as soon as the shades of night involve the city, I
will myself conduct you to the place, where you may at once revenge your
friend, and regain your freedom.

17. At this proposal, scorn and shame flashed from the kindling eye of Hamet,
and passion for a considerable time deprived him of the power of utterance; at
length he lifted his arms as high as his chains would permit, and cried with an
indignant tone, Mighty Prophet! and are these the wretches to which you permit
your faithful votaries to be enslaved?

18. Go, base Christian, and know that Hamet would not stoop to the vile trade
of an assassin, for all the wealth of Venice! no, not to purchase the freedom
of all his race! At these words, the merchan^, without seeming much abashed,
told him he was sorry he had offended him; but that he thought freedom had been
dearer to him than he found it was.

19. However, added he, as he turned his back, you will reflect upon my
proposal, and perhaps by tomorrow you may change your mind. Hamet disdained to
answer, and the merchant went his way.

20. The next day, however, he returned in company with his son, and mildly
accosted Hamet thus; The abruptness of the proposal I yesterday made you might
perhaps astonish you; but I am now come to discourse the matter more calmly
with you, and I doubt not, ^^en you have heard my reasons --

21. Christian, interrupted Hamet, with a severe, but composed countenance,
cease at length to insult the miserable with proposals more shocking than even
these chains. If thy religion permit such acts as those, know that they are
execrable and abominable to the soul of every Mohammedan: therefore, from this
moment let us break off all farther intercourse, and be strangers to each other.

22. No, answered the merchant, flinging himself into the arms of Hamet, let us
from this moment be more closely linked than ever! Generous man, whose virtues
may at once disarm and enlighten thy enemies! fondness for my son first made me
interested in thy fate; but from the moment that I saw thee yesterday, I
determined to set thee free. Therefore, pardon me this unnecessary trial of thy
virtue, which has only raised thee higher in my esteem.

23. Francisco has a soul which is as averse to deeds of treachery and blood,
as even Hamet himself. From this moment, generous man, thou art free; thy
ransom is already paid, with no other obligation than that of remembering the
affection of this thy young and faithful friend; and perhaps, hereafter, when
thou see an unhappy Christian groaning in Turkish fetters, thy generosity may
make thee think of Venice.

24. The feelings of Hamet at this unexpected deliverance are not to be
described. Francisco put him on board a ship, which was bound to one of the
Grecian islands, and, after taking leave of him in the tenderest manner, forced
him to accept of a purse of gold to pay his expenses.

25. Affectionate was the parting of Hamet with his little friend, whom he
embraced in an agony of tenderness, wept over him, and implored Heaven to grant
him all the blessings of this life.

26. About six months afterward, one morning, while the family were all in
bed, Francisco's house was discovered to be on fire, and great part of the
house was in flames before the family was alarmed. The terrified servants had
but just time to awaken Francisco, who was no sooner got into the street, than
the whole staircase gave way, and fell into the flames.

27* ^f the merchant thought himself happy on having saved himself, it was only
for a moment, as he soon recollected, that his beloved son was left behind to
the mercy of the flames. He sunk into the deepest despair, when upon inquiry he
found, that his son, who slept in an upper apartment, had been forgotten in the
general confusion.

28. He raved in agonies of grief, and offered half his fortune to any one, who
would risk his life to save his child. As he was known to be very rich, several
ladders were instantly raised by those who wished to obtain the reward; but the
violence of the flames drove every one down who attempted it.

29. The unfortunate youth then appeared on the top of the house, extending his
arms, and calling out for aid. The unhappy father became motionless, and
remained in a state of insensibility. At this critical moment, a man rushed
through the crowd, and ascended the tallest ladder, seemingly determined to
rescue the youth, or perish in the attempt.

30. A sudden gust of flame bursting forth, led the people to suppose he was
lost; but he presently appeared descending the ladder with the child in his
arms, without receiving any material injury. A universal shout attended this
noble action, and the father, to his inexpressible surprise, on recovering from
his swoon, found his child in his arms.

31. After giving vent to the first emotions of tenderness, he inquired after
his generous deliverer, whose features were so changed by the smoke, that they
could not be distinguished. Francisco immediately presented him with a ^^^se of
gold, promising the next day to give him the re^^rd he had offered.

32. The stranger replied, that he should accept of no reward. Francisco
started, and thought he knew the voice; when his son flew to the arms of his
deliverer, and cried out, "It is my dear Hamet! it is my dear Hamet!"

33. The astonishment and gratitude of the merchant were equally excited; and
retiring from the crowd, he took Hamet with him to a friend's house. As soon as
they were alone, Francisco inquired by what means he had been a second time
enslaved.

34. I will tell you in a few words, said the generous Turk. When I was taken
by the Venetian galleys, my father shared in my captivity. It was his fate, and
not my own, which so often made me shed those tears, which first attracted the
notice of your amiable son.

35. As soon as your bounty had set me free, I flew to the Christian who had
purchased my father. I told him, that as I was young and vigorous, and he aged
and infirm, I would be his slave instead of my father.

36. I added too the gold which your bounty had bestowed on me, and by these
means I prevailed on the Christian to send back my father in that ship you had
provided for me, without his knowing the cause of his freedom. Since that time
I have stayed here a willing slave, and Heaven has been so gracious as to put
it into my power to save the life of that youth, which I value a thousand times
more than my own.

37. The merchant was astonished at such an instance of gratitude and
affection, and pressed Hamet to accept of the half of his fortune, and to
settle in Venice for the remainder of his days. Hamet, however, with a noble
magnanimity, refused the offer, saying, he had done no more than what every one
ought to do in a similar situation.

38. Though Hamet seemed to under-rate his past services to the merchant, yet
the latter could not suffer things to pass in this manner. He again purchased
his freedom, and fitted a ship out on purpose to take him back to his own
country. At parting, they mutually embraced each other, and, as they thought,
took an eternal farewell.

39. After many years had elapsed, and young Francisco was grown up to manhood,
beloved and respected by every one, it so happened that some business made it
necessary for him and his father to visit a neighboring city on the coast; and
as they supposed a passage by sea would be more expeditious than by land, they
embarked in a Venetian vessel, which was bound to that port, and ready to sail.

40. A favorable gale soon wafted them out of sight, and promised them a speedy
passage; but, unfortunately for them, before they had proceeded half their
voyage, they were met by some Turkish vessels, who, after an obstinate
resistance from the Venetians, boarded them, loaded them with irons, and
carried them prisoners to Tunis. There they were exposed in the marketplace in
their chains, in order to be sold as slaves.

41. At last, a Turk came to the market, who seemed to be a man of superior
rank, and after looking over the prisoners, with an expression of compassion,
he fixed his eyes upon young Francisco, and asked the captain what was the
price of that young captive.

42. The captain replied, that he would not part with him for less than five
hundred pieces of gold. The Turk considered that as a very extraordinary price,
since he had seen him sell others, that exceeded him in strength and vigor, for
less than a fifth part of that money.

43. That is true, (replied the captain) but he shall either fetch me a price
that will repay me the damage he has occasioned me, or he shall labor all the
rest of his life at the oar. The Turk asked him, what damage he could have done
him more than the rest of the crew.

44. It was he (replied the captain) who animated the Christians to make a
desperate resistance, and thereby proved the destruction of many of my bravest
seamen: We three times boarded them with a fury that seemed invincible, and
each time did that youth attack us with a cool and determined opposition; so
that we were obliged to give up the contest, till other ships came to our
assistance. I will therefore have that price for him, or I will punish him for
life.

45. The Turk now surveyed young Francisco more attentively than before; and
the young man, who had hitherto fixed his eyes in sullen silence on the ground,
at length raised them up; but he had no sooner beheld the person who was
talking to the captain, than, in a loud voice, he uttered the name of Hamet.
The Turk, struck with astonishment, surveyed him for a moment, and then caught
him in his arms.

46. After a moment's pause, the generous Hamet lifted up his hands to heaven,
and thanked his God, who had put in his power to show his gratitude; but words
cannot express his feelings, when he found that both father and son were
slaves. Suffice it to say, that he instantly bought their freedom, and
conducted them to his magnificent house in the city.

47. They had here full leisure to discourse on the strange vicissitudes of
fortune, when Hamet told his Venetian friends, that after their generosity had
procured him liberty, he became an officer in the Turkish army, and happening
to be fortunate in all his enterprises, he had been gradually promoted, till he
arrived at the dignity of bashaw of Tunis.

48. That in this situation, he found the greatest consolation in alleviating
the misfortunes of the Christian prisoners, and always attended the sales of
those unhappy slaves, to procure liberty to a certain number of them. And
gracious Allah (added he) has this day put it in my power in some measure to
return the duties of gratitude.

49. They continued some days with Hamet, who did every thing in his power to
amuse and divert them; but as he found their desire was to return to their own
country, he told them that he would not detain them against their wishes; and
that they should embark the next day in a ship bound for Venice, which would be
furnished with a passport to carry them safe there.

50. The next day, he dismissed them with every mark of tenderness and
affection, and ordered a party of his own guards to attend them to the vessel.
They had no sooner got on board, than they found, to their inexpressible
surprise and joy, that they were in the very ship in which they had been taken,
and that, by the generosity of Hamet, not only the ship, but even the whole
crew, were redeemed and restored to freedom.

51. Francisco and his son, after a quick passage, arrived in their own
country, where they lived beloved and respected, and endeavored to convince
every one they knew, how great were the vicissitudes of fortune, and that God
never suffers humanity and generosity to go unrewarded, here or hereafter.

THE QUARREL OF BRUTUS AND CASSIUS.
Cassius. THAT you have wronged me does appear in this,
You have condemned and noted Lucius Pella,
For taking bribes here of the Sardians;
Wherein my letter (praying on his side,
Because I knew the man) was slighted of.

Brutus. You wronged yourself to write in such a case.

Cas. In such a time as this, it is not meet
That every nice offense should bear its comment.

Bru. Yet let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself
Are much condemned to have an itching palm,
To sell and mart your offices for gold,
To undeservers.

Cas. I an itching palm!
You know that you are Brutus that speak this,
Or, be assured, this speech were else your last.

Bru. The name of Cassius honors this corruption,
And chastisement does therefore hide its head.

Cas. Chastisement!

Bru. Remember March, the ides of March remember;
Did not great Julius bleed for justice sake?
What villain touched his body, that did stab,
And not for justice? What, shall one of us,
That struck the foremost man of all this world,
But for supporting robbers; shall we now
Contaminate our fingers with these bribes?
And sell the mighty meed of our large honors
For so much trash as may be grasped thus?
I had rather be a dog, and bay the moon,
Than such a Roman.

Cas. Brutus, bay not me,
I Will not endure it; you forget yourself,
To hedge me in; I am a soldier, I,
Older in practice, abler than yourself
To make conditions.

Bru. Go to; you are not, Cassius.

Cas. I am.

Bru. I say, you are not.

Cas. Urge me no more, I shall forget myself --
Have mind upon your health -- tempt me no farther.

Bru. Away, slight man!

Cas. Is it possible?

Bru. Hear me, for I will speak.
Must I give way and room to your rash choler?
Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?

Cas. Must I endure all this?

Bru. All this? aye, more. Fret till your proud heart breaks.
Go tell your slaves how choleric you are,
And make your bondmen tremble. Must I budge?
Must I observe you? Must I stand and crouch
Under your testy humor? Be assured,
You shall digest the venom of your spleen,
Though it do split you; for, from this day forth,
I Will use you for my mirth, yea for my laughter,
When you are waspish.

Cas. Is it come to this?

Bru. You say you are a better soldier:
Let it appear so; make your vaunting true,
And it shall please me well. For my own part,
I shall be glad to learn of noble men.

Cas. You wrong me every way; you wrong me, Brutus;
I said an elder soldier, not a better:
Did I say better?

Bru. If you did, I care not.

Cas. When Caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.

Bru. Peace, peace, you durst not so have tempted him.

Cas. I durst not?

Bru. No.

Cas. What, durst not tempt him!

Bru. For your life you durst not.

Cas. Do not presume too much upon my love;
I may do what I shall be sorry for.

Bru. You have done what you should be sorry for.
There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats;
For I am armed so strong in honesty,
That they pass by me, as the idle wind,
Which I respect not. I did send to you
For certain sums of gold, which you denied me;
For I can raise no money by vile means.
-- I had rather coin my heart,
And drop my blood for drachmas, than to wring
From the hard hand of peasants their vile trash,
By any indirection. I did send
To you for gold to pay my legions,
Which you denied me; was that done like Cassius?
Should I have answered Caius Cassius so?
When Marcus Brutus grows so covetous,
To lock such rascal counters from his friends,
Be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts,
Dash him to pieces.

Cas. I denied you not.

Bru. You did.

Cas. I did not; he was but a fool
That brought my answer back. Brutus has riv'd my heart;
A friend should bear a friend's infirmities;
But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.

Bru. I do not. Still you practice them on me.

Cas. You love me not.

Bru. I do not like your faults.

Cas. A friendly eye could never see such faults.

Bru. A flatterer's would not though they do
Appear as huge as high Olympus.

Cas. Come, Anthony, and young Octavius, come!
Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius.
For Cassius is a-weary of the world;
Hated by one he loves; braved by his brother;
Checked by a bondsman; all his faults observed;
Set in a note-book, learned and conn'd by rote
To cast into my teeth. O I could weep
My spirit from my eyes! -- There is my dagger,
And here my naked breast; within, a heart
Dearer than Plutus' mine, richer than gold!
If that thou need'st a Roman's, take it forth.
I that denied thee gold, will give my heart:
Strike as thou did at Caesar; for I know,
When thou did hate him worst, thou lov'dst him better
Than ever thou lov'dst Cassius.

Bru. Sheathe your dagger;
Be angry when you will, it shall have scope;
Do what you will, dishonor shall be humor.
O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb,
That carries anger, as the flint bears fire;
Which, much enforced, shows a hasty spark,
And strait is cold again.

Cas. Has Cassius lived
To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus,
When grief, and blood ill-temper'd vexes him?

Bru. When I spoke that, I was ill-tempered too.

Cas. Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.

Bru. And my heart too.

Cas. O Brutus!

Bru. What Is the matter?

Cas. Have you not love enough to bear with me
When that rash humor which my mother gave me
Makes me forgetful?

Bru. Yes, Cassius, and from henceforth,
When you are over-earnest with your Brutus,
He Will think your mother chides, and leave you so.

SPEECH OF DEMOSTHENES TO THE ATHENIANS, CONCERNING THE REGULATION OF THE STATE.
YOU ask, Athenians, "What real advantage have we derived from the speeches of
Demosthenes? He rises when he thinks proper; he deafens us with his harangues;
he declaims against the degeneracy of present times; he tells us of the virtues
of our ancestors; he transports us by his airy extravagance; he puffs up our
vanity; and then sits down."

2. But, could these my speeches once gain an effectual influence upon your
minds, so great would be the advantages conferred upon my country, that, were I
to attempt to speak them, they would appear to many as visionary. Yet still I
must assume the merit of doing some service, by accustoming you to hear
salutary truths.

3. And if your counselors be solicitous for any point of moment to their
country, let them first cure your ears; for they are distempered; and this,
from the inveterate habit of listening to falsehoods, to every thing, rather
than your real interests.

4. There is no man who dares openly and boldly to declare, in what case our
constitution is subverted. But I shall declare it. When you, Athenians, become
a helpless rabble, without conduct, without property, without arms, without
order, without unanimity; when neither your general, nor any other person, has
the least respect for your decrees; when no man dares to inform you of this
your condition, to urge the necessary reformation, much less to exert his
effort to effect it; then is your constitution subverted. And this is now the
case.

5. But, O my fellow-citizens! a language of a different nature has poured in
upon us; false, and highly dangerous to the State. Such is that assertion, that
in your tribunals is your great security; that your right of suffrage is the
real bulwark of the constitution. That these tribunals are our common resource
in all private contests, I acknowledge.

6. But, it is by arms we are to subdue our enemies; by arms we are to defend
our State. It is not by our decrees that we can conquer. To those, on the
contrary, who sight our battles with success, to these we owe the power of
decreeing, of transacting all our affairs, without control or danger. In arms,
then, let us be terrible; in our judicial transactions, humane.

7. If it be observed, that these sentiments are more elevated than might be
expected from my character; the observation, I confess, is just. Whatever is
said about a state of such dignity, upon affairs of such importance, should
appear more elevated than any character. To your worth should it correspond,
not to that of the speaker.

8. And now I shall inform you why none of those, who stand high in your
esteem, speak in the same manner. The candidates for office and employment go
about soliciting your voices, the slaves of popular favor. To gain the rank of
general, is each man's great concern; not to fill this station with true
manlike intrepidity.

9. Courage, if he possess it, he deems unnecessary; for, thus he reasons; he
has the honor, the renown of this city to support him; he finds himself free
from oppression and control; he needs but to amuse you with fair hopes; and,
thus, he secures a kind of inheritance in your emoluments. And he reasons truly.

10. But, do you yourselves once assume the conduct of your own affairs; and
then, as you take an equal share of duty, so shall you acquire an equal share
of glory. Now, your ministers and public speakers, without one thought of
directing you faithfully to your true interest, resign themselves entirely to
these generals. Formerly you divided into classes, in order to raise the
supplies; now the business of the classes is to gain the management of public
affairs.

11. The orator is the leader; the general seconds his attempts; the Three
Hundred are the assistants on each side; and all others take their parties, and
serve to fill up the several factions. And you see the consequences.

12. This man gains a statue; this amasses a fortune; one or two command the
State; while you sit down unconcerned, witnesses of their success; and, for an
uninterrupted course of ease and indolence, give them up those great and
glorious advantages, which really belong to you.

A FATHER'S ADVICE TO HIS CHILDREN.
OBSERVE and mark as well as you may, what is the temper and disposition of
those persons, whose speeches you hear, whether they be grave, serious, sober,
wise, discreet persons. If they be such, their speeches commonly are like
themselves, and well deserve your attention and observation.

2. But, if they be light, impertinent, vain, passionate persons, their speech
is for the most part accordingly; and the best advantage that you will gain by
their speech, is but thereby to learn their dispositions; to discern their
failings, and to make yourselves the more cautious both in your conversation
with them, and in your own speech and deportment; for in the unseemliness of
their speech you may better discern and avoid the like in yourselves.

3. If any person, that you do not very well know to be a person of truth,
sobriety, and weight, relate strange stories, be not too ready or easy to
believe them, nor report them after him. And yet, unless he be one of your
familiar acquaintance, be not too forward to contradict him; or if the
necessity of the occasion require you to declare your opinion of what is so
reported, let it be modestly and gently, not too bluntly or coarsely. By this
mean, on the one side you will avoid being abused by your too much credulity;
on the other side, you will avoid quarrels and distaste.

4. If any man speak any thing to the disadvantage or reproach of one that is
absent, be not too ready to believe it; only observe and remember it, for it
may be it is not true, or it is not all true, or some other circumstances were
mingled with it, which might give the business reported a justification, or at
least an allay, an extenuation, or a reasonable excuse.

5. If any person report unto you some injury done to you by another, either in
words or deeds, do not be over hasty in believing it; nor suddenly angry with
the person so accused; for it is possible it may be false or mistaken; and how
unseemly a thing will it be, when your credulity and passion shall perchance
carry you, upon a supposed injury, to do wrong to him that has done you none.

6. When a person is accused or reported to have injured you, before you give
yourself leave to be angry, think with yourself, why should I be angry before I
am certain it is true; or if it be true, how can I tell how much I should be
angry, till I know the whole matter? Though it may be he has done me wrong,
yet possibly it is misrepresented, or it was done by mistake, or it may be he
is sorry for it.

7. I will not be angry till I know there be cause, and if there be cause, yet
I will not be angry till I know the whole cause; for till then, if I must be
angry at all, yet I know not how much to be angry; it may be it is not worth my
anger, or if it be, it may be it deserves but a little. This will keep your
mind and carriage upon such occasions in a due temper and order; and will
disappoint malicious or officious tale-bearers.

8. If a man, whose integrity you do not very well know, make you great and
extraordinary professions and promises, give him as kind thanks as may be, but
give not much credit to it. Cast about with yourself what may be the reason of
his wonderful kindness; it is twenty to one but you will find something that he
aims at, beside kindness to you.

9. If a man flatter and commend you to your face, or to one that he thinks
will tell you of it; it is a thousand to one, either he has deceived and
abused you some way, or means to do so. Remember the fable of the fox
commending the singing of the crow, when she had somew^^^ in her mouth that the
fox liked.

10. If a person be choleric, passionate, and give you ill language, remember,
first, rather to pity him than to be moved into anger and passion with him; for
most certainly that man is in a distemper, and disordered. Observe him calmly,
and you shall see in him so much perturbation and disturbance, that you will
easily believe he is not a pattern to be imitated by you, and therefore return
not choler for anger; for you do but put yourself into a kind of frenzy because
you see him so.

11. Be sure you return not railing, reproaching, or reviling for reviling; for
it does but kindle more heat, and you will find silence, or at least very
gentle words, the most exquisite revenge for reproaches that can be; for either
it will cure the distemper in the other, and make him see and be sorry for his
passion, or it will torment him with more perturbation and disturbance.

12. Some men are excellent in the knowledge of husbandry, some of planting,
some of gardening, some in the mathematics, some in one kind, some in another;
in all your conversation, learn as near as you can wherein the skill and
excellence of any person lies, and put him upon talk of that subject, and
observe it, and keep it in memory or writing; by this mean you will glean up
the worth and excellence of every person you meet with, and at an easy rate put
together that which may be for your use upon all occasions.

13. Converse not with a liar or a swearer, or a man of obscene or wanton
language; for either he will corrupt you, or at least it will hazard your
reputation to be one of the like making. And if it does neither, yet it will
fill your memory with such discourses, that will be troublesome to you in
after-time, and the returns of the remembrance of the passages which you long
since heard of this nature, will haunt you, when your thoughts should be better
employed.

14. Let your speech be true; never speak any thing for a truth which you know
or believe to be false. It is a great sin against God who gave you a tongue, to
speak your offense against humanity itself; for where there is no truth, there
can be no safe society between man and man.

15. As you must be careful not to lie, so you must avoid coming near to it;
you must not equivocate, you must not speak that absolutely, which you have but
by hear say or relation; you must not speak that as upon knowledge which you
have but by conjecture or opinion only.

16. Let your words be few, especially when your betters, or strangers, or men
of experience or understanding, are present; for you do yourself at once two
great mischiefs. First, you betray and discover your own weakness and folly.
Secondly, you rob yourself of that opportunity which you might otherwise have
to gain knowledge, wisdom, and experience, by hearing those whom you silence by
your imper^inent talking.

17. Be not over earnest, loud, or violent in talking; for it is unseen^ly; and
earnest and loud talking make you overshoot and lose your business. When you
should be considering and pondering your thoughts, and how to express them
significantly, and to the purpose, you are striving to keep your tongue going,
and to silence an opponent, not with reason but with noise.

18. Be careful not to interrupt another in his talk; hear him out; you will
understand him the better, and be able to give him the better answer. It may
be, if you will give him leave, he will say something more than you have yet
heard, or well understood, or that which you did not expect.

19. Always before you speak, especially where the business is of moment,
consider beforehand, weigh the sense of your mind, which you intend to utter;
think upon the expressions you intend to use, that they may be significant,
pertinent, and inoffensive; and whereas it is the ordinary course of
inconsiderate persons to speak their words, and then to think, or not to think
till they speak; think first and speak after; if it be in any matter of moment
or seriousness.

20. Be sure you give not an ill report to any that you are not sure deserves
it. And in most cases, though a man deserve ill, yet you should be sparing to
report him so. In some cases indeed you are bound, in honesty and justice, to
give that account concerning the demerit or default of a person that he
deserves.

21. Avoid scoffing, and bitter and biting jeering, and jesting, especially at
the condition, credit, deformity, or natural defects of any person; for these
leave a deep impression, and are most apparent injustice; for, were you so
used, you would take it amiss; and many times such an injury costs a man dear,
when he little thinks of it.

22. Be very careful that you give no reproachful, bitter, menacing, or
spiteful words to any person, nay not to servants or other persons of an
inferior condition. There is no person so mean but that you may stand in need
of him in one kind, or at some time or another. Good words make friends, bad
words make enemies; it is the best prudence in the world to make as many
friends as honestly you can.

23. If there be occasion for you to speak in any company, always be careful,
if you speak at all, to speak latest, especially if strangers are in company;
for by this mean you will have the advantage of knowing the sense, judgment,
temper, and relations of others, which may be a great light and help to you in
ordering your speech; and you will better know the inclination of the company,
and speak with more advantage and acceptance, and with more security against
giving offense.

24. Be careful that you commend not yourselves; it is the most useless thing
that can be. You should avoid flattery from others, but especially decline
flattering yourselves. It is a sign your reputation is small and sinking, if
your own tongues must be your flatterers or commenders; and it is a fulsome and
unpleasing thing for others to hear it.

25. Abhor all foul, unclean and obscene speeches, it is a sign that the heart
is corrupt; and such kind of speeches will make it worse; it will taint and
corrupt yourselves and those who hear it, and bring disreputation to those who
use it.

26. Never use any profane speeches, nor make jests of scripture expressions.
When you use the names of God or Christ, or any passages or words of the holy
scripture, use them with reverence and seriousness, and not lightly or
scurrilously, for it is taking the name of God in vain.

27. If you hear any unseemly expressions used in religious exercises, you must
be careful to forget and not to publish them, or if you at all mention them,
let it be with pity and sorrow, not with derision or reproach.

ON THE PULPIT AND PREACHERS.
THE pulpit, therefore (and I name it, filled
With solemn awe, that bids me well beware
With what intent I touch that holy thing)
The pulpit (when the ^at'rist has at last,
Strutting and vap'ring in an empty school,
Spent all his force and made no proselyte)
I say the pulpit, in the sober use
Of its legitimate peculiar powers,
Must stand acknowledged, while the world shall stand,
The most important and effectual guard,
Support and ornament of virtue's cause.
2.
There stands the messenger of truth. There stands
The legate of the skies. His theme divine,
His office sacred, his credentials clear.
By him, the violated law speaks out
Its thunders, and by him, in strains as sweet
As angels use, the gospel whispers peace.
3.
He 'stablishes the strong, restores the weak,
Reclaims the wanderer, binds the broken heart,
And, armed himself in panoply compl^te
Of heavenly temper, furnishes with arms
Bright as his own, and trains by every rule
Of holy discipline, to glorious war,
The sacramental host of God's elect.
4.
I venerate the man, whose heart is warm,
Whose hands are pure, whose do^trine and whose life
Coincident, exhibit lucid proot
That he is honest in the sacred cause.
To such I render more than mere respect.
Whose actions say that they respect themselves.
5.
But loose in morals, and in manners vain;
In conversation frivolous, in dress
Extreme, at once rapacious and profuse,
Frequent in park, with lady at his side,
Ambling and prattling scandal as he goes;
But rare at home, and never at his books,
Or with his pen, save when he scrawls a card;
Constant at routs, familiar with a ^ound
Of ladyships, a stranger to the poor;
Ambitious of preferment for its gold,
And well prepared by ignorance and sloth,
By infidelity and love of the world,
To make God's work a sinecure; a slave
To his own pleasures, and his patron's pride.
6.
From such apostles, Oh ye mitred heads,
Preserve the church! and lay not careless hand^
On sculls that cannot teach, and will not learn.
7.
Would I describe a preacher, such as Paul,
Were he on earth, would hear, approve, and own,
Paul should himself direct me. I would trace
His master strokes, and draw from his design.
8.
I would express him simple, grave, sincere;
In doctrine incorrupt; in language plain;
And plain in manner. Decent, solemn, chaste,
And natural in gesture. Much impressed
Himself, as conscious of his awful charge;
And anxious, mainly, that the flock he feeds
May feel it too. Affectionate in look,
And tender in address, as well becomes
A messenger of grace to guilty men.
BRUTUS' SPEECH ON THE DEATH OF CAESAR.
ROMANS, COUNTRYMEN, AND LOVERS,
HEAR me, for my cause; and be silent, that you may hear. Believe me, for mine
honor; and have respect for mine honor, that you may believe. Censure me, in
your wisdom; and awake your senses, that you may the better judge.

2. If there be any in this assembly, any dear friend of Caesar, to him I say,
that Brutus' love to Caesar was no less than his. If then, that friend demand,
why Brutus rose against Caesar, this is my answer; not that I loved Caesar
less, but that I loved Rome more.

3. Had you rather Caesar were living, and die all slaves; than that Caesar
were dead, to live all freemen? As Caesar loved me, I weep for him; as he was
fortunate, I rejoice at it; as he was valiant, I honor him; but, as he was
ambitious, I slew him.

4. There are tears for his love, joy for his fortune, honor for his valor, and
death for his ambition. Who Is here so base that he would be a bondman? If any,
speak; for him have I offended.

5. Who Is here so rude, that he would not be a Roman? If any, speak; for him
have I offended. Who Is here so vile, that he will not love his country? If any,
speak; for him have I offended. I pause for a reply. --

6. None? Then none have I offended. I have done no more to Caesar, than you
should do to Brutus. And as I slew my best lover for the good of Rome, I
reserve the same dagger for myself, whenever it shall please my country to need
my death.

JUBA AND SYPHAX.
Juba. SYPHAX, I joy to meet thee thus alone.
I have observed of late thy looks are fallen,
Overcast with gloomy cares and discontent;
Then tell me, Syphax, I conjure thee, tell me
What are the thoughts that knit thy brow in frowns,
And turn thine eye thus coldly on thy prince?

Syphax. It Is not my talent to conceal my thoughts,
Or carry smiles or sunshine in my face,
When discontent sits heavy at my heart:
I have not yet so much of the Roman in me.

Jub. Why do thou cast out such ungenerous terms
Against the lords and sovereigns of the world?
Do not thou see mankind fall down before them,
And own the force of their superior virtue?
Is there a nation in the wilds of Afric,
Amidst our barren rocks and burning sands,
That does not tremble at the Roman name?

Syph. -- Where is the worth that sets this people up
Above your own Numidia's tawny sons?
Do they with tougher sinews bend the bow?
Or flies the javelin swifter to its mark,
Launched from the vigor of a Roman arm?
Who, like our active African instructs
The fiery steed, and trains him to his hand?
Or guides in troops the embattled elephant,
Laden with war? These, these are arts, my prince,
In which your Zama does not stoop to Rome.

Jub. These all are virtues of a meaner rank,
Perfections that are placed in bones and nerves.
A Roman soul is bent on higher views*
To civilize the rude unpolished world,
To lay it under the restraint of laws;
To make man mild, and sociable to man;
To cultivate the wild licentious savage
With wisdom, discipline, and liberal arts;
The establishments of life: virtues like these
Make human nature shine, reform the soul,
And break our fierce barbarians into men.

Syph. Patience, just heavens! -- Excuse an old man's warmth.
What are those wondrous civilizing arts,
This Roman polish, and this smooth behavior,
That render man thus tractable and tame?
Are they not only to disguise our passions,
To set our looks at variance with our thoughts,
To check the starts and sallies of the soul,
And break off all its commerce with the tongue?
In short to change us into other creatures
Than what our nature and the gods designed us?

Jub. To strike thee dumb, turn up thy eyes to Cato!
There may thou see to what majestic height
The Roman virtues lift up mortal man.
While good, and just, and anxious for his friends,
He Is still severely bent against himself;
Renouncing sleep, and rest, and food, and ease,
He strives with thirst and hunger, toil and heat;
And when his fortune sets before him all
The pomp and pleasure that his soul can wish,
His rigid virtue will accept of none.

Syph. Believe me, prince, there is not an African
That traverses our vast Numidian deserts
In quest of prey, and lives upon his bow,
But better practices these boasted virtues.
Coarse are his meals, the fortune of the chase,
Amidst the running stream he slakes his thirst,
Toils all the day, and at the approach of night
On the first friendly bank he throws him down,
Or rests his head upon a rock till morn:
Then rises fresh, pursues the wonted game;
And if the following day he chance to find
A new repast, or an untasted spring,
Blesses his stars, and thinks it luxury.

Jub. Thy prejudices, Syphax, will not discern
What virtues grow from ignorance and what from choice,
Nor how the hero differs from the brute.
But grant that others could with equal glory
Look down on pleasures, and the baits of sense;
Where shall we find the man that bears affliction,
Great and majestic in his griefs, like Cato?
See, with what strength, what steadiness of mind,
He triumphs in the midst of all his suffering^!
How does he rise against a load of woes,
And thank the gods that threw the weight upon him!

Syph. It Is pride, rank pride, and haughtiness of soul:
I think the Romans call it stoicism.
Had not your royal father thought so highly
Of Roman virtue, and of Cato's cause,
He had not fallen by a slave's hand inglorious:
Nor would his slaughtered army now have lain
On Afric sands, disfigured with their wounds,
To gorge the wolves and vultures of Numidia.

Jub. Why do thou call my sorrows up afresh!
My father's name brings tears into mine eyes.

Syph. Oh, that you would profit by your father's ills!

Jub. What would thou have me do?

Syph. Abandon Cato.

Jub. Syphax, I should be more than twice an orphan
By such a loss.

Syph. Ay, there is the tie that binds you!
You long to call him father. Marcia's charms
Work in your heart unseen, and plead for Cato.
No wonder you are deaf to all I say.

Jub. Syphax, your zeal becomes importunate;
I Have hitherto permitted it to rave,
And talk at large; but learn to keep it in,
Lest it should take more freedom than I Will give it.

Syph. Sir, your great father never used me thus.
Alas, he is dead! but can you ever forget
The tender sorrows, and the pangs of nature,
The fond embraces, and repeated blessings,
Which you drew from him in your last farewell?
Still must I cherish the dear, sad remembrance,
At once to torture, and to please my soul.
The good old king, at parting, wrung my hand,
(His eyes brimfull of tears) then sighing cried;
Pr'ythee be careful of my son! -- His grief
Swelled up so high, he could not utter more.

Jub. Alas, the story melts away my soul!
The best of fathers! how shall I discharge
The gratitude and duty which I owe him?

Syph. By laying up his counsels in your heart.

Jub. His counsels bade me yield to thy directions:
Then, Syphax, chide me in severest terms;
Vent all thy passion, and I Will stand its shock,
Calm and unruffled as a summer's sea,
When not a breath of wind flies over its surface.

Syph. Alas, my prince, I Will guide you to your safety.

Jub. I do believe thou would; but tell me how?

Syph. Fly from the fate of Caesar's foes.

Jub. My father scorned to do it.

Syph. And therefore died.

Jub. Better to die ten thousand deaths,
Than wound my honor.

Syph. Rather say, your love.

Jub. Syphax, I Have promised to preserve my temper;
Why will thou urge me to confess a flame
I long have stifled, and would fain conceal?

Syph. Believe me, prince, though hard to conquer love,
It Is easy to divert and break its force.
The glowing dames of Zama's royal court
Have faces flashed with more exalted charms;
The sun that rolls his chariot over their heads
Works up more fire and color in their cheeks:
Were you with these, my prince, you would soon forget
The pale unripen'd beauties of the North.

Jub. It Is not a set of features, nor complexion,
The tincture of the skin that I admire.
Beauty soon grows familiar to the lover,
Fades in his eyes, and palls upon the sense.
The virtuous Marcia towers above her sex.
See how the lovely maid improves her charms,
With inward greatness, unaffected wisdom,
And sanctity of manners. Cato's soul
Shines out in every thing she acts or speaks,
While winning mildness and attractive smiles
Dwell in her looks, and with becoming grace
Soften the rigor of her father's virtues.

Syph. How does your tongue grow wanton in her praise!

GENERAL WOLFE'S ADDRESS TO HIS ARMY.
I CONGRATULATE you, my brave countrymen, and fellow soldiers, on the spirit
and success with which you have executed this important part of our enterprise.
The formidable Heights of Abraham are now surmounted; and the city of Quebec,
the object of all our toils, now stands in full view before us.

2. A perfidious enemy, who have dared to exasperate you by their cruelties,
but not to oppose you on equal ground, are now constrained to face you on the
open plain, without ramparts or entrenchments to shelter them.

3. You know too well the forces which compose their army to dread their
superior numbers. A few regular troops from Old France, weakened by hunger and
sickness, who when fresh were unable to withstand British soldiers, are their
General's chief dependence.

4. Those numerous companies of Canadians, insolent, mutinous, unsteady and ill
disciplined, have exercised his utmost skill to keep them together to this
time; and as soon as their irregular ardor is damped by one firm fire, they
will instantly turn their backs, and give you no further trouble but in the
pursuit.

5. As for those savage tribes of Indians, whose horrid yells in the forests
have struck many a bold heart with affright, terrible as they are with the
tomahawk and scalping-knife to a flying and prostrate foe, you have experienced
how little their ferocity is to be dreaded by resolute men upon fair and open
ground. You can now only consider them as the just objects of a severe revenge
for the unhappy fate of many slaughtered countrymen.

6. This day puts it into your power to te^minate the fatigues of a siege which
has so long employed your courage and patience. Possessed with a full
confidence of the certain success which British valor must gain over such
enemies, I have led you up these steep and dangerous rocks; only solicitous to
show you the foe within your reach.

7. The impossibility of a retreat makes no difference in the situation of men
resolved to conquer or die; and, believe me, my friends, if your conquest could
be bought with the blood of your General, he would most cheerfully resign a
life which he has long devoted to his country.

FOSCARI, THE UNFORTUNATE VENETIAN.
THE most affecting instance of the odious inflexibility of Venetian courts,
appears in the case of Foscari, son to the Doge of that name. This young man
had, by some imprudences, given offense to the Senate, and was, by their
orders, confined at Treviso, when Almor Donato, one of the Council of Ten, was
assassinated, on the 5th of November, 1450, as he entered his own house.

2. A reward, in ready money, with pardon for this or any other crime, and a
pension of two hundred ducats, revertible to children, was promised to any
person who would discover the planner or perpetrator of this crime. No such
discovery was made.

3. One of young Foscari's footmen, named Olivier, had been observed loitering
near Donato's house, on the evening of the murder; he fled from Venice next
morning. These, with other circumstances of less importance, created a strong
suspicion that Foscari had engaged this man to commit the murder.

4. Olivier was taken, brought to Venice, put to the torture, and confessed
nothing; yet the Council of Ten, being prepossessed with an opinion of their
guilt, and imagining that the master would have less resolution, used him in
the same cruel manner. The unhappy young man, in the midst of his agony,
continued to assert, that he knew nothing of the assassination.

5. This convinced the Court of his firmness, but not of his innocence; yet as
there was no legal proof of his guilt, they could not sentence him to death. He
was condemned to pass the rest of his life in banishment, at Canea, in the
island of Candia.

6. This unfortunate youth bore his exile with more impatience than he had done
the rack; he often wrote to his relations and friends, praying them to
intercede in his behalf, that the term of his banishment might be abridged, and
that he might be permitted to return to his family before he died. All his
applications were fruitless; those to whom he addressed himself had never
interfered in (...) favor, for fear of giving offense to the obdurate Council*
or had interfered in vain.

7. After languishing five years in exile, having lost all hope of return,
through the interposition of his own family or countrymen, in a fit of despair
he addressed the Duke of Milan, putting him in mind of services which the Dog^,
his father, had rendered him, and begging that he would use his powerful
influence with the State of Venice, that his sentence might be recalled.

8. He entrusted his letter to a merchant, going from Canea to Venice, who
promised to take the first opportunity of sending it from thence to the Duke;
instead of which, this wretch, as soon as he arrived at V^^ice, delivered it to
the chiefs of the Council of Ten.

9. This conduct of young Foscari appeared criminal in the eyes of those
Judges; for by the laws of the republic, all its subjects are expressly
forbidden claiming the protection of foreign princes, in any thing which
relates to the government of Venice.

10. Foscari was therefore ordered to be brought from Candia, and shut up in
the State prison. There the chiefs of the Council of Ten ordered him once more
to be put to the torture, to draw from him the motives which determined him to
apply to the Duke of Milan. Such an exertion of law is, indeed, the most
flagrant injustice.

11. The miserable youth declared to the Council, that he wrote the letter in
the full persuasion that the merchant, whose character he knew, would betray
him, and deliver it to them; the consequence of which, he foresaw, would be,
his being ordered back a prisoner to Venice, the only means he had in his power
of seeing his parents and friends; a pleasure for which he had languished, with
unsurmountable desire, for some time, and which he was willing to purchase at
the expense of any danger or pain.

12. The Judges, little affected with this generous instance of filial piety,
ordained, that the unhappy young man should be carried back to Candia, and
there be imprisoned for a year, and remain banished to that island for life;
with this condition, that if he should make any more applications to foreign
powers, his imprisonment should be perpetual. At the same time they gave
permission, that the Doge and his lady might visit their unfortunate son.

13. The Doge was, at this time, very old; he had been in possession of the
office above thirty years. Those wretched parents had an interview with their
son in one of the apartments of the palace; they embraced him with all the
tenderness which his misfortunes and his filial affection deserved.

14. The father exhorted him to bear his hard fate with firmness. The son
protested, in the most moving terms, that this was not in his power; that
however others could support the dismal loneliness of a prison, he could not;
that his heart was formed for friendship, and the reciprocal endearments of
social life; without which, his soul sunk into dejection worse than death, from
which alone he should look for relief, if he should again be confined to the
horrors of a prison; and, melting into tears, he sunk at his father's feet,
imploring him to take compassion on a son who had ever loved him with the most
dutiful affection, and who was perfectly innocent of the crime of which he was
accused.

15. He conjured him, by every bond of nature and religion, by the bowels of a
father, and the mercy of a Redeemer, to use his influence with the Council to
mitigate their sentence, that he might be saved from the most cruel of all
deaths, that of expiring under the slow tortures of a broken heart, in a
horrible banishment from every creature he loved. "My son," replied the Doge,
"submit to the laws of your country, and do not ask of me what is not in my
power to obtain."

16. Having made this effort, he retired to another apartment; and, unable to
support any longer the acuteness of his feelings, sunk into a state of
insensibility, in which condition he remained till some time after his son had
failed on his return to Candia.

17. Nobody has presumed to describe the anguish of the wretched mother. Those
who are endowed with the most exquisite sensibility, and who have experienced
distresses in some degree similar, will have the justest idea of what it was.

18. The accumulated misery of those unhappy parents touched the hearts of some
of the most powerful Senators, who applied with so much energy for a complete
pardon for young Foscari, that they were on the point of obtaining it; when a
vessel arrived from Candia, with tidings, that the miserable youth had expired
in prison a short time after his return.

19. Some years after this, Nicholas Erizzo, a noble Venetian, being on his
deathbed, confessed that, bearing a violent resentment against the Senator
Donato, he had committed the assassination for which the unhappy family of
Foscari had suffered so much.

20. At this time the sorrows of the Doge were at an and; he had existed only a
few months after the death of his son. His life had been prolonged, till he
beheld his son persecuted to death for an infamous crime; but not till he
should see this foul stain washed from his family, and the innocence of his
beloved son made manifest to the world.

21. The ways of Heaven never appeared more dark and intricate, than in the
incidents and catastrophe of this mournful story. To reconcile the permission
of such events to our ideas of infinite power and goodness, however difficult,
is a natural attempt in the human mind, and has exercised the ingenuity of
philosophers in all ages, while, in the eye of Christians, those seeming
perplexities afford an additional proof, that there will be a future state in
which the ways of God to man will be fully justified.

PART OF CICERO'S ORATION AGAINST VERRES.
I ASK now, Verres, what you have to advance against this charge? Will you
pretend to deny it? Will you pretend that any thing false, that even any thing
aggravated is alleged against you?

2. Had any prince, or any state, committed the same outrage against the
privilege of Roman citizens, should we not think we had sufficient reason for
declaring immediate war against them?

3. What punishment, then, ought to be inflicted upon a tyrannical and wicked
praetor, who dared, at no greater distance than Sicily, within sight of the
Italian coast, to put to the infamous death of crucifixion that unfortunate and
innocent citizen, Publius Gavius Cofanus, only for his having asserted his
privilege of citizenship, and declared his intention of appealing to the
justice of his country against a cruel oppressor, who had unjustly confined him
in prison at Syracuse, whence he had just made his escape?

4. The unhappy man, arrested as he was going to embark for his native country,
is brought before the wicked praetor. With eyes darting fury, and a countenance
dis^orted with cruelty, he orders the helpless victim of his rage to be
stripped, and rods to be brought; accusing him, but without the least shadow of
evidence, or even of suspicion, of having come to Sicily as a spy.

5. It was in vain that the unhappy man cried out, "I am a Roman citizen; I
have served under Lucius Pretius, who is now at Panormus, and will attest my
innocence." The blood-thirsty praetor, deaf to all he could urge in his own
defense, ordered the infamous punishment to be inflicted.

6. Thus, fathers, was an innocent Roman citizen publicly mangled with
scourging; whilst the only words he uttered amidst his cruel sufferings were,
"I am a Roman citizen!" With these he hoped to defend himself from violence and
infamy. But of so little service was this privilege to him, that while he was
asserting his citizenship, the order was given for his execution; for his
execution upon the cross!

7. O Liberty! O sound, once delightful to every Roman ear! O sacred privilege
of Roman citizenship! once sacred! now trampled upon! But what then! Is it come
to this? Shall an inferior magistrate, a governor, who holds his power of the
Roman people, in a Roman province, within sight of Italy, bind, scourge,
torture with fire and red-hot plates of iron, and at last put to the infamous
death of the cross, a Roman citizen?

8. Shall neither the cries of innocence expiring in agony, the tears of
pitying spectators, nor the majesty of the Roman commonwealth, nor the fear of
the justice of his country, restrain the licentious and wanton cruelty of a
monster, who, in confidence of his own riches, strikes at the root of liberty,
and sets mankind at defiance?

9. I conclude with expressing my hopes, that your wisdom and justice, fathers,
will not, by suffering the atrocious and unexampled insolence of Caius Verres
to escape the due punishment, leave room to apprehend the danger of a total
subversion of authority, and introduction of general anarchy and confusion.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A TUTOR AND PUPIL, ON ILL HUMOR.
Tutor. WHY that sour look and those short speeches, which you gave your
companion, my young f^iend? Nothing gives me more uneasiness than to see
persons in ill humor, and disposed to torment each other. In the flower of
their age, and in the very season of pleasure especially, why will they waste
the few days of sunshine in disputing and repining; and only feel their error,
when it is too late to repair it. Ill humor embitters every enjoyment, and
turns a paradise into a place of misery.


Pupil. How can we possibly appear always happy, when we have so few happy
days? There is ever some thorn annexed to the sweetest rose. A bitter
disappointment; an unsatisfied desire; an unexpected evil is ever present to
irritate and ruffle the mind, and destroy its peace.


Tutor. Let us preserve our minds in a disposition to enjoy the good things
Heaven sends us, and we shall be able to support the evil, when it comes, with
resignation and composure.


Pupil. But we cannot always command our tempers: much depends on the
constitution; and when the body is in pain, the mind cannot be at ease.


Tutor. Allow it to be a natural disease of the mind, to be discomposed by
untoward events; but is there no remedy for it? May not much be done by
prudence and resolution toward curing it? Ill humor may be compared to sloth.
It is natural to men to be indolent; but if once they get the better of
indolence, they exert themselves with alacrity, and action becomes a real
pleasure.


Pupil. But we are not masters of ourselves; our feelings overpower our reason,
and even make us neglect our interest. You may as well advise milk not to turn
sour by being exposed to the sun, or the sensitive plant not to shrink from the
touch, as the mind of man to be unruffled by cross accidents, and his
appearance to be calm and cheerful, when he suffers insults, injuries, or pain.


Tutor. Say not what our strength will effect till we have tried it. Do not the
sick consult physicians, submit to scrupulous regimen, and the most nauseous
medicines, to recover their health? Why neglect the more pernicious disorders
of the mind? Why not use more diligence and care to cure them? What quality is
more desirable than good humor? It adds charms to virtue, and even lessens the
hatefulness of vice. It is essential to social happiness; and when we choose a
companion, whether for an hour or a year, for the journey of a day, or the
journey of life, this is a principal requisite.


Pupil. I acknowledge its excellency. It is valuable in brute animals; it
pleases even in a domestic cat or dog; and good temper is one of the best
qualities in a horse, which no beauty of shape, color or eyes can supply. How
much more amiable is it in a fellow-being? But what methods can you prescribe
for obtaining and preserving it? Perhaps I may become a proficient, if not an
adept in this art.


Tutor. Cultivate benevolent dispositions. Accustom yourself to turn your mind
from deformed and painful objects to scenes of moral and natural beauty. Think
how unreasonable and cruel is ill humor. Is it not enough that we are without
the power to make another happy, but must we deprive him of the satisfaction,
which, if left to himself, he is frequently capable of enjoying? It is often
mean and contemptible. When a man is in ill humor, why does he not hide it, and
bear the burden of it himself, without interrupting the pleasure of others?
Because he is conscious of wanting worth, is full of that envious discontent
which foolish vanity produces, and dislikes to see people happy unless their
happiness is his own work.


Pupil. Despicable meanness indeed! What punishment does not he deserve, who,
from such motives, uses his power over a human heart to rob it of that real
pleasure, which it would naturally enjoy!


Tutor. Often by such a cruel tyranny, the peace of a tender and delicate mind
is so deeply wounded, that every favor, and every possible attention
afterward, cannot heal it; domestic sweets are embittered; and moral
misconduct ensues.


Pupil. Henceforth then I will each day inquire what good I can render, and
what evil avert from my friends? If, when their minds are tormented by violent
passion, or overwhelmed in deep distress, I cannot give them relief, I can at
least endeavor not to interrupt them in their pleasures; and if I cannot
augment my own happiness, I may avoid diminishing theirs.


Tutor. A noble resolution! worthy an ingenuous heart! As every indulgence of
passion makes a second indulgence more natural, so every victory over it makes
a second conquest more easy. By the habitual exercise of the gentle and tender
affections, you will secure to yourselves pure and permanent pleasure; you will
spread joy and cheerfulness all around you; and be fitted for the perfect
enjoyments of that world, where meekness, humanity and benevolence shall have
an unceasing reign.


A SHORT ADDRESS TO PARENTS.
TO you, who are parents, nature itself has given a tender concern for your
children's welfare, as your own; and reminds you justly, that, as you have
brought them into the dangers of life, your business is to provide that they
get well through them.

2. Now, the only provision commonly attended to, of wealth and honors, can
never produce happiness, unless the mind, on which all depends, be taught to
enjoy them properly. Fortune, without this, will but lead them to more
abandoned sallies of extravagance, and expose them to more public censure.

3. Education then is the great care with which you are entrusted; scarce more
for their sakes than your own. You may be negligent of your son's instruction,
but it is on you as well as himself, that his ignorance and contemptibleness
will bring both reproach and inconvenience. You may be regardless of his
moral^; but you may be the person who will at last most severely feel the want
of them.

4. You may be indifferent about his religion; but remember, dutifulness to you
is one great principle of religion, and all the rest promote such habits as you
may bitterly repent (when it is too late) your omission to cultivate in him;
and you may live and die miserable on his account, whom timely care would have
made your joy and comfort.

5. Therefore, in a case of such moment, let no false shame nor favorite
passion prevail over you, but "Give your hearts early to the Lord who made
you." Lay the foundations of your lives here, on the firm ground of Christian
faith; and build upon it whatever is just and good, worthy and noble, till the
structure be complete in moral beauty.

6. The world, into which you are entering, lies in wait with variety of
temptations. Unfavorable sentiments of religion will soon be suggested to you,
and all the snares of luxury, false honor, and interest, spread in your way,
which, with most of your rank, are too successful, and to many, fatal.

7. Happy the few, who in any part of life become sensible of their errors, and
with painful resolution tread back the wrong steps which they have taken!

8. But happiest of men is he, who, by an even course of right conduct, from
the first, as far as human frailty permits, has at once avoided the miseries
of sin, the sorrows of repentance, and the difficulties of virtue; who not only
can think of his present state with composure, but reflect on his past behavior
with thankful approbation; and look forward with unmixed joy to that important
future hour, when he shall appear before God, and humbly offer to him a whole
life spent in his service.

A SERIOUS ADDRESS FROM A PRECEPTOR TO HIS SCHOLARS.
I AM truly sensible of the important trust reposed in me, and cannot but feel
a solicitude to discharge it with propriety. I will not say that the pecuniary
emolument arising from it is by any means indifferent to me. No man would
sacrifice his ease, and enter into an anxious employment, without a desire of
those rewards which are allotted to industry.

2. And it is equitable that he, who is willing to step forward and render
himself extensively useful to others, should derive such advantages from his
exertions, as may render his old age easy and respected, or provide for the
wants of a rising family.

3. But I must declare, on the other hand, that the satisfaction arising from a
consciousness of performing the duty incumbent on me, and rendering a service
equivalent to the recompense, sweetens every labor, and gives additional value
to the pecuniary compensation.

4. You are placed here for two purposes; the improvement of the understanding,
and the formation of virtuous principles for the guidance of your moral
conduct. Improvement of the understanding is apparently the first object in
your entrance at school; but it cannot be doubted but that improvement of the
heart is really esteemed by those to whom you are most dear, at a higher price
than the finest accomplishment of the most cultivated intellect.

5. It is your business to unite these estimable objects, and to suffer your
hearts and understandings to vie with each other in the pursuit of excellence.
The principal purpose of my frequent addresses is to promote the knowledge and
the practice of the Christian religion; and in the performance of this purpose,
I shall of necessity be led to recommend the purest system of morality. Ethics,
improved and exalted by the Christian religion, become the guides to real
wisdom and solid happiness, to which they could never attain when taught only
in the schools of heathen philosophy.

6. In the religious part of your education, it is not expected that you should
be engaged in the profound disquisitions of theology. The plain doctrines of
the religion which you have been taught to profess must be explained to you;
but the principal business is to open your hearts for the reception of those
sentiments and precepts, which conduce to the direction of your actions in the
employments and engagements of your subsequent life.

7. In the first place, I must then remind you of the necessity of reading the
Scriptures; that is, of drinking the sacred waters at the fountain. But to read
the Scriptures to advantage, judgment is necessary; and as judgment at your age
is not mature, you must seek and follow the directions of your instructors.

8. At your age, the plainest and most perspicuous passages will best deserve
and reward your attention. The historical parts of the Old Testament will
entertain you, if you consider them only in a classical view, as valuable
passages of ancient history; but I chiefly refer you to the books which more
immediately conduce to moral instruction.

9. If you read the Old Testament with a taste for its beauties, you will
accomplish two important purposes at the same time. You will acquire a
knowledge of the Holy Bible, which is your duty; and you will improve your
taste and judgment, which is your business as students in the course of a
polite education.

10. The New Testament requires the peculiar attention of every one who
professes himself a Christian. But here also judgment is necessary to direct
the student in the mode of his study. To one who has not the requisite share of
introductory knowledge, the Gospel will appear to contain many difficulties.

11. As you cannot yet engage in theological studies, I must recommend it to
you to take up the Testament with that humility which becomes all human
creatures, but more particularly persons so young as you are, and so destitute
of all that knowledge which can enable you to form a decisive opinion in
divinity.

12. You will do right to pay particular attention to the sermon on the mount,
and to that admirable epitome of all moral philosophy, the rule of doing to
others as we wish them to do to us. If you pay due obedience to this precept,
you will never hesitate in determining what part you shall act whenever
difficulties occur.

13. It will however be proper that you should at an early age familiarize to
your mind the language of the Scriptures, in all their parts, though you should
not be able fully to comprehend them. You will thus treasure up many useful
passages in your memory, which, on many occasions in the course of your lives,
may be useful.

14. A very early acquaintance with the words of the Old and New Testament,
even before any adequate ideas of their meaning have been obtained, has been
found useful in subsequent life to the professed divine.

15. And here I cannot but animadvert on the prevalent neglect of the Holy
Scriptures; a neglect which too plainly indicates a faint belief in the
doctrines which they contain, and which ought to animate every parent and
instructor in the business of infusing religious sentiments and a reverence for
the Scriptures, while the mind is most susceptible of deep impressions.

16. You, who constitute a part of the rising generation, will exert yourselves
in removing an evil which menaces the ruin of the national morals and
prosperity. They indeed who are capable of a sentiment so enlarged as this,
exhibit a manliness of mind, which is the more honorable to them as it is
uncommon at their age.

17. In the religious part of your education, it would be a disgraceful
omission to neglect the catechism. I recommend it to you as a useful, though
humble guide, and I wish to warn you against that pride of heart which induces
some persons to slight it, and from that spirit of censoriousness, which causes
in others a dislike of all that contradicts their own particular persuasion.

18. Make it a rule, never to be violated, to pray night and morning. It is
indeed true that in this, and other schools, it is usual to begin and end the
exercises of the day with prayer; but I am sorry to say, that this is often
considered as a mere formality. You will pay attention to this duty, and you
will also repeat other prayers at lying down on your pillow and rising from it.

19. You will in vain expect success in your studies, unless you implore a
blessing on them from Heaven; or if you should be permitted by Providence to
make a proficiency in knowledge for the sake of others, you will not derive
from your acquisition that degree of happiness which you would otherwise enjoy.
You must ask the Giver of every good gift for that most valuable gift of
literary improvement.

20. You are apt at your age to be thoughtless. You enjoy health and spirits.
You are strangers to the cares of the world. Cheerfulness indeed becomes you;
but let me prevail with you, when I entreat you to consider the value of time,
and the importance of making a good use of it.

21. Consider your parents. Form an idea of the anxiety which they feel on your
account. You must have observed how eagerly they wish for your improvement.
They feel a laudable ambition, which prompts them to desire that you may arrive
at eminence in whatever profession or employment you may hereafter be engaged
by Providence.

22. To them it would be a painful sight to see you contemptible and
unsuccessful. But nothing can vindicate you from contempt, or ensure your
success so effectually as personal merit, or the qualities of a good
disposition, adorned with a competent share of human learning and
accomplishments.

23. Your parents do all in their power to promote your improvement; but after
all, they cannot but know that it remains with yourselves to give efficacy and
final good success to their endeavors. The mind is not like a vessel into which
may be poured any quantity of whatever the possessor chooses to infuse. It is
rather like a plant, which, by the operation of its own internal powers,
imbibes the nutriment afforded by the earth.

24. But, not to dwell on similies, it is certain that your instructors can
serve you only in conjunction with your own efforts. Let me then entreat you to
exert yourselves, if you have any regard for your parents, whose happiness so
essentially depends on your conduct; if you have any regard for your own honor,
success, and comfort; if you hope to be useful and respected in society, and
happy in a future state.

FINIS.

