A MAP of BARBARY comprehending MOROCCO, FEZ, ALGIERS, TUNIS and TRIPOLI.


A SHORT ACCOUNT OF ALGIERS, AND OF ITS SEVERAL WARS AGAINST SPAIN, FRANCE,
ENGLAND, HOLLAND, VENICE, AND OTHER POWERS OF EUROPE, FROM THE USURPATION OF
BARBAROSSA AND THE INVASION OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. TO THE PRESENT TIME. WITH
A CONCISE VIEW OF THE ORIGIN OF THE RUPTURE BETWEEN ALGIERS AND THE UNITED
STATES.

AUT HISCE TELLUS IN PATULOS SPECUS,
AETHERVE FLAMMIS PERDE SEQUACIBUS
TURPES COLONOS, AFRICANAE
DEDECUS, OPPROBRIUMQUE TERRAE.
Buchanan. TO WHICH IS ADDED, A COPIOUS APPENDIX, CONTAINING LETTERS FROM
CAPTAINS PENROSE, M'SHANE, AND SUNDRY OTHER AMERICAN CAPTIVES, WITH A
DESCRIPTION OF THE TREATMENT THOSE PRISONERS EXPERIENCE.

SECOND EDITION, IMPROVED.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR MATTHEW CAREY, NO. 118, MARKET STREET, OCTOBER 20,
1794.

[COPY RIGHT SECURED, ACCORDING TO ACT OF CONGRESS.]

CONTENTS.
Chap. I. General description of the country of Algiers. Climate. Seacoast.
Principal cities. 3 Chap. II. Customs. Religion. Government. Land Forces.
Corsairs. 10 Chap. III. Origin of the present government of Algiers. Expedition
of Charles V. 16 Chap. IV. Pinchinin. His engagement with a Dutch ship.
Bombardment and destruction of Algiers, by the French. Defeat of the Spaniards.
27 Chap. V. State of America as to Algiers. Conduct of Britain, Concluding
Remarks. 33
APPENDIX.
No. I. Letter from William Penrose, captain of the ship President, to his
owners, dated Algiers, Nov. 4, 1793. 37 No. II. Extract of a letter from John
Bulkeley and Son, to a merchant in this city, dated Lisbon, Nov. 15, 1793. 38
No. III. Letter from J. Bulkeley and Son, to William Bell, dated Lisbon,
December 17, 1793. ib. No. IV. Extract of a letter from John M'Shone, captain
of the Minerva to Wm. Bell, dated Algiers, Nov. 13, 1793. 39 No. V. Copy of a
letter from captain O'Brien, to James Simpson, Esquire. at Gibraltar, dated
Algiers, the 28 th November, 1793. 40 No. VI. Letter from sundry captive
American captains, to colonel D. Humphreys, dated Algiers, Dec. 29 th, 1793. 41
No. VII. To captain O'Brien, and the other captains, etc. of the United States,
now prisoners in Algiers, dated Madrid, January 12 th, 1794. 43 No. VIII.
Treatment of the American Prisoners at Algiers. 44 No. IX. List of the American
vessels captured by the Algerines. ib. No. X. Reflections on Slavery. 45 No. XI.
Letter from Messrs. Wignell and Reinagle. 46 No. XII. Amount of the benefit at
Charleston, for relief of the American captives. ib. No. XIII. Extracts from a
Poem of Colonel Humphreys. ib.
SHORT ACCOUNT, etc.
CHAPTER I. General description of the country of Algiers. Climate. Seacoast.
Principal cities.
ALGIERS is a country which derives its name from its metropolis; and extends
four hundred and eighty miles in length from east to west along the northern
coast of Africa. Its utmost breadth is three hundred and twenty miles, but at
the distance of an hundred miles from the the seacoast, that part of Africa
becomes a barren desert, almost utterly uninhabitable either by man or beast.
Algiers is situated between thirty-two and thirty-seven degrees of north
latitude, which corresponds to that of the United States, from Virginia to
Carolina, inclusive. It is bounded on the north, by the Mediterranean sea; on
the south, by mount Atlas; on the east, by the country of Tunis; and on the
west, by the river Mulvia, which separates it from the empire of Morocco.

The principal rivers, which water the territory of Algiers, rise in Mount
Atlas, and run by a northerly direction into the Mediterranean sea. They are
seven in number. None of them has a long course, or even is navigable; at least
none of them is made use of in navigation. It is however likely that they might
be made use of for this purpose, were the inhabitants of a more intelligent and
industrious character; for some of them are of a tolerable depth. Such is the
gross ignorance of the natives in whatever concerns domestic improvement, that
there is not a single bridge over any of these rivers. When they are to be
crossed, the traveller has sometimes to wander for several miles in search of
a ford, as ferry boats are unknown. If a heavy rain happens to fall, he is
forced to wait, till the river returns to its usual size.

This country consists of eighteen provinces. The climate is remarkably
delightful. The air is pure and serene. The soil is covered with almost a
perpetual verdure. Extreme heat is not common. This description applies to the
lands on the seacoast; for as we advance into the country, the soil becomes
more parched and barren. Indeed a considerable part of the back country is a
savage desert, abounding with lions, tigers, leopards, buffaloes, wild boars,
and porcupines. And it must be acknowledged, that these animals are not the
least amiable inhabitants of this country.

There are few towns of any consequence, though when successively under the
dominion of Carthage and Rome, it abounded with populous cities. Bona is
supposed to be the same place with the ancient Hippo, a seaport built by the
ancients. It was formerly the capital of the province of Bona. It lies on the
Mediterranean sea, and there is a coral fishery near it. It is a town of no
importance, and of slender population. In this part of the world, elegant
architecture has, for many centuries, been utterly forgotten or despised. The
buildings of Bona, as every where else, are therefore mean. It is exposed to
the incursions of the Arabs. The name of this people is used by travelers in a
very indefinite manner. Algiers is at the distance of some hundreds of leagues
from Arabia: but as this part of Africa was formerly conquered by that nation,
under the banners of Mahomet, the name is still applied to a race of tawny and
independent barbarians, who wander in gangs about the country, and unite the
double professions of a shepherd and a robber. Bona was formerly a magnificent
city. Its grandeur is now only to be traced in the ruins of a monastery. It has
a fortress, and a garrison of three hundred Turks, as the banditti choose to
call themselves; a Turk being the most reputable title in that country. This
circumstance is alone sufficient to ascertain the depth of its wretchedness.
These adventurers however are not Turks, but the sweepings of all nations
blended together. They are commanded by an aga, who is likewise governor of the
town. Bona was taken by Charles V. in his expedition to Tunis, but was not long
after recovered by its former masters.

Constantina is situated on the river Sef Gomar, forty-eight miles from the
seacoast. It received its present name from that of a princess, the daughter
of the emperor Constantine, to whom it was indebted for magnificence. The
situation is on a peninsula, difficult of access, except toward the
south-west. It is one mile in circumference, well fortified, and contains many
fragments of ancient architecture. In particular there is part of a noble
bridge; and near it is a large subterraneous aqueduct, which terminates in a
cascade. State criminals are sometimes precipitated down this place, and dashed
to pieces against the rocks at its bottom. A bey resides here, and has under
his command three hundred Turkish horse, and one thousand five hundred Moorish
soldiers. This is the account given by travelers, though it is not likely that
the number of the garrison is always the same. In details of this kind, we must
be contented with the best materials that can be had, though sometimes not
entirely above exception. The inhabitants of Constantina are said to be opulent
and haughty. This city was formerly the residence of a race of kings who
governed the province of Constantina, of which it is the metropolis; but in the
year 1520, the whole territory was conquered by Barbarossa, that distinguished
scourge of mankind, who annexed it to the government of Algiers. Some splendid
ruins exist in the vicinity of Constantina. Upon the seacoast, at a small
distance from it, are the traces of a Roman colony, anciently called Colo. It
is situated on a high rock, and has a garrison. Adjoining to it is a French
factory, to which the Moors bring hides, wax, and wool, for sale. At no great
distance are the remains of the ancient city of Stora. It is said that the
mountainous part of this territory is inhabited by a hardy people, who can
raise forty thousand fighting men. It is not probable, that those writers who
made this affection had ever an opportunity of counting their number. History
abounds with such random calculations. The vagabond who founded Rome has been
supplied by the generosity of succeeding historians, with an army about equally
numerous, though it is, at the same time, acknowledged, that his kingdom was
only seven or eight miles in length.

Gigeri is situated about fifteen miles from Bona. It contains about fifteen
hundred houses, and the inhabitants are very poor. It is defended by a fort and
a small garrison. The natives of this part of the country are independent and
barbarous. They retire, when circumstances require it, to inaccessible
fastnesses, and set the dey of Algiers at defiance. Ships, when wrecked on this
coast, are plundered, and the crews are treated with the utmost savageness. In
this respect, however, the natives of the territory of Gigeri cannot differ
much for the worse from the rest of their countrymen; nor is the practice
peculiar to Barbary. Scenes of the same kind are frequently acted, and if any
thing can be still more infamous, are almost always acted with impunity, on the
coast of Cornwall, and other maritime counties of England. There is a story of
an English parson, whose congregation, during the time of divine service, heard
of a shipwreck. In spite of his utmost efforts to detain them, the whole
assembly rushed out of church, in a body, to divide the plunder.
The French, in the year 1666, had begun to fortify Gigeri. They were driven
from it by the Algerines, with the loss of their cannon, and most of their
effects.

Bugia was formerly the capital of a kingdom of the same name. It stands at the
mouth of the river Major, or Zinganor, about twenty leagues to the eastward of
Algiers. It is little better than a heap of ruins; a description which applies
to almost every town in that part of the world. It has three castles, two at
the port, and one upon a rock, at a small distance behind them. In the year
1671, a British admiral took or destroyed, in this harbor, nine Algerine ships
of war. It is extremely seldom, that an admiral has been charged with such a
laudable commission.

Stessa or Steffa is situated in a fertile valley, sixty miles to the south of
Bugia, and fifteen miles from the sea. It exhibits only the melancholy ruins of
its former magnificence, containing about three hundred miserable families.

Tebef was formerly a flourishing city, but is at present extremely reduced.
Zamoura is in the same condition. It is defended by a fort. Couco was once the
metropolis of a kingdom of the same name. Its sovereigns were in the habit of
forming alliances with the court of Spain. For this reason, the Algerines, in
the beginning of the seventeenth century, ravaged the whole country, and
destroyed every town in it. The inhabitants have still supported their
independence, by taking refuge in the mountainous parts of the country, which
are said to be very fertile; but the Algerines prevent them from holding any
intercourse with foreign nations. Biscara has a fort and garrison. One of the
chief employments of the people here, is to catch and tame lions, tigers, and
other beasts of prey, which they carry for sale to Algiers. Necanz is one of
the pleasantest towns in Barbary. It is watered by an agreeable river, whose
banks are adorned with a variety of beautiful trees. The town contains a
magnificent mosque and a college for the education of Mohammedan students.

Oran is situated about two hundred and fifty miles west of Algiers. It lies
partly on a plain, and partly on the ascent of a hill. It is a mile and an half
in circumference and tolerably fortified. But it is unfortunately commanded by
some of the neighboring eminences; so that a garrison of ten or twelve
thousand men is necessary to defend it with success against a skilful enemy. As
the Spanish coasts and merchant ships had suffered much from the corsairs of
this port, Ferdinand, king of Spain, determined to attempt its reduction. For
this purpose, he transported into Africa an army, under the command of his
prime minister cardinal Ximenes, one of those sew statesmen, who have not
deserved the detestation of mankind. The wonted good fortune of Ximenes did
not, at this juncture, desert him. He had maintained a correspondence with some
of the people of Oran; and when the Moors sallied out to attack the Spanish
army, their perfidious countrymen shut the gates against them. Ximenes killed
four thousand of the barbarians, and set at liberty twenty thousand Christian
slaves. The Algerines, during almost two hundred years, made frequent and
unsuccessful attempts to recover the town. At last, in 1708, they retook it. In
June, 1732, a Spanish army was disembarked not far from Oran. The Turkish
commander, his troops, and the inhabitants were seized with a panic, and
abandoned their fortifications without much resistance. The victors found in
the place an hundred and forty-six pieces of cannon, besides mortars, and at
least fifty ship loads of provisions. This latter supply contributed much to
the preservation of their new conquest. Without it they must have run the
greatest hazard of perishing in the midst of success; as a tempest, which
lasted for several days, cut off all intercourse between the army upon shore,
and the fleet at sea. The Moors not long after attacked the Spaniards with
great fury, but were finally repulsed with much slaughter on both sides. Oran
is still possessed by Spain.

Tremesen was formerly the capital town of a kingdom of that name. It is
situated ninety miles south-west of Oran, surrounded by a strong wall and well
fortified. It has five gates with draw-bridges before them, and a castle
containing handsome barracks for the Janisaries who are in garrison. Tremesen
while a metropolis was a splendid city. It contained one hundred and fifty
mosques, and one hundred and sixty public baths. Since it ceased to be the seat
of an independent government, it has shrunk into ruins and desolation. The
mosques are reduced to eight, and its public baths to four. The inhabitants are
extremely indigent.

Mostagan stands fifty miles east of Oran. This town is built in the form of a
theater opening to the sea, and surrounded on every other side with rocks that
hang over it. The ruins of an old Moorish castle stand in a space between the
rocks, and there is a strong stone wall toward the port, with a modern built
castle, garrisoned by a number of Turks. The citadel is erected upon the summit
of one of the rocks, and commands both city and territory. The haven is
commodious, and the town is well supplied with water. The neighboring
mountains are inhabited by a people called Magarabas, who live in tents,
possess a great number of flocks, and pay to the dey of Algiers twelve thousand
crowns annually. There is a handsome mosque in this town.

Tenez is situated about one hundred miles to the eastward of Oran, twenty
miles east of Mostagan, and at a league distant from the sea, where it has a
convenient port. There is a castle that was once a royal palace, and in which
the governor resides. The fortifications are strong, the garrison numerous, and
the neighboring territory fertile. This was supposed to have been the Julia
Caesarea of the ancients.

Sercelli lies between Tenez and Algiers, about twenty-four miles to the
westward of the latter. It is defended by a Turkish garrison, and has a port,
which will only admit of small vessels. This was anciently a large and populous
city, but is at present a poor and desolate place.

The southern part of the Algerine territories is inhabited by a wandering race
of people, who, like the Tartars, roam from place to place, and live in tents.
The country itself is hilly, a branch of mount Atlas running through it. The
only riches of the people are their numerous flocks and herds. The government
exacts a tribute from them, but a bey is obliged to come annually at the head
of an army to collect it; and many of them retire to inaccessible places till
the troops are withdrawn, in order to evade the payment.

Algiers itself stands on a bay of the Mediterranean sea. It is built on the
side of a mountain. The houses rise gradually from the seashore up the ascent,
in the form of an amphitheatre. The town appears beautiful at a distance, when
approaching from the water. The mosques, castles, and other public buildings
have a striking effect; but the streets are narrow, and the houses mean. The
roofs are flat, so that the people can visit each other, at a considerable
distance in the town without going into the streets. The walls are about a
league in circumference, and defended by some square towers and bastions. The
port has a pier about five hundred paces in length, which extends from the
continent to a small rocky island called the Lantern. On this island, there is
a castle with three lines of brass cannon. The town has five gates, ten great
mosques, and fifty lesser ones, and is computed to contain an hundred thousand
inhabitants. The fortifications are extensive and strong. The Christian slaves
are often employed in removing stones from a quarry, at some distance in the
country, which they lay on the sand, to defend the mole from the impetuosity of
the waves. This laborious work is never at an end, because the sea constantly
washes away the stones, and makes a perpetual supply necessary. One street,
which is broad and handsome, passes through the town from east to west; but all
the other streets are narrow, incommodious, and dirty. There are said to be
fifteen thousand houses, which are commonly built round a small square with a
paved court in the center. Around this court is a double range of galleries,
one above the other, and both supported by columns. The palace of the dey
stands in the center of the city. This building is very extensive, and
surrounded by two superb galleries, supported by marble pillars. There is a law
here, by which any woman convicted of amorous correspondence with a Christian,
is thrown into the sea, with her head tied up in a sack, unless her lover
chooses to turn Mohammedan. Examples of this kind are not unfrequent, as the fair
sex, in that part of the world, are said to be remarkably frail. Six of the
baths have been converted into prisons for the Christian slaves. In each of
these, there is a chapel for the free exercise of their religion. Every slave
is let out at a certain hour in the morning, and must return at a stated hour
at night, in order to be locked up. Each of them is allowed a mattress and a rug
for a bed. There are several tolerable edifices without the walls of the town,
which add to the beauty of the environs. Among these are a variety of Turkish
sepulchers and monuments. One of these monuments contains six magnificent tombs
of a circular figure. They were erected to the memory of six deys, who were, in
the course of a few days, successively elected and murdered. There is perhaps
no nation in the world from which we may not learn some useful lesson. With
respect to the burial of their dead, travelers inform us, that the Mahometans
discover a degree of delicacy, of which Christians have no conception. In our
church yards, nothing is more common, and surely nothing can be more completely
shocking, than to see graves broke up, a second time, before the person has
returned to his original dust; and the remains of the dead are tossed about
with as little ceremony as possible. This wretched violation of decency arises
from the orthodox desire of being buried in holy ground; a practice which has
no doubt been encouraged by the parties concerned, for the purpose of exacting
a high price. Exorbitant demands of this kind have not long since been paid
within less than an hundred miles of Philadelphia. The Algerines, and the other
professors of the Mohammedan religion, would regard it as an act of the most
barbarous sacrilege to disturb the remains of the dead, by opening their
graves, at any distance of time, or upon any pretense whatever. Hence their
burial grounds in the neighborhood of a large city are sometimes ten miles in
extent.

Algiers had formerly nothing but rain water. A Moor, who had been driven from
Spain, constructed two aqueducts, by which it is now supplied with abundance of
excellent water from the adjacent mountains. The country around this city is
very fertile. Country-seats, gardens, and groves of trees are said to be
numerous. The Algerines are unacquainted with the art of pruning and grafting
trees. Their gardens are not walled, but fenced round with a peculiar species
of fig trees, which from their prickles, and the compactness with which their
branches interweave, are well adapted for that purpose. Among other rich tracts
in the province of Algiers Proper, the great plain of Mettijah is admired for
its astonishing fertility. It is fifty miles in length, twenty in breadth, and
includes many villas, fragrant groves, and delightful gardens. The soil
produces such a profusion of the most delicious fruits, rice, roots, and grain
of every species, that the inhabitants enjoy annually two, and frequently three
crops. The hot baths of M^^^^cga, in the neighborhood of this city, are
natural curiosities. The principal one is twelve feet square and four deep. The
water is very hot, and when it has filled the larger basin, runs through into
another of a smaller size, where the Jews bathe, as they are not permitted to
use the same bath, with the Mahometans. These hot fountains are conjectured to
proceed from the great quantities of sulphur, nitre, and other inflammable
substances in the bowels of the earth. To this cause likewise have been
ascribed those earthquakes, to which the whole country, and Algiers in
particular, are frequently subjected.

CHAPTER II. Customs. Religion. Government. Land Forces. Corsairs.
THE present inhabitants of the territory of Algiers are composed of a
multitude of different nations. Among those are the Moors or Morescos who were
driven out of Spain about the end of the sixteenth century, and the Arabians
who trace their descent from those disciples of Mahomet who formerly subdued
this country. Levantines, Turks, Jews, and Christian slaves, with a crowd
formed of the posterity of all these different people, make up the rest of the
population. The Moors and Arabs are the most numerous. The former compose the
great body of the inhabitants of the towns. But it may be readily supposed,
that amidst such a variety of different races, immense numbers cannot be said
to belong to any particular tribe or nation whatever. In this country there are
many wondering bands of shepherds who live together in camps, and remove from
one place to another as they want pasture for their herds and flocks, or as any
other accidental circumstance happens to make it necessary. They sometimes pay
rent to landlords, in corn, fruit, honey, wax, and other productions of the
same kind. The dey likewise demands a tribute. The excellence of the climate
renders this simple way of living tolerable, though the tents of these people
are mean, their utensils of little value, and their lodging filthy. The family
and their domestic animals lie promiscuously in the tents together, except the
dogs, which are left on the outside as guards. They raise considerable numbers
of bees and of silkworms. They subsist chiefly on bread, rice and fruit. Wine
and spirituous liquors are almost entirely unknown.

The dress of the men is only a long piece of coarse cloth wrapped round the
shoulders, and falling down to their ankles, with a cap of the same stuff. The
women pay some more attention to the ornamental part of dress. The children are
suffered to go stark naked till seven or eight years of age. The Sheik or chief
of a tribe wears a cap of fine cloth. These people are usually called Arabs;
their customs, language and religion bear a strict affinity with those of
Arabia. They are robust and of a swarthy complexion. The men are active, the
women prolific, and the children healthy. They have neither to encounter the
hardships incident to the life of a North-American savage, nor are their
constitutions enfeebled, as is sometimes the case in manufacturing towns, by
sedentary and unhealthy employments. When a young man would marry, he drives a
number of cattle to the hut where the parents of his mistress reside. The bride
is set on horseback and led home, amidst the shouts of a crowd of young people,
who have been invited to the nuptial feast. When she arrives at the hut of her
lover, a mixture of milk and honey is given her to drink, and a song suitable
to the occasion is sung. She then alights, and is presented with a stick, which
she thrusts into the ground, and repeats some lines to the following effect: As
this stick is fastened in the earth, so I am in duty bound to my husband; as
nothing but violence can remove it, so death alone shall force me from his
love. She then drives his flock to water and back again, to show her
willingness to perform any duty that he may assign her. These previous
ceremonies being settled, all the company enter the hut, and the evening
concludes with the greatest festivity that these people are capable of
enjoying. Subsequent to the marriage, the wife is obliged to wear a vail. She
never stirs from the hut for the space of a month, after that time. These are
the ceremonies reported to be customary in celebrating a marriage among the
pastoral tribes of Barbary. But narratives of this kind must be received, as
bishop Burnet admonishes the reader, to peruse his History of his own times,
viz. with some grains of allowance. Such uniform regularity is hardly to be
expected among a race of wandering shepherds. Perhaps an African critic would
turn from our description of his country with as much disdain, as a citizen of
the United States feels in attempting to peruse a frothy volume respecting
North America, fabricated by some of the professional book-builders of Paris or
of London. The following curious circumstances may serve to show what kind of
opinion ought to be entertained of the authors of oriental travels. In the year
1783, an adventurer, who called himself a modern Greek, published a small
volume entitled the life of Ali Bey. It contained some romantic stories, which
the author attested as an eyewitness. About this time the court of France had
dispatched into Egypt Monsieur Savary, a gentleman of some note in the republic
of letters. His business was to obtain authentic information concerning the
ancient and modern situation of that country. He returned, and in due time
published two large volumes, pregnant with learning and sublimity. Monsieur
Volney soon after entered the lists as a third champion. He made a very severe
attack on the veracity of his French predecessor. In particular, he upbraided
him with having stolen a great number of pages, from a very contemptible
imposture which pretended to be a life of Ali Bey. This biographer, as an
evidence, perhaps, of his classical pedigree, had assumed the name of
Cosmopolitos. Volney added that a copy of the book having by chance come to
Egypt, while he was there, the European merchants in that province could not
help expressing their surprise, that their countrymen were stupid enough to
digest such ridiculous reveries. Monsieur Savary did not long survive this
humiliating discovery. But the "Modern Greek" replied in a volume of letters,
which he inscribed by permission to Sir William Fordyce, an eminent English
physician. In this work he affirms that Volney himself wrote HIS travels in a
garret at London. BELLA! HORRIDA BELLA!

It is certainly, though not generally known, that the letters of Lady Mary
Wortley Montague are the offspring of a mercantile pen. Even Baron Tott, and
Mr. Bruce, though writers of comparative authenticity, require in the reader,
strong and frequent doses of faith.




The Moors or Arabs, for the two names appear to be synonymous, are good
horsemen, but great thieves. Their principal arms are a short lance and a
scymitar, though they are likewise acquainted with the bow and the musket. It
is dangerous to travel in the country, for fear of being robbed; but persons
are said to be in safety, if attended by one of the Mohammedan Marabouts or
hermits. The inhabitants of the seacoast are perfectly versant in the use of
firearms.

Algiers retains the title of a kingdom; an epithet which might, without
regret, be expunged from every human vocabulary. It is however a military
republic, though it certainly can reflect no luster on that species of
government. The national ordinances run in these words: We, the great, and
small members of the mighty and invincible militia of Algiers, etc. The dey is
elected by a divan composed from the army. He seldom secures his office,
without tumult and bloodshed; and he often falls by the dagger of an assassin.
This sovereign may with peculiar propriety adopt the expression of one of the
heroes of Ossian: I was born in the midst of battles, and my steps must move in
blood to the tomb. The way in which his authority is exercised, corresponds
with that by which it has been obtained. When Mr. Bruce, as British resident at
Algiers, had occasion to visit the dey, he sometimes found him in his hall of
audience, with his clothes all bespattered with blood, like those of a carcass
butcher. It is a very frequent amusement with him, to cause the heads of his
subjects to be struck off in his presence. Mr. Bruce said, that he knew of one
man, who was executed, for no greater offense than because a gun-flint was
found upon him. His indictment and trial were very concise. You rascal, what
business have you with a flint, unless you were going to conspire against the
state?

The aga of the Janisaries is the officer next to the dey in dignity and power.
He enjoys his post but two months, and then retires upon a pension. The other
officers of importance are a secretary of state, twenty-four Chiah bassas or
colonels subordinate to the aga, eight hundred senior captains, and four
hundred lieutenants. Among these officers, the right of seniority is strictly
observed. A breach of this point would be expected to produce a revolt among
the soldiers, and might perhaps cost the dey his life. Besides these officers,
there are others belonging to the Turkish forces, who form a separate body. The
dey has a corpse of guards; a very necessary, though sometimes a fruitless
precaution; as any private soldier who has the courage to murder him, stands an
equal chance of becoming his successor. Experiments of this description are
sometimes made. Since the beginning of the present century, six private
soldiers entered into a conspiracy to kill a dey of one of the states of
Barbary. They gave him a mortal wound in his palace, and in the midst of a
crowd of people. He expired, exclaiming, "Has nobody the courage to kill a
villain?" One of the conspirators, the intended successor, instantly ascended
the vacant throne, and brandishing his naked scymitar, declared that he would
do justice to ali! His five associates went about the hall to enforce the title
of their new master; and none present seemed to give themselves any disturbance
about what had happened. He kept his situation unmolested, for about ten
minutes, till an old veteran unobserved took aim with a musket or blunderbuss,
and shot him dead. Upon this, the five others were immediately dispatched by
the persons present. But what showed the nature of the government in its proper
light was the observation of the new dey. He said, that if the usurper could
have held his place for twenty minutes longer, he would have obtained the
throne.

The people of Algiers in general speak a compound of Arabic, Moresco, and the
remains of the ancient Phoenician languages. The natives of all denominations,
for the most part, understand the Lingua Franca. This is a kind of dialect,
which, without being the proper language of any country on the coast of the
Mediterranean sea, has a kind of universal currency all over that quarter of
the world, as the channel of information for people, who cannot understand each
other through any medium but itself. The public business of the nation is
transacted in the Turkish tongue, in which also the records are kept. It is
curious, that in conversation, a Turk transposes his nouns and verbs, in the
same way that the Greek and Latin writers have done. Some of our modern critics
have been woefully perplexed in attempting to explain this practice, which they
seem to consider as peculiar to those two ancient languages. Had they been
acquainted with the circumstance just now mentioned, they might readily have
solved some of their doubts by a voyage to Constantinople.

In Algiers, both men and women spend a great part of their time in indolence;
the men, in drinking coffee and smoking; and the women, in dressing, bathing,
visiting the tombs of their relations, and sauntering in their gardens. The
Algerines by their law may have four wives, but they usually content themselves
with two or three at the most. The husband seldom sees his wife before
marriage, but accepts her upon description of a female confident. When the
match is agreed upon, the bridegroom sends a present of fruits and sweetmeats
to the bride, and entertains her relations with a feast and a musical
entertainment.

The militia who elect the dey are either Turks or renegado Christians. Their
number has been variously stated by different authors from six thousand five
hundred to twelve thousand. The dey pays no other revenue to the grand
seignior, than that of a certain number of handsome youths, and some other
annual presents. His income is more or less in proportion to his opportunities
of plundering his neighbors or his subjects. Dr. Shaw says, that the taxes of
the whole kingdom produce yearly to the dey but about three hundred thousand
dollars. He conjectures that the eighth share of the prizes, the property of
persons who die without children, and to whom the dey falls heir, with the
presents from foreign nations, and his private acts of robbery at home, extend
to an equal sum. It is easy to see that this calculation must be extremely
questionable. The tyrant himself can hardly be supposed capable to give a
distinct estimate.

The Mufti, the Ca^i, and the grand Marabout, are the principal ecclesiastics.
The first is the high priest of their religion; the second, the supreme judge
in ecclesiastical causes, and in such civil matters as the civil power does not
interpose in. The third is the chief of an order of saints or hermits. These
three persons are distinguished by the largeness of their turbans. They sit in
the divan a little below the dey, on his right hand. The divan itself consists
of about two thousand Turkish officers and soldiers.

The common punishment at Algiers, for offenses not capital, is the bastinado;
for those, which are so, the bow-string, which two people pull different ways
with all their strength, so that the criminal is instantly dispatched. The
Christian slaves are liable to a variety of punishments. They are sometimes
burned, or rather roasted alive. At other times, they are impaled. This is
done, by placing the offender on the end of a sharp stake, which is thrust up
his posteriors close by the backbone, till it appears above his shoulders.
Slaves are sometimes cast over the walls of a town upon iron hooks. These catch
by the jaws, by the ribs, or some other part of the body; and the sufferers
have been known to hang thus for several days, alive, and in the most exquisite
torture. Crucifixion, by nailing the hands and feet to walls, is likewise
practiced.

A Moor convicted of house-breaking, has his right hand cut off and fastened
about his neck. He is then led through the city on an ass, with his face
toward its tail. Persons of distinction, for crimes against the state, are
placed between two boards, and sawed asunder. Women, detected in adultery, are
fixed by their necks to a pole, and held under water till they are suffocated.

When an Algerine pirate takes a prize, he examines into the quality and
circumstances of the prisoners If he disbelieves the account that they give of
themselves, they are bastinadoed, till he has met with an agreeable answer.
Having obtained what information he is able, he brings them on shore, after
having stripped them almost naked. He carries them directly to the palace of
the dey, where the European consuls assemble, to see if any of the prisoners
belong to their respective nations, who are at peace with Algiers. In that
case, they reclaim them, provided that they were only passengers; but if they
have served on board of the ships of any people at war with "the mighty and
invincible militia," they cannot be discharged without payment of the full
ransom.

Matters are thus settled between the dey and the consuls, what part of the
prisoners are to be set at liberty, and what part are to be considered as
slaves. The dey has next his choice of every eighth slave. He generally chooses
the masters, surgeons, carpenters, and most useful hands belonging to the
several prizes. Besides his eighth, he lays claim to all prisoners of quality,
for whom a superior ransom is to be expected. The rest are left to the corsair
and his owners. They are carried to the slave market; the crier proclaims their
rank, profession, and circumstances, and the price set upon each of them. They
are then led to the court before the palace of the dey, and there sold to the
best bidder. If any sum is offered beyond the price first set upon them, it
belongs to the government. The captors and owners have only that which was
originally set upon the slaves. For this practice of buying and selling slaves,
we are not entitled to charge the Algerines with any exclusive degree of
barbarity. The Christians of Europe and America carry on this commerce an
hundred times more extensively than the Algerines. It has received a recent
sanction from the immaculate Divan of Britain. Nobody seems even to be
surprised by a diabolical kind of advertisements, which, for some months past,
have frequently adorned the newspapers of Philadelphia. The French fugitives
from the West Indies have brought with them a crowd of slaves. These most
injured people sometimes run off, and their master advertises a reward for
apprehending them. At the same time, we are commonly informed, that his sacred
name is marked in capitals, on their breasts; or in plainer terms, it is
stamped on that part of the body with a red hot iron. Before therefore we
reprobate the ferocity of the Algerines, we should enquire whether it is not
possible to find, in some other regions of the globe, a systematic brutality
still more disgraceful?

CHAPTER III. Origin of the present government of Algiers. Expedition of
Charles V.
ALGIERS had undergone a variety of revolutions in its form of government,
previous to the beginning of the sixteenth century, which it is not within the
plan of this sketch to describe. But about that time a sudden revolution
happened, which, by rendering the states of Barbary formidable to the
Europeans, has made their history worthy of more attention. Horuc and
Hayradin, the sons of a potter in the isle of Lesbos, prompted by a restless
and enterprising spirit, forsook their father's profession, ran to sea, and
joined a crew of pirates. They soon distinguished themselves by their valor
and activity, and becoming masters of a small brigantine, supported their
infamous trade with such conduct and success, that they assembled a fleet of
twelve galleys, besides many vessels of smaller force. Of this fleet, Horuc,
the elder brother, called Barbarossa from the red color of his beard, was
admiral, and Hayradin second in command. Their names soon became terrible from
the Straits of the Dardanelles to those of Gibraltar. Together with their power
their ambitious views extended, and while acting as corsairs, they assumed the
ideas, and acquired the talents of conquerors. They often carried the prizes,
which they took on the coast of Spain and Italy, into the ports of Barbary. The
convenient situation of these harbors, lying so near the greatest commerical
states at that time in Christendom, made the brothers wish for an establishment
in that country. An opportunity of accomplishing this project, presented
itself, and they did not suffer it to pass unimproved. Eutemi, king of Algiers,
having attempted several times, without success, to take a fort which the
Spanish governors of Oran had built not far from his capital, applied to
Barbarossa. The corsair, leaving his brother Hayradin with the fleet, marched
at the head of five thousand men to Algiers. Such a force gave him the command
of the town. He secretly murdered the monarch whom he had come to assist, and
proclaimed himself king in his stead. The authority which he had usurped, he
established by arts suited to the genius of the people whom he had to govern;
by liberality without bounds to those who favored his promotion, and by
cruelty no less unbounded to all whom he had any reason to mistrust. He
continued to infest the coast of Spain and Italy with fleets which resembled
the armaments of a great monarch, rather than the squadrons of a pirate. Their
frequent and cruel devastations obliged Charles V. about the beginning of his
reign, to furnish the Marquis de Comares, governor of Oran, with troops
sufficient to attack him. That officer executed the commission with such
spirit, that Barbarossa's forces being vanquished in several encounters, he
himself was shut up in Tremesen, and in attempting to make his escape was
fortunately slain.

His brother Hayradin, known likewise by the name of Barbarossa, assumed the
scepter of Algiers. He carried on his naval robberies with great vigor, and
extended his conquests on the continent of Africa. But perceiving that the
Moors and Arabs submitted to his government with the utmost reluctance, and
being afraid that his continual depredations would, one day, draw upon him the
arms of the Christians, he put his dominions under the protection of the grand
seignior, and received from him a body of Turkish soldiers sufficient for his
security against his domestic as well as foreign enemies. At last, the infamy,
or, as Dr. Robertson calls it, the fame of his exploits daily increasing,
Solomon offered him the command of the Turkish fleet; and Hayradin on the other
hand, justly dreading the consequences of the tyranny of his officers over the
Algerines, sought the protection of the grand seignior. This was readily
granted, and himself appointed bashaw or viceroy of Algiers; by which means he
received such considerable reinforcements, that the unhappy Algerines durst not
make the least complaint; and such numbers of Turks resorted to him, that he
was not only capable of keeping the Moors and Arabs in subjection at home, but
of annoying the Christians at sea.

Hayradin set about building a strong mole for the safety of his ships. In this
he employed thirty thousand Christian slaves, whom he obliged to work, without
intermission, for three years, in which time the work was completed. Hayradin
soon became dreaded not only by the Arabs and Moors, but also by the maritime
Christian powers, especially the Spaniards. The viceroy failed not to acquaint
the grand seignior with his success, and obtained from him a fresh supply of
money, by which he was enabled to build strong forts, and to erect batteries on
all places that might favor the landing of an enemy. All these have since
received greater improvements from time to time, as often as there was occasion
for them.

In the mean time the sultan, either out of a sense of the great services of
Hayradin, or perhaps out of jealousy lest he should make himself independent,
raised him to the dignity of bashaw of the empire, and appointed Hassan-Aga, a
Sardinian renegado, to succeed him as bashaw of Algiers. Hassan had no sooner
taken possession of his new government, than he began to pursue his ravages on
the Spanish coast with greater fury than ever; extending them to the
ecclesiastical state, and other parts of Italy. Pope Paul III. alarmed at this
proceeding, exhorted the emperor Charles V* to send a powerful fleet to
suppress those frequent piracies: and, that nothing might be wanting to render
the enterprise successful, a bull was published by his holiness, wherein a
plenary absolution of sins, and the crown of martyrdom, were promised to all
those who either fell in battle or were made slaves. The emperor, on his part,
needed no incitement, and therefore set sail at the head of a powerful fleet,
consisting of an hundred and twenty ships and twenty galleys, having on board
thirty thousand troops, with an immense quantity of arms and ammunition. In
this expedition, many young nobility and gentlemen attended as volunteers, and
among these many knights of Malta, so remarkable for their valor against the
enemies of Christianity. Even ladies of birth and character attended Charles,
and the wives and daughters of the officers and soldiers followed him with a
design to settle in Barbary, after the conquest was finished.

By this prodigious armament, the Algerines were thrown into the utmost
consternation. The city was surrounded only by a wall with scarce any
outworks. The garrison consisted of eight hundred Turks and six thousand
Moors, without firearms, and poorly disciplined and accoutred; the rest of
their forces being dispersed in the other provinces of the kingdom, to levy the
usual tribute on the Arabs and Moors. The Spaniards landed without opposition,
and immediately built a fort, under the cannon of which they encamped, and
diverted the course of a spring which supplied the city with water. Being now
reduced to the utmost distress, Hassan received a summons to surrender at
discretion, on pain of being put to the sword with all his garrison. The herald
was ordered to extol the vast power of the emperor both by sea and land, and to
exhort him to return to the Christian religion. But to this Hassan only
replied, that he must be a madman, who would pretend to advise an enemy, and
that the person advised would act still more madly who would take counsel of
such an adviser. He was, however, on the point of surrendering the city, when
intelligence was brought him that the forces belonging to the western
government were in full march toward the place; upon which it was resolved to
defend it to the utmost. Charles, in the mean time, resolving upon a general
assault, kept a constant firing on the town; which, from the weak defense made
by the garrison, he looked upon as already in his hands. But while the divan
were deliberating on the most proper means of obtaining an honorable
capitulation, a mad prophet, attended by a multitude of people, entered the
assembly, and foretold the destruction of the Spaniards before the end of the
moon, exhorting the inhabitants to hold out till that time. This prediction was
soon accomplished in a very surprising and unexpected manner; for, on the 28th
of October 1541, a dreadful storm of wind, rain, and hail, arose from the
north, accompanied with violent shocks of earthquakes, and a dismal and
universal darkness both by sea and land; so that the sun, moon, and elements,
seemed to combine together for the destruction of the Spaniards. In that one
night, some say in less than half an hour, eighty-six ships and fifteen galleys
were destroyed, with all their crews and military stores; by which the army on
shore was deprived of all means of subsistence. Their camp also, which spread
itself along the plain under their fort, was laid quite under water by the
torrents which descended from the neighboring hills. Many of the troops, by
trying to remove into some better situation, were cut to pieces by the Moors
and Arabs; while several galleys, and other vessels, endeavoring to gain some
neighboring creeks along the coast, were immediately plundered, and their
crews massacred by the inhabitants.

Next morning, Charles beheld the sea covered with the fragments of ships, and
the bodies of men, horses, and other creatures, swimming on the waves; at which
he was so disheartened, that abandoning his tents, artillery, and all his heavy
baggage, to the enemy, he marched at the head of his army, in no small
disorder, toward Cape Mallabux, in order to reimbark in those vessels, which
had out-weathered the storm. But Hassan, who had watched his motions, allowed
him just time to get to the shore, when he sallied out, and attacked the
Spaniards in the midst of their hurry to get into their ships. He killed great
numbers, and brought away a still greater number of captives; after which he
returned in triumph to Algiers.

Soon after this, the prophet Yusef, who had foretold the destruction of the
Spaniards, was declared the deliverer of his country, and had a considerable
gratuity decreed him, with the liberty of exercising his prophetic function
unmolested. It was not long, however, before the Marabouts, and some
interpreters of the law, made a strong opposition against him, remonstrating to
the bashaw, how ridiculous and scandalous it was to their nation, to ascribe
its deliverance to a poor fortune tellers, which had been obtained by the
fervent prayers of an eminent saint of their own profession. But though the
bashaw and his divan seemed out of policy, to give into this last notion, yet
the impression, which the prediction of Yusef and its accomplishment had made
upon the minds of the common people, proved too strong to be eradicated; and
the spirit of divination and conjuring has since got into such credit among
them, that not only their great statesmen, but their priests, marabouts, and
santoons, have applied themselves to that study, and dignified it with the name
of Mahomet's Revelations.

The Spaniards had scarce reached their ships, when they were attacked by a
fresh storm, in which several more of them perished. A vessel in particular,
containing seven hundred soldiers, besides sailors, sunk in the sight of
Charles, without a possibility of saving a single man. At length with much
labor, they reached the port of Bujeyah. They stayed no longer here than till
the sixteenth of November, when they set sail for Carthagena, and reached it on
the twenty-fifth of the same month. In this unfortunate expedition upwards of
one hundred and twenty ships and galleys were lost, with above three hundred
colonels and other officers, and eight thousand soldiers and marines, besides
those destroyed by the enemy on their reimbarkation, or drowned in the last
storm. The number of prisoners was so great, that the Algerines sold some of
them, by way of contempt, for an onion per head.

From this time, the Spaniards were never able to annoy the Algerines, in any
considerable degree. In 1555, they lost the city of Bujeyah, which was taken by
Salab (...), successor to Hassan. This commander, in 1556, set out upon a new
expedition, suspected to be against Oran; but he was scarcely got four leagues
from Algiers, when the plague, which at that time reged violently in the city,
broke out in his grom, and luckily carried him off in twenty-four hours.

Immediately after his death, the Algerine soldiery chose a Corsican renegado,
Hassan Corso, in his room, till they should receive further orders from the
port. He did not accept of the bashawship without a good deal of difficulty,
but immediately prosecuted the intended expedition against Oran, dispatching a
messenger to acquaint the port with what had happened. The army had hardly
begun their hostilities against the place, when orders came from the port,
expressly forbidding Hassan Corso to begin the siege, or, if he had begun it,
enjoining him to raise it immediately, which he accordingly did.

Corso had enjoyed his dignity for four months, when Tekelli, a new bashaw,
arrived, as his successor from Constantinople. The Algerines resolved not to
admit him; but by the treachery of the Levantine soldiers, he at last entered.
Corso was thown over a wall, in which a number of iron hooks were fixed. One of
these catching the ribs of his side, he hung three days in horrid agony before
he expired. We meet with events in the annals of mankind, that make us doubt
the truth of the most authentic history. We cannot believe that such actions
have ever been committed by the inhabitants of this globe, and by creatures of
the same species with ourselves. We are tempted to think we are perusing the
records of hell. View of Society and Manners in Italy, by Dr. Moore. Letter
16th.


Tekelli was assassinated under the dome of a saint, by Yusef Calabres, the
favorite renegado of Hassan Corso. The murderer was chosen bashaw, but died of
the plague, six days after his election.

Yusef was succeeded by Hassan the son of Hayradin Barbarossa. Not long after,
the Spaniards undertook an expedition against Mostagan under the command of the
count d'Alcandela, but were utterly defeated, the commander himself killed, and
twelve thousand men taken prisoners. Hassan having disobliged his subjects,
they sent him in irons to Constantinople, while two Turkish officers supplied
his place. Hassan cleared himself; but Achmet, a new bashaw, was appointed.
Upon his arrival at Algiers, he sent the two deputy bashaws to Constantinople,
where their heads were struck off. Achmet, in four months, died; and Hassan was
sent a third time viceroy to Algiers.

He soon engaged in the siege of Marsalquiver, possessed by the Spaniards, and
situated near the city of Oran. The Turkish standards were several times
planted on the walls, and as often dislodged; but in the end Hassan was obliged
to raise the siege.

In 1567, Hassan was again recalled to Constantinople. His successor, Mahomet,
incorporated the Janisaries and Levantine Turks together. He thus put an end to
their dissentions, and laid the foundation of the Algerine independency on the
port. He likewise added some considerable fortifications to the city and
castle, which he designed to render impregnable. At this time, one John Gascon,
a bold Spanish adventurer, formed a design of surprising the whole piratic navy
in the bay, and setting them on fire in the night time. He had the permission
of Philip II. and was furnished by him with vessels, mariners, and fireworks,
for the execution of his plan. He set sail for Algiers in the beginning of
October, when most, if not all the ships lay at anchor there; and advanced near
enough, unsuspected, to view them. He came accordingly, unperceived by any, to
the very mole gate, and dispatched his men with their fireworks; but these
were so ill mixed, that they could not be kindled. Gascon finding himself
discovered, and in the utmost danger, sailed away with all possible haste; but
he was pursued, overtaken, and brought back a prisoner. Mahomet immediately
caused a gibbet to be erected on the spot where Gascon had landed, and hung him
by the feet upon a hook, with his royal commission tied to his toes. He had not
been long suspended, when the captain who made him prisoner, and a number of
other corsairs, interceded so strongly in his behalf, that he was taken down,
and put under the care of some Christian surgeons; but two days after, some
Moors having reported as the common talk and belief in Spain, that the
Algerines durst not hurt a hair of Gascon's head, he was hoisted up by a pulley
to the top of the execution wall, and thrown down again. In his fall, a hook
catched him by the belly, and gave him a wound, of which he instantly expired.

Mahomet was succeeded by ^^hali, a renegado, who reduced the kingdom of Tunis.
It remained subject to the viceroy of Algiers only till the year 1586, when a
bashaw of Tunis was appointed by the Sultan.

Algiers continued to be governed, till the beginning of the seventeenth
century, by Turkish viceroys or bashaws. At last, the Turkish Janisaries and
militia becoming powerful enough to suppress the tyrannic sway of those
bashaws, they sent a deputation of some of their chief members to
Constantinople to complain of their rapacity. They represented to the ministry,
how much more honorable it would be for the grand seignior to permit them to
choose their own dey, or governor, from among themselves, whose interest it
would be to see that the revenue of the country was rightly applied in keeping
up its forces complete, and in supplying all other exigencies of the state,
without any farther charge or trouble to the port, than that of allowing them
its protection. Algiers was to be wholly left under the direction of the dey
and his divan. The power of the Turkish bashaw was to be reduced to a shadow.

These proposals were accepted by the port. The divan elected a dey from among
themselves. They compiled a new set of laws, and made several regulations for
the better support and maintenance of this new form of government. The
subsequent altercations that frequently happened between the bashaws and deys,
the one endeavoring to recover their former power, and the other to curtail
it, caused such frequent complaints and discontents at the Ottoman court, as
made them sometimes repent of their compliance.

In the year 1601, the Spaniards made another attempt upon Algiers. Their fleet
was driven back by contrary winds, so that they came off without loss. In 1609,
the Moors being expelled from Spain, flocked in great numbers to Algiers; and
as many of them were very able sailors, they undoubtedly contributed to make
the Algerine fleet so formidable as it became soon after. In 1616, their fleet
consisted of forty ships between two hundred and four hundred tons burden, and
their admiral was five hundred tons. It was divided into two squadrons, one of
eighteen sail, stationed before the port of Malaga; and the other at the Cape
of Santa Maria, between Lisbon and (...); both of which attacked Christian
ships, both English and French, with whom they pretended to be in friendship,
as well as Spaniards, and Portuguese, with whom they were at war

The Algerines were now become formidable to the European powers. The
Spaniards, who were most in danger, solicited the assistance of England, the
Pope, and other states. The French, however, were the first who dared to show
their resentment at the perfidious behavior of these miscreants; and in 1617,
M. Beaulieu was sent against them with a fleet of fifty men of war. He defeated
their fleet, and took two of their vessels. Their admiral sunk his own ship and
crew, rather than fall into the hands of the enemy.

In 1620, a squadron of English men of war was sent against Algiers, but did
nothing. The Algerines, becoming more insolent, openly defied all the European
powers, the Dutch only excepted, to whom, in 1625, they sent a proposal, that
in case they would fit out twenty sail of ships in the following year, upon any
service against the Spaniards, the corsairs would join them with sixty sail.

Next year, the Cologlies, or children of such Turks as had been permitted to
marry at Algiers, who were enrolled in the militia, seized on the citadel, and
had well nigh made themselves masters of the city. They were attacked by the
Turks and renegadoes, who defeated them with terrible slaughter. Numbers were
executed, and their heads thrown in heaps on the city walls.

In 1623, the Algerines and other states of Barbary, threw off their dependence
on the port. Sultan Amurath IV. had been obliged to make a truce for
twenty-five years, with the emperor Ferdinand II. As this put a stop to the
piratical trade of the Algerines, they proceeded as above mentioned; and
resolved, that whoever desired to be at peace with them, must, separately,
apply to their own government. They began to make prizes of several merchant
ships belonging to the powers at peace with the port. They seized a Dutch ship
and poleacre at Scanderoon; they even ventured on shore, and finding the town
abandoned by the Turkish aga and inhabitants, they plundered all the magazines
and warehouses, and set them on fire. About this time, Louis XIII. undertook to
build a fort on their coasts, instead of one formerly built by the Marsilians,
and which had been demolished. This, after some difficulty, he accomplished;
and it was called the Bastion of France; but the situation being found
inconvenient, the French purchased the port of La Call, and obtained liberty
to trade with the Arabians and Moors. The Ottoman court, in the mean time, was
so much embarrassed with a Persian war, that there was no leisure to check the
Algerines piracies. This gave an opportunity to the vizir and other courtiers
to compound matters with the Algerines, and to get a share of the prizes, which
were very considerable. For the sake of form a severe reprimand, accompanied
with threats, was sent them. They replied, that they deserved to be indulged in
these depredations, as they were the only bulwark against the Christian powers,
and in particular, against the Spaniards, the sworn enemies of the Moslem name.
They added, that if they should pay a punctilious regard to all who could
purchase liberty to trade with the Ottoman empire, they would have nothing to
do but set fire to their shipping, and turn camel-drivers.

In the year 16^5, four brothers of a family in France, entered into an
undertaking so desperate, that perhaps the annals of knight-errantry can
scarcely furnish its equal. This was no less than to retort the piracies of the
Algerines, upon themselves; and as they indiscriminately took the ships of all
nations, so were these heroes indiscriminately to take the ships belonging to
Algiers; and this with a small frigate of ten guns! An hundred volunteers
embarked; a Maltese commission was obtained, with an able master, and thirty
mariners. On their first setting out, they took, on the Spanish coast, a ship
laden with wine. Three days after, they engaged two large Algerine corsairs,
one of twenty and the other of twenty-four guns. The French made so desperate a
resistance, that the pirates were not able to take them, till five other
corsairs came up. The French vessel, being almost torn to pieces, was then
boarded and taken. In 1642, the brothers redeemed themselves, at the price of
six thousand dollars.

In 1637, the Algerines infested the British channel; and, accordingly to Mrs.
Macauley, History of England, vol. II. chap. 4.
had made such a vast number of captures, as to have at one time, between four
and five thousand subjects of England prisoners.

The Algerines prosecuted their piracies with impunity, to the terror and
disgrace of Christendom, till the year 1652; when a French fleet being
accidentally driven to Algiers, the admiral took it into his head to demand a
release of all the captives of his nation without exception. This being
refused, the Frenchman without ceremony carried off the Turkish viceroy, and
his (...) or judge, who were just arrived from the port, with all their
equipage and retinue. The Algerines, by way of reprisal, surprised the Bastion
of France already mentioned, and carried off the inhabitants to the number of
six hundred, with all their effects. Upon this, the admiral sent them word,
that he would pay them another visit, next year, with his whole fleet.

The Algerines fitted out a fleet of sixteen galleys and galliots, under the
command of Hali Pinchinin. The chief design of this armament was against the
treasure of Loretto; which they were prevented by contrary winds from
obtaining. Hereupon they made a descent on Puglia in the kingdom of Naples;
where they ravaged the whole territory of Necotra. They carried off a vast
number of captives. Thence steering toward (...), they scoured the Adriatic,
and loaded themselves with immense plunder.

The Venetians, alarmed at such savages, equipped a fleet of twenty-eight sail,
under the command of admiral Capello, with express orders to burn, sink, or
take, all the Barbary corsairs which he met with, either on the open seas, or
even in the Ottoman harbors, agreeable to a late treaty of peace with the
port. On the other hand, the captain bashaw, who had been sent out with a
Turkish fleet to chase the Florentine and Maltese cruisers from the
Archipelago, learning that the Algerine squadron was so near, sent express
orders to the admiral to come to his assistance. Pinchinin readily agreed; but
he was overtaken by Capello, from whom he retired to Valona, a sea port
belonging to the grand seignior, whither the Venetian admiral pursued him; but
the Turkish governor refusing to turn out the pirates, according to the
articles of the peace between the Ottoman court and Venice, Capello was obliged
to content himself with watching them for some time. Pinchinin soon ventured
out, an engagement immediately ensued, and the Algerines were defeated. Five of
their vessels were disabled; one thousand five hundred men, Turks, and
Christian ^^aves, were killed; besides one thousand six hundred galley slaves
who regained their liberty. Pinchinin, after this defeat, returned to Valona,
where he was again watched by Capello, but the latter had not lain long at his
old anchorage, before he received a letter from the senate, desiring him to
make no farther attempt on the pirates at that time, for fear of a rupture with
the port. Capello was forced to submit; but resolving to take such a leave of
the Algerines as he thought they deserved, observed how they had reared their
tents, and drawn their booty and equipage along the shore. He then kept firing
among their tents, while some well manned galliots and brigantines were
dispatched to attack their shipping. Sixteen galleys, with all their cannon,
and stores, were towed out. In this last engagement, a ball from one of the
Venetian galleys, struck a Turkish mosque, and hence, the whole action was
considered as an insult to the grand seignior. To conceal this, Capello was
ordered to sink all the Algerine ships that he had taken, except the admiral;
which was to be conducted to Venice, and laid up as a trophy. Capello received
a severe reprimand, and the Venetians were obliged to buy, with five hundred
thousand ducats, a peace from the port.

In the mean time, the news of this defeat and loss filled Algiers with rage
and confusion. The city was on the point of an insurrection, when the bashaw
published a proclamation, forbidding, not only complaints and outcries, under
the severest penalties, but all persons whatever to take their thumbs from
within their girdles, while they were deliberating on this subject. They
applied to the port for an order, that the Venetians settled in the Levant,
should make up their loss. But with this the grand seignior refused to comply,
and left them to repair their losses, and to build new ships in the best manner
that they could. It was not long, however, before they had the satisfaction of
seeing one of their captains land, with a fresh supply of six hundred slaves,
whom he had brought from the coast of Iceland, whither he had been directed by
a miscreant native taken on board a Danish ship.

CHAPTER IV. Pinchinin. His engagement with a Dutch ship. Bombardment and
destruction of Algiers, by the French. Defeat of the Spaniards.
THE pirates did not long continue in their weak and defenseless state; being
able, at the end of two years, to appear at sea with a fleet of sixty-five
sail. The Admiral Pinchinin equipped four galliots at his own expense; with
which, in conjunction with the Chiayah or secretary of the bashaw of Tripoli,
he made a second excursion. This small squadron, consisting of five galleys and
two brigantines, fell in with an English ship of forty guns; which, however,
Pinchinin's captains refused to engage, but being afterward reproached by him
for their cowardice, they swore to attack the next Christian ship that came in
their way. This happened to be a Dutch merchantman, of twenty-eight guns and
forty men, deeply laden, and disabled by a calm from using her sails. Pinchinin
immediately summoned her to surrender; but receiving an ironical answer, drew
up his squadron in form of an half moon, that they might pour their shot all at
once into their adversary. This, however, the Dutchman avoided, by means of a
breeze of wind which fortunately sprung up and enabled him to turn his ship; by
which the galleys ran foul of each other. Upon this Pinchinin ran his own
galley along side the merchantman, the upper deck of which seventy Algerines
immediately took possession of, some of them cutting the rigging, others plying
the hatches with hand-grenadoes; but the Dutch having secured themselves in
their close quarters, began to fire at the Algerines on board, from two pieces
of cannon loaded with small shot; by which they were all soon killed or forced
to submit. Pinchinin in the mean time made several unsuccessful attempts to
relieve his men, as well as to surround the Dutch with his other galleys; but
their ship lay so deep in the water, that every shot did terrible execution
among the pirates; so that they were obliged to remove farther off. At last the
Dutch captain, having ordered his guns to be loaded with cartouches, gave them
a parting volley, which killed, as it is said, two hundred of them, and sent
the rest back to Algiers in a dismal condition.

But though Pinchinin thus returned in disgrace, the rest of the fleet quickly
came back with vast numbers of slaves, and an immense quantity of rich spoils;
in so much that the English, French, and Dutch, were obliged to cringe to the
Algerines, who sometimes condescended to be at peace with them, but swore
eternal war against Spain, Portugal, and Italy, whom they considered as the
greatest enemies to the Mohammedan name. At last Lewis the fourteenth, provoked
by the grievous outrages committed by the Algerines on the coasts of Provence
and Languedoc, ordered, in 1681, a considerable fleet to be fitted out against
them, under the Marquis du Quesne, vice admiral of France. His first expedition
was against a number of Tripolitan corsairs; who had the good fortune to outrow
him, and shelter themselves in the island of Scio belonging to the Turks. This
did not prevent him from pursuing them thither, and making such a terrible fire
upon them, as destroyed fourteen of their vessels, besides battering the walls
of the castle.

This severity seemed only to be designed as a check to the piracies of the
Algerines; but, finding that they still continued their outrages on the French
coast, Du Quesne sailed in August, 1682, to Algiers, cannonading and bombarding
it so furiously, that, in a very short time, the whole town was in flames. The
great mosque was battered down, and most of the houses laid in ruins, so that
the inhabitants were on the point of abandoning the place; when, on a sudden
the wind turned about, and obliged Du Quesne to return to Toulon. The Algerines
immediately made reprisals, by sending a number of galleys and galliots to the
coasts of Provence, where they committed the most dreadful ravages, and brought
away a vast number of captives; upon which a new armament was ordered to be got
ready at Toulon and Marseilles, against them the next year; and the Algerines,
having received early notice, put themselves into as good a state of defense as
the time would allow.

In May, 1683, Du Quesne with his squadron cast anchor before Algiers; where,
being joined by the marquis d'Affranville, at the head of five strong vessels,
it was resolved to bombard the town next day, when accordingly, one hundred
bombs were thrown into it which did terrible execution, while the besieged made
some hundred discharges of their cannon against the assailants, without doing
any considerable damage. The following night, bombs were again thrown into the
city in such numbers, that the dey's palace and other great edifices were
almost destroyed; some of the batteries were dismounted, and several vessels
sunk in the port. The dey, and Turkish bashaw, as well as the whole soldiery,
alarmed at this dreadful havoc, immediately sued for peace. As a preliminary,
the French insisted on the surrender of all Christian captives who had been
taken fighting under their flag, which being granted, one hundred and forty-two
persons were directly delivered up, with a promise of sending on board the
remainder, as soon as they could be got from the different parts of the
country. Accordingly Du Quesne sent his commissary general and one of his
engineers into the town; but with express orders to insist upon the delivery of
all the French captives without exception, together with the effects that had
been taken from the French; and that Mezomorto their then admiral, and Hali^
Raise one of their captains, should be given as hostages.

This last demand having embarrassed the dey, he assembled the divan, and
acquainted them with it. Upon this Mezomorto fell into a violent passion, and
told the assembly, that the cowardice of those who sat at the helm had
occasioned the ruin of Algiers; but, that for his part, he would never consent
to deliver up any thing that was taken from the French. He immediately
acquainted the soldiery with what had passed; which so exasperated them, that
they murdered the dey that very night, and on the morrow chose Mezomorto in his
place. This was no sooner done, than he cancelled all the articles of peace
which had been made, and hostilities were renewed with greater fury than ever.

The French admiral now kept pouring in such volleys of bombs, that in less
than three days, the greatest part of the city was reduced to ashes; and the
fire burnt with such fury, that the sea was enlightened for more than two
leagues round. Mezomorto, unmoved by all these disasters, and the vast numbers
of the slain, whose blood ran in rivulets along the streets; or rather, grown
furious and desperate, sought only how to wreak his revenge on the enemy; and,
not content with causing all the French in the city to be cruelly murdered, he
ordered their consul to be tied hand and foot, and fastened alive to the mouth
of a mortar, from which he was shot away against their navy. By this piece of
inhumanity, Du Quesne was so exasperated, that he did not leave Algiers till he
had utterly destroyed all their fortifications, shipping, almost all the lower
part, and above two thirds of the upper part of the city, which became little
more than an heap of ruins.

The Algerines were now thoroughly convinced that they were not invincible;
and, therefore, immediately sent an embassy into France, begging in the most
abject terms for peace; which Lewis very soon granted, to their inexpressible
joy. They now began to pay some regard to other nations, and to be somewhat
cautious how they wantonly provoked their displeasure. The first bombardment by
the French had so far humbled the Algerines, that they condescended to enter
into a treaty with England; which was in 1686 renewed upon terms very
advantageous to the latter. It is not to be supposed, however, that the natural
perfidy of the Algerines would disappear on a sudden. Notwithstanding this
treaty, therefore, they lost no opportunity of making prizes of English ships,
when they could conveniently seize them. Upon some infringement of this kind,
captain Beach, in 1695, drove ashore and burned seven of their frigates which
produced a renewal of the treaty five years after; but it was not until the
taking of Gibraltar and Port Mahon, that Britain could have a sufficient check
upon them to enforce the observation of treaties; and these have since proved
such restraints upon Algiers, that they still continue to pay a greater
deference to the English than to any other European power.

In 1708, Oran, as has been already related, was taken by the Algerines from
the Spaniards, and recovered by the latter in 1732. The Turkish bashaw was in
1710, finally expelled.

Since the last siege of Oran the most remarkable event in the annals of
Barbary is the attack of Algiers, by the Spaniards in the year 1775. With a
concise account of that expedition, we shall close this chapter of blood.

On the 23d of June 1775, a fleet of six ships of the line, twelve frigates and
thirty-three other armed vessels set sail from Carthagena, in Spain, to attack
Algiers. There was on board a body of troops amounting to twenty-four thousand
four hundred and forty-seven men, including infantry, cavalry, marines, and six
hundred deserters destined to serve as workmen. They were commanded by the
count O'Reilly, a personal favorite of the late king of Spain. They had
likewise for the land service, an hundred and seventy-six pieces of artillery,
mortars, and howitzers, with a suitable quantity of military stores. On the
30th of June, and 1st of July, they anchored in the bay of Algiers. They
observed a large encampment, placed behind a battery, east of the river Xarach,
which runs on the eastward of the city. On the 2d of July, a council was held;
and orders were given that the troops should hold themselves in readiness to
disembark next morning, by daybreak. But as the succeeding night was windy,
and a swell had set in from the shore, these orders were countermanded. From
this day, to the 6th, there were frequent councils, violent debates, and
nothing done. A quarrel broke out between O'Reilly and the Marquis de Romana, a
Spanish major general, who was killed in the subsequent action. On the 6th, the
principal officers were again assembled, to receive their ultimate
instructions. The commander in chief warned the army, that it was the custom of
the Moors, to pretend a most violent attack, and on the smallest resistance, to
fly with precipitation, that they might draw the enemy into an ambuscade. He
cautioned the troops not to break their ranks, as nothing but the force of
discipline could secure them against so active an enemy. He pointed out the
very error which they soon after committed, and the snare into which they were
betrayed. On landing, the army was directed to gain some heights, which were
supposed requisite to ensure success against Algiers. In the afternoon of the
6th, some ships of war were ordered to fire against three batteries to the
eastward of that city. This commission was executed with so much laudable
attention to the personal safety of the assailants, if such we may term them,
that their shot did not reach the shore, those of one seventy-four gun ship
excepted. At sun set this formidable attack ceased.

On the 7th at daybreak, between eight and nine thousand men were put on board
the boats for landing. They advanced, under the protection of some larger
vessels very near the coast. Not a Moor appeared to oppose them; and at seven
o'clock in the morning, they returned on board the transports. Not a shot was
fired on either side, during the whole day.

On the 8th, at daybreak, the ships being stationed to batter the different
forts to the right and left of the place of disembarkation, the troops, to the
number of about eight thousand, were put on board the boats; which formed in
six columns. The place of landing was a league and an half to the eastward of
the city of Algiers. Eighty thousand Moors, of whom two thirds were cavalry,
came in sight, but did not attempt to oppose the landing of the Spanish forces.
It is said, that the whole number of Africans collected on this occasion, was
not less than one hundred and fifty thousand. The troops advanced into a close
country, which the Algerines had occupied in small parties. The grenadiers and
light infantry of the Spaniards were repulled, and the whole body fell into
confusion. In a very short time they fled, leaving behind them a great number
of killed and wounded. The latter, a few excepted, were, in spite of their
entreaties, left to the mercy of the conquerors. Part of a second embarkation
of troops added to the general confusion. A third body had cast up an
entrenchment on the shore, for the protection of the army. The Africans
attacked it, but were driven back with great slaughter on both sides. The
Spaniards, in their gazette, acknowledged the loss of five hundred and
twenty-one men killed, and two thousand two hundred and seventy-nine wounded.
It is said, that the Algerines had between five and six thousand men slain on
the spot. The wounded Spaniards, who were left on the field of battle, were
every one murdered by the enemy. The government of Algiers had offered ten
zequins for the head of each Spaniard. Fifteen pieces of cannon, and three
howitzers were left behind by these unfortunate invaders. The real amount of
their loss can hardly have been less than three thousand lives, and was perhaps
considerably greater. In the gazette of a court, we seldom expect an honest
reckoning of this kind. If the writer of that of Madrid intended us to believe
that two thousand two hundred and seventy-nine of the wounded were brought off,
the officer from whose journal this account is extracted, says that a much
greater number were left behind, than were saved, which makes the story worse
and worse. On details of this kind, we cannot dwell with pleasure. One
circumstance is evident, that the Spanish commanders did not understand their
business.

CHAPTER V. State of America as to Algiers. Conduct of Britain. Concluding
Remarks.
IN the two last Chapters, we have seen the Algerines successively set at
defiance, several of the most formidable nations of Europe. When the United
States of America had obtained their infant independence, it was naturally to
be expected, that they also should, in some degree, suffer, by the ravages of
the corsairs. Various circumstances pointed them out, as eligible objects of
piratical rapine. They possessed an extensive trade with Europe, which in the
first place, presented a splendid temptation to plunder. There was, on the part
of the Algerines, a second and irresistible motive to hostilities. America did
not support, at her national expense, any maritime force whatever; and thirdly,
had she even established an armed navy, this country lies at the distance of
more than three thousand miles, from the common range of the privateers of
Barbary. Hence, to reduce them to submission, must always require a proportion
of trouble and expense greatly superior to the substantial magnitude of the
object of attack; and this remoteness of our situation might be considered as
an additional inducement to the regency of Algiers for interrupting our
navigation. Of the number and strength of the corsairs, it is impossible to
give an accurate statement. Their actual force, however, compared with that
which the United States could easily fit out, is but trifling. To bring their
whole ships of war, at once, to a regular engagement, never can be practicable,
but should it happen, it may without presumption be supposed, that fifteen or
twenty American forty gun frigates would send their navy to the bottom. When we
reflect on the numerous and peculiar incitements which these Africans had, to
commence depredations on the commerce of the United States, instead of being
surprised at our having suffered so much, it rather becomes an object of wonder
that we have suffered so little. The late alarming intelligence from Lisbon has
excited universal attention from the public to that subject, which may be
divided into two questions. First, why, excepting two vessels, On the 25th of
July, 1785, the schooner Maria, captain Stephens, belonging to Mr. Forster, of
Boston, was taken off Cape St. Vincents, by an Algerine cruiser; and five days
afterward, the ship Dolphin, captain O'Brien, belonging to Messrs. Irvines, of
Philadelphia, was taken by another, fifty leagues westward of Lisbon. These
vessels, with their cargoes, and crews, twenty-one in number, were carried into
Algiers. Of this number two have been ransomed by their friends. The remainder
now reduced by death to thirteen, are yet slaves. In the newspapers about that
time, two or three other ships are reported as captured, but upon enquiry,
these two vessels only appear to have been so.
have not the ships of this country met with any interruption since the end of
the war with Britain? Second, why has our trade now suffered so unexpected and
severe a check?

In answer to the first query, it has happened, that since the independence of
North America, the Algerines have been constantly at war, with the Dutch, or
the Portuguese, or both at once; and as either of these nations is greatly
superior, in regular strength at sea, to the corsairs, they have, hitherto, for
the security of their own commerce, watched the entrance of the Mediterranean
so carefully, that the corsairs have been seldom able to get out of it. That
they sometimes did so, is unfortunately certain, from the fate of the two
American vessels abovementioned; but, in general, they were shot up in the
Mediterranean as in a prison, without a possibility of extending their
depredations on the Atlantic ocean. Into the former, American vessels but
sometimes ventured, and when they did so, they derived security from forged or
purchased Mediterranean passes. A British ship has for her protection a pass,
which is written on a large sheet of parchment, and has, by way of ornament,
some figures or dashes drawn with a pen, or engraved on the margin. The
Algerines cannot read English, and it would most likely cost the captain of a
corsair his head, were he to carry a British vessel, by mistake, as a prize
into the harbor of Algiers. They have adopted a sagacious contrivance to
discover whether such passes are genuine. They keep a stick marked with notches
corresponding to the shape of those figures, that are uniformly delineated on
the margin of the parchment. When the pass is produced, their measure is
applied. In this was, it cannot be difficult for the most bungling artist, who
has an original pass before him, to deceive them, and, by this means, it is
said, upon reputable authority, that many vessels have been preserved. Besides,
even in the Mediterranean itself, the progress of the Algerines has been
considerably cramped by the Portuguese and Dutch ships of war, and both these
nations, as well as the Spaniards, from a regard to their own interest, as well
as from the common principles of justice and humanity, have been forward to
extend their protection to the American flag.

In answer to the second query, this protection has, at present been suspended,
because a cessation of hostilities has taken place between Holland and Portugal
on the one side, and the regency of Algiers on the other. Spain, at the same
time, has been engaged in the general conspiracy of the Domitians and Caligulas
of Europe, against the republic of France; and as this country has contracted
the guilt of becoming a free nation, we likewise are involved, though, as yet,
but at second hand, in the vengeance of the imperial and royal Vandals. The
corsairs of Barbary are now at liberty to attack the vessels of the United
States, not only in the Mediterranean, but also in the Atlantic ocean. From the
final establishment of American independence, some attempts are reported to
have been made by the American government, to conclude a pacification with the
state of Algiers, but for some reason or other, these attempts have hitherto
proved unsuccessful. The circumstances which have always disappointed the
pacific designs of our administration, deserve to be investigated.

Several of our late letters from Lisbon agree in asserting, that the present
peace or truce between Algiers and Portugal has been formed by the officious
intervention of England, without the knowledge of the latter. The same advices
add, and their information is universally believed, that this has been done by
England, that the corsairs of Barbary might have liberty to interrupt the
commerce of this country with Europe. Since the commencement of the unfortunate
war, that now spreads desolation and bankruptcy over so many countries in that
quarter of the world, American bottoms, because they were neutral, obtained the
preference to those of England in the carrying trade. They were not liable to
be seized by French privateers, and could, therefore, unmolested, transport the
commodities of any one country to any other. This advantage gave our vessels a
decided superiority; and the master of an American ship frequently received
twenty per cent. more for the same freight, than would be given to the master
of an English vessel. This humiliating distinction alarmed the pride of the
English nation. Divested of the carrying trade, the naval despotism of England
would at once shrink into nothing. The powers of Europe may reduce her to the
natural level of her importance, without the expense of firing a single gun.
Let them declare, that no vessel of that country shall bring into their
harbors, any commodities but those of British growth or manufacture. Her navy,
which has perpetrated such incessant mischief, would then, if I may borrow the
trite quotation from Shakespeare, vanish, like the baseless fabric of a vision.

The Americans, for some time time past, have been making rapid strides toward
her expulsion from the carrying trade. England could hardly venture, at this
crisis, to add a second republic to the catalogue of her enemies. She has,
therefore, adopted the miserable expedient of turning loose the Algerines, that
these execrable ruffians might plunder our property, and plunge our
fellow-citizens into slavery.

Lord Sheffield, in a pamphlet which has obtained more notice than it deserved,
informs the English nation, That it will not be the interest of any of the
great maritime powers, to protect the American vessels from the Barbary states.
This benevolent remark has received a proper answer from the author of
"Observations" on his lordship's pamphlet. The moderation of style, the candor
of reasoning, and the unquestioned authenticity of the facts advanced by Mr.
Coxe, deserve, in an uncommon degree, the attention, and the gratitude of his
countrymen.

In consequence of the peace so maliciously patched up through the interference
of the British, considerable havoc has been made on the American commerce, a
number of our vessels having been taken, and the crews, to the number of above
130, carried into the most cruel slavery. The whole of these depredations were
committed in the month of October and November 1793. Shortly afterward, the
court of Portugal ordered its vessels on their old station, and since that
time, they have kept the corsairs within the straits, and preserved our vessels
from their rapine.

When the news of the misfortune of so many of our citizens arrived in America,
the sympathy of the public was excited to the highest possible degree.
Committees were appointed in several places to collect money, for their relief,
if not for their ransom. The committee appointed in Philadelphia for this
purpose, received considerable sums; from the managers of the new theater alone
nearly one thousand dollars. But humanity has to deplore, that a most
unaccountable torpor has taken place of benevolence and charity on this trying
occasion. Curiosity has in vain exerted itself to discover, why a business so
extremely interesting, and undertaken with so much ardour, has utterly died
away, and even seemed to have been obliterated from public recollection!

During the last session of Congress, an act was passed empowering the
President to purchase, or cause to be built, a number of vessels for the
defense of the commerce of the United States against the Algerines. These
vessels are now building -- and it is hoped, from the excellence of their
construction, and the acknowledged abilities of the gentlemen appointed to
command them, that should they ever meet any of those detestable pirates, they
will fully avenge the injured honor of America.

APPENDIX.
No. I. Letter from William Penrose, captain of the ship President, to his
owners, dated Algiers, November 4, 1793.
ON the 23d October, at nine o'clock A. M. a sail to windward bore down upon
us, which we thought was a Spanish privateer; when he came nigh, (...) Spanish
colors, (...) a (...) to leeward, and (...). As soon (...) saw the American
colors hoisted, (...) immediately. It being then nearly calm, as it had been
for eight days before; in an instant there was nearly 3^ armed men on (...),
the first saluted me with a dreadful stroke with his cutlass, (...) jump over
the rail into the boat and all hands after me, without ever suffering any one
to go below, and carried us on board the cruizer, where they stripped us to the
(...), and gave us a few old rags, that would (...) cover our nakedness, let
alone keep us from the cold. In this situation, we were obliged to lay on deck;
the people they let go below, and Mr. Barry by some means or other, got below
for two nights -- I was forced to lay on the poop, and the wind being at E. N.
E. it almost perished (...) but at length an old man, more (...) than the rest,
lent me a blanket, which they had taken out of the ship. The provisions they
gave us was black bread and water, sometimes a few rotten olives, and that we
(...) was a treat. In this ^^^^^tion we continued eight days.

On the 31st we arrived at Algiers we thought ourselves hardly treated on board
the cruizer; but also, our sorrows were but coming on; for we were not on
(...), when they almost loaded us with irons, and the second day (...) to work
like criminals, and murderers: we are in the (...) ^bject slavery ever people
were, in the world. The same day arrival two frigates and a brig, who had taken
nine more American vessels; so that our number now is above one hundred, and
are expecting more daily. They have several cruizers out now, and there are
several in the harbor equipping with the utmost speed.

When I was taken, Cape St. Mary's bore N. N. W. 5 or 6 miles distance; made
Cape St. Vincent's on the 15th, on the 17th spoke an English brig; but I
suppose he had not heard of the Algerines being out of the Streights; for he
said nothing about them; but we have every reason to suspect them to be our
worst enemies.

There is part of two ships companies here, that was taken eight years ago, but
the plague and hard usage has carried them all off but ten. The small pittance
they had from the United States, has been taken off nigh three months, so that
we have nothing to subsist on, but a little black bread and water, and
sometimes nothing; for it is against their religion to give Christians, any
flesh meat; and if you will be so kind as to supply me with a few dollars for
the present, I shall take it as the greatest favor any person ever conferred
on me, for it is impossible to subsist long in this miserable situation.

No. II. Extract of a letter from John Bulkeley and Son, to a merchant in this
city, dated Lisbon, November 15, 1793.
THE 28th ult. we had the pleasure of acquainting you of the novelty of the
truce made by this court with the regency of Algiers, for 12 months, and as
such their cruizers at liberty to cruize without restraint of the others as
hitherto, which they are actually doing, and no less than 8 of their corsairs
passed into the ocean; some reports make them 16 sail; but we are happy to
inform you, that hitherto they have met with little success, for we find they
captured only one large American ship, bound to Barcelona for Spanish account
-- name or where loaded unknown; and this we are advised from Gibraltar, under
the 28th ult. One letter says she was in Tangiers, and another that she passed
up escorted by two xebooks; whether these advices mean one or two vessels, we
are at a loss to determine, for want of further explanation. It is reported
four more Americans are captured, but as yet no particulars are mentioned, and
our letters by this day's post from Cadiz and other ports, are quite silent on
this head. We consider and hope the reports ill grounded and spread by
designing persons for interested purposes, and have the satisfaction to advise
you that a number of American vessels are safe arrived at this and the ports in
Spain; as to their return home, they are free of being captured, as this court
and that of Spain, grant them convoys to a certain latitude, whence they are
clear of the corsairs, whose cruizing station we learn is between Cape St.
Vincents and the Western Islands; and the vessels coming to these markets
should steer a contrary course, and make Cape Finister their first land, and
from thence coast it to their respective destinations: besides, as the winter
approaches, these rovers will skulk home, for they will not venture to keep in
the ocean during the rough months, being unskilful navigators, and their
vessels ill calculated to work in these seas; so that, during this season there
will be no great risk in calling on us to try this market.

No. III. Letter from J. Bulkeley and Son to William Bell, dated Lisbon,
December 17, 1793.
WE have just received the enclosed letter by a Portuguese frigate: it is we
presume from Captain M'Shane, who had the misfortune of being captured near the
mouth of the Streights, by an Algerine cruizer, and carried a slave to Algiers.
-- We feel very much for him, and all the Americans who have fallen victims to
the detested rovers, and it will give us pleasure to alleviate their
unfortunate situation.

We are sorry to inform you, that on the 5th of November, to the date of
Captain M'Shane's letter, there were 120 to 130 poor Americans in slavery; and
this is not the worst, the piratical beings came out again into the Atlantic
the 29th ult. in search of more plunder, and we fear they will do further
mischief. Their cruizing now is contrary to their old system of retiring from
the ocean in November, and coming out in April; but they never did much harm to
the Portuguese, for since our residence in this city, half a century, they
captured but three brigs, one ship, and three or four schooners, and carried
them into Algiers. We hope the United States will soon establish a force to
keep those pirates from ever entering the Atlantic again.

We suppose you have been informed that this court and Spain grant convoys to
your flag, as well as those of the Hanse towns. Our letters from Gibraltar
dated the 25th ult. advise that a Portuguese frigate had taken under her
protection six Americans, to see them to the westward, out of danger.

No. IV. Extract of a letter from John M'Shane, captain of the Minerva, to
William Bell, dated Algiers, November 13, 1793.
ON the 18th October, about five leagues from Gibraltar, we were boarded by a
zebecque of 20 guns, belonging to this place, who after coming within
musket shot, kept up a constant firing with small arms, until they manned our
yards from theirs, then the firing ceased, and they came down sword in hand,
spared our lives, but nothing else, having stripped us of the clothes we had
on, and put us on board the zebecque, which brought us to this place on the
30th ult. when we were taken before the dey, from thence to the canyon, where
the slaves are kept locked up at night: next day we were all sent to the
marine, and kept at hard labor from day light till dark, with an iron chain
which reaches from our legs to our hips; about 50lb. weight, and treated with
great severity by our masters, who allow us nothing but bread and water for our
subsistence. The wheel-barrow men in your city lived a genteel life to what we
do.

Our situation is truly shocking -- and how long we can exist, God only knows.
The carpenter, John M'Farlane, a Scotchman, was taken out of the marine, by the
British consul -- the sail-maker, John Fogereaux, and two Spaniards, G. Romeo
and B. Gazona, were sold at public auction. On the evening of the same day, I
arrived here, the following masters with their crews were brought in --
Captains Wallace, Virginia; Newman, Boston; Tailor, Rhode Island; Furnace,
New Hampshire: Calder, Gloucester; Burnham, New York; Bailey, New bury; Moss,
ditto; Penrose, Philadelphia.

The whole number of Americans is between 120 and 130. They treat the Dutch in
the same manner they do us. -- Captain O'Brian and Stephens, with their crews
are here, ten of them are living, the rest dead. -- If their small number could
not be redeemed, we have no hopes of relief; therefore endeavor to make
ourselves as happy as possible: they ask for my ransom 4000 dollars, first and
second mate, 3000 dollars each, and for each man, 1500 dollars. If a peace is
not made, or our ships protected, we may expect to increase daily as we are all
employed in the marine department, fitting out cruizers. I have not yet learned
their force; but as there is no check on them, no American vessel will be able
to go to Europe in safety. A courier is arrived from Alicant, informing the dey
that colonel Humphreys is there with full power from Congress, to make a peace,
and waits his permission to come; but the dey, I am informed, had refused him.

I remain Your humble servant.
N. B. Names of the crew on board the ship Minerva.

John M'Shane, master; Andrew Tullock, 1st mate; Samuel Millburne, 2d ditto;
John M'Farlane, carpenter; John Fogereaux, sail-maker; Abel Willis, cook.

Seamen -- Joseph Rogers, William Brown, Thomas Burdon, William Walker, William
Grafton, Giani Romeo, Barrotami Gazona, John Sutton, Edward Kerr, Joseph Deitz.



No. V. Copy of a letter from captain O'Brien, to James Simpson, Esquire. at
Gibraltar, dated Algiers, the 28th November, 1793.
YOUR letter of the 12th inst. I received the 25th. It is a long period since I
heard from you; but I hope you will be this way shortly from Toulon.

The Algerines, in their October expedition, captured ten sail of American
vessels; nine of them have safely arrived. The crews of these ten vessels,
amounting to 102, are at present in Algiers, experiencing what we have suffered
for upwards of eight years. -- I have repeatedly, for these five years past,
forewarned the United States of the impending danger; for the Portuguese have
been trying a long time to effect a peace with Algiers; but the Americans in
general would put but little confidence in the assertions of a poor victim
captive; but they now find that they contained the truth.

On the 11th instant, Mr. Humphreys, the Ambassador for Algiers, sent hither a
courier to obtain the dey's permission to come hither in order to make peace.
The dey answered, that he would not receive him, either to make peace or redeem
the American slaves -- that he had been soliciting the Americans to come and
make a peace with this regency for three years past, and they had treated his
propositions with neglect and indifference; and that since he had made a truce
with the Dutch and Portuguese, and captured ten sail of Americans, and likely
to take many more, he could not and would not make peace with them: that he
made the truce with Portugal for the purpose of capturing American vessels, and
could not therefore be at peace with all nations. The courier returned to Mr.
Humphreys at Alicant with the dey's reply -- but we have heard nothing more
since.

The terms prescribed by the dey for the relief of the Portuguese, is as
follows: 1,200,000 Mexican dollars for the treasury; 600,000 dollars for the
dey's voice and the great officers, of the regency, ambassadorial and consular
presents -- equal to what Spain gave; and the redemption of 75 Portuguese
captains, at 2000 dollars each. On the 7th inst. the Portuguese frigate sailed
from Algiers for Lisbon, with the dey's propositions.

The day following the dey called captain Logie, and desired he would
immediately write to Portugal, that he demanded for his family and friends
600,000 dollars in addition to the terms above expressed.

The Algerine politicians are of opinion, that Portugal will not agree to the
dey's demands; but, sir, I think they will, as they wish to extend their
commerce, and well know the difficulty of blocking up the Streights, and the
vast sums they expend in keeping up the fleets against the Barbary States.

The Dutch truce will expire in twelve days from this date; and if Van Trump is
not here in the limited time, away go the rovers in quest of Dutchmen.

The Danes, in my opinion, are on the verge of losing their peace with Algiers.
Should these three nations be baffled, relative to Algerine affairs, then the
United States might probably have an opportunity of establishing a peace; but
never on so favorable terms as they might have had three years past; which
neglect will cost them four millions, together with loss of trade, insurance,
armaments, and peace redemptions. At all events, the United States have no
alternative but to fit out twelve of the best sailing vessels that can possibly
be built; these cruizers to be properly appointed and completely manned, for
all depends on this measure. At the same time, the door for obtaining a peace
should be kept open, and care taken that the United States do not become the
dupe and buffoon of all Europe.

No. VI. Letter from sundry captive American captains, to colonel David
Humphreys, dated Algiers, December 29th, 1793.
WE the subscribers, in behalf of ourselves, and brother-sufferers, at present
captives in this city of human misery, return you our sincere thanks, for your
communications of the 29th ult. and for the provision you have been pleased to
allow us, in order to alleviate somewhat our sufferings in our present
situation.

We have drawn up and signed two petitions, one to the Senate, the other to the
House of Representatives, and we shall esteem it, among the many favors you
have rendered us, that you will please to forward these petitions to their
respective address, so that no time may be lost, but that they be laid before
the Representatives of our country, hoping that the United States, will fully
provide funds for extricating from captivity, and restore us to our country,
families, friend and connections.

We have perused with sentiments of satisfaction and approbation, your memorial
to the regency of Algiers, and have to observe, that its contents fully
coincide with our sentiments on this business, which we trust, in the Almighty,
will terminate to the honor and interest of our common country,
notwithstanding the insinuations, (of others in this quarter) to the prejudice
of the United States.

We trust, and hope, that the United States will adopt such effectual plans, in
order to prevent any more of our brethren, sharing our unhappy fate, which
unavoidably must happen, if some speedy and decisive means is not immediately
put in execution, as we understand the Portuguese truce, with this regency, was
agreed on for one year.

What damps our sprits in some degree, is, that we are informed, that the
plague, that fatal and tremendous disorder, has given its awful alarm in the
country adjacent. And as your unfortunate countrymen are confined during the
night time, in the slave-prisons, with six hundred captives of other nations,
from our crowded situation, we must be exposed to this contagious disorder;
which necessitates the subscribers, to entreat you, sir, that in this case,
those our friends, and of influence in this regency, will be authorized by you,
and our honored countrymen, Mr. Charmichael, and Mr. Short, to have a house
taken for the residence of the American masters and mates, and, if possible,
the mariners, to shield them from the threatening storm of mortality and danger.

We make no doubt, but in case of the Almighty's wrath, visiting this city of
iniquity, but the dey and regency would acquiesce to the proposed plan of
humanity, which would be establishing an example for the general welfare of
mankind -- and would to posterity be recorded to the immortal honor of the
United States.

The same time, honored sir, and friend, be you assured, for your consolation,
that we the American captives, in this city of bondage, will bear our
sufferings with fortitude and resignation, as becoming a race of men endowed
with superior souls in adversity.

We are much indebted to Mons. Skjoldebrand, and brother, his Swedish majesty's
agents, in this city, for their humanity, and attention to the American
captives; and feel ourselves particularly obliged to you for recommending us to
the good offices of consuls Skjoldebrand, and Mr. Mace, whom you mention to us
as friends.

With sentiments of gratitude and the most profound respect, we remain,

Honored sir, Your most obedient most humble servants, The subscribers in
behalf of ourselves, and brother-sufferers. Richard O'Brien, 1785 Isaac
Stephens, 1785 James Tailor, 1793 William Wallace, 1793 Samuel Calder, 1793
William Penrose, 1793 Timothy Newman, 1793 Moses Morse, 1793 Joseph Ingraham,
1793 Michael Smith, 1793 William Furnass, 1793 John Burnham, 1793 John M'Shane,
1793


To DAVID HUMPHREYS, Esquire. etc.
No. VII. To captain O'Brien and the other captains, etc. of the United States,
now prisoners in Algers.
Madrid, January 12 th, 1794.
I HAVE been favored by the receipt of your joint letter, dated 29th December,
and, as I am about to set out immediately for Lisbon, I shall be able to do
little more than assure you that your memorials to the Senate and House of
Representatives of the United States shall be forwarded to them in the earliest
and safest manner possible.

Having communicated to Mr. Carmichael, and Mr. Short, your apprehension that
the plague may again be introduced to Algiers, from the adjacent countries,
where it is already said to prevail; we have not hesitated to concur with you
in sentiment, that in case of that dreadful event, it might be useful for you
to have a house hired in the country; in order to endeavor, by all human
precautions, to prevent your falling victims to that terrible disorder.
Whereupon Mr. Robert Montgomery, consul of the United States, at Alicant, has
been empowered, in case that dreadful event should happen, to furnish
sufficient money to pay for the hire of a house, in the manner, and for the
purpose you propose. This provisional arrangement to continue in force, until
Mr. Montgomery shall receive ulterior instructions from the government of the
United States, for continuing or suspending the same.

I entreat you will be persuaded, my dear and unfortunate countrymen, that I
receive with great satisfaction the marks of your approbation, of the honest,
but ineffectual efforts I have made in your favor. Would to Heaven, they had
been as successful, as they were disinterested and sincere.

I have only to repeat, that you may at all times, and on all occasions, count
upon the sympathetic regard,

And esteem of your real friend, And affectionate fellow-citizen, D. HUMPHREYS.
P. S. Though I have repeatedly remarked, that it may perhaps, (for particular
reasons) be inexpedient for me to keep up a regular correspondence with you;
yet it is proper I should add, that I shall always be glad to hear from you;
and that it may be particularly interesting to the government of our country,
to receive at the earliest possible period, all intelligence of importance. I
shall therefore always be ready to communicate such intelligence, until some
nearer, and better channel of communication can be established.



No. VIII. Treatment of the American Prisoners at Algiers.
WHILE the people of the United States, anxious to preserve their liberty at
home, they cannot be unconcerned at knowing the hard fate of those of their
countrymen, who, by being exposed to the severe and perilous duties of the sea,
are rendered at the same time obnoxious to, and many of them actually enduring
the hard condition of slaves, to the most ferocious enemies to humanity.

Captain Laurence, of the Hull Packet, was desirous of obtaining the best and
most authentic information, respecting the condition of his unfortunate
countrymen in Algiers, obtained it at Cadiz, and now respectfully lays it
before the American people. -- The Americans taken by the Algerines, have their
heads close shaved; nor are they allowed to wear any kind of covering on the
head: they are entirely stripped of their apparel, and a coarse dress given
instead of it. At night they are confined in a dungeon, and at daylight led in
chains to their usual work, which is generally rigging and fitting ships; some
are sent as navigators and pilots on board the cruizers, and are obliged, on
pain of punishment, to exert themselves to the utmost of their abilities.

Their food is generally bread and water, nor is the least difference made
between sick and well, officers and men, but all treated equally ill. It was
reported at Cadiz, that there were several European navigators lately gone
among them; particularly one Kelly, who was tried in Dublin for piracy; and
that they were determined to scour the western ocean next spring. The Hull
Packet left Cadiz with an English fleet, under convoy of a frigate and sloop of
war. A few days after leaving that place, two sail passed the fleet, steering
in for the Streights, the sloop of war gave chase and spoke them; and captain
Laurence was informed they were an Algerine cruizer, and an American ship, her
prize.

No. IX. List of American vessels captured by the Algerines.
SHIP Minerva, John M'Shane, Philadelphia, owned by William Bell, 17 men. Ship
President, William Penrose, Philadelphia, owned by John and James Craig, 12 men
and a passenger. Ship Hope, John Burnham, New York, 19 men. Ship Thomas, T.
Newman, Boston, owned by Thomas Adams. Brig Jane, Moses Moss, Newburyport,
owned by himself, 8 men. Brig Polly, Michael Smith, Newburyport, owned by
Bailey and Royce, 9 men. Brig Olive Branch, William Furnace, Portsmouth, owned
by Col. Hamilton, 7 men. Brig George, James Tailor, Newport, owned by Gibbs and
Channing, 8 men. Schooner Dispatch, William Wallace, Richmond, owned by Gillis
and Freeland, 7 men, Schooner Jay, Samuel Calder, Gloucester, owned by E.
Parsons. And Capt. Jackson, from Malaga to America, with fruit.

No. X. Disguise thyself as thou will, still, Slavery, still thou art a bitter
draught. STERN.
AND are there so great a number of our countrymen groaning under the merciless
scourges of foreign slavery? Confined in a dark and unwholesome dungeon, loaded
with galling irons, and sighing out their unremitted unavailing complaints,
una^isted, unrelieved. The refreshing gales of wind are not permitted to ^an
their emaciated bodies, nor the cooling water from the springs to quench their
parching thirst. The unrelenting master (...) the bloody scourge, and exalts
the engine of inhuman barbarity. Vain and fruitless their incessant
supplications, their cries are lost in air, and resignation is their only
antidote. The most striking pictures, though exhibited by the pencil of a
HOGARTH, affecting indeed to the imagination, yet sail infinitely short of the
reality. Their accumulated wretchedness far transcends the power of
description. Bereft of every dawn of consolation -- filled with excruciating
woe, they tremble, faint and sink under the pressure of affliction, Oh, my
countrymen, is no resource in store to snatch those of your brethren who are
yet living from an ignominious dissolution! Is there no hand to administer the
consolatory cordial of redress? -- Now is the season to exert our philanthropy
-- and what occasion so pressing? -- what time so proper?

Deci^s, the humane, benevolent man! -- the affectionate parent, and
respectable citizen -- he who vindicated the sacred cause of Liberty, and
adorned society by inflexible honor and probity, whose heart was the
receptacle of distinguished virtues -- he Who had a tear for pity, and a hand
Open as day for melting charity!
Behold him cruelly rent from the embraces of a beloved wife -- from the arms
of his infants -- from every object beneath the circling rays of the sun, that
could afford a gleam of momentary joy, and consigned to chains and misery! See
him groaning under the burden imposed upon him; and bearing a still heavier
weight within. He silently wipes away the involuntary tear which rolls down his
emaciated cheek, and struggles to suppress the rising sigh. Follow him when
evening approaches into his destined dungeon -- Observe the settled melancholy
which preys upon his haggard countenance -- Restless thought presents to his
tortured imagination the happy moments of love and liberty! He now gives free
scope to the most impassioned grief, and bewails his cruel destiny -- the briny
torrent gushes unrestrained from his eyes, and waters the moistened earth. --
He exclaims, "Happy, thrice happy days of former prosperity, gone, gone for
ever! My eyes behold no more the ineffable smiles of friendship, or the
endearing face of love! All nature is a vale of horror, -- a howling waste --
My dear children -- my wife, Oh!" Overwhelmed by heart-rending anguish, the
stupor of insensibility affords him a momentary alleviation! Such scenes of woe
audibly demand the interposition of our rulers and citizens -- If the yoke of
British oppression seemed to us so insupportable -- if we resolutely determined
to risk our lives in an attempt to throw it off -- Remember how vastly
dissimilar the comparison betwixt our then situation and that of those wretched
captives -- Every exertion should be attempted if possible to emancipate those
of our brethren in captivity, who may yet survive. Let us adopt the sentiment
of the admirable Rosseau -- "No man," says he, "can boast of having leisure,
while there remains good to be done, his country to serve, or wretches to
relieve."

No. XI. Letter from Messrs. Wignell and Reinagle, managers of the New Theater,
Philadelphia, to John Barclay, Esquire. chairman of the committee appointed to
collect subscriptions for the relief of the prisoners at Algiers.
WE have the pleasure to enclose you a draft for nine hundred forty-one dollars
being the profit of one night's performance at our theater, the 23rd March
last, in aid of the fund for the relief of citizens of Philadelphia in
captivity at Algiers.

A further subscription by the individual members of the company is on foot,
and when completed will be forwarded to you.

We have the honor to be with the greatest respect, sir, your obedient humble
servants. WIGNELL AND REINAGLE.
Philadelphia, 9th April, 1794.
John Barclay, Esquire.
No. XII.
THE sum of two hundred and fifty-six pounds two shillings and sixpence
sterling, was the amount of the benefit night at the theater in Charleston, (S.
C.) for the American captives in Algiers, which sum was deposited by Messrs.
West and Bignal, in the treasury of that state.

No. XIII. Extracts from a "Poem on the happiness of America," by Colonel
Humphreys.
HOW long will heaven restrain its bursting ire,
Nor rain blue tempests of devouring fire?
How long shall widows weep their sons in vain,
The prop of years in slav'ry's iron chain?
How long the lovesick maid, unheeded, rove
The sounding shore, and call her absent love;
With wasting tears and sighs his lot bewail,
And seem to see him in each coming sail?
How long the merchant turn his failing eyes,
In desperation, on the seas and skies,
And ask his captur'd ships, his ravished goods,
With frantic ravings, of the heavens and floods?
How long, Columbians dear! will ye complain
Of these cursed insults on the open main?
In timid sloth, shall injured brav'ry sleep?
Awake! awake! avengers of the deep!
Revenge! revenge! the voice of nature cries:
Awake to glory, and to vengeance rise!
To arms! to arms! ye bold indignant bands!
It Is heaven inspires; it is God himself commands,
Save human nature from such deadly harms,
By force of reason, or by force of arms.
O ye great powers, who passports basely crave,
From Afric's lords to sail the midland wave --
Great fallen powers, whose gems and golden bribes
Buy paltry passports from these savage tribes --
Ye, whose fine purples, silks, and stuffs of gold
(An annual tribute) their dark limbs infold --
Ye, whose mean policy for them equips,
To plague mankind, the predatory ships --
Why will you buy your infamy so dear?
Is it self-int'rest, or a dastard fear?
Is it because ye meanly think to gain
A richer commerce on the infested main?
Is it because ye meanly wish to see
Your rivals chained, yourselves ignobly free?
Who gave commissions to these monsters fierce,
To hold in chains the humbled universe?
Would God, would nature, would their conquering swords,
Without your meanness, make them ocean's lords?
What! Do you fear? nor dare their power provoke,
Would not that bubble burst beneath your stroke?
And shall the weak remains of barbarous rage,
Insulting, triumph over the enlightened age?
Do ye not feel confusion, horror, shame,
To bear a hateful, tributary name?
Will ye not aid to wipe the foul disgrace,
And break the fetters from the human race?
Then, though unaided by those mighty powers,
Ours be the toil; the dangers, glory ours:
Then, O my friends, by heaven ordained to free,
From tyrant rage the long infested sea --
Then let us firm, though solitary stand,
The sword, and olive branch in either hand:
An equal peace propose with reason's voice,
Or rush to arms, if arms should be their choice,
But hark! the trumps, as if by whirlwinds blown,
Sound from cold Lawrence to the burning zone!
Thy cause humanity that swells their breath,
Wakes in each bosom cool contempt of death,
By rumbling drums, from distant regions called,
Men, scorning pirate rage, start unappall'd:
With eye balls flaming, cheeks of crimson flush,
From rice-green fields, and fir-clad mountains, rush
High-m^ttled youth -- unused to sights of slain,
Of hostile navies, or the stormy main --
Enraged, they leave unfinished furrows far,
To dare the deep, and toil in fields of war:
From dreams of peace, stern-visag'd vet'rans wake,
Their rattling arms, with grasp indignant, shake;
Those arms, their pride, their country's gift, what day
To independence they had opened the way;
Frowning wide ruin, terrible they rise,
Like battling thunders bursting from the skies.
From Erie's inland vales, unnam'd in song,
In native fierceness pour the hunter throng;
Beneath their rapid march realms roll behind;
Their uncomb'd locks loose floating on the wind;
Coarse their worn garbs -- they place their only pride
In the dread rifle, often in battle tried.
With aim unbanlk'd, whose leaden vengeance sings,
Sure as the dart the king of terrors flings:
So erst, brave Morgan, thy bold hunters sped --
Such light-armed youths the gallant Fayette led,
Ere Steuben brought the Prussian lore from far,
Or Knox created all the stores of war.
Through tented fields impatient ardour spreads --
Roused by the trump the coursers rear their heads,
Snuff in the tainted gale the sulfurous grain,
Responsive neigh, and prance the wide champaign.
Now preparation forms the gleaming blade;
In moulds capacious ponderous deaths are made:
In crowded docks the incessant labor glows;
The tool resounds -- the wondrous structure grows --
Propp'd on the stocks, stupendous navies stand,
(...) their huge bulks, and darken all the strand;
Till towering fleets, from different harbors joined
Float on the pinions of the favoring wind;
Tall groves of masts, like mountain forests, rise;
Waved high in air, the crimson streamer flies:
To prosperous gales the canvass wide unfurled
Bears the roused vengeance round the watery world:
See! ocean whitens with innum'rous sails;
Be still, ye storms! breathe soft, ye friendly gales!
See! where Columbia's mighty squadron runs
To climes illum'd by other stars and suns;
Gains the deep straight; ascends the midland wave,
Of ancient fleets the unfathomable grave!
When freedom's ardent chiefs, with eager eye,
Dim through the mist the corsair force descry;
Their cloudlike sails hang in the distant heaven,
Like shad'wy vapors of ascending even --
Here over the topmast, flames the imperial star,
There the (...) crescent leads the coming war.
The obstructions cleared -- obliquely on the gales --
With open ports -- half-furl'd the flapping sails --
Near and more near athwart the bill'wy tide,
In terrors armed, the floating bulwarks glide;
Tier pil'd over tier, the sleeping thunder lies,
Anon to ^end the shud'ring main and skies.
Ere yet they shut the narrow space between,
Begins the prelude of a bloodier scene --
With sudden touch, deep throated engines roar,
Pierce heaven's blue vault, and dash the waves to shore;
Then mad'ning billows mock the fearful sound,
While over their surface globes of iron bound;
Unknown concussions rolling over their heads,
Far fly the monsters round their coral beds.
The battle closes -- fiercer fights begin --
And hollow (...) reverberate the din:
The green waves ^^acken, as the tempest lours,
Chain bolts and langrage rain in dreadful showers;
Ship locked to ship, hangs over the foaming flood,
The black sides wrapped in flame, the decks in blood:
From both the lines now smoke, now flames aspire,
Now clouds they roll, now gleam a ridge of fire:
On hostile prows, Columbia's heroes stand,
Conquering 'mid death, or dying sword in hand:
Pomiscuous cries, with shouts confusedly drowned,
In the wild uproar, swell the dol'rous sound:
And naught distinct is heard, and naught is seen,
Where wreaths of vapor hovering intervene,
Save when black grains expand imprisoned air,
The thunders wake, and shoot a livid glare:
Then ghastly forms are seen by transient gleams,
The dead and wounded drenched in purple streams.
Now helmless ships in devious routes are driven,
The cordage torn, the masts to atoms riv'n:
Now here they glow with curling waves of fire,
In one explosion total crews expire.
Here barks relinquished, burnt to ocean's brink,
Half veiled in crimson clouds begin to sink.
With men submerg'd, there frailer fragments float,
Here yawning gulfs absorb the o'erloaded boat:
There red-hot balls, that graze the waters, hiss,
And plunge the galleys down the dread abyss.
Here shattered limbs -- there garments dipped in blood,
With mingling crimson stain the foughten flood,
While Afric's pirates, shrinking from the day,
By terror urged, drag wounded hulks away.
As when two adverse storms impetuous driven,
From east and west, sail up the azure heaven,
In flaming field of day together run,
Explode their fires, and blot with night the sun --
The eastern cloud, its flames expired at last,
Flies from the lightning of the western blast:
So fled the corsair line the blightning stroke
Of freedom's thunder -- so their battle broke --
As if by heaven's own arm subdued at length,
Their courage perished, withered all their strength.
Oh then let victory stimulate the chase,
To free from shameful chains the human race,
To drive these pirates from the insulted waves,
To open their dungeons to despairing slaves,
To snatch from impious hands and break the rod,
Which erst defaced the likeness of a God:
Then seize the occasion, call the furious gales,
Crack bending oars, stretch wide inflated sails;
On rapid wings of wind the tempest bear,
Make death's deep tubes with lurid lightnings glare:
Like evanescent mists dispel their hosts,
And with destruction's besom sweep their coasts.
Woe to proud Algiers; to your princes woe!
Your pride is falling with your youths laid low --
Woe to ye people, woe, distress, and fears!
Your hour is come to drink the cup of tears:
A ghastly paleness gathers on your cheeks,
While memory haunts your ears with captive shrieks;
Then stifled conscience wak'ning dares to cry,
"Think on your crimson crimes, despair and die." --
Then ruin comes, with fire, and sword, and blood,
And men shall ask, where once your cities stood!
And lo! successful from heroic toils,
With glory covered, and enriched with spoils,
With garlands waving over these spoils of war,
The pomp preceded by the imperial star,
'Mid shouts of joy, from liberated slaves,
In triumph ride the avengers of the waves.
And see they gain Columbia's happy strand,
Where anxious crowds in expectation stand,
See raptured nations hail the kindred race,
And court the heroes to their fond embrace:
In fond embraces strained, the captive clings,
And feels and looks unutterable things.
See there the widow finds her darling son,
See in each others' arms the lovers run,
With joy tumultuous their swollen bosoms glow,
And one short moment pays for years of woe!
When grateful sports and festal songs proclaim
Their joys domestic, and their distant fame.
BOOKS Published and for Sale, by M. CAREY.
SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE MALIGNANT FEVER, Lately prevalent at Philadelphia, with a
statement of the proceedings that took place on the subject, in different parts
of the United States. To which are added, accounts of the plague in London and
Marseilles, and a list of the dead in Philadelphia from August, to the middle
of December, 1793. By Matthew Carey. Price half a dollar in blue paper -- Three
quarters of a dollar bound.

AMERICAN MUSEUM. From its commencement in January, 1787, to its termination in
December, 1792. Twelve volumes, 8vo. Price nineteen dollars and one fifth.

"The American Museum is not only eminently calculated to disseminate
political, agricultural, philosophical, and other valuable information -- but
it has been uniformly conducted with taste, attention, and propriety. If to
these important objects be superadded the more immediate design, of rescuing
public documents from oblivion, I will venture to pronounce, as my sentiment,
that a more useful literary plan has never been undertaken in America, nor one
more deserving of public encouragement." GENESIS WASHINGTON.

YOUNG MISSES' MAGAZINE. Containing -- Dialogues between a governess and
several young ladies of quality, her scholars; -- in which each lady is made to
speak according to her particular genius, temper, and inclination. -- Their
several faults are pointed out, and the easy way to amend them, as well as to
think, and speak, and act properly; no less care being taken to form their
hearts to goodness, than to enlighten their understanding with useful
knowledge. A short and clear abridgment is also given of sacred and profane
history, and some lessons in geography. The useful is blended throughout with
the agreeable; the whole being interspersed with proper reflections and moral
tales. Price one dollar, thirty-three cents.

CHARLOTTE -- A TALE OF TRUTH. A novel -- by Mrs. Rowson of the New-Theatre,
Philadelphia -- author of Victoria, the Inquisitor, Fille de Chamber, etc.
Price 62cents.

"IT may be a Tale of Truth, for it is not unnatural, and it is a tale of real
distress -- Charlotte, by the artifice of a teacher, recommended to a school,
from humanity rather than a conviction of her integrity, or the regularity of
her former conduct, is enticed from her governess, and accompanies a young
officer to America. -- The marriage ceremony, if not forgotten, is postponed,
and Charlotte dies a martyr to the inconstancy of her lover, and treachery of
his friend. The situations are artless and affecting -- the description natural
and pathetic; we should feel for Charlotte if such a person ever existed, who
for one error, scarcely, perhaps, deserved so severe a punishment. If it is a
fiction; poetic justice is not, we think, properly distributed." Critical
Review, vol. i. p. 468.

M'FINGAL, an Epic Poem, in four cantos, By J. Trumbull, Esquire. Price 37cents.

CHARMS OF MELODY; a choice collection of the most approved songs, catches,
duets, etc. Price 25 cents.

THE LADY's POCKET LIBRARY, containing -- Miss More's Essays -- Dr. Gregory's
legacy to his daughters -- Lady Pennington's unfortunate mother's advice to her
daughter -- Marchioness de Lambert's advice of a mother to her daughter -- Mrs.
Chapone's letter on the government of the temper -- Swift's letter to a young
lady newly married -- Moore's fables for the female sex. Price 87 cents.

LETTERS from an American Farmer, describing certain provincial situations,
manners and customs, and conveying some idea of the state of the people of
North America. Written to a Friend in England. By J. Hector St. John, a Farmer
in Pennsylvania. -- Price 80 cents.

Contents.
Letter I. Introduction. II. On the situation, feelings, and pleasures of an
American farmer. III. What is an American? IV. Description of the island of
Nantucket, with the manners, customs, policy, and trade of the inhabitants. V.
Customary education and employment of the inhabitants of Nantucket. VI.
Description of the island of Martha's Vineyard, and of the whale fishery. VII.
Manners and customs at Nantucket. VIII. Peculiar customs at Nantucket. IX.
Description of Charleston; thoughts on slavery; on physical evil; a melancholy
scene. X. On snakes: and on the humming bird. XI. From Mr. Iwan Alexiowitz, a
Russian gentleman, describing the visit he paid, at my request, to Mr. John
Bartram, the celebrated Pennsylvania botanist. XII. Distresses of a
frontier-man.
PLOWDEN's HISTORY of the BRITISH EMPIRE, from May 1792, to December 1793.
Price a dollar and a quarter.

RIGHTS OF WOMAN. Price a dollar.

THE INQUISITOR. By Mrs. Rowson. Price 87 cents.

LADIES' FRIEND: Being a treatise on those virtues and qualifications, which
are the brightest ornament to the fair sex, and render them most agreeable to
the sensible part of mankind. Price 37 cts.

SMITH's HISTORY OF NEW YORK. Price one dollar and a quarter.

COMPLETE ATLAS FOR THE PRESENT WAR. Containing -- Maps of the United
Provinces, of the Netherlands, of France, of Germany, of Spain and Portugal, of
Italy, and the West Indies. Price two dollars.

AN IMPARTIAL HISTORY OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION; from its commencement to the
execution of the queen and the deputies of the Gironde party. Price two dollars.

THE CONSTITUTIONS of the several United States, according to the latest
amendments -- with the declaration of independence -- the federal constitution,
and the amendments made thereto. Price five-eighths of a dollar.

THE AMERICAN JEST BOOK-AND MERRY FELLOW's COMPANION. Price five-eighths of a
dollar.

POEMS BY COL. HUMPHREYS, containing, among others, his address to the armies
of the United States -- and his poem on the happiness of the United States.
Price three-eighths of a dollar.


