THE CHILDREN's FRIEND. TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH OF Mr. BERQUIN.

NEWBURY-PORT: PRINTED and SOLD by JOHN MYCALL. Sold also by ISAAC BEERS in
New Haven.

THE CHILDREN's FRIEND. A book with the same title has been published by Mr.
WEISSE, one of the most celebrated Poets of Germany; whence the Author means to
select, for his own work, what appears to him the most excellent; as well as
from the works of Mess. Camp and Salzmann.

By Mr. BERQUIN.
PROSPECTUS.
THE design of this work is to give amusement to Children, by the same means
that will most naturally lead them to Virtue, in constantly presenting it to
their eyes, in its most amiable form. Instead of those extravagant fictions,
and romantic wonders, with which their imaginations have so long been led
astray; they will here merely be offered such adventures, as they may
themselves almost daily be spectators of in their own families. No attempt will
be made to inspire them with any sentiments above their conception and
capacity; and they will only be brought into action with one another, with
their parents, with their play-fellows, the domestics who surround them, and
the animals to which they are most accustomed. They will express themselves in
their own simple and unadorned language. Eagerly interested in all that
happens, they will artlessly give way to every rising emotion of their early
feelings. They will then in their own faults find their punishment, in their
own good actions their recompense. Every thing will concur to inspire them with
a love of goodness, as the means of happiness, and an abhorrence of vice, as
the source of mortification and misery.

It is hardly necessary to mention that this work is equally intended for
children of both sexes. A view of the first passions of the human heart, in the
artless scenes of ingenuous infancy, is perhaps, of all representations, the
most certain of attracting attention at every period of life. Young people,
whose minds are not corrupted, will look back with the tenderest recollection,
to that sweet early season, of which, though their natural impetuosity makes
them hasten from it with little regret, they can never recall the ideas without
delight, when it has been spent with its customary happiness. Parents will
behold with pleasure a new source of instruction and entertainment for their
children, from which they may themselves sometimes gather familiar and useful
examples in what manner to reason with, and to treat them. The Aged, arrived at
the opposite period of our mortal career, and peculiarly soothed by the society
of children, whether from the disgust they are too apt to find in all other, or
from an instinctive self-love, which urges them to seek out beings yet more
feeble than themselves, upon whom to exercise what is left them of authority,
will be gratified by finding the means of attaching them, by such dialogues and
discourses as will here be set before them. And even Men of the World,
hackneyed as they are in common pictures of life, may yet be open to sensations
of pleasure in seeing a new portrait of manners, which, like those of the
pastoral times, have the power of interesting universally, by the charm: of
Innocence and of Nature.
The difference of their characters and their pursuits, while both are yet so
young, is not sufficiently marked to require separate lessons. And the utmost
attention has been paid to bringing them as often as possible together, with a
view to contribute toward inspiring that harmony and social affection, which
it is ever most delightful to see between the children of the same parents.

It has been endeavored to give all possible variety to the several little
Pieces which the volume contains. There is not one in the whole collection,
which has not bad the trial of being read to some children of a more or less
advanced age and understanding; and whatever was found deficient in engaging
their attention, has either been altered or omitted.

Several little dramatic pieces are interspersed through the work, of which
children may perform the principal characters, with a view to give them, early
in life, courage, grace, and ease in their address, deportment, and
conversation. The representation of these drama^ may be made a domestic
festival, while they contribute to their education. The parents, by performing
a part in them, will enjoy the delightful satisfaction of participating in the
gaiety of their young family; and it may be considered as a new band to unite
them still more tenderly to each other, from an interchange of gratitude and
pleasure.

Independent, however, of the moral purposes, which it is hoped this work may
answer to children; the original will be found no less useful in early teaching
them to speak the French language with facility; while to the youthful students
of English in France, the translation may prove of equal service. Among the
books which are generally given to them, the greater part are either above
their comprehension, or written with but little knowledge of their ideas and
characters. But here, every subject that is presented to them, will be of a
sort to excite their curiosity, and interest their affections; and cannot,
therefore, fail to familiarise them to the phrases natural, in both languages,
to their age, and to those expressions which paint, with the greatest
simplicity, their desires, their wants, and their pleasures.

PREFACE,
BY The TRANSLATOR.
THE work of Mr. Berquin, which is here presented to the English reader, has
been received in France with the flattering success of universal approbation:
and the edition which has been published in London, has already met with almost
similar encouragement and honors. To transfuse into the present version,
either the spirit or the elegance of the original, is beyond the hopes of the
Translator; whose expectations will be answered, if it facilitates to our
little students of the French language, the reading and understanding these
admirable Lessons of Amusement; and whose utmost ambition, upon this subject,
will be gratified, if it proves, at the same time, an assistance in the
attainment of English, to the youthful pupils of our own tongue upon the
continent.

With this view, the greatest attention has been paid to preserving the sense
of the author, without adhering to the idiom of his language. The diction,
therefore, will always be English, though the conversation to which it is the
vehicle may be foreign. Some trifling circumstances, also, have been
necessarily changed, where the manners of the two Nations were too opposite for
a coalition.

The exclamation of Mon Dieu, so common in France, to all ages, all occasions,
and all ranks of people, would, in England, be extremely offensive in the
mouths of children, except upon the most serious subjects, and when spoken with
reverence and supplication.

Nor was it possible to translate literally the terms and actions of courtesy
and good-breeding, among the children introduced in the dramas: for it appears,
from the specimens which Mr. Barquin has given, that the customs and opinions
of our neighbors relating to juvenile politeness, vary not less from our own,
than their sentiments in religion and politics.

All however, that belongs to story, character, and sentiment, has been
faithfully preserved. It were vain to make alterations, where there is no
chance of improvement: and great, indeed, must be the skill that could add, in
this little volume, to the interest excited by the story, the example impressed
by the character, or the moral enforced by the sentiment.

It will, however, perhaps, be necessary to say ^^^ething concerning the little
dramas which are interspersed through the work, lest their design should be
censured, from being ill understood.

That they may be studied, and even acted, with innocence, and improvement, in
private houses, is the sole view of their insertion: but a public exhibition of
them is by no means recommended; and all applause, even at excellence, ought in
prudence to be withheld. Emulation might else be degraded into env^, and
modest ease and courage might degenerate into boldness. It is the office of
kindness to still the passions, not to awaken or give birth to them: and this
office would ill be performed by kindling, in the bosoms of children, the
dangerous flame of ambition; which, though capable of being turned to many
admirable purposes, incurs the danger, in the experiment, of leading to vanity
and conceit. Piety and humility, forbearance and humanity, are the virtues here
chiefly inculcated; for to those they must hereafter owe all that will be found
most laudable, amiable, and attractive, in their conduct, their disposition,
and their manners.

Neither is there the most remote desire to cultivate theatrical talents: these
little dramas are merely meant as a private study of elocution, and an exercise
for the memory; not as incitements to competition, nor promoters of vainglory.

The great business of education, is to open and employ the various faculties
of the understanding: and where these views are fulfilled, the several
instructors of youth may be severally contented: Not so, however, their
parents, their present friends, or their future connexions. Talents, science,
and learning, however* brilliant, important or profitable, must still, to those
with whom we live and associate, be secondary considerations. The comforts of
life cannot spring from them, though they constitute its refinements: they will
not make the character endearing, though they may render any commerce with it
illustrious. Domestic happiness has its basis in the temper, and every social
virtue its origin in the heart. To form or to mend these, is the business,
therefore, of the moralist: and this, in the earliest stages of reflection and
observation, is the lesson and aim of every tale in this work.

The first impressions that strike deep in the human mind, whether frivolous or
serious, are rarely subdued, and scarce ever perhaps totally eradicated.
Whatever, therefore, has any chance of first catching their attention, should
long merit their remembrance; and to make what is subservient to their
education, contribute to their amusement, is cheating idleness of futility, and
alluring labor from instruction.

THE CHILDREN's FRIEND.
THE LITTLE BROTHER.
LITTLE Fanny Greenland rose very early one morning, with a design of gathering
some flowers, and making them up into a nosegay for her mama. But, as she was
preparing to go down stairs, her father came into the room, and taking her in
his arms, said, with a smile: Kiss me, my dear Fanny, and come with me
directly: I have something to show you that I am sure you will like.

WHAT is it, papa? cried she eagerly.

WHY God has made you a present tonight, he answered, of a little brother.

A little brother! O where is he? Pray let me see! Pray carry me to him!

MR. Greenland then opened the door of her mama's chamber. At the bedside
there was a woman, whom Fanny had never before ^en in the house, wrapping up
the newborn baby in swaddling-clothes.

THE little girl asked a thousand and a thousand questions: Mr. Greenland
answered them with the utmost goodness; and thought he had fully satisfied her
curiosity, when she called out: Papa, who is that old woman? How she tosses my
little brother about! Are you not afraid she will hurt him?

Mr. Greenland. Not at all; you may be quite easy about that. She is a very
good woman, and I sent for her on purpose to take care of him.


Fanny. But he belongs to mama, does not he? Has she seen him yet?

Mrs. GREENLAND, (drawing open the curta^^ of her b^d^ YES, my love. Are you
not very glad to see him yourself?


Fanny. O, very glad, mama. You are very good to give me such a pretty little
companion. What a droll little face he has! and he is as red! -- just as if he
had been running. Will you let him come and play with me, papa?


Mr. Greenland. He is not able, my love; he cannot stand upon his feet. Only
look how weak they are!


Fanny. O goodness, what little tiny feet! I see he could not run long with me.


Mr. Greenland. You must have patience, Fanny. He must first learn to walk: and
after that you may play what gambols you please together in the garden.


Fanny. May we indeed. O poor little thing! I must see and give you something,
that you may begin to love me. Here, I have got a print in my pocket; take it.
-- Look, papa, look! the little monkey will not take it; he keeps his little hands
shut quite close.


Mr. Greenland. He does not know the use he may make of them. You must wait a
few months.


Fanny. O, that I will, my dear pretty little man! I will give you all my
play-things. Hey, shall you like to have them? Answer me, I say! He seems as if
he smiled. Call me Fanny, -- Fanny! Why, now, why will not you speak?


Mr. Greenland. He will not speak for two years, perhaps. But take care, lest
you disturb your mama with your prattle.


Fanny. Ah, papa, see if his face is not quite changed: he is crying; I dare
say he is hungry. Hush! hush! and I will go and bring you some sugar-plums.


Mr. Greenland. Don't trouble yourself about his food; he has no teeth; how can
he eat?


Fanny. What! cannot he eat? What will he live upon, then? Is he going to die?


Mrs. Greenland. No, my love. God has given me milk on purpose that I may feed
him with it. He is very weak now, but in a few days you will see some
difference; and, in a few weeks, he will roll about the ground like a little
lamb.


Fanny. But how tired I shall be to wait so long first! Only see, papa, what a
delicate little head he has! I am afraid to touch it.


Mr. Greenland. Yes, you may touch it, but very gently.


Fanny. O, very gently, indeed. Goodness, how soft it is! it is just like cotton.


Mr. Greenland. The heads of all little babies are the same.


Fanny. If he should happen to fall, he wo^ break it into a thousand pieces.


Mrs. Greenland. Certainly; but we shall take great care how we hold him, and
so preven^ his falling.


Mr. Greenland. Do you know, my dear Fanny, that five years ago, you were as
little as this yourself?


Fanny. Me! as little as him! O, you are not in earnest, papa?


Mr. Greenland. Nothing can be more true.


Fanny. Well, I am sure I don't remember it.


Mr. Greenland. No, I fancy not. But do you recollect when I had this chamber
papered?


Fanny. No, papa; it has always been the same as it is now.


Mr. Greenland. No such thing. I had it papered at the time when you were as
little as your brother.


Fanny. Well then, I am sure I never saw it.


Mr. Greenland. Little babies never see or take notice of any thing that
passes. When your brother is as old as you, ask him if he remembers your trying
to teach him to pronounce your name today. You will find he knows nothing of
it.


Fanny. And did mama give me milk too, when I was a little thing, like that?


Mr. Greenland. Without doubt. O if you knew all the trouble she has had with
you! You were so weak that you could take nothing; every moment we were afraid
you would die. Ah, my poor little baby! your mama used to say, what must I do!
if she should cry herself into fits! And great, indeed, was the difficulty she
found to keep any life in you.


Fanny. Ah, my dear mama! was it you, then, that taught me how to eat?


Mr. Greenland. Yes, my love, it was your mama. And after she had succeeded in
making you take your food, you became fat and sprightly. For near two years,
she had every day, and every hour of the day, the same trouble. Sometimes, when
she slept from mere fatigue, you woke her with your cries. She would then
instantly rise, and hasten to your cradle. My dear little Fanny, she would say,
while she kissed you a thosand times, perhaps you are hungry? And then again
she would feed you.


Fanny. Was my head as soft, then, as my little brother's?


Mr. Greenland. Just the same.


Fanny. And now it is quite hard! Goodness, how many hundred times I might have
broke it!


Mr. Greenland. O what care did we take that no accident should happen to you!
You^ mama, for a while, gave up all company, all pleasure, all public places,
rather than lo^^ sight of you even for an instant. And whenever she was
absolutely obliged to go out, upon some call of duty, or some indispensible
^^^ness, she was always in an agony till she ^ ^^^ned. My dear Gertrude, she
would say to your nurse, I entreat you to be as careful of Fanny as if she were
your own child. And she continually made her presents, that she might be
induced to pay you the greater attention.


Fanny. O what a good mama! But, papa, was there ever a time when I did not
know how to run? Why I can run now quite fast. Only see, in three steps I am at
the end of the room. Who was it first taught me to do this?


Mr. Greenland. Your mama and I. We put a band of stuffed velvet round your head,
that you might not hurt yourself if you should happen to fall; we held you by
leading-strings, to assist your first little steps. We took you every day to
the green-plat in the garden, and then, sitting opposite each other, at a
little distance, we made you stand all alone between us, and then held out our
arms, to invite you first to one, then to the other. The smallest false step
you took, made our blood run cold. But by continually repeating this exercise,
we taught you at last to walk by yourself.


Fanny. O, I never thought I had given you so much trouble! And was it you too,
that taught me to speak?


Mr. Greenland. Yes, we also taught you that. I took you upon my knees, and
repeated to you the names of Papa, and Mama, till you were able to lisp them
yourself; and every word that you now know, you were then taught by us in the
same manner. You ought yourself to remember that it was us, also, who
instructed you how to read.


Fanny. O, I remember that quite well. You used to put me upon a chair between
you at table. Then in the desert we had always a plate of dried plums, and
little squares with printed letters. And whenever I named them right, you
always gave me some of the plums. O! it was such a pretty play!


Mr. Greenland. If we had not taken any pains with you, if we had left you
quite to yourself, what do you think would have become of you?


Fanny. O, I should have been dead a long while ago. O what a good papa and
mama you are!


Mr. Greenland. Yet do you not sometimes vex your papa? Are you not sometimes
disobedient to your mama?


Fanny. But I never will again as long as I live! I did not know you had done
so many things for me.


Mr. Greenland. Observe well the care we shall take of your little brother, and
then say to yourself: And I, I also, have given as much trouble to my parents!


THIS conversation made a deep impression upon Fanny's mind; and when she saw
her mama's tenderness for her little brother, her uneasiness for his health,
her patience in feeding and nursing him; the sorrow with which she heard his
cries; the earnestness of her papa to share some part of her fatigue; and their
mutual trouble and difficulty, in teaching the child both to walk and speak;
she said in her heart: Ah! my dear papa and mama, you have already taken the
same pains with me! This thought filled her with so much tenderness and
gratitude, that she faithfully remembered the promise she had made them, of
never w^ully giving them the smallest displeasure.

THE FOUR SEASONS.
O THAT Winter would but last forever! cried little Frank, as he came home from
sliding upon the ice, after amusing himself by making figures with the snow in
the garden.

MR. Goodman his father, hearing this exclamation, called to him, and said:
Frank, you will oblige me, by writing down that wish in my tablets. Frank
instantly obeyed, though with a hand that was shaking with cold.

THE winter, however, soon passed away, and the Spring succeeded it.

FRANK walked out one morning with his father, along a bank that was bordered
with hyacinths, auriculas, and narcissuses, and was almost transported with
delight, while he breathed their fragrance, and admired their freshness and
beauty.

THESE, said Mr. Goodman, are the productions of spring. They are brilliant,
but they are very short-lived. O! answered Frank, that it was but always Spring!

WILL you write this wish in my tablets? said his father. Frank, jumping with
high spirits and joy, readily complied.

THE spring, nevertheless was soon replaced by the Summer.

FRANK, one fine afternoon, went out with his father and mother, and some
companions of his own age, to walk in a neighboring village.

THEY observed, as they proceeded, the most beautiful variety of views and
objects: now they admired the young green corn, waving lightly with the wind,
like the sea in its gentlest motion; and now a meadow enameled with a thousand
flowers. Now they saw little lambs frisking and bounding on the hills; and now
little chickens were playing gambols around the hen. They regaled themselves
with cherries, strawberries, and other fruits of the season; and they passed
the whole day in sporting in the fields.

DO you not find, Frank, said his father, when they were returning home, that
summer has its pleasures?

O yes, answered Frank, how I wish it was to last the whole year!

THIS wish, also, at the desire of his father, he wrote in his tablets.

AT length came the Autumn.

ALL the family now went to see and enjoy the harvest. It was not quite so hot
as in summer; the air was soft, and the sky was serene. The wagons were
loading with rich sheaves of golden corn, the orchards were blooming with ripe
plums and crimson mulberries, and the branches of the apple trees were bending
with their fruit.

THIS was a day of feast and frolic to Frank, who loved nothing so much as
green-gages, and rich plums, and who was allowed the full enjoyment of
gathering them himself.

THIS fine season, said his father to him, will soon be over; the winter is
advancing to us with great strides, to take the place of the autumn.

O how I wish, cried Frank, that it would stop by the road, and that the Autumn
would never go away from us!

Mr. Goodman. And should you like that, Frank?


Frank. That I should, I assure you, papa.


BUT pray, cried his father, taking his tablets from his pocket, look a little
at what is written here. Read it aloud.

Frank, (reading.) O that the winter would but last for ever!


Mr. Goodman. Now look and read two or three leaves further.


Frank, (reading.) O that it was but always spring!


Mr. Goodman. Look now at this page; what do you find there?


Frank, (reading.) I wish that the summer was to last all the year round!


Mr. Goodman. Do you know the handwriting of all this?


Frank. Yes, papa; it is my own.


Mr. Goodman. And what is it you were wishing just now?


FRANK. That winter would stop by the road, and autumn never go away from us.


Mr. Goodman. This is really worth attention. In the winter, you wished it
should always be winter; in the spring, that it should always be spring; in the
summer, that it should always be summer; and now today, in the autumn, you
wish that it should always be autumn. Do you reflect at all upon what may be
gathered from wishes so contradictory?


Frank Why, I suppose, papa, that all the seasons are good in their turn.


Mr. Goodman. Yes, my dear, they are all good, and all fertile in riches, and
in pleasures. God understands much better than we, limited creatures that we
are, how to direct and to govern their retreat and their approach.


HAD it depended upon you, last winter, we should have seen no more either of
spring, summer, or autumn. You would have covered the earth with a perpetual
frost, and have been a stranger to all pleasure, but that of sliding upon the
ice, and of forming figures with the snow. How many blessings and enjoyments
would you have been deprived of by this arrangement!

IT is most fortunate for us, that it is not in our power to regulate the
course of nature. All happiness would else be over with us for ever, merely by
the grant of our presumptuous wishes.

THE SNOW.
AFTER many flattering, but deceitful promises, the spring at length returned.
The soft-blowing wind again warmed the air, the snow was melted, the grass
recovered its beautiful green, the flowers put forth their sweets, and the
birds were every where heard singing. Little Louisa was already taken into the
country by her father: and already she had listened, with delight, to the ear^
songs of the cha^h and the blackbird, and had gathered the first budding
violets; when, suddenly and unexpectedly, the weather again changed. All at
once, the wind rose in the North with violence, it blew furiously through the
woods, and the ground was covered with snow. At night little Louisa went
shivering to bed, yet returning thanks in her prayers to God, that he had given
her so safe a shelter from the injuries of the season.

THE next morning when she got up, the flowers, the grass, the hedges, were all
one white. There had been, during the night, so great a fall of snow, that the
passengers, who were obliged to walk in it, found it up to their knees.

LOUISA was grieved at the sight; but the little birds seemed much more so; for
the snow lay so deep upon the ground, that they could find neither grain nor
worm, to appease their hunger.

ALL the little feathered inhabitants of the woods, now flew to the towns and
the villages, to seek for refuge and protection. Large flights of sparrows,
linnets, chaffinches and larks, came into the yards and gardens, perched upon
the roofs of the houses, and beat about, with their little bills and their
feet, in every heap of rubbish they could find, in hopes of picking up
something for food.

NEAR fifty of these little ramblers flew or dropped into the courtyard before
Louisa's house. Louisa saw them, and, full of sorrow, went into her papa's
room. What is the matter, my love? cried he. O papa, she answered, those poor
little birds, that sung so prittily and so merrily only two days ago, are now
all down there, in the courtyard. They are quite numbed with cold, and they
have nothing to eat. May I go to the granary, papa, and take out some grain for
them?

WITH all my heart, answered her father. Louisa waited for nothing more. The
granary was at some distance from the house; but she hastened to it with all
speed, followed by her governess, and eagerly filled her hands with corn and
hemp seed, which she ran and threw all over the courtyard. The birds now flew
about her in great numbers, eagerly picking at the smallest little seed. Louisa
stood some time looking at them, and was overjoyed at the sight. She then went
to her father and mother, begging them to come and look too, and take part in
her joy.

BUT these little handfuls of grain were soon devoured. The birds flew to the
edges of the roof of the house, and sorrowfully looking at Louisa, seemed to
say: Have you nothing more to give us?

LOUISA understood their language; and, swift as an arrow, she ran in search of
more grain. In her way she met with a boy who was carrying in his hand a cage
filled with birds* but who had by no means so compassionate a ^rt as Louisa's;
for he shook the cage so roughly, as he went along, that the poor little
animals had their heads continually beat against the wire bars.

LOUISA saw this with much concern. What are you going to do with the ^ds?
cried she to the boy.

I don't know yet, answered he, but I shall sell them if I can; and if nobody
will buy them, I shall make a feast of them for my cat.

YOUR cat! cried Louisa, your cat! O you wicked boy!

O, they will not be the first, cried he, that she has had to craunch alive
between her teeth. And then, carelessly swinging about the cage, he was walking
off.

LOUISA stopped him, and asked how much he would have for them?

I will sell them all at a farthing a piece, he answered, and there are
eighteen of them.

VERY well, I Will take them of you, cried Louisa; and bidding the boy follow
her, she hurried to her father, and begged his permission to make the purchase.

HER father readily consented, and even gave her the use of an empty room to
keep them in.

THE boy, well satisfied with his bargain, then went away; and told all his
comrades that he knew a young lady who bought people's birds.

IN a few hours, there came so many other boys, with more of these little
animals, to the courtyard before Louisa's house, that the place seemed turned
into a bird-market. They all pressed about her when she came in sight, jumping
one above the other, and lifting their cages up with both their hands, each
trying to recommend to her the birds belonging to himself.

LOUISA bought all that were offered to her, and carried them into the room
where she had placed the others.

SHE did not leave them till night; but never had she gone to bed so pleased
and delighted before. How happy I am, cried she, to have saved the lives of so
many innocent little creatures, and now to have the feeding of them myself!
When summer comes, I will go into all the fields and woods; and then my little
guests shall sing me their prettiest songs, to thank me for all this care I
have taken of them.

SHE closed her eyes with this thought, and dreamt that she was strolling in a
very beautiful forest, where every tree was peopled with birds, hopping from
branch to branch, and gaily warbling, or feeding their young: and Louisa at the
sight smiled in her sleep.

SHE rose very early, to get food for her little visitors, both in her room and
in the courtyard: but she was not quite so happy today, as she had been the
night before. She knew what money she had had in her purse, and that but little
could now remain. If this snowy weather lasts some days longer, cried she, what
will become of all the rest of the birds? The wicked boys here will be giving
the^ ^ll alive to be eat up by their cats; and for want of a little more money,
I shall not be able to save them.

WITH these melancholy thoughts, she slowly drew out her purse, to count over
the little treasure that was left.

BUT what was her amazement to feel it quite heavy! She opened it, and found it
full of coins of different value, mixed and heaped together.

SHE flew to her father, and, in a transport of surprise and joy, related what
had happened to her.

HER father took her to his bosom, and, while he embraced her, wetted her
cheeks with his tears.

MY dearest child, cried he, thou have never given me so much satisfaction as
at this moment. Continue still to assist all the little suffering creatures
that are in your power, and as fast as your purse is emptied, you shall again
see it filled.

WHAT joy was this for Louisa! She ran into her birds apartment, with her apron
full of hemp seed and corn. The birds all flew to her, with eyes that showed
their eagerness for their breakfasts. She then went down into the courtyard,
where she gave another plentiful repast to her hungry visitors.

SHE now saw that she had near an hundred pensioners to nourish. What pleasure,
what rapture to her was this!

NEVER had her dolls or her play-things afforded her such delight.

IN the afternoon, as she put her hand into her bag of seeds, she found a
little slip of paper, containing these words: "The inhabitants of the air fly
toward thee, O Lord! and thou give them nourishment: Thou put forth thy
hand, and pourest down thy blessings upon every thing that has life."

SHE eagerly turned to her father, who had followed her, and exclaimed: I,
then, papa, am now like God; for the inhabitants of the air fly toward me, and
when I put forth my hand, I pour down blessings upon them.

YES, my child, said her father, every time you do good to any living creature,
you are like God. When you are grown up, you may succor your fellow creatures,
as you now succor these little birds: and then you will resemble God much
more. What happiness for a human being to be able to do any thing like God!

DURING a week after this time, Louisa continued to put forth her hand, and
pour down blessings upon all the little hungry animals that surrounded her. At
length the snow melted; the fields recovered their verdure; and the birds,
which had not dared venture from the housetops, now spread their wings toward
the woods.

BUT those which were in her bird-apartment, were still her guests. At the
return of the sun, they flew to the windows, and beat their little wings and
bills against the glass; but all in vain: their prison was too strong for their
resistance; and Louisa had no idea of their misery.

ONE day, when she was carrying them some food, her father came into the room;
and Louisa was delighted to make him the spectator of her amusement.

BUT, my dear Louisa, cried he, why do these birds look so restless and uneasy?
They seem to want something. Perhaps they have left in the fields and woods,
some companions they wish to see again.

VERY true, papa; perhaps they have; for they have looked quite unhappy ever
since the fine weather. I Will go and open the window, and let them fly away.

I think you will do quite right, answered her father, for you will make a
general joy throughout the country. These little prisoners will go and find
their companions again; and they will fly before them, just as you run before
me, when I have been absent a few days, and come home.

ALL the windows were already open when he had finished speaking. The birds
instantly perceived it, and, in a minute, not one remained in the room. Some of
them grased the earth with their wings; others mounted upwards toward the sky*
some perched upon the adjoining trees; and others flew backwards and forwards
before the windows, singing and chirping, and rejoicing in the pleasure of
their restored liberty.

LOUISA walked out in the country every day during summer, and, on each side,
as she turned, always heard or saw some birds. Now the early lark took its
flight from her feet, and sung his joyful song in ascending to the clouds: and
now the chaffinch twittered hers, as she perched upon the tops of the bushes:
and when any one distinguished i^self by warbling with unusual sweetness,
Louisa said to herself: O! I dare say that was one of my little guests! for I
am sure I can tell by his voice, he was well fed in the cold weather.

ANDREW.
A POOR labourer, named Bennet, had six young children, whom he found great
difficulty in maintaining; but whom he had nevertheless supported by his
industry, till there came so bad a season, that the price of corn was raised,
and bread was sold dearer than ever. The good man worked day and night; yet, in
spite of his utmost diligence, he could not earn money enough to buy even the
worst and cheapest food for so many poor hungry children. He was soon therefore
reduced to the utmost misery. One day he called about him all his family, and,
with tears in his eyes, said to them: My sweet little ones, every thing is
grown so dear, that with all my working I cannot get enough for your
subsistence: this morsel of bread, that I now show you, costs me all the money
that I can earn in the whole day. You must content yourselves, therefore, to
share with me the little I am able to get: and though it will not be enough to
satisfy you, it will serve to prevent your dying quite starved. The poor man
could say no more; he raised up his eyes to heaven, and sobbed bitterly. His
children all cried too; and every one said to himself: O good God! come to our
help, poor little miserable things that we are! help to our poor father, and
leave us not to die for hunger!

BENNET then divided his loaf into seven equal parts; he kept a share for
himself, and gave the rest among his children. One of them, however, whose name
was Andrew, refused his portion, saying: I am ill, father, and I can take
nothing; so pray eat my share yourself, or else part it among the others. My
poor dear child, what is it ails you? cried Bennet, taking him in his arms. I
am ill, answered Andrew, very ill, father, I will go and lie down. Bennet
immediately carried him to bed; and early the next morning, in the greatest
distress, he went to a physician, and conjured him to have the charity to come
and see his sick son, and direct what should be done for him.

THE physician, who was a very humane man, consented to accompany Bennet home,
though certain he should never be paid for his visit. He went to little
Andrew's bedside, took his hand, and felt his pulse; but could discover no
symptom of any disorder. He found him, however, extremely weak, and said he
would give orders for some medicine that would strengthen him. No, don't order
me any thing, Sir, cried Andrew, for I must not take it, be it what it will.

Physician. You must not take it! and pray why not?


Andrew. Don't ask me, Sir, for I cannot tell you the reason.


Physician. And who should hinder you, child? You seem to me a very obstinate
little boy.


Andrew. No, indeed, Sir, it is not out of obstinacy, if you will believe me; but
only I cannot tell you why.


Physician. Well, just as you please; I shall not force you: but I shall ask
your father; and he, I presume, will speak to be better understood.


Andrew. O no, pray Sir! don't let my father hear any thing about it.


Physician. You are a most preverse and incomprehensible boy; and I shall most
undoubtedly apply to your father, if you will not explain yourself.


Andrew. Oh! no, no, Sir! for God's sake don't do that! I would rather tell you
every thing! But first, pray send my brothers and sisters out of the room.


THE physician then bid all the chrildren go; and the little Andrew said: Oh,
Sir! in these hard times, my father can but just get enough to buy a coarse
brown loaf; and he shares it among us all; and every one can have but a little
morsel; and for all that he hardly keeps any for himself. But it makes me very
sorrowful to see my poor little brothers, and my poor little sisters, all so
hungry. And I am the eldest, and I am stronger than they are; so I had rather
go without myself, than eat any of it from them. And this is the reason I made
believe I was ill: but pray, Sir, don't tell my father, for it will only fret
him.

THE physician, wiping his eyes, said: But you too, my good boy, are you not
hungry yourself?

Andrew. O yes, indeed, I am very hungry too; only that does not vex me so
badly as seeing them so.


Physician. But you must soon die yourself, if you will take no nourishment.


Andrew. I know it very well, Sir, but I shall die with a very good heart; for
my father will have one mouth less to fill: and when I go to God almighty, I
shall beg him very hard to give my poor little brothers and sisters something
to eat.


THE worthy physician felt the utmost tenderness and admiration as he listened
to the sentiments of this generous child. He took him in his arms, pressed him
to his bosom, and said to him: No, my excellent little lad, thou shall not die;
God, the father of us all, will take care of thee, and of all thy family. Give
thanks to him, that he has sent me to your assistance: I shall return to you
presently.

HE then hastened to his own house, and loading one of his servants with all
sorts of provisions, he bid him attend him back to Andrew and his half-starved
little brothers and sisters. He made them all sit down at a table, and desired
them to eat till every one was fully satisfied. It was a scene of true delight
to this good physician, to witness the happiness of these innocent creatures;
and when he went away, he charged Andrew to suffer no further uneasiness,
promising to supply them himself with all necessaries.

HE faithfully kept his word, sending them every day food in great plenty: and
many other good and charitable persons, to whom he told this adventure,
imitated his benevolence. Some gave them provisions, others money, and others
linen and clothes; so that, in a very short time, they had even more of every
thing than they required.

NO sooner was Bennet's landlord, who was a nobleman of extensive fortune and
interest, informed of what the courageous little Andrew had suffered for the
sake of his father, and his brothers and sisters, than, struck with admiration
at such generosity and fortitude, he sent for the poor man, and said to him:
You have a most wonderful son; and I will myself, also, be a father to him. I
will settle you upon my own estate; and the rest of your children shall be
educated to whatever trade they themselves choose, and at my expense: and if
they improve as they ought, I will take care to have them all provided for.

BENNET returned home almost wild with joy; and, throwing himself upon his
knees, gave thanks to heaven, for having blessed him with so excellent a child.

CAROLINE.
MRS. P...., a lady as much distinguished for elegance of manners, and
quickness of parts, as for the delicacy of her sentiments, and the dignity of
her character, one day gently reproved Priscilla, her eldest daughter, for some
little giddiness, which, though proper for correction, was yet very pardonable
at her early age. Priscilla, touched by the mildness of her mother's
reproaches, burst into a flood of tears, from repentance and tenderness.
Caroline, at that time but three years old, no sooner saw her sister weeping,
than climbing up by the back of her chair, in order to reach her, she took with
one hand her pocket handkerchief, and softly wiped her eyes, while with the
other she slipped a sugar-plum into her mouth; which, with the simplicity of
childish generosity, she took from her own. How tender a subject this, if in
the hands of some good painter!

THE LITTLE FIDDLER. A DRAMA IN ONE ACT.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.
MR. MELFORD. CHARLES, his son. FERDINAND, his nephew. JOHN, the little fiddler.
SOPHIA, daughter to Mr. Melford. friends of Sophia.
CHARLOTTE, ANNA,

The scene is in Mr. Melford's house.

THE LITTLE FIDDLER. A DRAMA IN ONE ACT.
SCENE I.
CHARLES AND FERDINAND. CHARLES. COUSIN, I want you to do me a favor.


Ferdinand. Well, what is it? You are always asking something or other of me.


Charles. That is only because you are quicker than I. You know that fable of
Phaedrus's, that our tutor has given me to do?


Ferdinand. What! and have you not done it yet?


Charles. How should I have done it, when I have never set about it?


Ferdinand. And could you find no time to work from eleven o'clock to three?


Charles. You shall judge yourself, if it was possible. All the forenoon, I was
obliged to run about in the garden, to get an appetite against dinner. Then we
spent a whole hour at table. And as to sitting down and studying immediately
after eating, you know, as well as I do, that the doctors all say it is very
wrong. And so, as I eat very heartily, I was forced to take a great deal of
exercise after it, for the sake of my health.


Ferdinand. Well, at least, that is over now; and between this and night, you
have more time than you can want for this little fable.


Charles. But pray, is not this the hour for my lesson of writing and accounts?


Ferdinand. But the writing-master is not come yet --


Charles. If he is not, I am every moment expecting him; and I do every thing
ill when I take the wrong hours.


Ferdinand. But you will have some of the afternoon left when he is gone, and
all the evening besides.


Charles. No, I sha'n't have an instant: for my sister has invited the two Miss
Fentons today.


Ferdinand. And pray, Sir, do they come to see you?


Charles. No; but I must help my sister to entertain them, for all that.


Ferdinand. And what will be in the way when they are gone?


Charles. O, thank you for nothing! work by candlelight, to spoil my eyes! --
Yet this nasty translation must be done and ready by tomorrow-morning.


Ferdinand. Very well; whether it must, or must not, what is that to me?


Charles. Do you wish, then, to see me scolded by the tutor, and papa?


Ferdinand. You always get the better of me by that. Come, where is the fable?


Charles. Up stairs in my room, upon the drawers. I Will go and get it for you:
cannot you come with me?


Ferdinand. No, go first, and I Will follow. I see your sister, and I know she
wants to speak to me.


Charles. Well don't go and tell her any thing of this, do you hear?


SCENE II.
SOPHIA and FERDINAND. SOPHIA. WHAT are you debating about with my brother,
cousin? Has he been playing you one of his usual tricks?


Ferdinand. No, he has not been playing me one of his usual tricks, but he has
been making me one of his usual requests. He has desired me, according to
custom, to do his task for him against tomorrow.


Sophia. And is papa never to be told of his idleness?


Ferdinand. I, at least, can never bear to tell him of it. My uncle, you know,
since the death of your mama, has had such bad health, that the least
disturbance makes him ill for several days. Besides, I only live by his bounty,
and he might perhaps suppose I wish to injure his son in his opinion.


Sophia. Well, I must take some opportunity of talking about him to papa
myself. But do you know why I wanted to speak to you? The two Miss Fentons are
coming to see me today, and you must help me to amuse them.


Ferdinand. I Will do the best I can, my dear cousin.


Sophia. O, here they are.


SCENE III.
FERDINAND, SOPHIA, ANNA and CHARLOTTE FENTON. SOPHIA. AH! how do you do, my
dear Charlotte and Anna?


(They kiss one another, and court'sie to Ferdinand, who bows to them.)
Charlotte. My dear Sophia! it seems a year since I have seen you!


Anna. It Is a long, long time indeed!


Sophia. I believe it is more than three weeks.


(Ferdinand brings chairs, and places a table before them.) Charlotte. O, pray,
Master Ferdinand, don't give yourself so much trouble


Ferdinand. I am proud of waiting upon you, Miss Charlotte.


Sophia. O I am sure Ferdinand does it with pleasure. (She shakes hands with
him.) I only wish my brother had a little of his complaisance.


SCENE IV.
FERDINAND, SOPHIA, ANNA, CHARLOTTE, and CHARLES. CHARLES (without taking any
notice of the young ladies.) HOW abominable of you, Ferdinand, to keep me
waiting so long, while you are playing the fine gentleman here!


Ferdinand. Really, Charles, I did not expect I should have been the first
person in the company, you would have made your compliments to just now.


Charles. O, don't be angry at that, young ladies; I shall soon be at your
service.


Anna. Pray don't hurry yourself upon our account, Master Charles.


(Charles leads Ferdinand apart, and while the young ladies converse with one
another, he takes out of his pocket the paper with the fable, and gives it to
Ferdinand.) Charles. Here it is; you know what I mean.


Ferdinand. Six lines! A hard task, truly! Are you not ashamed of yourself?


Charles. Hush, hush! hold your tongue.


Ferdinand. Young ladies, I am very sorry, but I must leave you for about half
a quarter of an hour.


Charlotte. We shall wait for you with impatience.


Sophia. If you must go, my dear cousin, pray do me the favor to bid Jenny
bring us the tea.


SCENE V.
CHARLES, SOPHIA, ANNA, and CHARLOTTE. CHARLES (throwing himself on a couch.)
COME, then, I shall take this place for myself.


Sophia. I think, at least, you might have asked leave first.


Charles. Of you, perhaps?


Sophia. I am not the only person here.


Charlotte. I suppose your brother counts us for nothing.


Anna. No, it is only that he thinks he does us a great deal of honor by
staying in the room with us.


Charles. I know very well you could dispense with my company, but I could not
so easily deny myself yours.


Sophia. Well, here is, at least, some appearance of a compliment: though, to
say the truth, I believe you might have counted the tea for one reason of
staying.


Charles. But of all things, my little sister, don't flatter yourself I stay
for you.


Sophia. O no, I think a great deal too humbly of myself: though if any thing
would make me proud, it would be that I am the sister of so polite a young
gentleman as you.


(Jenny brings the tea, and sets it before Sophia.) Charles. Come, let me pour
it out.


Sophia. No, no, that is my business; you are a great deal too awkward. If you
choose to be employed, you may hand the tea to these young ladies.


Anna. Not so much sugar in my cup.


Sophia. Take what you like for yourself, my love. (She gives her the tea, and
holds the sugar to her; Charles takes his own tea, and snatches the sugar
basin.) Why now, Charles, you have three great lumps already.


Charles. But that is not enough. I love to have my things very sweet.


(He takes several lumps of sugar, one after another, till his sister gets the
basin out of his hand.) Sophia. Charles, are you not ashamed of yourself? don't
you see there will not be enough left for us?


Charles. Well, don't you know where to get more?


Sophia. I believe my brother would be quite angry with himself, if he saved
his sister any trouble.


Charles. It Is only because by that means you would give me the pleasure of
being alone with these young ladies.


Anna. Do you hear that, Sophia? Never again tell us your brother is not
perfectly well bred.


Sophia (After collecting the cups before her, and filling them a second time.)
Charles, give this to Anna.


(Charles takes the cup and saucer, but in holding it to Anna, throws all the
tea over her robe-coat. The young ladies hastily rise.) Sophia. See! here is a
proof of his good-breeding! (In a low voice to Charles.) I dare say, you
spiteful thing, you did it on purpose!


Anna. O dear! what will mama say? what can I do?


Charlotte. This is but the second time she has ever had on that coat! Come,
quick, let us have a glass of clean water.


Sophia. No, no; I have heard it is better to rub it with a dry cloth. See,
here is a clean white handkerchief.


(They both run to Anna; Charlotte holds her robe-coat, and Sophia rubs it.
Mean while Charles sits at the table quite at his ease, and drinks his tea.)
Charlotte. Enough, enough, you must let it dry now.


Anna. Fortunately it will fold over here, and nobody will think of examining
it.


Charles. (to himself.) So much the worse!


Sophia. See, look at it, Charlotte; I don't think it will appear.


Charlotte. Why if I had not seen the stain before --


Anna. Well, well, never mind. Only, pray, Master Charles, spare yourself the
trouble of helping me another time.


Sophia. Come, then, let us sit down again, and be comfortable.

(She is going to fill the cups, but finds the tea-pot emptied. She turns
angrily to Charles.)
WELL, there is an ill nature in this, that nobody could imagine! Would you
believe it, while we were taking so much trouble, he has been drinking up all
the tea? Only see, the pot is quite empty! However, wait a moment, and I Will run
and tell them to bring us some more.

Charlotte. No, no, we have had enough. I cannot drink another drop.


Anna. This misfortune to my gown, has taken away my thirst.


Charles. Pray make no ceremony; they can soon bring more.


Anna. Upon my word, though, I think you should have prepared for your
brother's being one of the guests.


Sophia. But those who are not invited, might at least wait till it comes to
their turn.


Charlotte. My dear Sophia, don't think about it, for we really don't want any
more.


Sophia. Well, then, what shall we do next? O here comes my dear Ferdinand! He
will help us to think of some play.


Charles (mocking her.) O here comes my dear Ferdinand! -- Very well, Madam!
but I must speak to him before you do.


(He goes up to Ferdinand, while the young ladies are engaged in conversation
with one another.) SCENE VI.
ANNA, CHARLOTTE, SOPHIA, FERDINAND, CHARLES. CHARLES (in a low voice.) WELL,
have you done it?


Ferdinand. Yes; here it is: take it, and blush at your own laziness. Well,
young ladies, have you fixed upon any play?


Anna. No, we waited for you to choose for us.


Ferdinand. I have a little fiddler down stairs, who is quite at your service.
If you will give me leave, I Will call him up, and he shall either sing you a song,
or play you a country-dance.


Sophia. A little fiddler? O where is he?


Charlotte. How good-natured of Master Ferdinand to get such an entertainment
for us!


Ferdinand. We shall not only have an entertainment for ourselves, but do an
act of charity besides; for this poor little scraper has nothing in the whole
world except his fiddle to get his living by.


Charles. And pray who is to pay him, Master Ferdinand? You are always talking
as if you were worth thousands, when all the time you know you have not half a
farthing.


Sophia. Are you not ashamed, brother?


Ferdinand. Let him go on, cousin, he does not hurt me. There is no crime in
being poor. I am like the little fiddler in that, and he is a very good boy. I
shall give him a shilling, which I have in my purses, and he has agreed to play
for it all the evening.


Charlotte. No, no, we will all go shares in paying him.


Anna. Yes, we will make a little collection for him.


Ferdinand. Shall I go and fetch him? he is waiting at the door.


Sophia. Certainly, my dear cousin; and pray make haste.


(Ferdinand goes out; and, at the same time Jenny brings some cake upon a
waiter.) SCENE VII.
ANNA, CHARLOTTE, SOPHIA, and CHARLES. (Charles offers to take the waiter from
Jenny, but Sophia prevents him.) CHARLES. WHY I only want to divide it into
shares.


Sophia. No, no, I shall save you that trouble: you may else do it so
obligingly as to leave us no more cake than you did tea.


(She divides the cake, and hands round the shares.) Charles (after taking his
own piece.) And pray who is that other bit left for?


Sophia. Would you have me forget cousin Ferdinand?


Anna. I would rather give him my own portion.


Charlotte. And I mine too.


Charles (spit^fully.) I hope the gentleman is well enough off among you!


Sophia. Do you envy him for having only his own share of cake?


SCENE VIII.
ANNA, CHARLOTTE, SOPHIA, CHARLES, FERDINAND, (holding little Jack by one hand,
who carries his fiddle with the other.) FERDINAND. YOUNG ladies, will you give
me leave to introduce this little musician to you?


Charlotte and Anna. Dear! what a pretty boy he is!


Sophia. Pray where do you come from, little boy?


Little Jack. I come from a great way off, ladies and gentlemen.


Anna. And what has made you travel so far?


Little Jack. Because my poor daddy is blind, and he cannot work any longer
himself: so we go about the country, and I earn bread for us both with my
fiddle.


Sophia. Very well, then, pray let us hear what sort of a player you are.


Little Jack. Yes, Miss; but I can do no great things.


Ferdinand. Come, come, play your best; it will be well enough for me; and
these young ladies are so good that they will excuse your playing a little out
of tune, if that should happen.

(Little Jack tunes his fiddle. In the mean time Anna hands the cake to
Ferdinand. He bows and takes the waiter from her, which he holds in his hand,
without touching the cake, while he is listening to little Jack, who begins by
playing the tune of the following Song, which he afterward sings.) 1
Pity a poor little boy his hard case,
Who has all alone the care of his da^
No victuals have they, and no drink in this place,
But what charity gives to their fortune so sad.
2
O pity their case, and help them, I crave,
They hardly are able your goodness to sue;
One with long sorrows is near to his grave,
T'other's too little to labor for two.
3
O then, good Christians, bemoan their hard case,
And help a poor boy to support his old dad;
No victuals they have, and no drink in this place,
But what charity gives to their fortune so sad.

Ferdinand (taking his hand.) Poor little fellow! have you no money then?


Little Jack. Lack-a-day, no, Sir! but I have my fiddle, and with that I can
always get something more; so I am never out of heart. If we fall sick, God
Almighty will take care of us; and if we die, we shall only want a little bit
of ground to cover us; and that we may have any where.


Ferdinand. Poor good little boy! But may be you are hungry? Here, will you
have my cake?


Little Jack. O lack! no, little Master! Eat it yourself. I want nothing but a
morsel of bread.


Ferdinand. No, you shall have this cake: I can eat bread as well as you.


Little Jack. Thank you, then, Master! But I will not eat it now; I Will keep it to
treat my daddy with, for he is not used to eat such nice things as these.


Sophia. Will you keep it for your daddy, you good boy? -- No, you need not,
for he shall have my share.


Charlotte. And mine too.


Anna. And pray take mine for him besides.


Little Jack. O lack! no, keep your cake yourselves, my pretty ladies! this bit
is enough for me. It is not with such dainties as these that poor people must
stuff themselves.


Charles (mocking him.) No, to be sure, that might make you lose your fine
voice!


Sophia (to Charles.) Nobody has asked you for your share, Sir!


Charles. O, I munched that up long ago.


Ferdinand. Come, little Jack, will not you just taste one little crumb?


Little Jack. No, my pretty Master, if you will have me take it from you, pray
let me wrap it up in my handkerchief, and carry it away with me.


Sophia. Stay a moment, and I will get you a clean bit of cloth: you may put
your cake upon the window in the mean time.


Little Jack. Yes, my good little Miss, and then I Will play you another tune;
for that is what I come here for, and not to eat up your nice cakes.


Anna. I should like vastly to dance a minuet with Master Ferdinand. Pray can
you play us one?


Little Jack. Any thing you please; minuet, or a jigg, or a country-dance.


Anna. First of all, then, let us have a minuet.


(Ferdinand takes her hand to dance with her.) Charlotte. Why cannot we dance a
double minuet, (going up to Charles) Master Charles?


Charles. O, you must do without me, for I don^t know how to dance.


Sophia. Yet he has learnt two whole years.


Charles. But I am not in a capering humor today.


Charlotte (curtsying to him.) So then I am refused, am I?


Sophia. Cousin, lend me your hat. Now, Ma'am, I shall have the honor to be
your beau myself.


Anna. O, then we will all four dance at once, shall we?


Ferdinand. I am ready for whatever you please.


(They dance a double minuet; and when it is over, Charlotte goes up to
Ferdinand.) Charlotte. Now let me dance with you, Master Ferdinand.


Ferdinand. I shall like it of all things.


Anna. Why then, now, Sophy, I Will be your beau.


Sophia ( to herself.) So by this means I never get my cousin myself. However,
I cannot well help giving him up to these young ladies, because they are my
visitors.


(They dance another minuet. Charles, mean time, goes up to the window, takes
little Jack's cake, and glides out of the room with it.) Sophia ( to
Ferdinand.) Ah! now you are quite tired already. Well, it must be owned, we
ladies are a great deal stronger in the feet than you gentlemen are.


Ferdinand. That is only because you are a great deal lighter.


Anna ( to Ferdinand.) If your cousin was as obliging as you, we could manage
very well, and tire you both out; because then one of us might be resting, and
taking breath, while the other two were dancing.


( They look about for Charles.) Charlotte. Why, he is gone! Well, never mind,
it is so much the better.


Little Jack. Shall I play you another tune?


Ferdinand. No, we have had enough; unless you young ladies desire any more.
This poor fellow will be glad to go and earn a little somewhere else. I told
you what a small sum I have in my purse, and Charles is gone off without giving
any help.


Charlotte. O, we will all join.


Anna. Yes, we shall do that of course, to be sure. ( She takes out her purse.)
Here, Master Ferdinand, here is my shilling.


Charlotte. And here is mine*


Sophia. See, my dear cousin Ferdinand, I have two shillings; so do you keep
your own shilling, and let this be for us both.


Ferdinand. No, no, Sophy, I ought to pay first.


( He collects the money, and carries it to Jack.) Little Jack. O, I must not
take all that! Why, Master, you only promised me a shilling!


Ferdinand. You shall have it all, little boy. You are such a good little
fellow, that I wish I could give you as much again.


Little Jack. God reward you, little ladies and gentlemen; God reward you!
Pray, Miss, ( to Sophia) would you be so kind now as to give me a little morsel
of old cloth, just to wrap up the cake that you bid me carry to my daddy?


Sophia. O, I had forgot!

She runs and brings him a handkerchief. Here, little boy, you shall have this:
it is a little worn, but it will do very well to hold the cake.


Little Jack. O, it is a great deal too good. I am afraid to take it.


Sophia. I cannot use it any more, and I should only have given it to somebody
else.


Little Jack. May God reward you, Miss, for your charity!


( He goes to the window for his cake.) Sophia. Give it to me, and I Will fold it
up for you.


( They look for the cake.) Little Jack ( sorrowfully.) Lack-a-day, it is all
gone!


Sophia. Only think, now, of that greedy Charles; he has taken this poor little
fellow's share!


Little Jack. Well, don't be angry, my pretty young lady; for I don't mind it
much, only because of my daddy.


Ferdinand. If Charles was not your brother, cousin Sophy, his greediness
should cost him dear. However, little Jack's father shall not be the loser by
it. My dear Sophy, would you lend me that shilling that you wanted to give the
fiddler for me just now?


Sophia. No, no, cousin, I Will have the merit of giving it, myself. -- See,
here is a shilling for you; buy another slice of cake for your daddy with it.


( Charlotte and Anna feel for their purses.) Charlotte. See, here is something
more for you.


Anna. Take this too, little boy.


Little Jack. Lack-a-daisie! lack-a-daisie! no, it is quite too much!


Ferdinand ( kindly taking him by the hand.) How sorry I am that I have nothing
more to give you! but I am an orphan myself and only live, like you, upon the
bounty of others.


Little Jack. Then I wish you had not brought me here, Master; or else that you
would take back your money for your own self.


Ferdinand. Don't be uneasy about me: so good-bye; and go and see what you can
get somewhere else.


Little Jack ( as he is going to Sophia.) Here is your handkerchief, my good
young lady; for I don't want it for the cake, now Master has eat it.


Sophia. Keep it if you can make any use of it.


Little Jack. God preserve you all, ladies and gentlemen, in health and wealth,
and make you as rich as you are good. ( He goes out.)


SCENE IX.
SOPHIA, CHARLOTTE, ANNA, and FERDINAND. SOPHIA. DID you ever know any thing in
your life so monstrous as the behavior of Charles?


Anna. He should not give himself all these airs, if I was his sister.


Charlotte. I am very mad that he has taken away all the pleasure we had in
giving the cake to that poor little fellow.


Anna. Well, well, he is not much to be pitied now; he has been made good
amends for his cake.


Ferdinand. Very true, thanks to your goodness. But that is no excuse for what
Charles has done: and poor little Jack might have had the money without losing
the cake.


Sophia. You, my dear cousin, are the greatest sufferer. You gave up your
share; and then, after all, it has been for nobody but that ill-natured
Charles! ( A knocking at the door.)


SCENE X.
ANNA, CHARLOTTE, SOPHIA, FERDINAND, and LITTLE JACK. FERDINAND. O HERE comes
our little fiddler again. What do you want, my boy?


Little Jack (crying.) O dear, O dear! What can I do! I am ruined!


(They all run up to him, and surround him.) Sophia. What has happened to you?


Little Jack. All my little treasures...... that were to serve to feed me and
my daddy.... See! see! look!.... my poor fiddle...... broke to pieces!......
and your handkerchief, and your good money....... all gone!...... he has taken
it all from (...)!


Ferdinand. And who is it has taken it? and who has broke your fiddle?


Little Jack. The same...... that same person that eat up all my cake!


Sophia. My brother?


Ferdinand. What! Charles?


Charlotte. I cannot believe it.


Anna. O how wicked!


Little Jack. Yes, yes, it is he! it is he! I had just stepped across the
threshold, when up he comes to me, and asks if I had been paid for my fiddling?
and says he will pay me himself if I had not. O yes, O yes, says I, to be sure I
have; I have only been paid too much. Where did they get the money? says he;
come, let us see what they have given you. And so then, fool that I was! -- I
ought to have thought about the cake; but I did not think of any thing, I was
so over-joyed to carry so much money to my daddy! So I had not counted it out
myself, so I thought I would count it now. So I puts my fiddle on the ground,
close by my side, and I takes out the pocket handkerchief. See, says I, I have
got this into the bargain; one of the Misses gave it me. So I had put all my
money in it: but when I was going to untie the knot, he catched at it. So then
I guessed at his spite: he pulled it to him, and I pulled it to me; when, all
of a sudden, he saw my fiddle lying upon the ground, and plump he sat both his
feet upon it! I let go my hold, in my fright; and then he plucked at the
handkerchief, and runs off with it. My fiddle and bow are both broken; and I
have neither my pocket-handkerchief nor my money! O my daddy! my poor daddy!
what shall we both do now?


Sophia. Indeed, I cannot tell myself!..... I have nothing more left.....O
cousin!


Charlotte (to Jack.) See, here are a few halfpence for you; it is all that I
have about me.


Little Jack. Thank you, good young lady, but that will not buy me another fiddle!
O my poor daddy! he had had that fiddle upwards of fifteen years!


Anna. Take this too; it is all I have in my purse.


Sophia. And here is my thimble; its all gold: so run and sell it; and see what
you can get for it. I have an ivory one for myself, that I can use instead of
it.


Ferdinand. No, keep your thimble, my dear cousin. Come here, Jack; I can get
you out of this distress all by myself.

(He takes his buckles out of his shoes, and offers them to Jack.) I have
another pair that are plated. You will certainly get half a guinea, or twelve
shillings for these; and they are my own, to do what I please with; for my
godfather gave me them for a birthday present.


(Sophia holds the thimble to him, and Ferdinand the buckles: Jack hesitates in
receiving them.) Little Jack. No, I must not take them! my daddy will be afraid
I have stole them!


Sophia. At least you shall have my thimble.


Ferdinand. Will you take the buckles, or not? You Will put me quite in a passion
if you don't; take them, at once, I say!


Little Jack. Ah! good Lord! must I rob you then, of all your fine things?


Ferdinand. Don't mind that, for God can give me more than I part with. Your
father is in want of bread: as for me, I have no father to feed!


Sophia. Go, go, and take all the care you can of yourself.


Little Jack. At least, let me leave the thimble.


Sophia. No, no, it is yours now.


Charlotte. If you ever come our way, call, and I Will give you something.


Anna. Here, you shall take our direction, upon this bit of paper. Every body
will tell you where the Miss Fentons live, when you come into our street.


Little Jack. O, but when I go to grand people's houses, they never ask me into
the parlour; I am always sent down to the kitchen.


Charlotte. But we will take care of that ourselves.


Sophia. Well, that is settled: so now go; for your father will perhaps be
uneasy about you; and our papa may come home.


Little Jack. What, the gentleman of the house? Will he come soon, do you think?


Sophia. Yes: so go your way at once; and besides, the same ill-natured boy
that took away your other things, may come and take away these, too.


Little Jack. But are you sure, Miss, you sha'n't get scolded?


Ferdinand. No, no, fear nothing. Goodbye.


Little Jack (going.) What good Masters and Mi^^es!


SCENE XI.
SOPHIA, CHARLOTTE, ANNA, and FERDINAND. CHARLOTTE. I AM very sorry you should
have parted with your buckles, Master Ferdinand.


Anna. What a good example you have set us!


Ferdinand. I received it myself first, from Sophia. If it was not for finding
Charles guilty of so vile an action, I should only be glad that I had had it in
my power to do a little good. O with what pleasure I shall always look at my
plated buckles!


SCENE XII.
Mr. MELFORD, SOPHIA, CHARLOTTE, FERDINAND, ANNA, LITTLE JACK. (The children
get together in a little group. Sophia and Ferdinand look a little displeased
at Jack, and whisper one another.) Mr. MELFORD (to the Miss Fentons.) GOOD day
to you, young ladies: I am much obliged to you for the honor you do Sophia, in
coming to see her. Will you give me leave to examine this boy before you? I
found him lying in wait for me upon the stairs, and he would not quit me till I
consented to let him speak to me in your hearing. Come, then, ( to Jack) tell
me now what it is you have to say?


Little Jack ( to Sophia and Ferdinand.) My dear good Master and Miss, I beg
for the love of God, you will not be angry with me; but I don't know how to hold
my tongue; for it would be a very bad thing in me, if I was to keep what you
made me take, without your papa's consent: for I know well enough that Masters
and Misses have nothing to give away of their own.


Mr. Melford. What does all this mean?


Little Jack. I am going to tell you, Sir. This young gentleman called to me,
out of the window, to bring my fiddle to play to these young ladies. There was
another young gentleman here, too, a very pretty Master, but a very wicked bad
cheat.


Mr. Melford. What! my son do you mean?


Little Jack. I ask pardon, Sir; I spoke before I was aware. I played all the
tunes I knew, as well as I could, and these good little gentlefolks were so
kind as to give me a bit of cake, and a handkerchief to tie it up in, and
almost a handful of money, silver and halfpence and all; there was I don't know
how much.


Mr. Melford. Well, and what then?


Little Jack. Well, that wicked little Master took away from me all the cake
that I was a going to carry to my daddy, because of his being blind. But that is
not much matter: but, after that, he slips slily out of the room before me; and
when I was a going away, all full of joy, with my little parcel, he watches for
me by the door, snatches away my handkerchief, and all the money in it, and
breaks my fiddle to pieces! See here! only look at it! (crying,) it was all my
fortune, to keep my daddy and me both!


Mr. Melford. If you speak the truth, this is the most unpardonable wickedness
I ever heard! What! my son?


Charlotte. His behavior in every thing else makes it easy to believe this.
Only ask Sophia.


Mr. Melford. Well, little fellow, don't cry about it; I shall have you made
amends. But is this all?


Little Jack. No, Sir, only hear: I was in such trouble, that I came back
again, to tell these worthy young gentlefolks all that had happened to me. They
had not got money enough among them to make it up to me; but this good Miss,
here, gives me her gold thimble, and this good Master, his silver buckles. But
I could not tell how to take them, for fear my daddy should think I stole them.
But I knew you was going to come home, so I stayed to give you them back. See,
here they are;.... but now I can buy no fiddle! O my dear fiddle! I shall never
get another like it! So many pretty tunes as I used to play upon it!.... My
poor daddy will cry like a little child!


Mr. Melford. Astonishing! what an history is this! I know not which to admire
most, this incomparable boy, or you, my generous children! -- Excellent little
fellow! so poor, yet so scrupulous! In a state of so much indigence, to lose
your little all; yet rather run the risk of seeing the father you are so fond
of, perish, than hazard committing a fault yourself!


Little Jack. It Is no such great matter, Sir, not to be a rogue; for bread
that is ill got, gives no nourishment: and that is what my daddy and mammy always
told me. If you could but only get me another fiddle, I should not mind for the
rest. For God will take care and make me amends himself, for all that I should
have got over and above, by the thimble and buckles.


Mr. Melford. What purity, and honesty of character must there be both in your
father and yourself, that you do not even suspect any evil in others! The
blessings of God shall reward you through my means; you shall stay and live
with us. I will immediately place you about Ferdinand, and by and by see what
better can be done for you.


Little Jack. What! may I wait upon this angel of a young gentleman? O, I cannot
help jumping for joy! (He jumps.) But, O dear! now I think of it, (
sorrowfully) I cannot leave my daddy all alone! How can he live without me? And
shall I come into abundance, while he goes and dies with hunger? No, no! I
will not do it, indeed!


Mr. Melford. Charming boy! and who is your father?


Little Jack. A poor blind old labourer, that I keep with my little fiddle. To
be sure he eats nothing, no more than I do, but a luncheon of bread, that we
sop in raw milk. But God always sees that we have enough for the day: so we
never think about tomorrow; for we know he will see after that for us, too.


Mr. Melford. Well, my little good lad, I will take care of your father also;
and, if he likes it, I will get him into an hospital, where there is the utmost
attention paid to the old and infirm, and where you can go and see him whenever
you please.


( Jack gives a shout for joy, and runs wildly up and down the room.) Little
Jack. O good Lord! -- O my dear daddy! -- O, I know it will make him die for
joy! I cannot stay any longer here; I must run and look for him, and I Will bring
him back with me directly!


(He runs out. Sophia and Ferdinand take Mr. Melford's hand, and wipe their
eyes.) SCENE XIII.
Mr. MELFORD, SOPHIA, ANNA, CHARLOTTE, and FERDINAND. Mr. MELFORD. O MY
children! how happy a day would this be to me, if my high approbation of the
generosity and goodness you have shown, was not checked by the deepest concern
at the unworthy conduct of my son! Yet it ought not to be checked, when I see
how excellent a child is given me in his place, in thee, my dearest Ferdinand!
a child not, indeed, my own by birth, yet nearly allied to me by blood, and
every way meriting from me the tenderness of a father. Yes, you alone, now,
must be my son! But where is Charles? Go and look for him, and bring him to me
immediately.


(Ferdinand goes out.) Sophia. We have not seen him this hour. While the little
boy was playing us a minuet, and we were dancing it, he stole off with his
cake, and has never come back.


Ferdinand (returning.) He was seen go into a confectioner's just by. I told
the man to fetch him.


Mr. Melford. You shall all step into the next room. I will first hear what he
will have the assurance to say for himself. When I want you, I will call.


Charlotte and Anna. We had better go home, then.


Mr. Melford. No, no, my dears; I will send word to your friends, that you will
spend the rest of the evening here. Probably the blind old man, and his
excellent little son, will also be our guests. I shall require some balm ^^ the
cruel wound that Charles has made in my heart: and I know none more soothing
than the conversation of such amiable children.


Sophia (listening at the door.) I think I hear Charles coming.


(Mr. Melford opens another door, and the children go into the next room.)
SCENE XIV.
Mr. MELFORD (alone.) I HAVE long feared this dreadful blow; yet I could never
have suspected him of such thorough worthlessness. It may not, however, be yet
too late to correct him. But, alas! how desperate a remedy must I try!

SCENE XV.
Mr. MELFORD, CHARLES. CHARLES. DO you want me, papa?


Mr. Melford. Whence come you? why were you not in your room?


Charles. Our tutor is gone out; and F^^^^nand was come down: and so, after
working hard all the afternoon, I grew tired of being by myself.


Mr. Melford. And why could you not join the little party I found with your
sister, as Ferdinand has done?


Charles. Why, so I should, only that those young ladies have treated me so ill
--


Mr. Melford. Treated you ill? You astonish me!


Charles. First of all, they went to tea, and refused to give me a drop; and
all the while did nothing but ill-natured things to me. Ferdinand had picked up
in the street a little beggar, to play the fiddle to them: and they gave him
some of the cake that they had with their tea, but would not let me taste a
morsel of it: Then they went to dancing; but not one of them would take me for
a partner, though there were three of them, and there was no gentleman except
Ferdinand. So what could I do? I went and stood out at the door, to see the
people pass.


Mr. Melford. Only out at the door? What was it, then, that happened between
you and the little fiddler, in the corner of the street? I have been informed
that you beat him, and broke his fiddle; and that he went away crying.


Charles. That Is very true, papa; and if I had not had so good a heart as I
have, I should have sent for a constable, to carry him to prison. Only hear how
it was. When I saw him going out, I said to myself: Well, I ought to give
something, too, to that poor fellow, for his trouble; for I know Ferdinand has
nothing of his own; and a bit of cake is no payment for a beggar. So I took
some money from my purse, and gave it him: and he drew a handkerchief out of
his pocket, to put it in. I saw directly that it belonged to my sister. Only
look at the mark. I asked him very mildly to give it me; but he would not. So I
took him by the collar; and, in wrestling together, by mere accident, I
happened to trample upon his fiddle.


Mr. Melford. (angrily.) Say no more! false and worthless that you are, I have
patience to hear no more!


Charles (approaching him and trying to take his hand.) But, my dear papa, what
are you so displeased at?


Mr. Melford. Begone, wretch! get out of my sight! You ^^ll me with horror.


(He calls the children out of the next room.) SCENE XVI.
Mr. MELFORD, SOPHIA, ANNA, CHARLOTTE, CHARLES, FERDINAND. Mr. MELFORD. COME
in, my children, and let me only see those who deserve my affection. Do you,
therefore, ( to Charles) instantly quit my sight. But no; stay! You must first
receive your sentence of punishment. You have heard his charges against you? (
to Sophia and Ferdinand.)


Sophia. Yes, papa; and if it were not that we must speak in our own defense, I
would not say one word, now, against him, for fear of increasing your anger.


Charles. Pray, papa, don't believe her!


Mr. Melford. Be silent! I know already but too well what falsehoods you are
capable of uttering. Falsehood is ever ready to lead to theft and to murder:
you have already committed one of these crimes; I dread to think you may only
want power to commit the other! Speak, Sophia.


Sophia. In the first place, he has done nothing at all this whole afternoon:
Ferdinand even did his fable for him.


Mr. Melford. Is this true, Ferdinand?


Ferdinand. I cannot deny it, Sir.


Sophia. After that, he flung a whole cup of tea upon Anna's gown; and while we
were all employed in wiping and rubbing it, he sat still at the table, and
quite emptied the tea-pot: he did not leave us one drop. And he eat up all the
sugar, and swallowed all the cream. These young ladies know it very well. As to
the cake --


Mr. Melford. Enough, enough! all your worthlessness is discovered. Go, shut
yourself up for the rest of the day in your own room, and tomorrow you shall
be sent out of the house. I shall give you time for repentance before I admit
you into it again; and if you do not make use of it for that purpose, I will
never see you more. Ferdinand, give orders that he is properly watched; and let
the tutor come to speak with me as soon as he returns home.


Sophia and Ferdinand. MY dear papa! --

MY dear uncle! --


Mr. Melford. I will not hear one word in his favor. He who could be capable
of robbing a poor boy of the reward of his industry, of breaking the instrument
by which he gains his livelihood, and then of trying to justify his wickedness
by falsehood and scandal, merits being shut out of all human society: and if
his amendment is not such as I wish, I shall forever banish him from my house.
I thank heaven, however, that it has still left me two such excellent children:
you will now be all my comfort; and with you I will try to forget my own
unhappiness, in the discovery of my son's unworthy principles.


THE CANARY BIRD.
CANARY-birds to sell! who will buy Canary-birds? choice, fine Canary-birds!
cried a voice that was passing by the house where Jamima lived. Jamima heard
it, and running to the window, looked into every part of the street. She then
saw a man carrying upon his head a great cage filled with Canary-birds. They
hopped so lightly from perch to perch, and warbled so sweetly, that Jamima, in
the eagerness of her curiosity, almost threw herself out of the window, in
order to see them yet nearer.

MISS, said the man, will you buy a Canary-bird?

I will, if I may, answered Jamima; but I must not of my own accord: if you will
wait a little, I Will run and ask leave of papa.

THE man readily agreed to wait; and seeing a large post at the other end of
the street, he went thither, and rested his cage upon it. Jamima, in the mean
time, ran to her father's room, and, quite out of breath, called out: papa!
papa! pray come to the window! pray come directly!

Mr. Godfrey. And what is the haste?


Jamima. Why here is a man that sells Canary-birds: I dare say he has got more
than a hundred; a great large cage quite full of them upon his head!


Mr. Godfrey. And why are you in such joy about it?


Jamima. Why, papa, because I want -- that is, I mean, if you will give me
leave -- I wish I might buy one.


Mr. Godfrey. But have you any money?


Jamima. O yes, papa, I have enough in my purse.


Mr. Godfrey. And who will feed the poor thing?


Jamima. I will, papa, I Will feed him myself. You shall see me: O, I am sure he
will be very glad to be my bird.


Mr. Godfrey. Ah! I fear --


Jamima. What, papa?


Mr. Godfrey. That you will let him die of hunger, or thirst.


Jamima. I, papa! -- I let him die of hunger or thirst! O no, indeed. I will
never touch a morsel of breakfast myself, till I have fed him.


Mr. Godfrey. O Jamima, Jamima, how giddy are you! And one single day's
forgetfulness will kill him!


JAMIMA, however, gave such ^^ir promises to her father; she pleaded,
entreated, hung by the skirt of his coat, and begged his consent with so much
earnestness, that Mr. Godfrey, at length, could no longer refuse it.

HE then took her hand and led her into the street. They soon came up to the
man, and chose the most beautiful bird that was in his cage: his feathers were
of the brightest yellow, and he had a little black crest on the top of his head.

WHO, now, was so happy as Jamima? She gave her purse to her papa, that he
might pay for it; and he then took money from his own, to buy a very handsome
cage, with two pretty drawers to hold seed, and a water-glass of crystal.

NO sooner had Jamima fixed her new favorite in its little palace, than she
flew all over the house, calling her mama, her sisters, and even all the
servants, to show them the bird which her papa had permitted her to buy. When
any of her young friends came to see her, the first words she said to them,
were always: Do you know I have got the prettiest Canary-bird in the whole
world? he is as yellow as gold, and he has a black tuft upon his head, just
like the feathers in mama's hat. But come, and you shall see it: his name is
Darling. I christened him myself.

DARLING, thus highly in favor, fared extremely well under the care of Jamima.
The moment she rose every morning, her first thought was to procure him fresh
seed, and the clearest water. Whenever there were any cakes or biscuits at her
father's table, Darling had his share first. She had always some little bits of
sugar in reserve for him: and his cage was garnished all round with chick-weed,
and various good little things.

DARLING was not ungrateful for her attentions: he soon learnt to distinguish
Jamima from the rest of the family; and the instant he heard her footstep, he
fluttered his little wings, and chirped without ceasing. Jamima almost eat him
up with kisses.

IN about a week, he began to sing, and his song was the prettiest in the
world. Sometimes he would warble his wild notes so long, that she feared he
must have died with fatigue in the middle of his little air; then, after a few
moments rest, he would begin again, more sweetly than ever, and with so clear
and brilliant a tone, that he was heard all over the house.

JAMIMA, seated by the side of his cage, spent whole hours in listening to him.
Her work was frequently thrown aside, that nothing might interrupt her looking
at him: and when he had delighted her with one of his little songs, she
entertained him, in her turn, with an air upon the bird-organ, which he
presently strove to imitate.

BY degrees, however, these pleasures became familiar, and lost their power of
charming. Her father one day made her a present of a book of prints; and she
was so much taken up with admiring them, that Darling was neglected. Still he
fluttered his little wings, and chirped, the instant he saw Jamima; but Jamima
no longer heard him.

NEAR a week now passed, and Darling had neither fresh chick-weed, nor biscuit.
He sung the prettiest little songs that Jamima had taught him; he even composed
new ones for her himself; but all in vain: Jamima had other things in her head.

IT was now her birthday; and her godfather presented her with a great jointed
doll. This doll, which she called Colombine, completed the downfall of Darling.
From the time she rose, to the hour of going to bed, she had no thought, and no
employment, but to dress and undress, again and again, this dumb little
Colombine; to talk to her, to call her by her name, and to carry her in her
arms up and down the room. The poor bird was now well enough off, if, toward
the evening, she remembered to give him a little food.

SOMETIMES, however, he had to wait for it till the next morning.

AT length, one day when they were at table, Mr. Godfrey accidentally turning
his eyes toward the cage, saw the Canary-bird lying upon its stomach, and
panting with great difficulty. His feathers almost stood an end, and he looked
as round as a ball. Mr. Godfrey went up to him: but no chirping! no fluttering
of his wings! the poor little animal had hardly strength even to draw its
breath.

JAMIMA! cried Mr. Godfrey, with much displeasure, what is the matter with your
bird? Jamima, coloring, stammered out: Why, papa, it is -- the thing is -- why,
I happened to forget -- And, trembling and ashamed, she ran for the box of seed.

MR. Godfrey took down the cage, and examined the drawers, and the water-glass.
Alas! poor Darling had not one drop of water, nor one single seed!

O poor little bird! cried Mr. Godfrey, into what cruel hands have you fallen!
If I had but foreseen it, you should never have been bought. All the company
then rose, and approached the cage, lifting up their hands with a look of pity,
and calling out: O poor little bird!

MR. Godfrey put some seed into both the drawers, and filled the glass with
fresh water: and at length, though with much difficulty, Darling was brought
back to life.

JAMIMA, crying, left the table, and running up to her own chamber, passed the
rest of the day in tears.

THE next morning, Mr. Godfrey gave orders that the bird should be carried out
of the house, and given to the son of Mr. Mersey, one of his neighbors, who
had the character of being a very careful boy, and who, he hoped, would not
forget him, as Jamima had done.

THE sorrow and repentance of the little girl grew now more and more violent. O
my dear little bird! she cried, my poor sweet Darling! -- O papa! dear, dear
papa! indeed I will never forget him again; indeed, indeed, I promise you I
will not. Only let me have him this once! this one single time is all I beg!

MR. Godfrey at length, moved by her entreaties, restored to her the
Canary-bird; not, however, without a severe reproof for her past negligence,
and a most earnest charge that she would be more attentive for the future. This
poor little animal, said he, is shut up in a cage, and has therefore no power
to provide for its own wants. If you want any thing, you can at least ask for
it; but this poor little bird can make nobody understand his language. If ever
again you make him suffer, either from hunger or thirst --

AT these w^^ds a shower of tears trickled down the cheeks of Jamima. She took
her papa's hand, and kissed it, but her shame and sorrow prevented her speaking.

JAMIMA was now once more the mistress of Darling; and Darling was easily and
cordially reconciled with Jamima.

ABOUT a month after, Mr. Godfrey and his lady were obliged to make a journey
of a few days into the country. My dear Jamima, said he, in taking leave, be
very sure you never forget the little Canary-bird.

O no, papa! cr^ed she; and scarcely were they seated in the carriage, before
she flew to the cage, and made it her first business to see that the bird
should have every thing it could possibly require.

IN an hour or two, however, she began to grow tired; she sent for some of her
little friends to visit her, and her gaiety returned. They all walked out
together, and when they came back, they spent the first part of the evening in
playing Blind-man's-buff, and Puss-in-the-corner; and then they diverted
themselves with dancing. It was very late when the little party broke up, and
Jamima went to bed quite wearied and fatigued.

THE next morning she awoke almost at the break of day, and could think of
nothing but her last night's amusements. If her governess would have given her
leave, she would have flown the very moment she was dressed, to return the
visit of her young friends: but it was necessary to wait till the afternoon.
Scarcely, however, had she patience to finish her dinner, before she desired to
be taken to them.

AND what became of Darling? He was obliged to stay at home alone, and to fast!

THE next day, also, was spent in nothing but amusements.

AND Darling? -- He was forgotten again!

THE third day it was still the same.

AND Darling? -- Why, who would think of him in the midst of such diversions?

THE fourth day Mr and Mrs. Godfrey came home from their journey Jamima had
thought but little about their return: but her father had no sooner embraced
her, and enquired after her health, than he said: And how is Darling?

O, very well, answered Jamima, a little surprised, and running to the cage for
the bird.

ALAS! the poor little animal was no more! it was lying upon its back, its
wings stretched out, and its beak open.

JAMIMA wrung her hands, and screamed aloud. Every body ran to her, and saw
what had happened.

POOR little hapless animal! cried Mr. Godfrey, how painful has been thy death!
Had I but myself destroyed thee on the day of my departure, thy sufferings
would at least have been but for a moment; while now, for so many days, thou
have borne all the pangs of hunger and thirst, and thy death has been attended
with the most cruel and lingering pains. Thou art happy, however, to be at
length delivered from the hands of so pitiless a guardian.

JAMIMA wished to hide herself in the bowels of the earth: she would willingly
have given up all her play-things, and all her pocket-money, to have restored
Darling to life: but all was now too late!

MR. Godfrey took the ^^rd, and gave orders to have it stuffed, and then hung
it up in the saloon.

JAMIMA did not dare look at it: or if, by any accident, it caught her eyes,
they were instantly filled with tears: and she humbly and earnestly besought
her rather to have it removed from her sight.

MR. Godfrey, after many entreaties, at length consented: but every time she
was guilty of any fault or folly, the bird was again put in its place; and she
heard the whole family exclaiming: Poor unfortunate animal! how cruel a death
have thou suffered!

THE CHILDREN Who would be their own Masters.
LEANDER. O PAPA, how I wish I was a great big man, and as tall as you!


Mr. Dartrey. And why, my dear, should you wish that?


Leander. Because I need not mind any body in the world, and could do every
thing that came into my head.


Mr. Dartrey. You would then, no doubt, perform wonders!


Leander. That I would, I promise you!


Mr. Dartrey. And you, little Julia, do you, also, sigh for the liberty of
being your own mistress?


Julia. Yes, indeed, I do, papa.


Leander. O if Julia and I might but be our own managers!


Mr. Dartrey. Well, my dears, your wishes, for once, shall be granted: from
tomorrow morning you shall have the full power of conducting yourselves
according to your own fancies.


Julia. Ah, papa, you are only laughing at us!


Mr. Dartrey. No, I am in earnest: and neither your mama, nor myself, nor, in
short, any body in the house, shall make the least opposition to your
inclinations.


Leander. O thank you, dear papa! how nice it will be to feel our necks without
a collar!


Mr. Dartrey. Neither is this all: I do not give you liberty merely for
tomorrow; you shall keep it till you come to me of your own accords, and beg
me to take back my authority.


Leander. O! if that is the case, we shall be long enough our own masters!


Mr. Dartrey. I shall be very glad to see how you will govern yourselves.
Prepare, therefore, to become great personages tomorrow.


TOMORROW arrived. The two children, instead of rising, as usual, at seven
o'clock, kept in bed till past nine. Sleep, however, in too great a quantity,
serves but to make us languid and heavy. Such was its effect upon Leander and
Julia. They woke, at last, without being called, and got up very much out of
humor.

THEIR spirits, however, soon revived, by the delightful prospect before them,
of doing whatever they pleased for the whole day.

COME, what shall we begin with? cried Leander to his sister, as soon as they
were dressed, and had breakfasted.

Julia. Why, we'll go and play.


Leander. At what?


Julia. At building houses with cards.


Leander. O, that is very stupid indeed! I will not do that.


Julia. Will you play at Blind-man's-buff?


Leander. What, only us two?


Julia. Well, then at Back-gammon?


Leander. You know very well that I cannot bear those lazy sorts of games that
make ^ne sit still so.


Julia. Very well; tell me what you shall like yourself.


Leander. Why, we'll play at riding on a broomstick.


Julia. Yes, that is a pretty game, indeed, for a young lady!


Leander. We'll play, if you will, then, at driving. You shall be the horse,
and I will be the coachman.


Julia. O, to be sure, to be beat with your whip, as I was the other day! I
have not forgot it so soon.


Leander. Why, I was very sorry to do it; only the thing is, you never will go
a gallop.


Julia. Yes, but it hurt me very much; so I will not play at it any more.


Leander. Will Not you? Let Us play, then, at hunting. I Will be the huntsman, and
you shall be the hare. Take care of yourself, there! -- Come, run! --


Julia. No, no; no more of your hunting. You only keep treading on my heels,
and running your hands into my sides.


Leander. Well, then, if you will not play at any of my plays, I Will never play
with you again; do you hear that, Ma'am?


Julia. No more will I with you; do you hear that, Sir?


AT these words, they turned off from the middle of the room, where they were
standing; and each went into a corner, where they continued some time, without
looking at each other, or speaking a word.

THEY were still sullen and pouting, when the clock struck ten. They had now
lost a whole hour in quarreling. Leander, at length, approaching his sister,
said: Come, then, if you will, I Will play with you at Cribbage, at a dozen
chestnuts a game.

Julia. But I have no chestnuts. You know very well that you owe me a dozen
already, and you ought to pay me those first.


Leander. I owed you them yesterday; but I owe nothing at all to any body
today.


Julia. And pray how have you cleared yourself?


Leander. Why, who has a right to ask any thing of people that are their own
masters?


Julia. O, very well! but I shall tell papa how you have cheated me.


Leander. But I am not in papa's power now.


Julia. If this is the case, then, I sha'n't play at all.


Leander. You are very welcome to let it alone.


AGAIN they were sullen and silent, and again they retreated to different ends
of the room. Leander began to whistle; Julia, to hum a song: Leander tied knots
in his whip, and lashed the floor and wainscot with it; Julia dressed her doll,
and began a conversation with it: Leander muttered between his teeth; Julia
sighed and fretted.

THE clock now struck eleven, and a second hour had been lost in quarreling.
Leander, in a rage, flung his whip out of the window; Julia threw her doll into
a corner. They looked at each other, but neither of them knew what to say.

JULIA, at last, broke the silence: -- Come, then, Leander, I Will be your horse.

Leander. Will you, then you are a good girl. I have a thick string here, that
will do for a bridle. Put it in your mouth.


Julia. No, I will not put it in my mouth, indeed! you may fasten it round my
waist, or tie it to my arm.


Leander. How you talk! Did you ever see the horses with their bits any where
but between their teeth?


Julia. But I am not a real horse, Sir!


Leander. But you must do the same as if you were, Ma'am.


Julia. Indeed I see no reason for that.


Leander. I suppose you think you know more of the matter than I do, who am all
day long in the stable? Come, I say, take it as you ought.


Julia. You have been drawing it about in the dirt all the week, and I Am
resolved I will not put it in my mouth as long as I live.


Leander. I will not have it put any where else, I had rather not play at all.


Julia. Just as you please.


A third time they separated, and with more pe^vishness and a^ger than ever.
Leander brought back his whip; Julia again took her doll; but the whip no
longer sounded to his mind, and every thing went wrong at the doll's toilette.
Leander sighed; Julia wept. At length the dinner-bell rang, and Mr. Dartrey
himself made enquiries if they were ready to come to the table. But what, cried
he, seeing them both so sad, what is the matter with you?

NOTHING at all, papa, answered the children; and drying their eyes, they
followed their father into the dining parlour.

THEY had, this day, a variety of dishes upon the table, and each a bottle of
wine upon the side-board.

MY dear children, said Mr. Dartrey, had I still any authority over you, I
should forbid you tasting all these dishes, and still more your drinking any
wine: or, at least, I should help you to very little, from my knowledge of the
danger of wine and spices to children. But you are now your own managers, and
must eat and drink according to your discretion.

THE children waited not to be told this twice: one swallowed great mouthfuls
of meat without bread, the other took the gravy and sauce in large spoonfuls;
and both of them poured out full bumpers of wine, without thinking of mixing it
with water.

BUT, my dear, said Mrs. Dartrey, in a whisper to her husband, they will make
themselves quite ill.

I fear so too, replied Mr. Dartrey; yet I would rather they should learn, even
at their own expense, for once, the mischief of ignorance, than, by too much
attention to their health, deprive them of so important a lesson.

MRS. Dartrey, seeing the design of her husband, would not interfere, but left
the little simpletons to the enjoyment of their gluttony.

THEY now rose from table; the children having eat till they were too full to
swallow a morsel more, and drank till their little heads began already to be
heated.

COME along Julia, cried Leander; and he carried his sister with him into the
garden.

MR. Dartrey thought it necessary to follow their footsteps.

THERE was a small piece of water in the garden, and close to its border a
little boat. Leander had a fancy to get into it.

JULIA stopped him. You know very well cried she, we are forbid going there.
Forbid! replied he; have you forgot that we are to do just what we like?

O, very true! cried Julia; and giving her hand to her brother, they both
jumped into the boat.

MR. Dartrey now approached nearer, but did not yet think proper to discover
himself. He knew the water was not very deep, and that, if they fell into it,
he should not have much trouble in drawing them out again.

THE children endeavored to loosen the boat from the side, and push it into
the middle of the water; but they could not contrive to untie the knots of the
cord with which it was fastened.

WELL, if we cannot sail, cried the hair-brained Leander, we can at least play
at balancing. They then jumped backwards and forwards across the boat, now
making it lean on one side, now on the other.

THEIR heads being a little confused, it was not long before their feet began
to stagger. Each caught hold of the other for a prop; but they both fell
instantly upon the edge of the boat, and from the edge of the boat, plump, into
the water.

MR. Dartrey, swift as lightning, now flew from the place where he had been
concealed. He flung himself into the water, seized in each hand one of his
daring little children, and carried them, half dead with terror, into the house.

THEY were now very sick, but instantly undressed, and rubbed with flannel.
They were then each put into a warm bed, where they lay successively in a state
of extreme weakness, or in convulsions. They had a most dreadful headache, and
a pain in the stomach they could hardly endure. They fainted away several
times; and every fainting was followed by terrible sickness, and much
difficulty of breathing.

IN this deplorable manner they passed the rest of the day. They shed tears in
abundance; they sobbed aloud; till, at length, fatigued with sorrow and
suffering, they cried themselves to sleep.

EARLY the next morning, their father came into the chamber, and desired to
know how they had passed the night.

O, very ill, papa! cried they, both at once, and in a very feeble voice; we
could hardly sleep at all, and we have the headache and the stomach-ach still.

POOR little things! said their father, how sorry I am for you! But what, added
he a moment after, do you purpose doing with your liberty today? You have it
still, you know, in your own possession.

O no, no! cried they with eagerness, and both in a breath.

WHY how now? cried he; did you not tell me, the other day, how sad it was to
obey the directions of other people?

YES, papa, answered Leander; but we have been well punished for that
foolishness.

O yes; added Julia, and indeed we shall not soon forget it!

Mr. Dartrey. You would, no longer, then, be your own masters?


Leander. No, indeed, papa; we had much rather you should tell us what to do.


Julia. I am sure that will be a great deal better for us.


Mr. Dartrey. Think well of what you are saying; for, if I again take up my
authority, I give you warning that I shall instantly order you something that
you will find very disagreeable.


Leander. Never mind, papa; we are quite ready to do whatever you think proper.


Mr. Dartrey. Very well; here is a yellow powder called Rhubarb. Its taste is
bad, but its quality is excellent for those whose stomachs have been put out of
order by any excess. Since you consent to follow my directions, I desire you to
take this powder immediately. Obey quick!


Leander. I will, I will, papa!


Julia. And I too, papa, if it is as bitter as gall.


MR. Dartrey prepared the medicine, and gave it them. The children, without
drawing back, or making wry faces, as they had formerly done, only tried which
should take it with the best grace. Its success rewarded their obedience, in
restoring them both to their usual health.

FROM this time, whenever they were threatened with any terrible punishment for
their faults, it was by saying: Remember, we shall give you your liberty! a
menace of which they had a greater dread than any other children would have
felt in h^aring said to them: We shall put you in prison!

THE THORN-BUSHES.
IN a very fine evening in the month of May, Mr. Dalton, seated himself, with
his son Arthur, upon the side of a little hill; whence he taught him to view
and admire the beauties of the prospect before him, which the setting sun, in
bidding adieu, seemed to clothe in a robe of purple. They were a little
disturbed, however, from this pleasing study, by the loud singing of a
shepherd, who was bringing back his bleating flock from the neighboring
meadow. At each side of the road he went along, there were bushes full of
thorns, upon which every sheep that approached, left some part of its fleece.

LITTLE Arthur, young and eager, was quickly in a passion with these robbers.
See! see! papa, cried he, only look at those nasty thorns, that are stealing
the wool from the sheep! Why did God make those wicked brambles? or why does
not every body, of one accord, go and root them all up? If the poor sheep
should come back again by the same way, they would leave all the rest of their
clothing with them. But no! I will not let them; for I will get up myself
tomorrow morning, by break of day, and come with my little bill, and snip,
snap, I will cut down every one of the thorn-bushes: and if you will come with
me too, papa, and bring your great wood-knife, the business will all be done
before breakfast.

WE will think of your scheme replied Mr. Dalton; but, mean time, be not so
unjust to those thorns: recollect what happens in sheep-shearing time.

Arthur. What is that, papa?


Mr. Dalton. Did you never see the shepherds, with their great shears in their
hands, strip the poor trembling sheep, not merely of light tufts of wool, but
of their whole fleece?


Arthur. Very true, papa; for then they wanted it for their clothes: but these
thorns tear it off from mere ill nature, and without wanting it at all.


Mr. Dalton. You know not what purpose this may answer to them: but even
supposing it to be of no use, is the want of a thing sufficient reason for
seizing it?


Arthur. I have heard you say, papa, that the sheep naturally lose their fleece
about this time of the year: therefore is it not better to cut it off for our
own good, than to let it fall off for nothing at all?


Mr. Dalton. Your observation is just. All beasts have a dress from nature, and
from their's we borrow our's: for if we did not, we should be forced to go
quite naked, and exposed to all the cruel injuries of the weather.


Arthur. But the thorns have no need of any dress at all; therefore there can
be no reason to spare them. Tomorrow I will absolutely cut down every briar.
You will come with me, papa, will not you?


Mr. Dalton. Certainly. Tomorrow, therefore, we will meet at the very break of
day.


ARTHUR, who thought himself already a hero, from the mere idea of destroying,
with his own little hand, this legion of robbers, could with difficulty sleep
all night, so full was his mind of his victories for the next morning: and
scarce had the gay chirping of the birds, perched upon the trees near his
windows, proclaimed the return of Aurora, before he hastened to awake his
father; while Mr. Dalton, though little occupied with the destruction of the
thorns, yet charmed with an opportunity of showing to his son the opening
beauties of the rising morn, was not less eager to quit his bed. They dressed
themselves with speed, took up their arms, and set out upon their expedition.
Arthur, with an air of triumph, went first, and Mr. Dalton was hardly able to
keep pace with him. In approaching the thorns, they saw that they were almost
covered with little birds, hopping to and fro, and fluttering upon the
branches. Softly, softly! cried Mr. Dalton to his son; let us defer, for a
moment, our vengeance, lest we should disturb these pretty innocent creatures.
We will go again to that part of the hill where we were seated last night, and
try to find out what it is that these little birds are seeking in the bushes,
with so busy and occupied an air. They ascended the hill, sat down, and looked
on. They then perceived that the birds carried away in their bills those very
tufts of wool which the thorns had caught from the sheep the preceding evening;
and that chaffinches, linnets, and nightingales, came in large numbers to
enrich themselves with the spoil.

WHAT does this mean? cried Arthur, all astonished.

IT means, replied his father, that Providence takes care of the smallest
creatures, and furnishes them with all sorts of methods for their happiness and
preservation. You see here how the poor birds find ^apestry for the habitations
they build for their little ones; and how soft and warm a bed they prepare for
their young family. Thus those honest thorn-bushes, with which but yesterday
you were so easily provoked, unite the inhabitants of the air with those of the
earth: they take from the rich what is more than they can use, to give to the
poor what they absolutely need. Will you come, then, now, and destroy them?

O heaven forbid! exclaimed Arthur.

YOU are right, my child, answered Mr. Daltun; let them flourish in peace,
since they make so generous a use of their conquests.

JOSEPH.
THERE was once a certain crazy man whose name was Joseph, who never went out
without putting five or six wigs, one piled above another, upon his head, and
as many muffs upon each of his arms. But though his senses were disordered, he
was not mischievous, nor ever, unless much teazed and provoked, in a passion.
Yet he could not walk in the streets, without being surrounded by a set of idle
and impertinent little boys, who always tormented and followed him, calling
out: Here, Joseph, Joseph! What will you sell your wigs for? what will you take
for your muffs? Some of them were even wicked enough to throw stones after him.
Poor Joseph commonly bore these insults with great patience; though at times,
when pestered and vexed beyond measure, he would fall into a rage, and gather
pebbles, or take up whole handfuls of mud, to fling at the unfeeling little
fellows.

IT happened, one day, that this disturbance was made just before the house of
Mr. ^ennis. The noise of it carried him to the window, where he had the sorrow
to see that his own son, Henry, was in the midst of the crowd. The moment he
observed it, he shut down the sash, and retired into another apartment.

WHEN they met at dinner, Mr. Dennis said to his son: Who was that man you were
running after, and calling to, and shouting at so loud?

Harry. You know him very well, papa; it is that crazy man they call Joseph.


Mr. Dennis. Poor creature! What can have brought this misfortune upon him?


Harry. They say it was a lawsuit for a great estate. He was so vexed at
losing it, that it made him lose his senses besides.


Mr. Dennis. Had you known him, Harry, at the time when he was deprived of this
estate; and had he, with tears in his eyes, said to you: "Ah, my dear Harry,
how unfortunate I am! I have lost an estate upon which I lived in peace and
happiness; and all that I had besides is gone in the expenses of the lawsuit:
I have now neither a house in town, nor a house in the country; every thing I
was worth is taken from me!" would you then have laughed at him, and made game
of him?


Harry. God forbid! who could be so wicked as to make game of such an
unfortunate man? I should rather have tried to comfort him.


Mr. Dennis. Do you think him, then, happier today, when he has also lost his
senses?


Harry. No, I think he is more to be pitied than ever.


Mr. Dennis. And yet today you can insult, and even throw stones at, a poor
wretch that, when he was much less unhappy, you would have tried to comfort!


Harry. O papa, I have done very wrong; but pray forgive me, for indeed I will
never do so again.


Mr. Dennis. If you repent, I can readily forgive you; but my forgiveness is
not enough; there is another, of whom you must also beg it.


Harry. Do you mean Joseph, papa?


Mr. Dennis. Why Joseph?


Harry. Because it is him I have offended.


Mr. Dennis. If Joseph were still in his senses, you should certainly beg his
pardon for what you have done: but as he is not in a condition to understand
you, it would be useless to apply to him. You think, nevertheless, that it is
right to beg forgiveness of those whom we have offended?


Harry. You always taught me so, papa.


Mr. Dennis. And do you know who it is that has commanded us to pity the
unhappy?


Harry. God Almighty.


Mr. Dennis. Yet you have shown no pity for poor Joseph; on the contrary, you
have added to his misfortunes, by insulting him. Do you suppose that such
behavior has not offended God?


Harry. Yes, papa, I know it has, now you bid me think of it; but I will beg
pardon of him tonight in my prayers.


HARRY was faithful to his promise; he repented of his fault, and at night he
begged pardon of God with a true and penitent heart: and for some weeks after,
he not only left poor Joseph at peace himself, but frequently prevented his
companions from abusing him.

YET, notwithstanding all his good resolutions, he one day mixed again in the
crowd of idle boys that pursued him. It was merely, indeed, from curiosity, and
to see what tricks they would play the poor man. Yet, from time to time, he
shouted out with the rest: Joseph! Joseph! and, by degrees, he found himself
the foremost in the set; till at length Joseph, provoked with the noise and
hallooing, suddenly turned round and snatching up a great stone, flung it at
him with such fury, that it grazed his check, and made his nose gush out with
blood.

HARRY returned home all bloody, and roaring aloud. This is a just punishment
from God for your disobedience, said his father. But why, cried Harry, why am I
the only one to come so ill off, when all the rest, though they did a thousand
times worse than me, have not been punished at all? The reason, answered his
father, is, that you know much better than the others the fault you were
committing, and therefore you were the most criminal. A child who is well
instructed in the commands of God, as well as in those of his father, merits to
be doubly chastised when he has the worthlessness to break them.

THE LITTLE GLEANER. A DRAMA IN ONE ACT.
PERSONS.
Lord BEAUMONT. MARCELLUS, his son. HENRIETTA, his daughter. Mrs. JEFFERSON.
EMILY, her daughter. HERBERT, game-keeper to Lord Beaumont.
The scene is in a new-reaped field, upon which there are still several
sheaves. On one side stands the hall-house, belonging to Lord Beaumont; and on
the other, some cottages; with various rural objects dispersed in every part.

THE LITTLE GLEANER. A DRAMA IN ONE ACT.
SCENE I.
(The theater represents a field of corn, covered with sheaves.) EMILY (Holding
with both her hands a basket full of ears of corn, by the handle. She fits down
near a sheaf.) WELL, this is not bad for a beginning. O how happy it will make
my poor mother! (She sits down her busket, and (...) it with a look of much
delight.) That good (...) reaper! how kind of him to fill my basket so! I might
have run, about, here and there, all day long, and yet never have got together
ha^^ so much. I hope God will reward him for it. O, here is some more upon the
ground; now if I can only glean a handful or two -- (She presses down the corn
into the basket with ^^c^ her hands.) I can make room enough, by squeezing them
a little; and I have my apron besides. (She rises, and takes the two corners of
her apron with one hand, and is preparing to put the lo^se ears she has
gathered into it with the other, when she hears a noise.) O dear! what a
cross-looking man that is! Is he coming to me? I am sure I don't know that I
have done any harm.


(She returns to her basket, takes it up again, and is going.) SCENE II.
EMILY, and HERBERT. HERBERT (seizing her by the arm.) AH, ha! you little
thief! have I caught you?


Emily. Pray don't call me so, Sir; I am no little thief: I am a very honest
little girl; that I assure you.


Herbert. An honest little girl! You, an honest little girl! (He snatches the
basket out of her hands.) And pray what are you carrying off here, honest
little girl?


Emily. Only some loose ears, as you see.


Herbert. And did these loose ears put themselves into your basket?


Emily. Oh! if they would put themselves into my basket, I should have no need
to take so much trouble to gather and pick them up in the fields!


Herbert. They are stolen, then?


Emily. Don't treat me so rudely, Sir; for I would rather die of hunger, and
have my mother die too, than do what you say.


Herbert. Why, what the plague! they did not come of their own accord, and
throw themselves into your basket?


Emily. Fie upon you! you frighten me with such swearing. I Will tell you how it
was. I went into that field, down there, on purpose to glean; and there I met a
good old man, who saw me at work: Poor little thing! says he, what pains she
takes! I Will give her some myself. So there were some sheaves lying down in the
field; and he took great handfuls of ears out of them, and put them into my
basket. What we give to the poor, says he, God will give us again, and --


Herbert. O, ho! I see how it is! The old man in the field, down there, filled
your basket with the ears which you have been taking out of our sheaves? Is it
not so?


Emily. You may go and ask him yourself, and he can tell you.


Herbert. I go and ask him! O, to be sure! you may wait till I do. I have
caught you here, and that is enough.


Emily. But don't I tell you that I have not touched one single sheaf? The few
ears that I have got in my apron, I picked up off the ground, because I thought
every body had a right to them. However, if you want them, I am ready to give
you them again. See! here they are, all that were yours.


Herbert. No, no; these here shall stay with them there; and where the basket
goes you must go too. Come, follow me to the house of correction.


Emily (in a fright.) What! -- What do you say my good man?


Herbert. O yes, I am your good man, now, am I? but I should be much more your
good man if I would let you escape, should not I? To the house of correction, I
tell you; come, come along!


Emily. O no, no, I entreat you, for the love of God! I have taken nothing
here, I assure you, but just that handful of corn that I gave you again. What
will my poor mother do if I don't go home all day, and if she hears that they
have put me in prison? I don't know but it may quite kill her!


Herbert. A great misfortune, truly! the parish will have a good riddance.


Emily (crying.) O, if you did but know what a good mother she is, and how poor
we both are! -- I am sure you would pity us!


Herbert. I am not put here to pity people; I am put here to seize them, when
they come into my Lord's grounds, and to haul them to prison.


Emily. When they have done no harm, when they are quite innocent, as I am --


Herbert. Yes, yes, pray talk to me of your innocence! coming here to steal
from us a basketful of ears of corn, and then telling me a thousand falsehoods!
-- Come along, I say! follow me!


Emily (throwing herself down by one of the sheaves.) Oh for mercy, dear, good
Sir! have some pity upon me! Take my basket, if you choose it -- Ah! it will
hardly make you any richer, though it is all I have got for food! but pray don't
take me too! O, pray let me go! if not for my own sake, at least for my poor
mother's; -- I am her only comfort, and all her help!


Herbert. If I do let you go, I can tell you it is not for your mother; so pray
take notice of that, for I wish she was a hundred miles off: it is only for
yourself, because you have softened my heart a little by all that whimpering.
But don't expect to have your basket into the bargain; for that is forfeited,
according to law. Besides, this is Friday, and our magistrate hears causes; and
he will bring us in handsome damages; and then, if you cannot pay them, to prison,
ho! and, after that, you will be turned out of the village. (He takes the basket
upon his shoulder. Emily cries bitterly, and falls upon her knees.) Come, come,
don't stun me any more: if you do, you will see what you will get by it. (He goes
off muttering.) See here, now, if one was not always upon the watch, I believe
in my heart these vagabonds, let them be never so little, would run away with
the very ground we walk upon.


SCENE III.
EMILY (alone.) (She sits on the ground, and leans her head against a sheaf.
She weeps for some moments in silence, then rises and looks around her.) AH! he
is gone! naughty, wicked man! he has taken away all my comfort: I have lost
every thing! my ears of corn, my pretty little basket -- and who knows yet what
may happen to my poor mother and me? (After a short pause.) How happy are those
little birds! they may at least come and take some of these grains for their
dinners and suppers, while I -- but who knows if some other bad man, just like
this, is not now upon the watch, to kill them with his gun? I Will make them all
fly away, and then I Will go myself; for else, perhaps, they will come and punish
me for having leant my head upon that sheaf. -- But what two children are these?


SCENE IV.
MARCELLUS, HENRIETTA, and EMILY, (who dries her eyes.) MARCELLUS. O HO! you
are the little girl that the game-keeper surprised just now, stealing the corn
out of our sheaves?


(Emily sobs, and cannot speak.) Henrietta (viewing her attentively, and taking
her brother aside.) She looks like a very good little girl, Marcellus. See how
she cries! Don't frighten her any more with your scolding; it is not worth
while, for just the few loose ears that she has taken. (She goes up to her.)
Poor little girl! what makes you cry so?


Emily. Because they accuse me for nothing at all; and perhaps you will believe
it is for something.


Marcellus. Is it for nothing at all, indeed?


Emily. For nothing at all, you may believe me. I only went to glean in the
field down there, and an old reaper took pity of my hard work, and filled my
basket himself with ears of corn. Then I came to this place to pick up some
others, that I saw lying about here and there; and so your wicked game-keeper
found me just by this sheaf, and charged me with stealing. He took away my
basket from me; and he would have put me into prison, if it had not been that
my crying, and my prayers for my poor mother, melted him a little.


Henrietta. O, I should like to have seen him dare take hold of you! We have
the best papa in the world, and he does not suffer any body to do harm to poor
people: so he would very soon have had you set at liberty.


Marcellus. Yes, and he will make him give you back your basket too, that I
promise you.


Emily (joyfully.) O dear good Sir, do you think so indeed?


Henrietta. Marcellus and I will go and beg so hard of him -- 'ray be easy; for
he is never so well pleased with us, as when we ask him to do something for
poor people. Besides, we could even get you back your basket without saying a
word to him.


Emily. Ah! how happy are you, my dear little young lady! not to want help from
any body, and to be able to give help yourself to other people!


Marcellus. Are you so very poor, then, little girl?


Emily. I am sure, if I were not, I should not come here to get my bread so
hardly.


Henrietta. What! is it for bread that you come to pick up these ears of corn?
I thought, for my part, that it was only to bake the grains upon a red hot
shovel, and then eat them, as my brother and I do sometimes, when nobody looks
at us.


Emily. O dear, no! My mother and I should have threshed those ears, and then
have given the grains to the miller, to have ground them for flour, and so then
have made bread of it.


Henrietta. Poor little girl! you would not have had much from that; and it
would have lasted but a very short time.


Emily. And suppose it would have lasted but a day or two? Why, still it would
have been a day or two longer that my mother and I should have had to live.


Marcellus. Well, but that you may be quite sure of one other day, I will give
you a shilling, that I have kept this long while, because it is a new one.


Emily. Ah, dear Sir! so much money as that -- No, no, I don't dare take it!


Henrietta (smiling.) So much money as that! Take it, take it at once. If I had
but my purse here, I would give you a great deal more. However, I shall be sure
to put it by for you; so you shall lose nothing.


Marcellus (offering her the shilling again.) Take it, then, I say.


(Emily blushes, receives the money, and curtsies without speaking.) Marcellus.
But that is not all. I will go and run as fast as ever I can after our
game-keeper; and I Will soon make him return me the basket; or else --


Emily. O, don't give yourself so much trouble! You have promised to help me,
and that is all I can desire.


Henrietta. Tell me where it is you live?


Emily. Down in the village.


Marcellus. Why, we never saw you before: and yet we come here every year with
our papa, at harvest-time.


Emily. We have only been at this place a week. We are with a very good old
woman; her name is Madge, and she has been very kind to my mother; O, so kind,
you can hardly think!


Henrietta. What! old Madge?


Marcellus. We know her very well. She is the widow of a poor weaver, who could
not get any work. Papa lets her come here, sometimes, to weed in the garden.


Henrietta. Will you take me with you to your mother?


Emily. O, that would be too great a favor for her: a fine young lady, such as
you --


Henrietta. O, but papa does not like we should think ourselves any finer than
other people: so, if you have no reason but that --


Emily. No, none at all, because you can help me to comfort her for the loss of
my basket, and all my ears of corn. And besides, that wicked man threatened us
--


Marcellus. Never mind his threats. While my sister goes with you to your
mother, I will run after him, and you may depend -- but you will return here
again with my sister?


Emily. If you desire me, Sir, I will.


Marcellus. Your basket shall be ready for you before you come.


Emily. Perhaps I may bring my mother with me too, that she may thank you
herself.


Henrietta. Come, then, let us go and find her.


(She takes Emily by the hand, and they walk out together.) SCENE V.
MARCELLUS (alone.) HOW happy we are, my sister and I, not to be forced, like
that poor little girl, to run about every where, looking for loose ears of corn
for our living! Upon my word that little thing talks as if she were born to
something better: and she is not dirty nor ragged, like the children of our
cottagers here. O, I shall certainly prevail upon papa -- but here he comes,
and Herbert with him. O how lucky! There Is the very basket in his hand.

SCENE VI.
MARCELLUS, Lord BEAUMONT, and HERBERT. MARCELLUS (running up to his father.) O
MY dear papa, how glad I am to meet you! -- Give me that basket! (to Herbert.)


Herbert. Softly, softly, Sir; you will twist my arms off!


Lord Beaumont. What is it you want with that basket, Marcellus?


Marcellus. It belongs to a poor little girl, papa; and that wicked Herbert
took it away from her, with all the ears of corn that had been given her for a
present. I am resolved you shall know it all, papa!


Herbert. Mighty well! So then one is wicked for doing one's duty, and for not
abetting the thieves in their roguery? What for, pray, does my Lord pay me my
wages?


Lord Beaumont. I have already, and often told you, Herbert, it is for
preventing vagabonds from running over my grounds, and being troublesome to my
laborers and domestics, and not for seizing the poor wretches, and dragging
them to prison; and still less for terrifying the honest and industrious poor,
who come hither in search of a mite from my abundance, and only covet a few
loose ears of corn, that have been scattered about by chance, in a plentiful
harvest.


Herbert. Well, then, my Lord, in the first place, I never hinder them from
gleaning as much as they like, as soon as the harvest is in; but while one
single sheaf is left --


Marcellus. And why don't you say, also, till the ground is fallow, or covered
with snow? There is a great deal to be picked up, to be sure, when the harvest
is in!


Herbert. You understand nothing about all this, young gentleman. -- In the
second place, who can answer that these are not thieves?


Marcellus. Thieves! O goodness! thieves! -- Why, the little girl told me
herself that she had not taken one ear of corn from this place, and that her
basket was filled by an old reaper in that field down there.


Herbert. Very good! she told you so herself? as if there was one word of truth
in any thing that those sort of people say! I surprised her here, upon this
very spot, by a sheaf.


Lord Beaumont. And was she taking out the corn?


Herbert. I don't absolutely say that; but how do I know what she might do
before I came? And besides, all that history of an old reaper's filling her
basket, what can that be but a falsity? To be sure, I don't know our cottagers
better than that! O, they are mighty charitable gentlemen!


Marcellus. I insist upon it, and I am sure of it, that the corn was all given
to her, because she told me so, and such a good little girl as that would never
tell a story.


Herbert. And pray, Sir, did you never tell a story yourself? Yet we think you
a very fine young gentleman, for all that.


Marcellus. Do you hear, papa, how that impudent Herbert treats me? (To
Herbert, in a passion) No, I don't tell stories; if I did, I should be a very
wicked boy: but I don't; no more does the little girl neither. It is you
yourself that are a --


Lord Beaumont. Softly, Marcellus! I am satisfied thus far with your defending
yourself: we ought to believe all men honest, until we are convinced of the
contrary: but yet we ought not to be angry with those who are of a different
opinion, but rather endeavor with patience and gentleness to bring them to a
more pleasant and just way of thinking.


Herbert. It is much better, my Lord, to believe all men wicked, till we are
convinced, and that past any doubt, of their honesty. Whenever I meet a bull in
the high road, I always take it for granted he is vicious, and so get out of
his way. It may so happen that he may be very quiet; but I run no hazard in
being upon my guard. What is surest, is always safest and best.


Lord Beaumont. If all men thought like you, Herbert, with whom could we live?
And what would have been your own fate, if, when I first saw you, instead of
giving you an honest employment in my estate, which appeared to me a proper and
deserved provision for a disbanded old soldier, I had committed you to prison
as a vagabond, strolling about the country without a certificate of your
discharge?


Herbert. Why, that is true enough; but then it is true also that I am an
honest man.


Lord Beaumont. I should not let you belong to me if I doubted it: yet I had no
means at first of believing it, but from your own word, and your countenance.


Marcellus. O dear papa, if you give any faith to people's own words, and their
countenances, you will much sooner believe this little girl, than you did
Herbert.


Herbert. Odds bobs, Sir, only look me in the face! Sure enough your papa will
be well pleased with the countenance of your little girl, if it is as good a
one as mine.


Marcellus. O yes, indeed, it suits vastly well with that great bear's figure
--


Lord Beaumont. Fie, Marcellus, fie! Herbert, do you know this little girl?


Herbert. Why, I know her, and I don't know her. She and her mother have been
here about ten or twelve days; but how they came, or for what, no body can
tell, except it be the steward: and I must needs say, my Lord, it is very ill
done of him, to encourage such sort of gentry to come into the parish, to be
fed at the expense of our own poor.


Marcellus. Very well, then, I will feed them myself; yes, my own self!


Herbert. You have a fortune in your own hands, then, have you Sir?


Marcellus. Papa has enough, if I have nothing.


Herbert. Well, all I know is, that all our own poor will grumble at it.
However, if folks can but line the hand of people in power -- for as to the
steward, take it for granted --


Marcellus. See now if he does not say bad things of the steward too! I Will tell
him of it, I Am resolved.


Lord Beaumont. Hush, Marcellus! I see, Herbert, it is quite impossible to
correct your suspicious temper: I begin, therefore, to conceive some doubts of
you in my turn. You judge that this little girl filled her basket here, because
you found her by a sheaf in this field: you judge that the steward has been
corrupted with money, because he has countenanced a poor family in coming to
settle in the village? Very well: I also then judge, that you only kept the
little girl's basket, because she had no money to give you, nor even any thing
to drink; for, if she had, I conclude you would willingly have released her.


Herbert. What, my Lord, and can you believe this?


Lord Beaumont. And why should not I think the same of you, that you encourage
yourself to think of other people?


Herbert. Well, my Lord, well, I see I had better hold my tongue. And so, for
the future, if I should see these beggars carrying off your very fields upon
their shoulders, and your woods, and your meadows -- Pray am I to carry the
basket to the steward?


Marcellus. O no, no! Dear papa, pray do not send it away!


Lord Beaumont. Carry it to the poor woman, Herbert, and make some apology to
the little girl.


Herbert. An apology, my Lord? an apology, did you say? I go and make an
apology (...) and for what!


Marcellus. For what! For having made her cry without any reason, and for
having affronted her by accusing her of a bad action.


Herbert. If she has no basket, and no apology, but from me --


Lord Beaumont. Herbert, if I had been guilty of any injustice toward you, I
should not a moment hesitate in repairing it: and, to convince you of this, I
will go myself to the cottage, carry the basket, and make an apology in your
name.


Herbert. Master Marcellus, had not you better take it yourself?


Marcellus. O, with all my heart! But, papa, the little girl will be here
presently, with Henrietta, who is gone to comfort her mother. So we had better
wait till they come.


Herbert. If that is the case, I have no more business here. (He goes off
grumbling.) I see plainly we shall have such crowds of beggars in this village,
that we shall soon be obliged to beg ourselves.


SCENE VII.
Lord BEAUMONT and MARCELLUS. MARCELLUS. DO you hear what he says, papa?


Lord Beaumont. Yes; and I readily forgive his petulance.


Marcellus. But how can you let such a wicked man live with us?


Lord Beaum^nt. He is not wicked, Marcellus; he is only misled by an
extravagant zeal to serve us. I have found him very faithfully attached to me,
and extremely exact in the discharge of his trust.


Marcellus. But he is so unjust?


Lord Beaumont. You have this moment heard he did not mean to be so. His only
fault is following too literally the orders that are given him, and wanting
sufficient understanding to distinguish between persons and circumstances.


Marcellus. Pray, papa, explain to me what you mean by that?


Lord Beaumont. Willingly, my dear boy. When I took him into my service, I gave
him orders to keep all vagabonds from my grounds, or, if he surprised any upon
them, to carry them before the magistrate. But this order was merely meant for
those poor wretches who live by thefts and robberies, and who come to pilfer or
cheat the poor who belong to the parish.


Marcellus. Ah, I understand, now, how it is. So he thinks all those are bad
people, besides, who have nothing to live upon but what they are helped to by
others: And he does not enquire first whether it may be old age, or illness, or
some sad misfortunes, that have put them into such a hard way of living.


Lord Beaumont. Very well said, Marcellus, for circumstances change all things.
You, for example, have reflected too little in the quarrel you have just had
with him. You do not know but the mother of this little girl may be a bad
woman, nor even that the little girl herself has not told you a falsehood, and
may not, in fact, have stolen the corn from my sheaves.


Marcellus. No indeed, papa, that is impossible.


Lord Beaumont. And how is it impossible? Have you had the matter made clear to
you* Do you know who she is? or who her mothe^ is? or for what purpose they are
come hither?


Marcellus. Oh, if you had but only seen her! if you had but only heard her
speak! her words, her face, the tears running down her cheeks! Do you know she
is so poor, that she is in want of a handful of corn to make her some bread?
Need ^ne ask any thing more? Ought I to let a poor person die for hunger,
because I don^t know quite entirely if he is good, and deserves to be helped?


Lord Beaumont. Come to my arms, my dear boy! Preserve always but this generous
disposition for the poor, and God will bless you, as he has blessed me for the
same sentiments, by giving birth to them in your young mind. Mercy is ever
preferable to severity. A want of feeling can only lead to injustice: and if
those who beg our pity do not merit it, the fault is theirs, and not ours.


Marcellus. But, my dear papa, is it right to let such a person as Herbert have
a place that he can be so hard-hearted in?


Lord Beaumont. Certainly not, if I left to him the power of deciding either
for or against these poor creatures himself. But he can commit at the most,
only a short-lived injury, and one which it is easy to remedy. This, too, is an
inconvenience I have no means to avoid. In my steward, however, I have a man
full of good sense, integrity, and noble sentiments, and able to judge in all
cases by the true principles of equity; he gave me a favorable account of this
little girl, and of her mother, when they first came into the village; and he
told me that ^hey live with the good old Madge, who is a very honest woman.


Marcellus. But suppose Herbert had struck the little girl, as he threatened to
do?


Lord Beaumont. He never would have gone such lengths. I have forbid him, upon
pain of losing his place, to strike any body, even those whom he surprises
doing what may deserve it: and he follows, with the utmost exactness, all the
orders I give him.


Marcellus. Ah, papa, see here comes my sister, with the little girl!


SCENE VIII.
Lord BEAUMONT, MARCELLUS, HENRIETTA and EMILY. MARCELLUS (running to Emily
with the basket.) HERE, little girl, here is your basket (...) you, and not one
grain of corn the (...) in it.


Emily. My dear, dear, basket! O Sir! how much I am obliged to you! (Perceiving
Lord Beaumont.) But, pray, who is that gentleman?


Henrietta (running to her father, and jumping up to his neck.) This is our
papa!


Marcellus. And he is a very good-natured papa, I assure you; so don't be
afraid of him. Come, and let me take you to him. (He brings her forward.) He
has given old Herbert a good scolding for having used you so ill.


Emily (advancing fearfully to Lord Beaumont, and curtsying very low.) I beg
pardon of your Lordship for coming -- but indeed your Lordship has the best
children! -- so good! --


Lord Beaumont (to himself.) Marcellus is right; I cannot doubt her innocence
from her appearance. Her looks, her language, her decent air, all show that she
has had no common education.


Emily (whispering Marcellus and Henrietta.) Have I made your papa angry? He
seems talking to himself.


Lord Beaumont (overhearing her.) No, my little dear. If my children have done
well by you, it is no more than you seem to merit.


Henrietta. Yes, papa, she merits it indeed. O, if you had but seen her mother!


Lord Beaumont. Who is your mother, my dear? what led you to come to this
village? and what means have you of living here?


Emily. Why, we live -- indeed I hardly know how myself! -- but it is upon
little or nothing. We spend the whole day, and sometimes the night too, in
working and spinning for our breed. Old Madge gives my mother houseroom; and
this morning they sent me into the fields to glean: but indeed I have had very
bad success for a first beginning.


Marcellus (softly to Emily.) Not so bad as you think: my sister and I will ask
papa to let you have some corn without gleaning at all for it.


Lord Beaumont. But where did you live before you came hither?


Emily. In the town of Brentford, which is ^^t a few miles from this place. But
we found ^^ing there too dear; so old Madge asked my mother to come to her
cottage, and offered her a lodging for nothing.


Lord Beaumont (to himself.) If such poor objects as these practice this
benevolence, what ought not to be expected from the rich? (Turning to Emily.)
Is your father yet living? What is his business?


Marcellus. I will lay any wager he is no laboring man.


Henrietta. And so will I too; especially now I have seen her mother.


Emily (confused.) My father? -- I have not any! I never even saw him. He died
before I was born. O, if he was but alive!


Lord Beaumont. And don't you know who he was, nor what was his name?


Emily. My mother can tell better than I can.


Lord Beaumont. Can I speak to her?


Henrietta. O yes, papa, she is coming herself. She said she would only stay a
minute to get ready.


Lord Beaumont. And who brought you up?


Emily. My mother all by herself, my Lord. She taught me to read and to write.
She instructs me in my religion, and she has given me some lessons in drawing.


Lord Beaumont. In drawing? I have then no further doubt but this is some
younger branch of a noble family, reduced by misfortune to indigence.


Henrietta. Ah, see, here she comes!


Marcellus. Is that she?


Lord Beaumont (to himself.) I am eager to clear up this mystery. The child
reminds m^ strongly of somebody I have seen, but I cannot recollect whom.


SCENE IX.
Lord BEAUMONT, Mrs. JEFFERSON, MARCELLUS, HENRIETTA, and EMILY. EMILY (Running
up to her mother, who looks confused at the sight of Lord Beaumont.) COME in,
mama; and don't be afraid. This gentleman is only the papa of this young lady
and gentleman who have been so kind to us: and he is so good! he is as good as
they are.


(Mrs. Jefferson approaches modestly. Henrietta eagerly takes her hand, and
draws her along to her father.) Henrietta. Yes, yes, papa knows every thing.


Mrs. Jefferson. May I flatter myself, my Lord, that you have not suspected my
little Emily --


Lord Beaumont. Nothing further can be wanting than the mere sight of you and
your child, to create the most advantageous opinion of both.


Marcellus. Her name is Emily! O, what a pretty name! Is it not true, papa,
that she could not be born for a gleaner?


Mrs. Jefferson. The law of necessity is sometimes extremely cruel; yet, while
we do nothing that is dishonorable --


Lord Beaumont. We ought not to blush at poverty; it may be allied to every
virtue. But will you give me leave to ask who you are?


Henrietta. Her name is Mrs. Wood.


Mrs. Jefferson. From you, my Lord, I ought not to disguise my real name: I am
indeed under a necessity of owning it, that I may justify myself in your
opinion, for the state to which you see me fallen. Nevertheless, I wish to make
this confession to you without witnesses, (looking a^ the children.) It is not
that I blush at my abasement: but if my name should be known, I fear I might
find, among the common people, some ungenerous minds, who would take a pleasure
in humbling me, because it too often happens that we act not more nobly or
liberally by them, when in prosperity ourselves.


Marcellus. Very well; I will not listen.


Henrietta. And for my part, I will not say one (...), I assure you; and whoever
you are, Emily ^all always be my good friend.


Lord Beaumont. I should not, believe me, Madam, have made these enquiries, if
I had not particular reasons, and if I did not mean to repair, myself, if
possible, the injustice of fortune.


Mrs. Jefferson. I was born of a noble family, though little favored by riches.
I spent my youth, with a lady of high distinction, in quality of her companion.
About eight years ago, I made acquaintance with Lieutenant Colonel Jefferson,
who came to pass some months in the capital, where I was.


Lord Beaumont (joyfully.) Jefferson? Jefferson?


Mrs. Jefferson. (...) attached himself to me, and his virtues had already
engaged me in his favor. I gave him my hand, and a few days after our
marriage, we retired to the country where he had an estate.


Lord Beaumont. It Is the same! it is the same! I see his every feature in the
face of this child.


Mrs. Jefferson. What is it you mean, my Lord?


Lord Beaumont. Go on, Madam, I entreat you.


Mrs. Jefferson. I will be as concise as possible. We were beginning, in our
peaceful retreat, to enjoy all the happiness of a tender union; when, alas! my
beloved Colonel Jefferson, whose health had been greatly injured by the
fatigues of war, was seized with a cruel illness, which in a few days ended his
life.


(She we^) Henrietta (to Emily.) Poor thing! to ^e your papa so soon!


Emily. I was not even born!


Mrs. Jefferson. This child had not yet seen the light; alas! she was born in
the midst of sorrow! The moment that the brothers of my husband, who were
hard-hearted and interested men, found there was no male heir, they seized upon
his estates; producing an old deed, by which the female line of the fa^y was
shut out from the succession: and as, unfortunately, we had deferred from day
to day having our articles properly drawn up and attested, I was forced to
content myself with receiving from them just what they were pleased to pay,
both for my child and myself.


Lord Beaumont. I fear, from their unworthy avarice, the sum was small, and
could last but a short time.


Mrs. Jefferson. It served me to live upon for some years in the country, while
I was yet expecting a small jointure, which I had flattered myself I should
obtain. But at length, when all my hopes were destroyed, I resolved upon
returning to my former benefactress. Upon my arrival at her house, I received
intelligence that she was dead: I had then no resource left, but in selling all
that I possessed of jewels and clothes, and subsisting by the work of my own
hands. I retired to a small village, that I might live, at least, unknown. And
a short time ago, I accidentally met a woman whom I had formerly been
acquainted with, and who lived in this place.


Henrietta. That Is old Madge, papa.


Mrs. Jefferson. She had been in the service of the lady I have mentioned to
you. The care I had taken of her in a very painful illness, had procured me her
affection. I told her my situation: she proposed my coming hither, where I
might live in yet greater privacy. It is to her alone I am indebted for all the
hospitality I have met with: and as she has nobody belonging to her even to
close her eyes, she has given me to understand that I shall inherit what she is
worth at her death. You see, therefore --


Lord Beaumont. Enough Madam; this worthy woman shall not exceed me in
gratitude. I feel, indeed, more satisfaction than I am able to express, that I
have, at length, the power of paying a debt, which I contracted long ago with
your excellent husband.


Mrs. Jefferson. How, my Lord? did you, then know him?


Marcellus. What, papa, the father of Emily?


Henrietta. O my dear Emily, now I hope we shall keep you to live with us. --
But what is the matter! why do you cry?


Emily. Don't mind me; I am only crying for joy.


Lord Beaumont. I owed my life to him: what happiness for me, then, to pay that
obligation to his wife, and to his child! I served under him during the last
war in Germany. In an unfortunate engagement, at a moment when I was just
sinking with fatigue, one of the enemy assailed me; and his sword had already
made an aim that must have proved my destruction, had not the worthy Lieutenant
Colonel preserved me, by falling upon the enemy himself.


Mrs. Jefferson. O, I know him well by this account. He was as brave as he was
generous.


Lord Beaumont. Some days after, I had the command given me of a small
detachment, in a very hazardous expedition. We were surrounded by the enemy,
and after a long resistance, forced to surrender. My baggage had been
plundered, and I was stripped both of clothes and money. Colonel Jefferson, who
was informed of my situation, immediately had me recommended to the enemy's
General. I obtained, by his good offices, all the assistance that I required,
in the treatment of a deep wound which I had received in the engagement. It was
more than two years before I recovered. When I returned to my native country, I
had only time to once see and thank him, for I was obliged to embark
immediately for the West Indies. I had there the good fortune to marry
extremely well; and about six years ago I came back to England. I meant to
hasten to him, but I heard he was no more. How far was I from suspecting that
his wife and his daughter were in the melancholy condition which I have now the
sorrow to see!


Mrs. Jefferson. O gracious God, by what wonderful ways have thou guided me
hither!


Marcellus (to Emily.) What, then, did your father save our papa's life?


Henrietta, O, how much we ought to love you!


Lord Beaumont. Come hither, sweet Emily! come, and you shall find in me the
father you have lost. My children, too, much need another mother, in the place
of her who has been taken from them. The education which you have given to your
amiable daughter, shows me how worthy you are of this important charge. (Emily
takes his hand and kisses it.) I shall neglect no precaution to secure your
future life from any sudden stroke of unhappiness. Yes, my love, (to Emily, who
still holds his hand) I will suffer no difference to be made between you and my
children. You are the living image of your generous father, and you merit my
tenderness as much as he did my gratitude.


Mrs. Jefferson (clasping her hands.) What can I say, my Lord, to so much
goodness! I have nothing but my tears to express what I feel!


Henrietta (embracing her.) O my dear new mama! you and Emily will then always
be with us? O, you shall see how we will obey you in every thing.


Marcellus. Yes, Emily shall be my second sister; and I am sure she shall go
out no more to glean. O that spiteful Herbert! how I will laugh at him!


Mrs. Jefferson. My sweet little innocents! with what delight do you fill my
heart! Instead of one child, I have now, then, three: and no mother shall equal
me for care, attention and fondness. Will you, my Lord, permit me to carry this
happy intelligence to the good old Margaret? Yet I almost fear it will kill her
with joy.


Lord Beaumont. Tell her by all means, Madam. And I will go myself, mean time,
and give orders for your apartments in the castle.


Henrietta. Papa, may I go with Emily, and my new mama?


Marcellus. And I too, papa, may I not go with them?


Lord Beaumont. Certainly, my dears: and you may then bring Mrs. Jefferson and
her daughter to the castle; and pray don't forget old Margaret, whom you may
also invite to dine with us.


Marcellus (to Emily, who is going to take the basket.) No, no Emily, that is
not fit for you now; let the basket stay here.


Emily. O no, indeed, I would not give up this basket for all the world! I owe
all my happiness to it, and all my mother's happiness, and all the happiness of
knowing you, and all the good we have met with. My dear, dear little basket, I
will never, never be ashamed of you!


(She lifts it up, and carries it with some difficulty.) Henrietta. At least
take out the corn, and then it will be lighter.


Emily. No, no; the corn is my own, for I am sure that good old man gave it me,
let Herbert say what he will. And I shall make a present of it to old Madge.


Lord Beaumont. She shall be remembered at our harvest, and, from this time
forward, assured of a provision for the rest of her life.


Mrs. Jefferson. May heaven reward your generosity, in the goodness and duty of
your children!


ARABELLA and PEGGY.
BEFORE the sun was risen above the horison, to give light to the most
beautiful morning of the spring, the young Arabella was already in her father's
garden, intending to make her breakfast a greater regale to her, by first
strolling up and down the long alleys. Whatever could add to the charms of
these earliest hours of the day, seemed now united to delight her. The purity
and freshness of the air, gave a calm to all her senses. Her taste was
gratified by the delicacy of the sweetmeats she was eating; her eye, by the
soft luster of the newborn green; her smell, by the sweet perfume of a
thousand flowers; and, lest her ear alone should remain unsoothed, two
nightingales perched themselves upon the summit of an arbor just by, as if
purposely to rejoice her with their morning songs. Arabella was so enchanted
with the loveliness of the scene around her, that tears of pleasure started
into her eyes, though they escaped not down her cheeks. Her heart, beating with
the softest feelings, was filled with tenderness and benevolence: when, all at
once, her pleasing thoughtfulness was interrupted by the sound of the feet of a
little girl, who was coming into the same alley, and devouring with great
greediness a thick slice of brown bread.

AS she, also, was walking in the garden only to divert herself, she looked all
round her, without noticing any particular object, and advanced close up to
Arabella, without perceiving her. The moment she saw her, she stopped short,
and cast her eyes on the ground; and then, with the swiftness of a terrified
young deer, she hastily turned back the same way she came.

STOP, stop, cried Arabella, stay for me, little girl, stay for me! What do you
run so for? But these words only made the little rustic fly the quicker.

ARABELLA began to follow her; but being less practiced in such races, found it
impossible (...) overtake her. Fortunately, however, she had run into a winding
path, in order to get out of the garden; and the alley in which she had escaped
from Arabella, led directly to the garden-gate. Arabella, who was no less
sensible than pretty, crept, therefore, softly along the side of a thick hedge,
which bordered the walk; and arrived at the last bush, at the very instant the
little girl was obliged to pass it in her way out.

SHE now suddenly seized her, calling out: Ah ha! you are my prisoner! I have
you safe, you cannot run away any more.

THE little girl struggled to get out of her hands. Don't be so naughty, cried
Arabella; if you knew the good I mean to do you, you would not be so fierce.
Come, there is a good girl, come with me for a little while.

THESE friendly words, and still more the soothing voice in which they were
spoken, gave the little girl some courage, and she followed Arabella into a
summer house.

HAVE you ever a father? said Arabella, making her seat herself next to her.

Peggy. Yes, Miss.


Arabella. And what does he do?


Peggy. Any thing he can, to get his living. He is come today to work in your
garden, and he brought me with him.


Arabella. O, I see him down there, in the kitchen-garden. It Is that great fat
man. But what are you eating for your breakfast? Let me taste a bit of your
bread. O goodness! how it hurts my throat! Why does not your father give you
better bread than this?


Peggy. Because he has not so much money as your papa has: so he cannot let us
have nice things.


Arabella. But he gets some money by his work; and I think he might at least
give you a little white bread, or else something sweet to make you get this
down.


Peggy. Yes, if I was his only child; but we are five of us, and we have all
good appetites at our meals. Besides, one is wanting a waistcoat, and another a
jacket, and another a gown: and all that makes daddy almost out of his head;
and he says, sometimes, I may work and work, all day long; but I shall never
get enough to feed and clothe all these brats.


Arabella. You never eat any sweetmeats, then, I suppose?


Peggy. Sweetmeats! What Is that?


Arabella. Look! such as I have here, spread upon my bread.


Peggy. I never saw any in my life.


Arabella. Taste a little bit. Don't be afraid; only see how I eat them myself.


Peggy. (with great delight.) O Miss! how nice and sweet!


Arabella. I thought so! Pray what is your name, little girl?


Peggy (rising and curtsying.) Peggy, Miss, at your service.


Arabella. Very well, my good Peggy, wait here a minute or two, and I Will go and
beg something for you of my governess, and come back presently. Now pray don't
run away in the mean time.


Peggy. O no, Miss, I a'n't afraid now.


ARABELLA flew to her governess, and entreated she would give her some sweet
cakes, that she might let a poor little girl have some, who had nothing but dry
bread for her breakfast. The governess was charmed with the benevolence of her
amiable pupil: she gave her some in a saucer, with a new-baked roll; and
Arabella then, with all the speed in her power, ran back to carry them to Peggy
for her breakfast.

WELL, cried she, when she came up to her, did I tire your patience with
waiting? Here, then, see what I have brought you! Come, take some; never mind
that stale bread; you can eat enough of that at any time.

Peggy (eating the cakes.) They are just like sugar! I never tasted any thing
so nice before.


Arabella. I am very glad you like them; I was sure they would please you.


Peggy. What! do you eat these nice things every day? Ah! we poor folks have
nothing of that sort!


Arabella. I am sorry for that. However, come and see me every now and then,
and I Will give you some. But what a healthy look you have! Are you never ill?


Peggy. I! what I! No, never.


Arabella. Have not you ever a cough, then, nor a cold in your head?


Peggy. A cold in my head! What sort of illness is that?


Arabella. Why, it makes you want t^ (...) sneezing, and blowing your nose, and
(...), all day long.


Peggy. O yes, that happens to me sometimes; but I don't call that illness.


Arabella. And then don't they bid you lie in bed?


Peggy. In bed? O, to be sure! My mother would make a fine noise at me, if I
took it in my head to be so lazy as that!


Arabella. Why, what have you to do, such a little thing as you?


Peggy. Why, in the winter, I have to go and fetch in thistles for the ass, and
dry wood to boil the pot; and in the summer, I have enough to do with weeding
and leasing; and in the autumn, with gathering grapes, and apples, and pears,
and plumbs. O, Miss, we never want for work.


Arabella. And are your sisters all as healthy as you are?


Peggy. Yes, they are all as brisk as the little field-mice.


Arabella. I am very glad to hear that: I was afraid at first that God had not
taken good care of you; but as you are all so strong and hearty, I see he has
not forgot you. I am very well too, myself, though, to be sure, not so stout as
you are. But how come you to be barefooted? Why don't you wear some shoes and
stockings?


Peggy. Because it would cost daddy too much money to give them to all of us;
and so he gives them to none.


Arabella. And are not you afraid of hurting yourself?


Peggy. O, I never think of that. God has given me very good soles to my feet;
they are as hard as any of your shoes.


Arabella. I should not like to change with you, though. But why don't you eat
some more?


Peggy. Why, because I must go and get the herbs, and things, and not stand
prating here. It Is almost eight o'clock, and our ass will be wanting his
breakfast.


Arabella. Well, then, you shall take the rest of your roll with you: but stay
a little, and I Will pull out all the crumb, and then put the sweetmeats into
the hollow.


Peggy. I shall go and carry it to my little sister. O, I warrant she will not
make faces at this! She will not leave one morsel when once she has tasted it.


Arabella. I shall love you the better, now, for thinking of your little sister.


Peggy. O, I never have any thing nice, without giving her some. Good bye, Miss.


Arabella. Good bye, Peggy. Don't forget to come here again tomorrow, at the
same time.


Peggy. O, I shall take care of that, if my mama does not send me some where
else.


ARABELLA had now enjoyed the happiness of doing good. She still stayed
sometime walking in the garden, thinking over the pleasure which she had given
to Peggy, and the gratitude which Peggy had shown her in return, and the
delight of her little sister in eating the sweet cakes.

BUT what will be her joy, thought she, when I give her two new ribbons, and a
necklace? I am quite tired, myself, of those mama made me a present of the
other day, for all they are so pretty. I Will go and look in my drawers, and see
what else I can spare her. We are just of a size, and my things will fit her
charmingly. O how I long to dress her, and see how she will look!

THE next morning, Peggy again slipped into the garden; and Arabella gave her
some sweetmeats which she had bought for her.

PEGGY now failed not to come every morning; and Arabella thought of nothing
but what new dainties she could procure for her. When her own pocket-money was
insufficient to buy all she wanted, she begged her mama's leave to take
sweetmeats and preserves out of the house-keeper's room: and her mama
consented with pleasure.

ONE day, however, Arabella had the mortification of a refusal. She asked her
mama to advance her weekly allowance, that she might buy shoes and stockings
for Peggy, and not let her go about barefooted any more.

NO, I cannot, my dear Arabella, answered her mama.

AND why not, mama?

I will tell you at table, by and by, she replied, the reason that makes me
wish you to be a little less extravagant for your favorite.

ARABELLA was much surprised at this denial; and never before so eagerly waited
for dinnertime. At length it arrived, and all the family seated themselves at
table.

THE dinner, however, was almost over, and still not a word was said that led
to the subject of Peggy's shoes and stockings. But, at last, a plate of shrimps
was set on the table, and Mrs. Allison began the following conversation.

Mrs. Allison. O, here comes my Arabella's favorite dish; is it not? I am very
glad we happened to have it today.


Arabella. Yes, mama, I love shrimps very much, and this is the season when
they are best.


Mrs. Allison. And Peggy, I dare say, would like them still better than you do.


Arabella. O, poor little Peggy, I dare say she never saw any in her life. If I
was only to show her these long whiskers, she would be as frightened -- O, how
frightened she would be! I think I see her now, running away with all her
might. Mama, if you would give me leave, I should like vastly to see what faces
she would make at them. Two will be enough for her, if they are the two least
in the dish.


Mrs. Allison. This is a request, my dear, that I know not how to grant.


Arabella. And why, mama, why not? You, that always do so many good things for
every body? And when I asked you for some money this morning, to buy Peggy
shoes and stockings, you refused it me: so I suppose poor Peggy has made you
angry. Has she taken any fruit, or any thing out of the garden, mama? O, I will
scold her well for it, if she has.


Mrs. Allison. No, my dear Arabella, Peggy has not made me angry at all: but do
you mean, by the things you do for her, to make her happy or miserable?


Arabella. Happy, mama; God forbid I should make her miserable!


Mrs. Allison. And I too, my love, heartily wish her better fortune, since you
think she merits your regard. But is it certainly true, Arabella, that she has
nothing but dry bread for her breakfast?


Arabella. Very true, really, mama; for I am sure I would not deceive you.


Mrs. Allison. Indeed! and has that satisfied her quite till now?


Arabella. O dear, yes, mama: and if I was to have the nicest Savoy biscuits, I
could not eat them with more pleasure than she eats her dry brown bread.


Mrs. Allison. It seems, then, she has a very good appetite. But I don't know
how to suppose she goes always barefooted.


Arabella. Indeed she has always been barefooted whenever I have seen her;
only ask the gardener else.


Mrs. Allison. I dare say, then, her feet are all covered with blood, when she
has been walking upon sand, or stones.


Arabella. No, not at all. She runs about the garden like a fawn; and she
laughs, and says that God himself has sewed a pair of hard soles upon the
bottom of her feet.


Mrs. Allison. I know very well that my Arabella is no story-teller; but yet, I
must own I have some difficulty in believing all this. O, what wry faces would
you make, if we were to give you dry brown bread, without any butter, or
sweetmeats!


Arabella. O indeed, mama, I know very well it would stop in my throat.


Mrs. Allison. And I should like, also, to see how you would manage if we let
you go barefoot.


Arabella. Why, mama, now don't be angry, but yesterday I had a mind to try.
When I was alone in the garden, I took off my shoes and stockings, on purpose
to walk about like Peggy: but I found my feet sadly cut. -- However, I resolved
to trot on: but at last, I came plump on a sharp flint! O, it hurt me so! -- I
hurried back as fast as possible, though I picked all the best way I could; and
indeed, mama, I Will give you my word, I Will never go about barefoot any more.
Poor little Peggy! do you know she walks so, mama, all summer long?


Mrs. Allison. But what is the reason, then, that you cannot eat dry bread, and
go barefoot, as well as she?


Arabella. I suppose, mama, it is because I am not used to it.


Mrs. Allison. But if you should accustom her to the same delicacies you love
yourself, and to wear shoes and stockings, and then the dry bread should be
distasteful to her, and walking barefoot should hurt her, do you think you
would have done her any kindness?


Arabella. No, mama; but I want to serve her in such a manner, that she shall
never be in that bad way any more.


Mrs. Allison. That Is a very generous wish; but can you save enough of your
pocket-money to answer such a purpose?


Arabella. Yes, very well, mama, if you will only help me a little.


Mrs. Allison. You know well that I never refuse to assist the poor or
distressed, when a proper occasion offers: but is Peggy the only little girl
you know that wants help?


Arabella. No, mama, I know a great many others besides; and especially two
that live here by the village, that have neither father nor mother.


Mrs. Allison. Doubtless, then, they are in want of many things.


Arabella. Yes, indeed, mama, they are.


Mrs. Allison. But if you give every thing to Peggy, and feed her with biscuits
and sweetmeats, while the other poor things are left to starve with hunger; do
you think you are acting either with justice or humanity?


Arabella. But I can give them something too, from time to time, mama; only I
love Peggy the best of any of them.


Mrs. Allison. And if you should die, after using Peggy to all these luxuries
--


Arabella. I am sure, if I did, mama, she would cry.


Mrs. Allison. I can easily believe it. But she must then again sink into
indigence, or else, perhaps, commit bad actions, in order still to eat what she
liked, and dress herself as you had dressed her. Who then would be guilty of
her ruin?


Arabella (with sadness.) I, mama! So then, I suppose, I must give her nothing
more?


Mrs. Allison. That is not my intention. I think, however, that you will do
well to buy her fewer good things to eat, and rather bestow your money in
purchasing her plain and tidy clothes.


Arabella. I was thinking of that, mama, myself. Suppose I give her one of my
own robes?


Mrs. Allison. I think your rose-colour satin will suit her admirably,
especially when she runs about barefoot.


Arabella. O no! every body will point at her with their fingers! What can I
do, mama?


Mrs. Allison. If I were in your place, I should be very saving, for some time,
in my pleasures, till I had got together a little sum of money; and then I
would employ it in buying for her whatever I found she most wanted. The things
that serve for clothes to the children of the poor, are not very expensive.


ARABELLA followed her mama's advice. She called Peggy but seldom to partake of
her breakfast; but she frequently made her other, and far more useful presents.
Sometimes she gave her an apron, sometimes a petticoat, and sometimes a cap:
and she paid herself for her schooling, that she might be properly taught to
read.

PEGGY was so much delighted by these benefactions, that she every day attached
herself more and more tenderly to Arabella. She would frequently run after her,
to say: Have you any thing I can do for you, Miss Arabella? Can I go of any
errand? And, whenever Arabella found her some employment, nothing could equal
the joy with which Peggy hastened to oblige her.

SHE went one day to the garden-gate, to wait for Arabella's coming; but after
staying far beyond the usual time, Arabella appeared not. Peggy was forced to
go home, but soon returned to watch again; but again she saw nothing of
Arabella. Two days following, she continued to come at the accustomed hours;
but no Arabella was ready to receive her.

POOR Peggy was now in the utmost distress, that her benefactress seemed thus
to have forsaken her.

AH! cried she, does not she love me any longer? May be I have made her angry
without knowing it. I am sure if I could tell what it was, I would beg her
pardon again and again; for I shall die, now, if she will not love me always!

AT this moment, Mrs. Allison's maid happened to come out of the garden. Peggy
ran after her. Pray tell me, cried she, where Miss Arabella is?

MISS Arabella? said the maid, she is very ill; she has not perhaps, many hours
to live. I think her quite at the last moment; she has got the smallpox.

O good God! exclaimed Peggy, she must not die! I cannot let her die!

SHE then flew into the house, and ran up stairs into Mrs. Allison's room. O
good Lady, she cried, for pity's sake tell me where is Miss Arabella, and let
me go to her!

MRS. Allison would have stopped her, but she had seen, through the door, which
was half open, Arabella's bed: and she was already at its side.

ARABELLA was in all the restless pain of a violent fever. She was alone, and
very melancholy; for all her young friends had been taken from her.

PEGGY, crying bitterly, caught hold of her hand, pressed it between her own,
kissed it a hundred times, and said: Ah! good God! what a way do I see you in!
O, don't die, I beg you! What must I do if I should lose you? I will stay with
you both day and night; I will watch over you, and wait upon you. -- May I,
Miss Arabella? will you let me?

ARABELLA pressed her hand, and easily made her understand that she consented
with pleasure to her offer.

PEGGY now, with the permission of Mrs. Allison, became the constant attendant
of Arabella; and whatever she was suffered to do for her, she was careful
should be done as well as possible. They made up a bed for her upon the floor,
by the side of the little invalid; and she never for an instant quitted her.
When Arabella only made the slightest murmur, Peggy jumped up to enquire what
was the matter. She gave her all her physic herself. Sometimes she gathered
rushes, in order to amuse her by showing her how she could make pretty baskets;
at other times, she hunted over Mrs. Allison's library, to find out prints for
her to look at. Her mind was always employed in thinking of something to
entertain her, and make her forget her sufferings. During one week of the time,
Arabella lost her eyesight by her disorder; and this week seemed very long
indeed: yet Peggy assisted her to bear it, by diverting her with the history of
all the village; and, as she had improved very much by her lessons of reading,
she picked out for her all the books she thought she would like to hear; and
frequently, in a very tender manner, she would endeavor to give her comfort:
Only have a little patience, she would say, and God will take pity on you, as
you used to take pity on me. At this remembrance, she would cry; but, soon
drying her eyes, say more cheerfully: Come, Miss Arabella, shall I sing you a
pretty song to divert you? Arabella had but to give a nod, and Peggy
immediately sung to her all the little songs she had learnt from the shepherds'
boys in the neighborhood. And thus the time passed away, and Arabella hardly
ever was tired.

AT length, though by slow degrees, her health was perfectly re-established.
Her eyes again opened, her strength returned, her complexion lost its redness,
and her appetite was restored.

HER face, however, was still marked with her late disorder. But Peggy only
looked at her with the greatest pleasure, from thinking of the danger she had
been in of losing her. Neither could Arabella, in return, ever see her without
tenderness.

HOW can I pay you as I wish to do, cried she, for all that you have done for
me? She then applied to her mama, to know in what manner she could possibly
reward her constant and faithful little nurse. Mrs. Allison, who almost lost
her senses with the excess of her joy, in seeing her beloved daughter restored
to life, after so dangerous an illness, answered: Leave that to me; I will take
care that she shall be properly recompensed for what we both owe to her
diligence and fondness.

SHE then gave orders to have a complete dress made for Peggy, including one
thing of every sort that she could wear. Arabella undertook to equip her in it
herself, the first day that she should be thought well enough to go again into
the garden. This day proved a festival to the whole house. Not only Mrs.
Allison, but all the domestics, were transported with joy to see Arabella again
down stairs; while Arabella was equally delighted, from the pleasure of having
so useful a present for her good Peggy. Peggy herself was half crazy with her
own happiness, to meet again her little benefactress where she had first known
her, and to be dressed in new things from head to foot by her own hands.

JEMMY.
AS Mr. Courtney, in returning home from a morning-ride, passed along the walls
of a churchyard in a little village, his ears were struck with the sound of a
most piteous cry, which seemed to proceed from it. This humane gentleman had
too feeling a heart to hesitate in hastening to the assistance of the unhappy
person whom he heard in such distress. He alighted from his horse, which he
gave to the care of the servant who attended him, and then jumped over the wall
into the churchyard. He looked every way around him for some time to no
purpose; but at length he perceived, at the further end, and in a corner, a
grave which seemed to be just covered with fresh earth. Upon this grave, a
little boy of about five years old, lay at his full length. Mr. Courtney went
up to him with an air of kindness, and said: What are you doing there, my boy?

The Child. I am calling my mammy. They put her to bed here yesterday, and she
will not get up.


Mr. Courtney. Poor child! she must be dead.


The Child. Yes, they say she is dead; but I don't believe them; for she was
quite well the other day, when she left me at our neighbor Sarah's. She told
me she would come again, but she has never come! My daddy is gone away from me,
too; and so is my little brother; and none of the other children in the village
will play any more with me.


Mr. Courtney. They will not play with you? and why not?


The Child. I am sure I don't know; but whenever I want to run about with them,
they push me away, and leave me all alone. And they say very bad things of my
daddy and mammy; and that is what is worse than all. O mammy, mammy! get up,
get up!


MR. Courtney's eyes were now filled with tears. You say, cried he, that your
father and your little brother are both gone: Do you know to what place?

The Child. I don't know where daddy is; but my little brother went yesterday
to another village. There came a gentleman all in black, like our parson, that
took him away with him.


Mr. Courtney. And where do you live now?


The Child. At our neighbor Sarah's: I shall stay there till mammy comes back,
as she promised me. I love mammy Sarah very well; but I love mammy that lies
here (pointing to the grave) better than her. O mammy, mammy, why do you lie
here so long? when will you get up again?


Mr. Courtney. Poor little thing! don't call to her any more, for you can never
awake her.


The Child. Well, then, I will lie down here, and sleep by her side. O, I saw
her when they put her in, that great box! -- She was so pale! and so cold! --
Oh my mammy! I will lie down here, and sleep close by you!


MR. Courtney could no longer restrain his t^ars: he leant over the child, took
him in his arms, and tenderly embracing him, said: What is your name, my little
boy?

The Child. I Am called Jemmy, when I am very good; and when I am naughty, my
name is James.


WILL you show me the way to Sarah's? cried Mr. Courtney, smiling, in the midst
of his tears, at this simplicity.

Jem^y. Yes, Sir.


JEMMY then began running before Mr. Courtney, as quick as his little feet
would let him, till he came to the door of Sarah's cottage.

SARAH was not a little surprised at seeing a gentleman enter her little hovel;
while Jemmy, pointing to her with his finger, and then running to hide his face
in her lap, called out: Here she is! this is my other mammy!

SHE could not tell what to think of so extraordinary a visit: but Mr. Courtney
left her not long in uncertainty. He described to her the situation in which he
had found the little boy, told her with what compassion he had filled him, and
begged her to give him all the information in her power, concerning the
relations of the poor child.

SARAH got a chair for him by her side, and beg^n her account as follows.

THE child's father is a shoemaker, that lives next door: and an honest,
sober, hard-working man he is; quite young still, and very well looking. His
wife was a good pretty woman; but she had a poor constitution, though she was
industrious enough, and a very good house-wife. It Is about seven years ago that
they were married, and they lived very well together, and would have made the
happiest couple in the world, if they had but had a little more money. But John
had nothing besides his trade; and Margery was without father or mother, and
carried nothing to her husband, but a little money she had saved, when she was
at service at the good parson's that belongs to a parish about nine miles off.
This little money they spent in buying a bed, and some crockery ware, and
things for housekeeping, and a little store of leather for their work. And,
poor as they were, they found means to live pretty well, for the first years of
their marriage, by good care and hard work. But, then came a family; that was
the thing that first brought them into trouble. But, however, they would have
got out of that difficulty, by doubling their diligence, if it had not been for
other misfortunes. Poor Margery, who worked in the fields all day long in the
summer, to get a little money to carry at night to her husband, fell sick with
over work and was ill all the autumn, and all the winter and physic is very
dear. Besides that, business w^^^ on very badly, because John's customers, by
little and little, left him off, thinking they should be but ill served in a
house where there was a woman always sick. By and by, however, Margery got up
again; but her husband's business was ruined. They were forced to borrow money
to pay the doctor and apothecary. John had no more work to do, for he had lost
all his customers; and Margery could get little or nothing, because her
strength was so gone, that no body would employ her. And, besides all this, the
rent of their house, and the interest they were obliged to pay for the money
they h^d borrowed, quite crushed them. They were sometimes obliged to go
without food; and if they had but a morsel of br^ad to give their children,
they thought themse^ves happy enough.

(AT these words, little Jemmy ran into a corner, and began to cry.)

BESIDES all this, their hard-hearted landlord, seeing they could not pay their
winter's quarter, threatened John he would have him taken up. They begged and
prayed him to have patience till harvest-time, because then they could get a
little money, by working in the fields as day-labourers: but neither their
begging nor their praying could melt him; for all he was richer than any body
in all the village. It was a sad trouble to them to make him agree to wait only
for one month; and he said, that if he was not paid every thing by the end of
that, he would sell all their goods, and put John in prison. From that time
forward, those poor people were so sad and sorrowful, it would have melted a
rock to have see^ them. You may think, Sir, how it must move my heart, to hear
my poor neighbors bemoan themselves so, and to have nothing to help them with.
I went once myself to their creditor, and begged him to have some pity on their
misfortunes: and I offered to pawn to him all the things I was worth, for their
sakes. But it all answered no end. You are but a poor wretch yourself, says he,
any more than they; and this comes of letting one's houses to such a set of
vagabonds. Ah, Sir! (here the tears rolled down poor Sarah's cheeks.) I took
this hardness patiently, for fear of making him still worse; but I was sadly
afflicted to think I was only a poor widow, and could do nothing at all for
such honest people. What a deal of good the rich might do, if they had but the
same good will toward it that the poor have! But to come back to my poor
neighbors. I advised Margery to go to the parson, where she had lived in
service so many years, with a good and fair character, and tell him her
misfortunes, and pray him to lend her a little money. She told me she would
speak of it to her husband; but that it would be a hard matter to do it, for
fear the parson should think they had fallen so low by their own bad behavior.
Three days ago she brought me, according to custom, her two children, and asked
me to keep them till night: she said she would go to the next village, and see
if she could not get some hemp for spinning, in order to pay their debt. But
she could not pluck up courage to go to her old master the parson; and so her
husband said he would go in her stead; and he set out that same day. I was
ready enough to take care of the children, because I loved them dearly, for I
had known them both from their births. Margery, when she went away, kissed them
and hugged them again and again, as if she knew she was seeing them for the
last time. I think I see her still! She had her eyes full of tears, and she
said to the eldest: Don't you cry, Jemmy; I shall soon be back, and then I Will
come and fetch you. Then she held out her hand to me, thanked me for letting
her children stay with me, kissed them both again, and went away.

SOME time after, I heard a loud sound in her house; but, as I thought she was
gone, I took it for granted it was nothing but a faggot of wood standing loose
against the wall, that happened to tumble down; and so I never minded it.
Evening however came, and night came too, and still I saw nothing of neighbor
Margery. So then I thought I would go to her house, to see whether she was not
gone there first, to put by her flax, before she came to take home her
children. The door was open; so I went in. O good Lord! how was I struck, to
see Margery lying down on the ground, at the foot of the stairs stiff-dead! I
stood myself quite fixed, and as cold as a stone. I did not know what to do. At
last, after trying to no end to lift her up, I ran to the surgeon, who came
back with me, felt her pulse, and shook his head, and then called a jury to sit
on her body. The jury and the surgeon together tried to find out how she had
been killed; and they said she must have died at once of the fall, or else, for
want of help, have gone off in fainting-fits. Now I can tell well enough how it
all happened. She had gone back to her house to get a bag from the garret to
bring the hemp in, and her eyes being a little misty with crying, she did not
see where she had put her foot in coming down the garret-stairs, and so she
fell, head foremost, from top to bottom, upon the stone floor. This I know,
because of the bag's being at her side. But for all this, our justice had
different thoughts: he gave orders to have the body buried the next day in a
corner of the churchyard; and he said he would search far and near to find out
what was gone with John. I offered him to keep both the children myself; for,
hard as I find it to live, I always say to myself: God knows I am but a poor
widow; and so, if he gives these children to my care, he will see and help me
to rear them. However, the little brother of him you see here, did not stay
with me long; for it was but yesterday, a few hours after Margery was buried,
that the good parson that she had lived with, happened to call to see her. He
knocked some time at the door; and, as nobody opened it, he came up to my
window, and asked me what was gone with John, the poor shoemaker, that lived
at the next house. I told him, that if he would give himself the trouble to
come in for a moment. I had a great many things to tell him about John, and
about Margery too. So he came in, and sat down just where you do. I told him
all that had happened; and it brought the tears into his eyes. And then I told
him that John had thought of begging a little help of him in his difficulties.
He looked quite amazed, and told me he had not so much as seen John. The two
children came up to him: and he played with them a good while; and Jemmy asked
him if he could not wake his mammy for him, for she had be^n asleep a long
while. The good parson had the tears in his eyes again, when he heard the poor
child talk so; and he said to me: Good woman, I shall send tomorrow for both
these little boys, and I will keep them at my house. If their father comes back
again, and should be in a way to bring them up himself, he shall have them
whenever he desires. But in the mean time, I will take care myself to have them
educated. I cannot say I liked much to hear this. I love the little souls like a
mother, and it would have cost me very dear to lose them so soon. So I said:
Sir, I don't know how to bring myself to part from these children; I am so used
to them, and they are so used to me. -- Well, then, good woman, says he, you
shall let me have one, and I Will leave you the other, as I see he will be so
well off with you. And I will send you from time to time, something to help to
keep him. So I could not refuse that much to the good pars^n. So then he asked
Jemmy if he should not like to go with him? What there, where mammy is? says
Jemmy. O yes, that I shall! No, my little dear, says he, it is not there; it is
to my pretty house, and pretty garden. -- No, no, no, says Jemmy, I Will stay
here with Sarah; and I can go every day to look for mammy, and I like that
better than your pretty house and garden. The good parson would not pester the
poor child any more, for he had run to hide himself up in the curtains of my
bed. So he said he would send his man for the youngest of them, who would have
been more a trouble to me than the eldest; and he left me some money to help on
with Jemmy. So, Sir, this is all I have to tell you of Jemmy's relations. --
But what makes me most sorry now, is, that John never should come home again;
and that the folks have set it a going, that he is gone among a parcel of
smugglers, and that his wife killed herself for concern at it. These fibs have
run about so in the village, that the very babies have them in their mouths;
and when my little Jemmy goes among them, they push him away, and all try to
beat him. The poor child is sadly unhappy with it all; and so he never cares to
go out now, but only just to his mammy's grave.

MR. Courtney had heard in silence, but with the utmost compassion, the simple
narration of Sarah. Jemmy had again returned to her; he looked at her with
fondness, and called her from time to time, his mammy.

GOOD, worthy woman, said Mr. Courtney at last, you have indeed behaved most
generously toward this unhappy family; and God will surely bless you for it.

Sarah. I have only done my duty; for what are we put here for, but to help one
another? I think, for my part, I can do nothing more agreeable to God's
commands, in return for all the good things he has given me, than to comfort,
as well as I can, all my poor neighbors. If I could but have done something
better for them! But I have nothing on earth but my cottage, and a little
garden where I grow herbs, and what money I can earn by the labor of my own
hands. But for all that, for these eight years that I have been a poor widow,
God has always enabled me to live pretty comfortably: and I have good hope he
will support me the same for all the rest of my time.


Mr. Courtney. But if you keep this child constantly, the expense of his
maintenance will be very heavy for you, as it will be so long before he can
gain his own living.


Sarah. O, I can always manage so as to have enough for him: and I Will share the
last bit of bread I have in the world with him.


Mr. Courtney. But where will you get money enough to buy clothes for him?


Sarah. O, the same that covers the fields with grass, and the trees with
leaves, will take care and cover my Jemmy too. He has given me fingers to sew
and to spin, and I Will use them to clothe my little orphan into the bargain.
While one can work and pray, one can want for nothing.


Mr. Courtney. You are quite determined, then, to keep Jemmy yourself?


Sarah. Yes, Sir, as long as I live. I should have no comfort of my life, if I
was to turn off the poor little motherless child, or let it be shut up in a
workhouse.


Mr. Courtney. Are you related at all to his family?


Sarah. No, Sir, we are related together by nothing but good neighborhood, and
good religion.


Mr. Courtney. I too, then, am related, both to them and to you, by religion,
and by humanity. I cannot, therefore, suffer you to have alone all the honor
of doing good to this orphan, when heaven has furnished me with far better
means to serve him, than it has given to you. You must trust me with the care
of Jemmy's education: but since you are so much used to one another, and since
your benevolence to him so well deserves to share what his affection for his
mother has made me resolve in his favor, I will take you both together into my
house, and I will see and provide for you. Part, therefore, with your garden
and your cottage, and follow me. You shall be lodged and nourished for the rest
of your life.


Sarah (looking at him with tears in her eyes.) Don't be angry with me, Sir;
and may God reward you for all your goodness! but indeed I cannot accept your
kind offers.


Mr. Courtney. And why not?


Sarah. Why, Sir, in the first place, I should but yearn after the place where
I was born, and where I have lived so many years; and in the next place, I
should not know what to do in the hurry and bustle of a great house, and before
so many people. I am not used to idleness, nor to dainty feeding; and I should
only fall sick, if I had nothing to do, or was to eat better things than
ordinary. So I had best stay in my own cot, with my little Jemmy. He Will be
never the worse for living a little hardly. But, however, if you will send him
now and then a little money to pay for his schooling, and to buy him tools for
some trade, why, God will reward you for it an hundred fold; at least, Jemmy
and I will pray him to do it, every day of our lives. I have no child, and so
Jemmy is the same to me as if he was my own; and the little I have got shall
all go to him, when it pleases God to call me to himself.


Mr. Courtney. Be it so, then; I would not have my good offices for him
occasion you any uneasiness. I will leave you the child, since you do so well
together. Talk to him about me often, and make him understand that I shall
supply the place of a father to him, at the same time that you take upon
yourself both the nam^ and the cares of the mother he so much grieves after. I
will send you once a month all that you can want for his maintenance; and I
will frequently come and see you myself; and then my visit shall always be as
much to you as to him.


SARAH lifted up her eyes toward heaven, while she kissed the skirt of Mr.
Courtney's coat; and then, calling to the child: Come, Jemmy, she cried, come
and make a bow to the good gentleman, for he says he will be a father to you.

JEMMY made his bow; but, turning to Sarah, said: How can he be my daddy? he
has no apron on.

MR. Courtney smiled at this childish innocence, and, throwing a purse upon the
table, said: God bless you, most worthy woman! good-bye to you, my little
Jemmy; it shall not be long before you see me again. He then went where he had
left his horse, and rode immediately to the parish of the good clergyman, who
had taken the younger orphan.

HE found him employed in reading a letter, which was wetted with his tears.
After their first salutations, Mr. Courtney acquainted him with the subject of
his visit, and begged to know if he had procured any intelligence of what had
become of the father of the two poor little boys.

I have just now, Sir, answered the clergyman, received from him this letter,
which he had written to his wife. He directed it to me, with this little sum of
money, desiring me to forward them both to the poor woman, and to try to
console her for his absence. But, as she is dead, I opened it myself. Here it
is, Sir; will you have the goodness to read it? Mr. Courtney eagerly took it,
and read what follows.

MY DEAR WIFE,
"I am very sorry to think what trouble you must have been in at my absence:
but I must tell you how it all happened. As I was upon the road to go to the
worthy clergyman, your late master, this thought came into my head: What good,
thinks I, will come to me by turning beggar? it is only getting out of one debt,
to get into another; and then I shall never be at rest for thinking how I shall
pay it. At my age, to go and ask for money, when I am able to work for it, is a
shame. They Will only think me either lazy or extravagant. The worthy parson
married us himself, and he looks upon us as his children: but suppose he should
refuse me out of scorn; or else that it should not be in his power to help us?
Besides, supposing he would lend me the money for a whole year, how do I know
if I could pay him at the end? and if I did not, how am I any better than a
robber? I shall have imposed upon him. So this was what I said to myself about
it, my dear Margery; and then I began to think how I could get us both out of
these difficu^ties, in an honest way. But I did not know what to do; and I was
very mournful, and sadly at a loss; when all at once it came into my mind:
thinks I, Why, I am still but young, and I am tall and strong; what harm would
it do me to turn soldier for a few years? I can write and read, and cast
accounts prettily enough: and then I may make my own fortune, and my wife's and
children's beside; or, at least, I can get free of my debts. So if once I am
but fixed, why, as soon as I get any thing, I can send it to poor Margery. So I
turned all these tho'ts in my mind for about half an hour, and then I happened
to see, just behind me, a couple of soldiers. They soon joined me, and asked me
where I came from, and where I was going to, and whether I should like to serve
the King? I made them believe, at first, that I had no mind to their business:
and they pressed me a good deal, and promised me the good round sum of six
pound ten; so I told them, that, upon that condition, I would bind myself to
them for six years. Done! says they, so come along with us, and the affair
shall be settled at once. Then they took me before an officer, and had me
measured; and asked if I could read and write, and cast accounts; and when I
said Yes, they soon made them give me the money. And so, as you see, my dear
Margery, I am now turned a soldier, on purpose to get us clear of our
difficulties. I send you the six pound ten, for I would not keep a penny out of
it for myself. Pay off at once the four pound five that I owe, and the six
shillings interest; and with the rest, do the best you can for keeping house.
Nurse yourself well, that you may get back your strength; and buy clothes for
the children, and send them to school. I know you are careful and industrious,
and will make the most you can of every thing. My pay will be four-pence a day;
and I shall try to save one or two out of it, every day, to send to you at the
end of the month: and in a little while, I shall ask leave of absence, that I
may go and see you, my dear Margery. So don't afflict yourself; but trust in
God, for six years will soon pass away. I shall then come and live with you
again, and we will keep house together as we used to do.

"BRING up our children well, and make them stay within doors, and teach them
to love work. Say your prayers with them every day, and tell them how to do
their duty, and grow up honestly. You are able enough to show them what is
right. So live in the fear of the Lord, and pray to him for me, and I will pray
to him for you. Send me an answer directly; you need only give your letter to
the parson, and I shall know how to get it. Kiss both the children for me. Tell
Jemmy, that if he is very good, I will bring him some pretty things when I come
home. So praise God for all things, and love me as long as you live; and I am
your loving husband,

"JOHN BUND."


MR. Courtney could not read this letter without tears. When he had finished
it, Ah! cried he, how good a husband, how good a father, and how honest a man!
What pleasure can be greater than serving such worthy people? I will go and buy
off the six years for John. I will pay his debts, and I will enable him to
begin his trade again with ease and comfort. The six pound ten shillings shall
be reserved for the children. It has been but too dearly earned by their
father! It shall be divided between them when they are old enough to go into
some business. Keep the whole sum in your hands for them, and speak to them of
it from time to time, as the most lively and tender token of their father's
regard for them. I will pay you interest for it myself, which you shall add to
their little capital. I cannot but have some share in this most pitiable
transaction.

THE worthy clergyman was too much moved to be able to make any answer. Mr.
Courtney well understood the cause and feeling of his silence, and having bid
him adieu, pressed his hand and left him.

ALL his schemes in favor of John, have since been put in execution: and John,
restored to repose and quiet, now enjoys comfort and peace, such as he had
never before tasted, and such as, but for the loss of Margery, would make him
the happiest of men. His only consolation for that, is in continually talking
of her, with the faithful Sarah. The good woman looks upon herself as his
sister, and as the mother of his children. Little Jemmy has not yet suffered
one day to pass, without again visiting the grave of his mammy: but he has made
such good use of the opportunity which Mr. Courtney has given him for
improvement, that the most advantageous plan for his future welfare, is already
formed by that benevolent gentleman. He has also taken care that the same
attention shall be paid to his younger brother: nor has he ever, from that time
to this, mounted his horse, without recalling to his mind this touching
adventure: and whenever he is himself tormented by distress or misfortune, he
hastens to visit those whom his own generosity has made happy, and never fails
to return to his family lightened of all his sorrows.

THE MASONS ON THE LADDER.
AS Mr. Durand was walking out one day, with his little son Ambrose, through
some of the public streets, they stopped to look at a house which was building,
and already raised to the second story.

AMBROSE observed several workmen standing one above another upon the steps of
a high ladder, who were successively lifting up, and letting fall down, their
arms. This sight raised his curiosity. Papa, cried he, what game are these men
playing at? Let us go nearer the foot of the ladder, and see.

THEY now put themselves in a place where they could make their remarks without
any danger. They then perceived a man, who, from a large pile of stones, took
out one, which he carried to another man, who stood upon the first step of the
ladder; and who, lifting it up with both his hands above his head, gave it to a
third, who stood still higher, and who, in the same manner, passed it on to a
fourth. And thus, from one to another, the stone at length arrived at the top
of the scaffolding, where the masons were in readiness to go to work with it.

WHAT do you think of all this? said Mr. Durand to his son; can you tell why
such a number of people should be employed in building this one house? Should
you think it better to have one workman go on with it alone, and so to let
every man build a house by himself?

YES, indeed, I should, replied Ambrose; for there would then be a great many
more houses than there are now.

DO you consider well what you are saying? cried Mr. Durand: do you know how
many different trades and arts belong to the building of a house; that, if one
man alone should undertake it, he must be well acquainted with them all; and
that he might pass his whole life in acquiring such variety of knowledge,
before he would know enough of the matter to set about any building at all?

AND even supposing him able to learn, in a short time, all he should know for
that purpose; how slowly must he proceed, if wholly without help; first, in
digging the earth in order to prepare the foundation; then in collecting, and
bringing to the spot, the stones or bricks for the structure; then in shaping
them; in preparing the mortar, plaster, and lime, and whatever else is required
in the business of a mason! Imagine him, however, now here, and in full
spirits, settling his dimensions, raising his ladders, and running up his
scaffoldings; -- in what time do you think, all alone, he could build his house
to the roof?

Ambrose. Why indeed; papa, I am afraid he would never be able to finish it
quite, without a little help.


Mr. Durand. I think not, indeed. And you may make the same observation upon
all the works of a community, as upon the building of this house. When any man
takes a fancy to retire from society, and labor by himself; when, from the
fear of being obliged to others for assistance, he refuses to work with them;
he wastes both his strength and his time in the attempt, and is always, in the
end, compelled to abandon it. But where we mutually aid and help one another,
we can perform, in a short time, the most difficult and laborious things, and
such as, undertaken singly, might each require the life of a man to execute.


IT is the same also, with our amusements and pleasures. Those who would enjoy
them alone, and selfishly, must confine themselves to a very small number: but
if every one would unite in contributing to the happiness of others, each would
be certain of an ample portion for himself.

IN time, my dear Ambrose, you will enter into the world: let the example,
therefore, of these workmen, be ever present to your memory. You see, from the
mutual help which they give to one another, how much shorter and easier are the
labors of all. We will come this way again in a few days, and we shall find,
by their united industry, their house will be nearly finished. Endeavor, then,
always to assist others in their employments, if you wish to have them ready
and willing to assist you in yours.

THE SWORD. A DRAMA IN ONE ACT.
PERSONS.
Lord ORMSBY. AUGUSTUS, his son. HARRIET, his daughter. play-fellows of
Augustus.
PHILIP REYNOLDS, ROBERT REYNOLDS, WILLIAM DARBY, WALTER DARBY,
CLAYTON, Lord Ormsby's man.
The scene is in the chamber of Augustus.

THE SWORD. A DRAMA IN ONE ACT.
SCENE I.
AUGUSTUS. SO, this is my birthday! I am glad they told me of it, for else I
should have passed it by: and now it gives me a fair title to expect some new
present from papa. I wonder what it will be! Let me think, what can he give me?
I saw Clayton had something hid under his coat, when he went to papa's room
just now. He would not let me go in with him, to see what it was. However, only
for being obliged to behave a little well today, I would have made him show it
me, whether he would or not. But, mum! I shall know now; for I am sure that is
papa's step.

SCENE II.
Lord ORMSBY (with a sword and sword-belt in his hand,) and AUGUSTUS. Lord
ORMSBY. O HERE you are, Augustus. I have already wished you joy of your
birthday; but I fancy you don't think that quite enough, do you?


Augustus. O yes, papa, -- but what is that you have in your hand?


Lord Ormsby. Something that would not very well suit you yet; a sword, you see.


Augustus. What, is it for me? O, do let me have it, dear papa! and I will
always be so dutiful, and study so hard --


Lord Ormsby. If I could depend upon that! -- But perhaps you do not know that
a sword requires the carriage and manners of a gentleman; and that, if you wear
one, you must no longer consider yourself as a boy; that you must behave with
attention and decorum, and always remember, that it is not the part of the
sword to adorn the man, but the man the sword.


Augustus. O, that will be no difficulty. I shall understand very easily how to
adorn mine; and then I shall have nothing more to do with those lower sort of
people.


Lord Ormsby. Whom do you mean by those lower sort of people?


Augustus. Why, those that have no right to wear a sword, or a bag, and that
are not people of fashion, like you and me.


Lord Ormsby. Augustus, there are none, who, in my opinion, should be called
the lower sort of people, but those whose notions are mean, and whose actions
are yet worse, who are disobedient to their parents, and rude and ill-bred to
all others. I often, therefore, see many of the lower sort of people among the
first nobility, and many whom I think noble among those who appear to you the
lower sort of people.


Augustus. This is just what I think ^o.


Lord Ormsby. Why, then, did you talk just now of the right of wearing a sword
and a bag? Can you suppose the real dignity of people of rank consists in such
paltry ornaments? They may serve, indeed, to distinguish different stations of
life, because it is proper that different stations should be distinguished in
the world. But a rank the most exalted, will only make a man appear yet meaner,
if he is unworthy of filling it.


Augustus. So I think too, papa: but it will not make me appear meaner to have a
sword, and to wear it?


Lord Ormsby. Certainly not. I merely desire you to reflect that it is only by
your own good conduct you can merit this little mark of distinction. Take,
therefore, the sword; but remember well --


Augustus. O yes, papa, you shall see I will.


(He tries to put on the sword, but cannot manage it. Lord Ormsby buckles the
belt for him.) Lord Ormsby. Upon my honor, you don't look amiss in it.


Augustus. Don't I? O, I knew I should not.


Lord Ormsby. Bravo! Be careful, however, not to forget what I have said to
you. Adieu.

(He is going, but returns.) I have sent to invite some of your young friends
to come and spend your birthday with you. Pray remember that your behavior is
such as it ought to be.


Augustus. I will, papa.


SCENE III.
AUGUSTUS. (He walks about with an air of importance, looking from time to time
to see if his sword hangs right.) WELL, at last, then, I think I may call
myself a real gentleman! I should like, now, to meet some of the common sort of
gentry! I shall suffer no familiarity from any body that does not wear a sword;
and if they choose to take that amiss, -- have at them! I draw upon them in a
moment! But stop, let us see first if it has a good blade.

(He draws his sword, and pretends to fall in a passion.) How? are you laughing
at me, you little low fellow? one, -- two! -- What! do you dare defend
yourself? Die, dastard, die!

SCENE IV.
HARRIET, AUGUSTUS. (Harriet, hearing the last words, runs in screaming.) GOOD
God, Augustus, are you mad?

Augustus. What, is it you, sister?


Harriet. Yes, don't you see? But what are you doing with that thing there?
(pointing to his sw^^d.)


Augustus. What am I doing with it? Why, what every gentleman does with it.


Harriet. And who is it you are going to send out of the world in such a hurry?


Augustus. The very first person that takes the liberty to come in my way.


Harriet. There are lives enough in danger, then! And suppose it should happen
to be me?


Augustus. Why, if it should be you -- I would not much advise you to it. You
see I have now a sword. Papa himself made me a present of it.


Harriet. What, to let you go about, killing whoever you have a mind with it?


Augustus. Am I not a gentleman? Yes; and if any body fails to pay me proper
respect, bounce comes a blow! and if they choose to be impertinent, and don't
like it, out comes my sword!


(He is going to unsheathe it.) Harriet. O pray leave it alone, brother! But
for fear I should give you any offense, without knowing it, I should be glad if
you would tell me what all this respect is, that you are pleased to demand from
us.


Augustus. You shall soon know it. Papa has sent to invite some of my
play-fellows here; and if those little monkeys should not treat me properly,
you shall see how I shall behave to them.


Harriet. Very well: but I want to know what it is they are to do, in order to
treat you properly?


Augustus. In the first place, they must make me a bow down to the ground.


Harriet. making a low, curtsy, with pretended gravity. Your most obedient
humble servant, Sir. Is that right?


Augustus. None of your mocking, Harriet, or else --


Harriet. O, I am quite serious, I assure you. One ought to study how to do
one's duty to great people. There would be no harm if you were to teach your
play-fellows that.


Augustus. O, I shall make good sport with those little fellows, I promise you!
I shall push them, and pinch them, and worry them a thousand ways.


Harriet. You will do that, I suppose, as a mark of your being a gentleman? But
what if those little fellows should not approve such liberties? What if they
should return them by giving this fine gentleman a box on the ear?


Augustus. What, those little paltry cits, that have neither heart nor sword?


Harriet. Upon my word, papa could not have made you a more useful prese^^. He
certainly saw what a noble spirit lay hid in his son, and that nothing was
wanting but a sword to bring it to light.


Augustus. I tell you what, sister; this is my birthday, and so I must find
myself some amusement: but you must say nothing of it to papa.


Harriet. Why not? He would not have given you a sword, if he had not expected
some grand action from a fine gentleman, just new-armed. Did he tell you how
you were to use it?


Augustus. Yes, to be sure. You know he is always preaching to me.


Harriet. And what did he preach about?


Augustus. Dear, I don't know. That I was to adorn my sword, and not my sword
to adorn me; or some such thing.


Harriet. You have minded him vastly, then. To adorn you^ sword, is to know how
to employ it and you have shown already how well you know that.


Augustus. Very well, sister! You think to mock me, do you? but I shall teach
you --


Harriet. O, I know very well all that you can teach me. Put don't you see that
your sword looks quite awkward, for want of being dressed up with a proper
ornament?


Augustus. What is that? (He takes the sword out of the belt, and looks at it
very attentively.) I don't see the least thing in the world amiss in it.


Harriet. Upon my word, you are a most complete gentleman! But then a
sword-knot! O, how pretty a blue-and-silver bow would look upon this hilt!


Augustus. O, that is true: I tell you what, Harriet; you have a whole heap of
ribbands upon your toilette, and so --


Harriet. Why, I was thinking I would give you one, provided you will promise
first, that you will not come, by way of making me amends, and give me a great cut
with the edge of your sword, to show me what a valiant gentleman you are.


Augustus. What a simpleton! Come, here is my hand; touch, and be friends! You
have nothing to fear. But make haste, and be sure bring me a very pretty knot
now. When my company comes, I would have them see me in all my glory.


Harriet. Give me the sword, then.


Augustus. Here, take it; and make haste. You may put it on the table in my
room, and then I can get it when I am ready for it.


Harriet. You may depend upon me.


SCENE V.
AUGUSTUS, HARRIET, CLAYTON. CLAYTON. THE two Master Reynolds, and the two
Master Darbys are below.


Augustus. Very well! cannot they come up? Must I go down stairs to receive them?


Clayton. Your mama ordered me to tell you to come to them.


Augustus. No, no; I shall wait for them here.


Harriet. What, when mama says you must go down?


Augustus. It Is vastly well worth while to take all that trouble for them, to
be sure! However, I Will go presently. But pray, Ma'am, what are you standing
there for? How am I to have my sword-knot? Go, run, and let me find it all
ready upon my table. (As he is going out) Do you hear me?


SCENE VI.
HARRIET. WHAT an impertinent boy! how saucity he speaks to me! Luckily,
however, I have got the sword: to be sure, it is vastly well bestowed upon such
a quarrelsome little fellow as that. He shall wait some time before I give it
him again, though. Papa does not know him half so well as I do; but I shall
acquaint him with his airs. O, here he comes.

SCENE VII.
LORD ORMSBY and HARRIET. HARRIET. PAPA, I was just going to run and look for
you.


Lord Ormsby. What has put you in such haste? Why have you got your brother's
sword?


Harriet. I have promised him to put a handsome sword-knot on to it; but it was
only to get it out of his hands. Now pray, papa, don't let him have it any more.


Lord Ormsby. And why should I take back a present I have already given him?


Harriet. At least, then, papa, be so good as to keep it till he is less
passionate. I found him here, just now, fighting by himself, just like Don
Quixote; and cutting and thrusting with his sword against the wall; and
threatening that the first use he shall make of it shall be to conquer all his
play-fellows that are coming to see him.


Lord Ormsby. What a shatter-brain! If he thinks, however, to make use of it
for any such exploit, it will not turn out much to his honor, I promise you.
Give it me.


Harriet (giving it.) Here it is, papa. I think he is upon the stairs.


Lord Ormsby. Run and make up the knot, and when it is ready, bring it to me.


(They both go out.) SCENE VIII.
AUGUSTUS, WILLIAM and WALTER DARBY, and PHILIP and ROBERT REYNOLDS. (Augustus
comes in first with his hat on; the rest walk after him with their hats in
their hands.) WILLIAM (softly to Philip.) UPON my word, a most polite reception!


Philip. I suppose it is the fashion today, to receive company with one's hat
on, and to come into one's own room first.


Augustus. What are you grumbling about there?


William. Nothing at all, Master Augustus.


Augustus. Is it something I must not hear?


Philip. Perhaps it is.


Augustus. O, but I insist upon knowing it.


Philip. So you shall, when you have a right to make me tell you.


William. Softly, softly, Philip it is not proper to speak so bluntly in
another person's house.


Philip. It is still less proper, then, for people to be so ill-bred at home.


Augustus. Ill-bred? I ill-bred? what, because I walk in before you!


Philip. Yes, Sir, just that. Whenever we receive you at our house, or any body
else, we always go last ourselves.


Augustus. So you ought: but the difference between you and me --


Philip. Well, Sir, and what is the difference between you and me?


Augustus. Why, pray, what is your family?


Philip (to the two Darbys and his brother.) If you will take my advice, we'll
all go away, and leave him and his family to tire one another.


William. For shame, Master Augustus! If you think it below your dignity to
talk with us, what have you invited us for? We should none of us have begged
you to do us such a favor.


Augustus. It was not I that invited you, but papa.


Philip. O, very well, then, our best way will be to go and enquire for him,
and thank him for his civility; but tell him at the same time, that his son
thinks himself much dishonored by our visit. Come, brother.


Augustus (stopping him.) Why, you don't understand raillery! I Am sure I Am very
glad to see you, Master Reynolds. My papa did me a favor in inviting you,
because this is my birthday. Stay with me, therefore, pray.


Philip. O, with all my heart; only I must beg you to be a little more civil.
If I am not of quite so good a family as you are, I sha'n't suffer myself to be
affronted for nothing.


William. Well, don't mind it now, Philip; but let us all be friends again.


Walter. So, this is your birthday, then Master Augustus?


William. Pray let me wish you joy?


Philip. And I too; I wish you all sorts of happiness. And, above all, I wish
you to become a little more civil (aside.)


Robert. I suppose you have had a great many fine presents made you?


Augustus. Certainly.


Walter. Nothing like cakes, nothing to eat, I suppose?


Augustus. Ha! ha! Cakes, or something to eat! That would be worth having, to
be sure! Why, I have things of that sort every day.


Robert. No, no, I Will lay a wager it was money. A crown, or half-a-guinea, was
it not?


Augustus (proudly.) Something a little better than that, Sir! Something that
nobody in this room but me is of importance enough to wear.


(Philip and William walk apart, and whisper.) Robert. Whatever it is, I
suppose, if they had given it to me, I could wear it as well as any body else.


Augustus (looking at him with disdain.) Poor little fellow!


(To the others.) WHAT are you muttering together, you two? I thought you were
come here to help to entertain me.

William. Well, please to give us some opportunity.


Philip. I thought those that receive their friends, were the persons to find
the entertainment.


Augustus. Pray what do you mean by that, Mr. Philip?


SCENE IX.
WILLIAM, WALTER, PHILIP, ROBERT, AUGUSTUS, and HARRIET. HARRIET (bringing in a
cake.) YOUR servant, gentlemen; I hope you are all very well?


Philip. Yes, Miss Harriet, we are very much obliged to you. (Bowing.)


William. I am sure we are very glad you are so good as to come in among us.


Harriet. You are all very obliging. Brother, mama sends you this cake for your
friends; and she will send you some orgeat for them presently. Clayton will
bring it in, and will stay and pour it out for the company.


Philip. That will be doing us a great favor, indeed, Miss Harriet.


Augustus. No, no, we don't want you here. -- But pray, (whispering,) where is
my sword-knot?


Harriet. You will find both the sword and the knot in your own room. Good-by,
Master Darbys; good-by, Master Reynolds, till I have the pleasure of seeing you
again.


Philip. Will Not you return soon, Miss Harriet?


Harriet. I Will go and ask leave of mama.


SCENE X.
WILLIAM, WALTER, PHILIP, ROBERT, AUGUSTUS. AUGUSTUS (sitting down.) COME, get
chairs, all of you, and be seated.


(They look at one another, but sit down without speaking. Augustus gives one
cake to the two younger brothers, after eating so much himself, that none is
left for the two elder.) WELL, it is all done: but wait a little; for thy'll
soon bring in more, and then I Will help you.

Philip. We don't expect any, I assure you.


Augustus. So much the better.


William. If this is the politeness of a gentleman of family --


Augustus. It would be well worth while to incommode myself for such sort of
gentry as you! Have not I told you already they will bring us something else?
You may then take it, or let it alone. Do you understand what I say?


Philip. Yes, yes, it is very clear. And it is very clear, too, what a fine
gentleman we are visiting!


William. What, are you going to begin quarrelling again? Fie, Master Augustus!
fie, Philip!


(Augustus rises, and they all get up.) Augustus (advancing to Philip.) Whom do
you think yourself with, you little impertinent young cit?


Philip (steadily.) With a little impertinent young nobleman, very rude, and
very insolent, who thinks a great deal better of himself than he ought to do,
and who knows nothing at all of the manner in which well-bred people behave to
one another!


William. We are all of the same opinion about that, Master Augustus.


Augustus. I, rude, and impertinent! Do you dare say so to me, who shall be a
lord when papa dies?


Philip. Yes, and I say it again, a little impertinent young nobleman, very
rude, and very insolent! and I would say it if you were a duke, and say it if
you were a prince!


Augustus (striking him.) I Will teach you to know better, then, whom you have to
deal with.


(Philip tries to lay hold of him; but he escapes, and runs out of the room,
pulling the door after him.) SCENE XI.
PHILIP, ROBERT, WILLIAM, WALTER. WILLIAM. HOW very wrong this is, Philip! He
is gone, now, to find his father; and he will tell him a hundred falsehoods:
and then, what will he think of us?


Philip. His father is a man of honor; and I will go and find him myself, if
Augustus does not. I am certain he did not mean to have us asked here, on
purpose to be ill treated by his son.


Walter. I dare say, now, he will have us sent home, and make complaints
against us.


Robert. No; my brother has behaved very well: and our papa will approve all he
has done, as soon as we tell him how it happened. He does not like to have any
body use his children ill, I assure you.


Philip. Follow me, and we'll all go together to Lord Ormsby.


SCENE XII.
PHILIP, ROBERT, WILLIAM, WALTER, AUGUSTUS. (Augustus enters with his sword,
sheathed, in his hand. Robert and Walter run away frightened, one into a
corner, the other behind a sofa. Philip and William stand still and steady.)
AUGUSTUS (approaching Philip.) NOW, then! I shall teach you now, you
impertinent little wretch --


(He pulls the sword out of the scabbard, but, instead of a blade, draws out a
long turkey's feather. He stops, and starts with shame and disappointment.
Walter and Robert burst into a loud fit of laughter, and come forward.) Philip.
Come on, then! try the strength of your sword, young Lord -- that is to be!


William. Don't add to his confusion. He merits nothing but disdain.


Robert. O ho! then, Master Augustus, this is the thing, is it, that nobody in
this room is of importance enough to wear but you?


Walter. He will do nobody any harm, though, with his terrible arms! that is one
comfort.


Philip. I might now punish you for your ill behavior, but I should be ashamed
of such a revenge.


William. He does not any longer deserve to be one of our companions: let us
all leave him to himself.


Robert. Good-by to you, young gentleman, with your fine feather sword!


Walter. We will not come any more till you are disarmed, bacause we are afraid of
you with that bloody blade.


(They are going.) Philip (stopping them.) No, we had better stay a little, and
give an account of ourselves to Lord Ormsby; because otherwise, if he does not
see us, every thing will make against us.


William. Very true; for what could he think of our going away without taking
leave of him?


SCENE XIII.
LORD ORMSBY, AUGUSTUS, PHILIP, ROBERT, WILLIAM and WALTER. (They all how very
respectfully to Lord Ormsby: Augustus gets behind them, and cries with
passion.) Lord ORMSBY (looking angrily at Augustus.) WHAT does all this mean,
Sir?


(Augustus cannot speak for sobbing.) Philip. I hope your Lordship will pardon
the confusion you find us in; but indeed it is not our fault. From the moment
of our arrival, Master Augustus has behaved to us --


Lord Ormsby. Don't be uneasy, my young friend, I am well acquainted with the
whole affair. I have only been in the next room, where I heard, from the
beginning, all the impertinence of my son: and what renders him still more
inexcusable, is, that he had, but the moment before, given me a thousand fair
promises of behaving with propriety. I have long had a suspicion of his
insolence, and I was curious to know how far he would carry it. Yet, to avoid
any mischief, I had, as you see, a blade put to his sword which ran no risk of
drawing blood.


(Robert and Walter burst into a loud laugh.) Philip. I hope your Lordship will
pardon the liberty I have taken in telling him, rather bluntly, some home
truths.


Lord Ormsby. Pardon! I am even obliged to you. You are a very brave young man;
and you deserve, far more than he does, to be trusted with the arms of a
gentleman. As a mark both of my esteem and my gratitude, you must accept,
therefore, this sword; though not till I have restored to it a blade more
worthy of you, and which I am sure you will not abuse.


Philip. I am quite ashamed of so much goodness, my Lord: but pray give us
leave to retire; our company can be very little desired any longer by Master
Augustus today.


Lord Ormsby. No, no, my good young friends, you must not go. The presence of
my son shall be no interruption to your amusement. You can find diversion for
yourselves, and Harriet shall try to contribute to your entertainment. Come and
follow me into another room. As to you, Sir, (addressing himself to Augustus)
you will please to stay where you are. You may celebrate your birthday by
yourself. You shall never have a sword till you merit to wear one, and till it
ceases to be necessary to watch over you without one.


PHILIPPA AND MAXIMILIAN.
MRS. CARLTON was left a widow very young, with two children, named Philippa
and Maximilian. Each of them alike merited her tenderness, though it was
bestowed upon them with the greatest inequality. Philippa, notwithstanding her
youth, was very sensible of her mama's partiality in favor of her brother;
but, however unhappy it sometimes made her, she concealed in her own litt^^
^osom, all the uneasiness which it caused her.

HER face and figure, though not frightfully ugly, were by no means upon a par
with her heart and understanding: while her brother was as beautiful as a
little Cupid. Mrs. Car^^ton reserved for him all her fondness and caresses; and
even the servants of the house, in order to make their court to their mistress,
seemed to think of nothing but diverting him, and complying with all his
humors. Philippa, on the contrary, because always checked and reproved by her
mother, was certain of being treated still worse by the domestics. Far from
studying her inclinations, they did not even supply her with necessaries. When
she found herself quite alone, and thought herself deserted and forgotten, she
sometimes burst into a flood of tears; but never, before any witnesses,
suffered the smallest complaint to escape her, or showed the least sign of
discontent. It was in vain she strove, by a constant application to all her
tasks, by gentleness, and the most active desire of obliging, to make amends in
the sight of her mother for what she wanted in beauty: the qualities of the
mind are lost upon those who accustom themselves to value nothing but outward
appearances. Mrs. Carleton, little moved by the proofs of duty or regard she
received from Philippa, especially since the death of her father, seemed never
even to look at her without reluctance. She reprimanded her perpetually; and
required from her such perfection, as ought not, with justice, to have been
expected, even from an age and understanding far more advan^ed.

THIS unjust parent at length had a fit of sickness. Maximilian appeared very
truly concerned for her sufferings; but Philippa, who in the ^^^guid looks and
sunk features of her mama, fancied she perceived an abatement of her usual
rigor, far exceeded her brother in her attentions and tenderness. She watched
every turn of her eye, that she might discover her wishes, and save her the
trouble of speaking them, by bringing of her own accord whatever she thought it
likely she could want. She would not once quit her bedside while there was any
appearance of danger; and neither entreaties nor commands could prevail with
her to take a moment's rest.

MRS. Carlton, however, at length recovered. This much-desired restoration of
health removed all the fears of Philippa; but her unhappiness returned at the
same time, when she found her mother as harsh with her as ever.

ONE day, when Mrs. Carlton was conversing with her children upon the misery
she had suffered in her illness, and was thanking them both for the kindness
with which they had nursed and attended her; she said: My dear children, you
may each of you ask from me whatever you think will give you most pleasure: and
I will promise to grant it, be it what it may, so that it does not exceed the
limits of my income. What should you like, Maximilian? addressing herself first
to her son. A watch and a sword, mama, he answered. -- You shall have them both
tomorrow, as soon as you rise. And you, Philippa, what will you have? -- M^?
mama, me? cried Philippa, trembling, O, I want nothing at all, if you do but
love me. -- That is no answer, child; I mean to give you, also, some recompense
for your attention to me. What, therefore, should you like? Sp^^^, when I bid
you. Philippa, though accustomed to this severity, felt more than usually hurt
by it upon the present occasion. She threw herself upon her knees before her
mother's chair, and looked up to her with her eyes full of tears; then, hiding
her face with both her hands, she stammered out: Give to me, then, only two
such kisses as you gave my brother!

MRS. Carlton, touched at heart by this unexpected request, felt awakened at
that moment all those sentiments of affection for her daughter, which hitherto
had been stifled. She took her in her arms, pressed her fondly to her bosom,
and kissed her a thousand times. Philippa, who now first received from her
mother any marks of her kindness, gave herself wholly up to joy; kissing, in
her transport, her eyes, her cheeks, her hair, her hands, and her gown.
Maximilian, who had never been able to help loving his sister, joined in their
mutual caresses: and they all three enjoyed a happiness which was not limited
to that short instant. Mrs. Carlton, henceforward, bestowed with interest upon
Philippa all the fondness she had hitherto denied her; and Philippa returned it
with still increasing attachment. Maximilian, far from being jealous, made his
sister's felicity a pleasure to himself; and he found in a short time the
reward of this generosity. The natural goodness of his disposition had been
somewhat injured by the weakness and blindness of his mother; and as he grew
up, many little follies and errors escaped him, that might have weaned her love
from him, had not Philippa always made it her study to excuse him. The good
advice which, from time to time, she gave to him, brought him back into the
right road; and they all three learnt this lesson from their own experience:
That there can be no happiness in any family without the most perfect union
between brothers and sisters, and the most equal and impartial tenderness to
them from their parents.

THE LAMB.
LITTLE Phebe, a poor shepherd's daughter, was sitting one morning by the side
of a great road, holding upon her lap a porringer of milk, into which she was
dipping some brown bread for her breakfast.

DURING this little repast, a carrier came the same way, who was driving twenty
live lambs to market, in a cart. These poor little animals, heaped one upon
another with their legs tied, and their heads drooping, filled the air with the
most sorrowful bleatings, which went to the very heart of Phebe, though the
carrier heard them without pity. When he came up to her, he flung a poor little
lamb before her, that he was carrying by the heels, upon his shoulder. There,
child, cried he, there is a good-for-nothing beast for you, that has just died,
to cheat me of a crown. Take it, if you will, and make yourself a feast with it.

PHEBE immediately left off eating her breakfast, and, putting the porringer
and the bread on the ground, took the lamb in her arms, and looked at it with
the utmost compassion.

POOR little creature! cried she; yet why should I be sorry for you? Today, or
tomorrow, they would only have taken a great knife, and cut your poor throat;
and now, instead of that, you have nothing more to go through. While she was
talking to it in this manner, the lamb, growing warm again in her arms, began
to open its eyes and move, and made a fain^ bleating cry, as if pining for its
dam.

IT would be difficult to describe the joy of Phebe at the sound of its voice.
She wrapped it up in her apron, then covered it over again with her fustian
coat, and bent her neck almost down upon her knees to keep it warmer,
breathing, at the same time, with all her might, into its nostrils. By little
and little, she felt the poor animal revive, and her own heart beat with joy
every time it showed any signs of life. Encouraged by this success, she rolled
up some crumbs in her hands, put them into her porringer, and taking them out
with her fingers, contrived, though not without much difficulty, to force them
between its teeth, though they were shut very close. The Lamb, who was only
dying from want, felt itself a little strengthened by this nourishment. She now
began to stretch out her legs, and shake her head and her tail, and perk up her
ears; and soon after, she was so much better as to stand upon her feet; and
then, seeing the porringer with Phebe's breakfast, she went and drank out of it
herself, to the great delight of the little girl. In short, a quarter of an
hour had hardly passed, before she was so well recovered, as to cut a thousand
capers round her new little mistress. Phebe, in a transport of joy, took her in
her arms, and running with her into the cottage, showed her to her mother.
Little Baalam, as she now called her, became from this time the object of all
her cares. She always shared with her the bread and milk she was allowed from
her own meals; and she would not have parted with this one little lamb, for the
largest flock of sheep in the village. Baalam was so grateful for her kindness,
that she was never a step disstant from her. She would eat out of her hand, and
frisk perpetually round about her; and whenever Phebe was forced to go out
without her, the most plaintive bleating spoke her sorrow at the parting.

THE pity and goodnature of Phebe, however, had still a greater recompense.
Baalam was soon the mother of several other little lambs, who, in their turn,
grew the mother of more: so that, in a few years, Phebe had a very pretty flock
of sheep, entirely her own; which fed the family with their milk, and supplied
them with clothes from their wool.

THE VINE-STALK.
IN the beginning of the spring, Mr. Sefton took a walk one day about his
country house, with his son Jerry. The violets and primroses were in full blow;
and many of the trees were already budding forth their green leaves, while
others were bright and gay with white or crimson blossoms, that promised the
finest fruits. They strolled on till they came to an alley of lattice-work, at
the foot of which was planted a vine, whose rough and crooked stem spread,
without beauty or order, its brown and naked stalk all over the lattice. Papa,
cried Jerry, do you see this ugly tree, that looks as if it was staring and
making faces at us? Why should not we tear it up, and give it the gardener to
heat his oven?

JERRY then began pulling at it as hard as he could, in order to force it up by
the roots; but the roots were too deep in the earth for his strength. Pray let
it alone, cried Mr. Sefton; I will not have it removed. I shall tell you, in
due time, my reasons.

Jerry. But only look, papa, at those beautiful blossoms of the almond and
peach trees! why should not the vine be as pretty too, if it has a mind not to
be pulled up? It spoils and destroys the whole look of every thing. Shall I go
and tell the gardener to come and drag it away?


Mr. Sefton. No, my dear, I would have it stay where it is, a little while
longer.


JERRY still persisted in abusing it: his father endeavored to turn his
attention upon other objects; and, at last, the unfortunate vine-stalk was
forgotten.

MR. Sefton's affairs, soon after, carried him to a town at some distance,
where he was detained till the autumn.

HIS first care then, was to visit his country seat; and he again took his
little son with him. The weather was extremely hot, and they sought shelter
from the rays of the sun, by walking in the alley of lattice-work.

AH, papa! cried Jerry, how beautiful is this green, and this shade! How glad I
am you made them take away that nasty dry old wood that I was so vexed to see
in the spring, and surprise me by putting in its place the most charming tree
that ever I saw in my life! What delightful fruit it has! Only look at these
fine grapes, some green, some purple, others almost black! There is not one
single tree in the whole garden that makes so good a figure as this. Almost all
the rest have lost their fruit; but this, only look, papa, how it is covered!
see what thick clusters there are under all these large green leaves! I should
like to know whether they are as sweet-tasted as they are pretty.

MR. Sefton gave him one to make trial of. It was the muscadine sort. His
transports were now increased; and still more, when his father informed him,
that it was from pressing these grapes that the delightful juice was produced
which he sometimes had tasted at table, after dinner.

I see, my dear, how you are surprised, said Mr. Sefton; but your amazement
will be yet greater, when I tell you that this is the very same tree, so dry,
brown, twisted, and sprawling, which you so much scoffed at in the spring.
Shall I now, then, call the gardener, and tell him to root it up, and heat his
oven with it?

O, not for the world, papa! I would rather have him root up every tree in the
garden. That muscadine is so good!

Mr. Sefton. You see, then, Jerry, how well I did, not to follow your advice.
What has happened to you, frequently happens in life. At sight of an
ill-dressed or ugly child, the richer and happier are but too apt to despise
him; to grow proud by being compared with him, and even to have the cruelty to
insult and deride him. Be careful, my Jerry, of ever forming such hasty
judgments. Perhaps in that very outside to which nature has been so unkind,
there may reside a soul, that one day may astonish the world by the greatness
of its virtues, or instruct and benefit mankind by its extraordinary talents.
The stalk may be rough, where the fruit is the finest and best flavoured.


CAROLINE.
THE little Caroline, who has already been mentioned in the first volume, was
one day playing about her mother, while she was employed in writing letters.
The hairdresser being in waiting, Mrs. P. desired him to go into the next room,
and thin the child's hair. Instead, however, of merely thinning it, the man
continued to cut off lock after lock, till scarcely a hair remained on her
head. Her mother came into the room just as this provoking mistake of her
orders had taken place. Ah, my poor Caroline! cried she, half-screaming, you
have lost all your beautiful hair! Don't vex yourself, mama, cried Caroline,
simply; for it is not lost; it is put safe up in that drawer.

IN the summer, during her stay in the country, a chicken was brought upon the
table at dinner. Mrs. P. who dined alone with her children, after helping her
eldest daughter, gave a bit to Caroline. No, thank you, mama, cried she,
sighing, I would rather not eat any. -- And why not, my dear? -- Because, mama,
that chicken and I used to see one another every day, and we quite lived
together; for I always used to feed it myself. -- But your sister has eat some
of it. -- O yes, my sister may eat it without any harm; for she did not know it
half so well as I did.

WHAT may not in future be expected from a child who has given such early
proofs of the ingenuousness of her mind, and the tenderness of her heart? May
she but more and more resemble her admirable mother, and all that her most
ardent friends can wish for her will be effected!

THE FARMER.
AS Mr. Dodwell was one day shut up in his library, where he was settling some
affairs of importance, a servant came to tell him that farmer Mathews, one of
his tenants, was at the street-door, and desired to speak with him. Mr. Dodwell
gave orders that he should be shown into the antichamber, and desired to wait
there for a few minutes, while he finished his business.

ROGER, Alexander, and Sophy, three children of Mr. Dodwell, were in the
antichamber at the time farmer Mathews was carried there. He made them the
most respectful bow as he came into the room, though it was easy to discover he
had never received any lessons from a dancing master. Neither was his language,
nor his manner of speaking to them, at all more courtly.

THE two little boys looked and smiled at one another, with an air of ridicule.
They examined the honest farmer from head to foot, with a disdainful eye,
whispered one another in the ear, and burst out into such shouts of laughter,
that the poor man colored, and knew not which way to turn himself.

ROGER even carried his ill-breeding so far, as to hold his nostrils, and call
out to his brother: Alexander, Lord! what a strong smell here is of dung! He
then went for a chafing dish of hot coals, with which he walked up and down the
chamber, burning paper and sealing-wax, to take off, he said, the bad odor. He
next rung for one of the servants, and told him to bring a broom, and sweep
away the dirt that poor Mathews had made upon the floor with his shoes. Mean
while, Alexander held his sides with laughter at the impertinence of his
brother.

IT was not the same with their sister Sophy. Far from imitating the rudeness
of her brothers, she reproved them for their want of civility, endeavored to
make excuses to the farmer, and going up to him with a look of great sweetness,
she asked if he would have any wine to refresh himself, made him sit down, and
took his hat and stick herself, and put them upon the table.

AT this time Mr. Dodwell entered the room. He advanced with a friendly air to
Mathews, took him by the hand, enquired after his wife and children, and what
was the business which had ^de him come to town.

I have brought you my quarter's rent, Sir, answered Mathews, ^rawing from his
pocket a leather bag full of money. Don't be angry that I am two or three days
behind my time; for the roads are so broken up, that I could not any sooner
carry my corn to market.

I am not angry with you at all, answered Mr. Dodwell; I know you are a very
honest man, and that there is no need to remind you of your debts.

AND then he ordered a table to be brought forward, for the farmer to count his
money upon.

ROGER stared very hard at the sight of Mathew's crowns and half-guineas, and
looked at him now with a little less contempt.

When Mr. Dodwell had examined the farmer's accounts, and praised his
exactness, the good man produced a basket of dried fruit, which he had baked:
See, Sir, cried he, I have brought this for your young gentlefolks. Will Not you
let them come, some day, Sir, to take a little country air? I Will feast them the
best I can, and try if I cannot find them some amusement. I have got very good
horses; and I can come for them myself, and bring them back at night in my
chaise-cart. Mr. Dodwell promised he would himself go and see him, and begged
him to stay to dinner. Mathews thanked him for his kind invitation, but excused
himself from accepting it, because he had some purchases to make in town, and
was in great haste to get back to his farm.

MR. Dodwell had his basket then filled with cakes to carry to his children,
and tha^^ed him for the present he had brought to his own; and, after wishing
him strength for his hard labor, and health to support his family, he saw him
to the head of the stairs, and then bid him good-day.

HE was no sooner gone, than Sophy, before both her brothers, told her father
how rudely they had behaved to honest Mathews upon his arrival.

MR. Dodwell expressed much displeasure at Roger and Alexander, and, at the
same time, warmly praised Sophy for the difference of her conduct. I am glad to
see, said he, kissing her tenderly, that my dear Sophy so well knows what
civility is due to all honest people.

IT was now breakfast time; and he ordered the farmer's dried fruits to be
brought upon the table, and eat part of them himself, with his daughter. They
both found them very good. Roger and Alexander breakfasted at the same time,
but were neither of them invited to partake of the fruit. With their eyes,
however, they devoured it all.

MR. Dodwell pretended not to observe them; but again began a praise of Sophy,
charging her never to despise any body on account of the plainness of their
clothes: Because, said he, if we only are well-bred to those who are finely
dressed, it will seem as if our politeness was to the gown, or the coat, and
not to the persons who wear them. Those who are the worst dressed, are
sometimes the best people. Mathews is an example of this himself: he not only
manages, by his industry, to maintain himself, and his wife, and his children;
but, for these four years that he has been my tenant, he has paid his rent with
such exactness, that I have never once had to call upon him for his money. You
don't know, perhaps, my dear Sophy, that if this man were less honest, I could
not myself supply all the expenses of you and your brothers. It is he, in fact,
who buys you clothes, and procures you a good education; for all that I receive
from him, I reserve entirely for your dress, and your different masters.

WHEN breakfast was over, Mr. Dodwell gave orders to have the rest of the fruit
locked up in a buffet. Roger and Alexander looked greedily after it; though
they easily understood it was not preserved for their sakes.

THEIR father confirmed this disappointment to them. Expect not, he said, to
taste, either today, or any other day, those fruits. When the farmer, who
brought them for you, has better reason to be satisfied with your behavior. he
will not forget to send you more.

Roger. But, papa, was it any fault of mine that he has such a bad smell with
him?


Mr. Dodwell. What smell?


Roger. O, such a strong smell of dung, there was no bearing it!


Mr. Dodwell. And where could he get that smell?


Roger. Why, he is all day long working in the midst of it in his fields.


Mr. Dodwell. What should he do to prevent it, then?


Roger. Wy he should... he should...


Mr. Dodwell. Perhaps he should never put any dung upon his lands?


Roger. That would be the only way, papa.


Mr. Dodwell. But if he did not improve his lands by manuring them, how would
he gather in a plentiful crop from them? and if he had a bad one, how would he
manage to pay me rent for his farm?


ROGER was going to answer; but his father gave him a look, in which both he
and Alexander read his displeasure, and were silenced.

THE following Monday, early in the morning, the good Mathews was at Mr.
Dodwell's door. He sent up to him, to know if he should like to come and take a
turn about his farm. Mr. Dodwell, pleased with his civility, would not mortify
him by a refusal. Roger and Alexander earnestly begged to be admitted of the
party, and made many promises to behave better.

MR. Dodwell complied with their entreaties; and they jumped into the
chaise-cart with much delight: and, as the farmer had excellent horses, and
drove well, they came to his house before they knew where they were

WHAT could equal their happiness when the carriage stopped! Mathews' wife
came, with an air of the utmost satisfaction, to the door, gave them a joyful
^eception as she opened it, took the children in her arms to help them out,
kissed them cordially, and led them into the farm-yard.

ALL her own children were already there in their best clothes. How do you do?
and, You are very welcome, they all cried to their young guests, while they
bowed and curtsied with the utmost respect. Mr. Dodwell wished much to talk a
little with them, and caress them; but dame Mathews entreated him to come in,
for fear the coffee and rolls should grow cold, which she had got for their
breakfast.

IT was all ready, and upon a table covered over with the whitest cloth. It was
not, indeed, served in silver, nor even in china; but though the delft was
ordinary, it was perfectly clean and neat.

ROGER and Alexander looked slyly at each other, and would have shouted with
laughter, but from fear of making their papa angry. Dame Mathews, however, saw
by their grimaces what passed in their minds: she made an excuse, that her
things were no better; and said, that to be sure they would have been helped in
finer dishes at their own house, but that they must take in good part what was
given them with a hearty welcome.

BESIDE the rolls, they had some homemade cakes, which were so extremely good,
that it was easy to discover the hospitable woman had exerted her utmost skill
both in making and baking them.

AFTER breakfast, Mathews begged Mr. Dodwell to give a look at his orchard and
his grounds. Dame Mathews used her utmost endeavors to make this walk pleasant
to the children. She showed them her flocks of sheep, with which the meadows
were covered, and picked out some of the prettiest little lambs for them to
play with. She next carried them to her pigeon-house, where every thing was
neat and clean. Upon the ground there were two young doves, that were just
quitting their nests, but not yet bold enough to venture to trust to their own
little fluttering wings. Some of the females were sitting upon eggs in their
small houses; and others were occupied by feeding their young, but just coming
out of their shells.

FROM the pigeon-house they went to the bee-hives. Dame Mathews took care not
to let them come too near, yet placed them where they could plainly see the
little creatures at work.

AS the greatest part of these things was quite new to them both, they appeared
extremely entertained with them: and they were even begging to look at them all
a second time, when Tommy, the farmer's youngest son, ran to tell them that
dinner was waiting.

IT was served upon pewter dishes, and it was helped in earthen plates: but
Roger and Alexander were both put into such good humor by all they had been
looking at in the morning, that they were ashamed to give way any longer to
their turn for ridicule. They found every thing nice and well dressed; for dame
Mathews had done the best she possibly could to regale them.

WHILE they were eating fruit after dinner, Mr. Dodwell perceived two fiddles
hanging up against the wall. Who have you that plays upon these instruments
here? said he. My eldest boy and myself, answered the farmer; and, without a
word more, he made a sign to his son to unhook the violins. They then took it
in turn to play some little old ballads, now of a mournful cast, and now gay
and jolly, with such readiness, and so much desire of obliging, that Mr.
Dodwell both felt and expressed the utmost satisfaction at their performance.

WHEN they were going to hang up the instruments again in their places, No, no,
cried Mr. Dodwell, it is now your turns, Roger and Alexander, to try what you
can do for our entertainment. Come, play us some of your prettiest tunes. In
saying these words, he put the violins into their hands; but they knew not how
even to hold the bow, and their aukwardness and confusion raised a general
laugh.

MR. Dodwell then begged the farmer to order his horses out, that they might
return home. Mathews was very urgent in pressing them to stay all night; but
Mr. Dodwell could spare no more time, and therefore they took leave.

WELL, Roger, said Mr. Dodwell, in their way home, how do you find yourself
after your little journey?

Roger. Very well, papa. Those good people did the best they could to entertain
us.


Mr. Dodwell. I am very happy you are satisfied. But if Mathews had taken no
trouble in doing the honors of his house to you, and if he had not given you
any refreshment, should you have been as well pleased as you are now?


Roger. No, certainly, papa.


Mr. Dodwell. What should you have thought of him?


Roger. That he was a brutish clown.


Mr. Dodwell. O Roger, Roger! when this honest man came to our house, far from
offering him the smallest refreshment, you only laughed at him, and turned him
into ridicule! Who, then, best understands good manners, you, or the farmer?


Roger (coloring.) But it is his duty to receive us well; he gets his living
out of our estate.


Mr. Dodwell. And how?


Roger. Why, by the harvests from our fields, and the hay from our meadows.


Mr. Dodwell. True; but what does he do with the corn?


Roger. He lives upon it; he, and his wife, and his children.


Mr. Dodwell. And what with the hay?


Roger. He gives that to his horses.


Mr. Dodwell. And what does he do with his horses?


Roger. He employs them in tilling the ground.


Mr. Dodwell. You see, therefore, that some part of what he takes from the
ground, is turned, in the end, to its own benefit. But do you suppose he
consumes all it produces among his own family, and his horses?


Roger. No, the cows have their share too.


Alexander. Yes, and the sheep, and the pigeons, and the chickens.


Mr. Dodwell. Very true; but do his family, and his cattle together, consume
his whole crops?


Roger. No; for I remember I heard him say once that he carried part of it to
market to make money of it.


Mr. Dodwell. And what does he do with that money?


Roger. Why, papa, last week, you know, he brought a leather bag quite full of
it to you.


Mr. Dodwell. Who, then, at last, has the greater profit from the farm,
Mathews, or your father? It is true, indeed, he feeds his horses with the hay
he makes out of my meadows; but those horses are employed in tilling the land,
which, otherwise, would be overrun with weeds. He feeds, also, as you say, his
sheep and his cows with the same hay; but they supply dung for the ground that
lies fallow, which again makes it fertile. His wife and children, too, live
upon the corn reaped in the harvests; but they spend the summer in weeding that
corn, and then threshing it in the barns: and all this, in the conclusion, is
my own advantage. The overplus of his crops, he carries to sell at market; but
is it not to pay me his rent, that he gets the money? And as to what may
remain, after I have received my dues, does he not well deserve what his own
industry procures him? Once more, then, tell me, who is it has the greatest
profit, he or I?


Roger. Why -- I see now it is you.


Mr. Dodwell. And what profit should I have without his labors?


Roger. O, there are enough other farmers in the world!


Mr. Dodwell. True; but there are not any more valuable than this man. The
tenant who rented this very farm of me before I let it to Mathews, cut down the
trees, exhausted the soil, and suffered the barns and outhouses to run to
ruin. When the quarter-days came, he was never ready with his money; and when I
complained to him of his neglect, he represented to me that the whole farm was
not able to produce enough to pay me.


Roger. O, what a rogue!


Mr. Dodwell. If Mathews was just such another, do you think I should make much
of my estate?


Roger. Why, no.


Mr. Dodwell. Whom, then, am I obliged to for what I get from it?


Roger. Why, Sir, to this honest farmer.


Mr. Dodwell. Is it not then, our duty to behave well to a man who is so useful
to us?


Roger. Ah, papa! you make me quite ashamed of myself!


THEY were now for some minutes all silent: Mr. Dodwell then again renewed the
conversation.

WHY would you not play upon the fiddle, Roger?

Roger. You know, papa, I was never taught.


Mr. Dodwell. Farmer Mathew's son, then, knows something more than you do?


Roger. Yes, papa; but he does not understand Latin, as I do.


Mr. Dodwell. And do you, Roger, understand farming? can you follow the plough?
can you tell how to sow wheat, barley, oats, and all sorts of grain? Do you
know how they are cultivated? Can you even tell how to prune a vine, or raise a
fruit-tree, so as to make it bear?


Roger. I am no farmer; so I have no occasion to know such things as those.


Mr. Dodwell. And if every body in the world knew nothing but Latin, how do you
think we should all live?


Roger. Why, very ill; for we should not know how to get bread, nor vegetables.


Mr. Dodwell. And do you think the world could go on, if not even one single
person in it knew any Latin?


Roger. Why -- yes.


Mr. Dodwell. Remember, then, as long as you live, what you have just now heard
and seen. This farmer, so coarse in his dress, so awkward in his bow, so
uncouth in his compliments, this very farmer whom you so despised, is a man
infinitely more polite than yourself, and knows many more things than you do,
and these things all far more useful than any with which you can pretend to
compare them. You see, therefore, now, the folly and injustice of holding any
one in contempt for the plainness of his dress, or the want of polished
elegance in his manners.


THE FATHERS RECONCILED BY THEIR CHILDREN. A DRAMA IN ONE ACT.
PERSONS.
Mr. CLAREMONT. CONSTANTINE, his son. AMELIA, his daughter. THOMAS, son to the
physician of the Village. JENNY, his sister.
(The Scene is in a garden, under the windows of Mr. Claremont's house. On one
side is an arbor and at the end of the stage a thick grove.)

THE FATHERS RECONCILED BY THEIR CHILDREN.
SCENE I.
Mr. CLAREMONT, AMELIA, and CONSTANTINE. AMELIA. BUT, papa --


Mr. Claremont. Once again I repeat, that neither you nor your brother, upon
pain of incurring my utmost displeasure, must have any thing further either to
say or do with Doctor Goodwin's children.


Amelia. And what is it, papa, that has made you so angry with Doctor Goodwin?


Mr. Claremont. Must I tell you my reasons?


Constantine. No, certainly, Sir: it does not become us to ask you any such
questions. When papa gives us any orders, Amelia, we ought to obey him, without
a word.


Mr. Claremont. In truth, so I should think! Dr. Goodwin is an obstinate and
quarrelsome man. Ungrateful as he is! to deny any thing to me, that am his
landlord, and to whom he is indebted for all his fortune and prosperity!


Constantine. It Is quite abominable, papa: and, for my own part, I cannot
imagine why we have so long been in such intimacy with his children; for what
are they, after all, compared to us? I am sure, as to Tommy, if we had had any
one young gentleman in our neighborhood, I should never have spoken a single
word to him.


Amelia. O papa, how can you bear to hear my brother talk so! Tommy and Jenny
are both so good, and so amiable! I am sure we might think ourselves very happy
if we were like them.


Mr. Claremont. What is it to me whether they are good or bad? Once more, I lay
my commands upon you never to play with them, nor talk to them, if you would
not for the future, be confined wholly to the house.


Constantine. O, if Tom should only presume to come and stroll round the walls
of our garden, I promise you, I --


Mr. Claremont. What are you thinking of, Constantine? I do not mean to have
them ill-treated, nor offered the slightest affront.


Constantine (confused.) No, nor I don't mean that neither. I only say that I
will not let them come within an hundred yards of the house. I shall keep a
good watch over them.


Amelia. Papa, you used to be so fond of Dr. Goodwin! You thought him such a
worthy man, so sensible, so clever! and he taught my brother Latin, and he
taught me to spell, you know, papa, before we had this other master.


Mr. Claremont. Well, well, all this may have been in old times; but I will not
have you say another word about him. I shall have nothing more to do with him,
and you must have nothing more to do with his children. -- Why, how now! are
you crying? Please to dry your eyes, Miss Amelia! have you so little regard for
your father's desires, that you are to shed tears in obeying them?


Amelia. No, indeed, papa! Only forgive me this one last little mark of my love
for them, because I cannot help it. But I will not be more undutiful than my
brother, for all that.


Constantine. We shall see which will be most obedient.


Amelia. You will not order me, I hope, though, to hate them? Indeed, if you do,
papa, it will not be in my power to obey that.


Mr. Claremont. I don't desire you either to hate them, or to treat them ill;
but merely to drop all acquaintance with them.


Amelia. I Will do every thing you bid me, to be sure, papa. But I have one
favor I want to ask, sadly!


Mr. Claremont. What is it?


Amelia. It is only to speak to them just one single time, to tell them what
you have ordered.


Constantine. What good will that do, now all is broken off?


Mr. Claremont. The request is but reasonable, and therefore I will grant it.
You may tell them, at the same time, that their father must pay me within three
days, or I shall make him repent it.


Amelia. O papa, what do you mean? Does Dr. Goodwin owe you any thing?


Mr. Claremont. Do you suppose I should ask him for what he does not owe me?
But that is all nothing to you: mind only that you do as I bid you. (He goes
out.)


SCENE II.
AMELIA, CONSTANTINE. AMELIA. SO, brother! this is your friendship, is it, for
Tommy and Jenny?


Constantine. So, sister! this is your duty to papa, is it?


Amelia. And what is yours! Nothing in the world but make-believe. You only
coax him to get his money; you love no body at all but your own self.


Constantine. What, because I don't take pleasure in always contradicting him?
I suppose you would have me go and run after that girl and boy, for all he has
ordered me not?


Amelia. You never deserved their friendship, if it costs you no more than this
to give it up. But the moment you have nothing more to expect from people, you
can easily forget them.


Constantine. As if I could ever have expected any thing from such a boy and
girl as that!


Amelia. Pray, then, what was that mother-of-pearl box that you made Jenny give
you not a week ago; and that pocketbook, that you took so cunningly the day
before yesterday from Tommy? You have done a thousand mean things to get
nosegays and oranges from them; and yet now...


Constantine. Why, now I must do as I am bid. To be sure, it is a great loss of
good company not to play any more with those brats!


Amelia. Well, I dare say I shall see you before night playing in the midst of
all the dirtiest little nasty fellows in the village.


Constantine. I sha'n't lose much by the change, if you do.


Amelia. And they still less.


Constantine. I don't care for that. But here comes Master Tommy. Pray, since
you are so much his friend, advise him to keep his distance.


Amelia. You can go away yourself, if you don't like to see him.


Constantine. I don't like to see him; but I shall stay, for all that.


SCENE III.
AMELIA, CONSTANTINE, THOMAS, (with a little green wooden cage in his hand.)
THOMAS (to Amelia.) O, HOW glad I am that I have found you, Miss Amelia.


Constantine. My dear Tom, what have you got in that little cage?


Thomas. It Is a present that Mr. Brompton's game-keeper has made me.


Constantine. And do you intend to give it to me, my dear friend?


Amelia (aside). How artful!


Thomas. No, it is for Miss Amelia.


Ame^ia. For me? No, no, my dear Tommy; if it is made a present of to you, I am
sure I would not take it away from you. But pray, though, what is it?


Constantine (proudly.) Come, come, I choose to see what it is myself.

(He endeavors to take it from Thomas, but he holds it fast.) I suppose it is
only some odious bird.


Thomas. An odious bird? No indeed, is it not. Now, Miss Amelia, pray guess:
But I will not keep you in suspense: it is a squirrel. And it is the drollest little
thing! he is always trying to scratch his paws into your pockets: and then
he will come and eat out of your hand; and he will run about after you like a
little dog. (He takes it out, and gives the chain to Amelia.) Now don't let
this go, 'till he comes to be quite tame with you: if you do, he will be
getting away, and running up to the top of the trees.


Constantine (looking at it with envy.) A mighty fine present, truly! Nothing
but a squirrel! And it smells as nasty! just like a pole-cat.


Amelia. O the pretty little creature! how cunning and sensible it looks!


Thomas. I wish I had one for you too, Master Constantine; but I Will bring you
the very next that any body gives me. When he is got a little used to you, Miss
Amelia, he will do a thousand little tricks that will make you die with laughing:
he is droller than a monkey.


Amelia. That Is the very reason, my dear Tommy, that I will not rob you of him.
Go, go, little thing, go back into your house. Pray take it again, Tommy.


Constantine. Do you hear, Tom? Take it again.


Thomas. No, no, it is none of mine now. Would you vex me, Miss Amelia? O no;
that I know you would not.

(He runs to an arbor at the side of the scene.) There, I shall put it upon
the seat.


Constantine ^ to Amelia.) Suppose you keep it, hey? Papa will make you pay
dear for it, if you do.


Amelia. I have half a mind to accept it, only because of your threat. Papa
never forbid my taking squirrels. Only I am so sorry for poor Tommy, to have
nothing for him in return, but to take such a sorrowful leave of him!


Constantine. Very well, then: let me do it all myself; and I Will soon send him
off, him, and his fine squirrel into the bargain.


Amelia. No, no, I shall give you no such trouble. (To Thomas) Once more, my
dear Tommy, I do assure you ^ cannot take your present. And, besides, I have
such bad news to tell you, that I don't know how --


Constantine. Ay, Mr. Tom, you had better take care never to come any more into
our garden; nor even so much as to look at the very walls of our house!


Thomas. And should you have the heart to drive me away, Master Constantine? I
am sure I thought you had more friendship for me.


Constantine. Why, our friendship is all over now, to let you into the secret;
so I would advise you not to....


Amelia. Pray, Tommy, don't mind his rudeness. Perhaps you don't know that your
father has had a quarrel with ours?


Thomas. O yes, Miss Amelia, I know it very well; and I am so sorry for it! But
for all that, I did not think it would go so far as to break up all our
friendship; and I should still less have expected it to come from Master
Constantine himself.


Constantine. Sister, will you send him away at once? If you don't, I Will go and
tell papa.


Thomas. If you think you shall get any anger on my account, Miss Amelia....


Amelia. Don^t be afraid, Tommy; you need not go yet. Papa will not be angry about
it.


Constantine. We shall soon see that. I shall go and make your excuses to him.


(He goes out, but soon returns, and steals behind them into the arbor,
without their seeing him.) SCENE IV.
AMELIA, THOMAS. THOMAS. FOR the love of Heaven, Miss Amelia, do, pray tell me
what it is I have done to Master Constantine?


Amelia. Why, in the first place, he is a little jealous of the squirrel that
you have given me. And in the second place, he thinks he is making his court to
papa, to enter so into his quarrel with your father; for papa is very angry
indeed, though I don't know for what.


Thomas. No more do I neither. I only heard my father say, when he was walking
about very fast by himself: I could not have believed this of Mr. Claremont. He
is gone to my mother; and so, as my sister i^ with her too, she will know what
it all is.


Amelia. But, in the mean time, papa has ordered us not to speak to you; and
not to see you; -- no, not to speak so much as one single time, after this!


Thomas. What! must not I see you any more? and must I never see you again? O
Miss Amelia! what shall I do, what will become of me, if I must never see you,
nor speak to you? And what will my poor sister do, that loves you so truly? O
dear! O dear! what have we done to deserve this?


Amelia. Take comfort, Tommy; we will always be good friends, for all this. And
though we must not meet, nor talk together, nobody can hinder our thinking of one
another. And I shall always remember you, whenever I am playing with your
squirrel. I will never call it by any name but yours. O how dearly I will love
it!


Thomas. How glad you make me by saying that, Miss Amelia! I think I ought not
to be sorry at all now. But here comes my sister: she looks very melancholy.


SCENE V.
AMELIA, THOMAS, and JENNY. AMELIA (running out to meet Jenny, and kissing
her.) MY dear Jenny!


Jenny. My sweet Miss Amelia!


(Mr. Claremont appears at the back of the scene, and Constantine leads him
softly behind the arbor.) Thomas (to Jenny.) Ah, Jenny! we have very bad news
for you!


Jenny. And I have none that is any better for you. My father and mother are
both in such affliction....


Thomas. Did not I say so? But what has passed?


Jenny. Your papa, Miss Amelia, may be a little angry with ours, to be sure;
but certainly his request was a little unfair....


Amelia. Unfair? No, that it could not be. But if it was, I dare say I could
soften him, in a little time. Tell me, however, what it is?


Jenny. You know what a pretty thicket there is just at the back of your garden?


Amelia. Yes, very well. We always go there every evening in the spring, to
hear the nightingales. It Is the prettiest little wood!


Jenny. Well, and you know, too, that this little wood was given to my father
by old Mr. Drage, in return for the services he had done him in his lifetime.


Amelia. Well?


Jenny. Well, Mr. Claremont wants now to have it.


Amelia. What! my papa?


Thomas. Our own wood?


Jenny. My father told him he should be very glad to oblige him, for he should
never forget what he owed him, both he and all his family; but that Mr. Drage
had desired him, upon his deathbed, never to give up that wood, but to keep it
always for his sake.


Amelia. Well, indeed, with all my duty for papa, I cannot but own I think him a
little to blame in this affair. But, for all that, he did not want to have it
for nothing* that is not his way of thinking, I am sure.


Jenny. O no, indeed! he would willingly have paid my father for it, and
perhaps have given even more than it was worth.


Thomas. And what does he want to do with it? Has not he the same use of it
that we have?


Jenny. Why, he would cut down all those fine trees.


Amelia and Thomas. Cut them all down?


Jenny. You know the little hill behind the wood? He says he shall make that a
point of view from his own garden. Now our wood is just at the foot of that
hill; so to have that for the point of view, he must fell down the wood to the
ground.


Amelia. Ah, then, this is the reason he has sent for that architect from town,
who talks so to him of grottos, and bridges, and Chinese temples! Papa thinks
of nothing now but fine objects in a garden. He has always some new plan in his
hands. He gives me a description of them a hundred times a day. And I used to
be so delighted to think I should soon see so many fine improvements! Ah! I
don't wish for them now! I would rather a great deal your father should keep
his own little wood.


Thomas. What would become of all the birds that used to warble so prettily
upon those old trees, and make their nests there, because nobody disturbed nor
frightened them away? And we used to carry them crumbs of bread.


Jenny. And what should we do for a cool shady walk, when the hot days come?


Amelia. Yes, and the echo, that used to sing over again all the last words of
our songs, upon the little hill?


Jenny. And I Am sure the sight of a fine green wood is much prettier than of a
hill.


Amelia. And, besides, what need has papa of any new points of view, when there
are such a number every where all round?


Thomas. I should think I had a limb cut off in every stroke of the ax.


Amelia. No, no, your father must never give up his wood.


Jenny. Must he not give it up? Ah! he will not keep it long!


Amelia. And why not? Papa will not come and take it from him by force, I suppose?
Besides, it will not be in his power.


Thomas. But if he is so angry with us, as to forbid you to speak to us, or to
see us, -- ah! I would sooner give up ten woods than agree to that!


Jenny. And I, too! what shall I do there without you, Miss Amelia? O, I shall
never want to go into the wood again.


Amelia. Ah, my dear Jenny, how happy we used to be there! Do you remember how
we went of a night, and told one another every thing that had happened all day?


Jenny. Yes, and we used all to take our work there; and I used to knit, and
you used to net; and then, when Tommy brought us flowers, we used to leave it
all, and go about making up nosegays. And you used to give yours to me, and I
used to give mine to you: and that used to make us remember one another all the
next morning, till we used to meet again at night.


Thomas. And all this is over now! and we shall never do so any more!


Amelia. And I shall never, never be happy again! I am sure I shall fall sick!
and then my papa will be sorry for me; and then I shall tell him, that if ever
he would have me be well again, he must give me leave to see my dear little
companions.


(They all hiss one another, and cry.) Jenny. But, mean while, the pretty wood
will be all cut down! I know it will.


Amelia. But why?


Jenny. Ah, Miss Amelia, I have not told you all! About ten years ago Mr.
Claremont lent my father twelve guineas to set him up here a little; and you
know very well my father has never been in a way to pay it yet.


Amelia (aside.) Ah! this, then, is the debt he was mentioning!


Jenny. If we keep our wood, Mr. Claremont says he will have his twelve guineas
directly: and my father does not know where to get so much. Among all his
friends, there is nobody but your papa himself, that could lend him such a great
sum as that; and, unluckily, he happens to be the very person he owes it to.


Amelia (taking them both by the hand.) O, well, if that is all, I can get you
out of this difficulty myself.


Jenny. Get us out of this difficulty yourself!


Thomas. What, you yourself, Miss Amelia!


Amelia (looking at them with pleasure.) Will you promise faithfully not to
betray me?


Jenny. I, betray you.


Thomas. O, if I once promise I will not --


Amelia. Very well, I Will tell you then. You know -- I am sure I can never think
of it without being ready to cry -- You know how dearly my poor mama loved me:
and when she was in her last illness, one day that I happened to be alone with
her, she called me to her bedside, and kissed me, with tears in her eyes, and
taking a purse from behind her bolster: "My dear Amelia, she said, take this;
but be careful, I charge you, to let nobody know I have given it you. Keep this
money by you for particular occasions. You have a very good heart, and a very
good understanding at your age; (my mama was so kind as to say this) and so you
will know very well how to make use of it in doing good. Your father is noble
and generous in his disposition; but he is also a little passionate and
revengeful. You may yourself, if you attend to what I say, be the means of
sparing him much uneasiness and regret. In so large an estate as ours, there
must always be many poor tenants who suffer losses which they cannot help: and
those you may privately assist. You may also show your gratitude for any
services or favors you receive, without having always to apply to your father.
It has been through your hands that, for these last three years, I have myself
distributed all the money I have given away: I hope, therefore, you have
sufficient discernment to find out yourself those that deserve your kindness. I
have, indeed, not any doubt but you will make a proper use of this little sum,
which I trust to your disposal for the benefit of the worthy poor. The good
that you will do with it, I shall think done by myself; and it is the sweetest
method I can devise to make you keep me in your memory." And then she could not
say any more, for she fainted away. But I shall never forget all this, if I
live for ever and ever!


Jenny (wiping her eyes.) What a sweet, good lady!


Thomas. My father and mother never speak of her, but with tears in their eyes.


Amelia. Indeed mama had always a great regard for them. When she was dying,
she told me always to look upon Dr. Goodwin as one of my best friends, and to
follow his advice in every thing. You see, therefore, it is I that am obliged
all the while to you. How happy that makes me now! I shall do honor to mama's
memory; I shall show my own gratitude; I shall prevent papa's being unjust: I
shall save every thing -- the dear little wood! -- the tender friendship of us
three! -- the pleasure of meeting one another as we used to do!


Jenny (throwing her arms round her, and crying.) O my dear Miss Amelia!


Thomas (shaking hands with her.) My father will bless you at the bottom of his
heart; but he will never, I am sure, O never! take your money!


Amelia. O, but I am sure he will, if I beg it of him. Nobody in the world
shall know of it. Only wait here a little, and I will go and bring it you.


Thomas. O no! I dare not charge myself with it!


Amelia. You shall, then, my dear Jenny. And if you hinder her, Tommy, only
mind me! I will not accept your squirrel; I will do all that papa bid me, and
never speak to you, and never look at you any more, and never enter your house,
and never go to the wood again as long as I live!


Jenny. O Miss Amelia! if you talk so --


Amelia (putting her hand upon her mouth.) Don't say any thing against it, for
I will not listen to you. Stay but a moment for me, and I Will be here again. If I
can but shut myself up alone, I will write a few lines to your father: but if I
cannot contrive to come to you again, I will put the purse under that great
stone close by the arbor. Look, do you see where I mean? Now don't forget the
place.


Jenny. But I am quite certain my father will send me back again with the money.


Amelia. He had better not! Besides, you will not know where to find me; for how
can I tell -- oh dear! -- how can I tell but this may be the last time they
will let us talk to one another?


Jenny. O Miss Amelia! what is it you say?


Amelia. Why, to be sure, you know, I must obey papa. However, we live very
near one another, and they cannot prevent us, you know, from having eyes; and
whenever we can look at one another without any body's seeing us --


Jenny. O, I shall keep always watching, in hopes to catch a little sight of
you! and when I do, if my tongue must not speak, nobody can make my eyes not;
and they shall always tell you that I will love you the longest day I have to
live!


Thomas. Besides, who can hinder our being in the way, sometimes, when you go
out to walk? And then --


Amelia. O, so you may! and then, you know, we can give one another a nod, or a
smile, or a side-look, before any body sees us. So pray comfort yourselves,
Tommy and Jenny, for all will do very well. But where is the squirrel? Now I am
going to my own room, I Will take it with me.


Thomas. Stay a little, and I Will bring you its house, and carry it for you to
the door.


(He runs to the arbor.) Amelia. Good-by, my dear Jenny!


Jenny. Ah, my dearest Miss Amelia, I hope, at least, you don't wish me good-by
for ever?


Thomas (bringing back the squirr^l's house with a look of horror.) O, Miss
Amelia! the squirrel is gone!


Amelia. The squirrel! O dear, Tommy! no, I hope not!


Thomas. I am sure somebody must have opened the door, for I remember shutting
it up tight myself.


Amelia. Very likely it is my brother. He was jealous of your giving it to me;
and so, while we were talking here, I suppose he slipped into the arbor, and
opened the little door to let him out.


Thomas. Perhaps, then, he has only taken the squirrel to play with it a little?


Amelia. No; I know him better than you do; I dare say he has let him escape.


Thomas. Well, if he has, then, he cannot be far off. If I can only see him upon
some tree, I have nothing to do but show him a nut, and he will come to me
again. I Will go and beat about every bush, and climb up every tree.


(He goes.) Amelia. I wish you good success, my dear Tommy. -- Ah, poor Tommy!
how sorry I am for him! he had so much pleasure in giving me this little
present!


Jenny. That he had indeed; for he could not rest till he had brought it you.


Amelia. Well, but I must leave you now, my dear Jenny. I shall get to the
house by the terrace; and do you go out by the little garden-door, and step
softly along by the wall, as you go round. Then stand still, when you come
under my window; but don't speak a word, and make no noise: and I Will throw down
my purse to you, and a letter. But if I don't meet papa in the way, I shall
bring them both down for you myself.


Jenny. O my dear, generous Miss Amelia! how good you are!


(They go out different ways.) SCENE VI.
Mr. CLAREMONT and CONSTANTINE. CONSTANTINE. THERE, papa, was not I right? You
see now how well my sister obeys you!


Mr. Claremont. But what is this story of the squirrel?


Constantine. Why, I did not tell it you in our hiding place, for fear they
should hear us: but you must know, this dear friend Tommy has made a present of
a squirrel to his dear friend Amelia: and this dear friend Amelia took the
nasty little beast with such joy, that she said she would always call it her
dear friend Tommy. But I have taken care she should not long have to rejoice
over it.


Mr. Claremont. How so?


Constantine. Why, they put the squirrel's house into the arbor. So I slid in,
while they were taking their tender farewells one of another, and opened the
little door: and then I took out the squirrel, and let him loose into the
woods. I soon saw him clambering up a tree, and jumping from bough to bough.
They will be very cunning if ever they catch him again.


Mr. Claremont. Why then you have done a very vile action. Did not I bid you by
no means vex these poor children? And you know, too, what concern it will give
your sister.


Constantine. But does not she deserve to be punished for disobeying you?


Mr. Claremont. And how comes the right of punishing to belong to you? Run and
tell the gardener and his men to go all about, and look for the squirrel, and
bring it to me.


Constantine. Why, papa, did not you forbid my sister ever to speak again with
Dr. Goodwin, or his family; and now will you let her accept a present from them?


Mr. Claremont. Did Thomas know any thing of my commands, when he brought her
the squirrel?


Constantine. If he did not, Amelia did; and was not that disobedience in her?


Mr. Claremont. That Is my affair. She would not have failed to show me her
present, and I could have bid her send it back again, if I had thought proper.
Once more, run and do what I order you; and find me the squirrel, or be it at
your peril.


Constantine. But, papa, I think you heard a very pretty conversation among
them! My sister has money of her own, that you know nothing of; and she is to
give it to Dr. Goodwin, that he may pay you with it! Had not I better go and
watch for Jenny, and surprise her just as she takes the purse, and then bring
it to you?


Mr. Claremont. I would not much advise you to that. You know what my orders
are; go and follow them!


Constantine. So this is all I get, when I thought I had done such fine things!


SCENE VII.
Mr. CLAREMONT (after being some time silent.) YES, yes, I see I have carried
the matter too far. What a picture of friendship, of generosity, and of
gratitude, have these children shown me! It is true, indeed, I had forbidden
Amelia to -- But ought I to have forbidden her? ought I to destroy the very
feelings I had myself en^ouraged in her heart? Besides, why should I rob her of
the only happiness she can enjoy in this retired place? the greatest happiness,
indeed, of human life, the amiable and improving conversation of children of
her own age! a happiness which I could not buy for her again with all my
fortune. And for what? for a mere whim, after all. Sweet little Amelia! and so
neither the grottos, nor the bridges, nor the Chinese temples, nor all the fine
improvements I could put in my garden, could make you forget that wild wood
where you indulged your little heart in its first friendship? Why, what a
lesson is this to me! But for this, I was going to throw away all my own
friendship too! Thou have preserved it to me thyself, my Amelia! and thou have
saved me from injustice and repentance. How her noble behavior raises her
above her brother! how despicable he appears, compared with her! But I will not
torment myself with thinking of him. I have much curiosity to know whether Dr.
Goodwin is as high-minded as his children. My own opinion of him will depend
upon what he now decides: and I shall either find him a man unworthy of my
regard, or a friend I may always be proud of esteeming.

(Amelia passes softly, and on tip-toe, along the back of the stage; Mr.
Claremont sees her, and calls.) Amelia! (she still goes on; he calls again)
Amelia, I say! come hither!


SCENE VIII.
Mr. CLAREMONT, AMELIA. Mr. CLAREMONT. WHERE are you going? Why do you try to
run away from me?


Amelia (confused.) I was afraid of disturbing you, papa.


Mr. Claremont. Perhaps you were going to look for the squirrel that Tommy gave
you for a present?


Amelia. Why I own to you, papa, he has given me one. I dare say it was
Constantine told you of it?


Mr. Claremont. I suppose you have not accepted it.


Amelia. Me, papa? -- No -- Yes, I did. -- How could I help it? Poor Tommy was
so much delighted to give it me.


Mr. Claremont. You must make him take it back.


Amelia. I would, papa, if I had it; but it has made its escape.


Mr. Claremont. Is that true, Amelia?


Amelia. Yes, indeed, papa. I can show you its little house: its quite empty.


Mr. Claremont. Who can have let it out, then? Was it a piece of spite of
Constantine's?


Amelia. No, papa; I don't accuse my brother of it: it was only that the door
was not well fastened, and so the little prisoner got loose. But Tommy is gone
to look for him; and if he can find him, he will bring him to me again.


Mr. Claremont. You intend, then, to have another conversation with Tommy? What
have you to say to him? Have you not told him my orders? And have you not taken
your leave of him?


Amelia. Yes, papa, only -- Oh how sorry I was! It will be a great while before
I shall get the better of it, I Am sure!


Mr. Claremont. You find it very hard, do you, to obey me?


Amelia. O no, it is not that, papa; so pray don't think so! But could you love
me yourself, could you believe me to be your own child, if I was to tell you
that this sad quarrel did not give me any concern? What would you think of me,
and what would all my friends think of me, if I could take away my heart from
them at once, without feeling a little uneasiness?


Mr. Claremont. But is the affront I have received from their father so
indifferent to you, that you take no part in it?


Amelia. O yes, I do take a part in it, papa; and I would give any thing in the
world that you should have satisfaction for it.


Mr. Claremont. You know, then, what it is I have asked of him, and what it is
he has refused me?


Amelia. I know -- I only know -- Ah, papa, why do you ask me that?


Mr. Claremont. Because I want to know whether Dr. Goodwin's children are
acquainted with the affair, and whether they have entrusted you with it.


Amelia. Why yes, papa, they have -- they have told it me all, papa; but pray
don't be angry at that.


Mr. Claremont. Well, then, what do you think of my request? Does it seem
unreasonable to you? Have I not a right to expect from Dr. Goodwin, after all
that I have done for him, such a little compliance, when I am willing to pay
him a hundredfold for it?


Amelia. But, my dear papa, how can such a child as I am tell what grown-up
people ought to do?


Mr. Claremont. Ask your own heart. I insist upon knowing what that will tell
you.


Amelia. Pray, pray excuse me! for perhaps my heart might tell me something
that might only make you more angry.


Mr. Claremont. I understand you; it would tell you that I am in the wrong.


Amelia. Ah, papa! now you will be flying into a passion!


Mr. Claremont. Speak out, however, you will then see.


Amelia. I would not displease you for any thing in the world!


Mr. Claremont. You will not, you will not. Tell me honestly your opinion.


Amelia. Why then, papa, I think that you are in the right, and that Dr.
Goodwin is in the right too.


Mr. Claremont. We are both in the right, are we? What a little flatterer? But
this cannot be; for one of us must be in the right, and the other in the wrong.


Amelia. Indeed, papa, I only say what I think. You have done Dr. Goodwin a
great many services, and you have a right to expect in return that he should
give up to you a thing you have so much set your heart upon. And, at the same
time, he has a right to refuse you, because he has his own reasons for not
giving it up.


Mr. Claremont. And are his reasons good or bad?


Amelia. Indeed I am no judge of that. You look upon it as a matter of
gratitude that he should part with his little wood; and he looks upon it as a
matter of gratitude that he should keep it. You want to have it cut down, for
the sake of making a good point of view; and he wants to keep it up, for the
sake of a shady walk for his children. You are the richest man, and have the
most power; he is already in your debt, and has nothing to set against you, but
his entreaties, and the tears of his family.


Mr. Claremont. Enough, enough. You are but too dangerous an advocate. Well!
let him pay me the twelve guineas that I lent him, and then he may keep his
wood to himself.


Amelia. So then, it will only be force, at last....


Mr. Claremont. That will be in the right? hey?


Amelia. No, papa, I only meant to say... Indeed, I don't know what. -- But
these twelve guineas -- where is he to get them?


Mr. Claremont. If you don't know, no more do I. However, if he should apply to
you...


Amelia (clinging to him.) Oh! I cannot conceal it any longer! and if you should
punish me.... I have deserved your anger, for I....


Mr. Claremont. How now, how now? Let me alone, child! what is it you would do?


SCENE IX.
Mr. CLAREMONT, AMELIA, and CONSTANTINE, dragging in JENNY by force.
CONSTANTINE. I HAVE caught her, papa, I have caught her! She has a letter, that
I dare say is for my sister. Come, give it me at once, or else I shall search
both your pockets. Ay, ay, I saw it myself in her hand, as she was creeping
slyly along the hedge.


Mr. Claremont. No violence, Constantine. -- Do you want any body here, my dear?


(to Jenny.) Jenny (frightened.) No, Sir -- yes -- I want --


Mr. Claremont. What are you afraid of? Tell me, who is it you want?


Jenny. It Is only Miss Amelia.


Constantine. You know very well, Jenny, that papa has forbid her to speak to
you.


Mr. Claremont. I desire you will hold your tongue. What is this letter, then,
(to Jenny) that he is talking about?


Jenny. It Is nothing, Sir, -- nothing at all -- Ah! Miss Amelia, will you
forgive me?


(looking sorrowfully at Amelia.) Amelia. Yes, my dear Jenny, for I sha'n't
conceal any thing more now from papa.


Constantine. What, papa! does she dare speak to her before your face? Is that
her obedience? --


Mr. Claremont. Will you hold your tongue when I bid you? Well, Jenny, may I
know what this is?


Jenny. Yes, Sir, if I must tell you it all: the thing is, that my father has
writ a letter to Miss Amelia, just only to thank her for all her goodness to
us. (She gives the letter fearfully to Amelia; but Constantine snatches it from
her.)


Constantine. O papa, it is full of money! Now you will be paid for this, Miss!


Amelia. Indeed, papa, I was going to own every thing, when Jenny and my
brother interrupted us. But I must submit to being punished, as well as I can.


(Mr. Claremont opens the letter, and reads it.) GENEROUS and NOBLE YOUNG LADY,
"I should ill deserve the kindness you have shown me, if I were mean enough to
lead you into the smallest artifice, and to accept from you the money you so
liberally offer, in order to pay it to your papa. No, my sweet young lady, I am
actually his debtor, and I must still have the misfortune to continue such,
till I am able to clear myself by my own proper means. I am truly unhappy, that
I cannot, upon this occasion, comply with the wishes of Mr. Claremont with that
eagerness and pleasure I should show upon every other. If, without any
application to me, Mr. Claremont had made use of the method which he has in his
own power of compelling my consent, I should not have remonstrated with him
upon the subject, nor, even in my own heart, have formed a single complaint
against him: for then, at least, I should not have had to reproach myself with
having broken my own word. Represent this to him for me, my excellent young
friend. His regard, and yours, are more precious to me than all other things in
the world. Preserve for me therefore always, and preserve for my children, the
same generous kindness with which you have hitherto favored us. I have the
honor to subscribe myself, etc."


(Mr. Claremont, without shutting up the letter, looks at Amelia.) Amelia
(running to him.) Now, then, papa, let me tell you how this money came to be
mine, and pray forgive me that I did not tell you of it sooner: but --


Mr. Claremont (embracing her.) I know it all, my dearest Amelia; I overheard
all your conversation; and I am delighted with your generosity and nobleness of
mind. I will not be ashamed to acknowledge that, but for you, I had perhaps
committed an action I must have repented for all the rest of my life. Here,
take back your money; and be sure ever to make that worthy use of it, which
your excellent mother commanded: and fear not that I will ever suffer it to be
exhausted. No, I will renew it myself, while you continue so well to employ it.
Your favorite little wood, my dear children, shall not be taken from you; and
may the friendship you now feel for one another unite you for ever!


Amelia (taking one of his hands and kissing it.) O papa! you give me life a
second time.


Jenny (kissing his other hand.) O Sir, how good you are! O how my father --


Mr. Claremont. Tell him, my dear Jenny, that I beg him to take back his note;
and that I have one little change to make in it, which I will mention to him
when we meet.


Constantine. What, papa, do you --


Mr. Claremont. Hold your peace, Sir! You have already, today, given me but
too many proofs of the badness of your heart.


Constantine. Why, I have done nothing but obey you, papa; and is it not right
for children to obey their parents?


Mr. Claremont. Certainly, very right: but if the orders they receive are
unjust, it is their duty, and their God, they ought to obey first. If your own
heart did not tell you that I suffered mine to be too much swayed by passion, I
have nothing more to hope from you. See only how Amelia has behaved.


Constantine. But mama did not leave any money with me, to do what I had a mind
with.


Mr. Claremont. The reason, I fear, was that she too well foresaw the unworthy
use you would make of it. And had you not even a few kind words to bestow upon
your little friends, and upon a man who had taken so much trouble in your
education? And what is become of the squirrel? did you give orders to have it
every where searched for?


Constantine. I could not meet with any body in the garden.


SCENE X.
Mr. CLAREMONT, CONSTANTINE, AMELIA, JENNY and THOMAS. (Thomas comes in out of
breath with running: he holds the squirrel in one hand, and has the other
wrapped up in a handkerchief, which is spotted with drops of blood.) THOMAS.
JOY! joy! joy! here he is! I have caught him! here he is!


(perceiving Mr. Claremont, he stops short.) Amelia (running up to him.) O my
dear Tommy! (taking the squirrel.) My dear, dear little squirrel! I have got
you now! O, I Will take care you shall never escape again! Come, Sir, come, get
into your house.


(She shuts him up in his house, and carries him to the arbor.) Mr. Claremont.
What is that you have got upon your hand, my dear Tom? The handkerchief looks
bloody.


Thomas (with joyful surprise.) O Miss Amelia, do you hear? -- My dear Tom! Mr.
Claremont says, my dear Tom!


Amelia. Yes, Tommy, all is made up now.


Jenny. We are all to be friends now for ever.

(Thomas jumps for joy, and runs and clings about Mr. Claremont. Jenny takes
her brother's hand, and looks tenderly and anxiously at him.) But are you
wounded, Tommy? what is this blood?


Amelia. And was it for me, Tommy?


Thomas. O, it is nothing at all; it was only a bough that broke with my jumping
upon it, to get the little runaway. It happened to tear my hand a little: but
I had rather have torn my arm too, than not have brought back the squirrel to
Miss Amelia.


Amelia. O my dear Tommy! Papa, must not we have something done to his hand? My
governess has an excellent cure for a cut.


Mr. Claremont. I shall leave the care of that to you. Come, children, come in
with me. I will order a little feast to keep our reconciliation. I shall go
myself to invite your father and mother to be of our party. I seem today to
have gone to school to you, my Amelia, myself; and I see, by the example you
have shown, that well-educated and good children may give useful lessons, even
to their parents.


A BALLAD UPON AN INFANT IN A CRADLE.
AH, happy babe! what wishes vain
Thy innocence and peace excite!
Ah! could thou but through life maintain
The bliss which gives such pure delight!
Sweet is thy sleep! while visions gay,
The friends of infantine repose,
Before thy dawning fancy play,
Nor vanish, till thy eyes unclose.
Thy opening eyes a father please,
Thy childish look a mother charms;
In turn thy little frame they seize;
Thy safest cradle is their arms.
Thou rising hope of all thy race,
Whose peace upon thy smiles depend;
If joy but brighten in thy face,
Over every face its rays extend.
Ah! happy babe! what wishes vain
Thy innocence and peace excite!
O, could thou but through life maintain
The bliss which gives such pure delight!
Free from regret, or vain desires,
Each object offered to thy view
Thy spotless soul with joy inspires,
And wakens pleasure ever new.
Or if thou chance to heave a sigh,
Nor long, nor bitter, is thy woe;
Thy ready smile is ever nigh,
Though down thy cheek a tear may flow.
Thy very weakness gives thee power;
Thy earliest will seems law and right;
And even the aged, rough, and sour,
Melt into softness at thy sight.
Ah! happy babe! what wishes vain
Thy innocence and peace excite!
Ah! could thou but through life maintain
The bliss which gives such pure delight!
But no! for see, with rapid wing
Approaching storms the prospect lour,
And cares and crosses with them bring
Thy sports to mar, thy joys to sour.
Even I, however I still preserve
A taste for nature's artless charms,
Start, sigh, and tremble every nerve,
With frequent fears, and quick alarms.
Now false, now fickle proves some friend;
Now death some loved companion steals;
Now fairest hopes in visions end --
Alas! each day fresh woe reveals!
Ah! happy babe! what wishes vain
Thy innocence and peace excite!
Ah! could thou but through life maintain
The bliss which gives such pure delight!
If yet blind Fate, unknowing why,
The bitter cup of evil fill,
Quick to thy cradle will I fly,
To solace me for every ill.
Thy soft caresses, void of art,
Thy playful fearlessness of harm,
Shall to my sorr'wing soul impart
Some genuine drops of healing balm.
How sweet thy sight, how soft thy power!
Sole season of untutored joys!
Perhaps of mine the happiest hour
Is that which even thy praise employs!
Ah! happy babe! what wishes vain
Thy innocence and peace excite!
Ah! could thou but through life maintain
The bliss which gives such pure delight!
THE CHILD SEDUCED BY HER MAID.
Mrs. BEAUMONT, AURELIA. AURELIA. MAMA, will you give me leave to go and see my
cousin Harry this evening?


Mrs. Beaumont. No, Aurelia, I cannot.


Aurelia. Why not, mama?


Mrs. Beaumont. I don't think it absolutely necessary to tell you my reasons: a
little girl, such as you, should obey her parents, without allowing herself the
liberty of asking any questions. But nevertheless, to show you that I have
always rational motives, both for what I order, and for what I forbid, I will,
for this once, acquaint you what they are. Your cousin Harry can only set you a
bad example; and I fear, if you were to see him often, he might teach you to be
as thoughtless and indiscreet as himself.


Aurelia. But, mama --


Mrs. Beaumont. No answer, Aurelia! you know very well that I must always be
obeyed.


AURELIA now went to the further end of the apartment, to hide the tears which
were swimming in her eyes; but, as soon as ever her mama was gone out, she
seated herself in a corner, and gave full vent to her sorrow.

AT this time, Nanny, a maid servant but lately hired, came into the room. Why,
what is the matter, Miss Aurelia? said she, are you crying? what is it for?
will not you tell me who it is that vexes you so?

Aurelia. No, go, Nanny; you can do nothing to help me.


Nanny. And how can you tell that? When I lived with Miss Sophy, she was always
sure to come to me, whenever any thing was the matter. Ah, my dear Nanny, she
used to say* now you know what has happened to me, tell me what I shall do. And
then I always used to give her some good advice.


Aurelia. But I don't want your advice. I tell you again that you can do
nothing at all for me.


Nanny. Well, at least, then, let me go and see for your mama. She can give you
some comfort, if I cannot: and I don't like to see such a pretty young lady
fretting so.


Aurelia. O yes, certainly, mama will give me great comfort!


Nanny. Why, sure it could not be she that has vexed you so?


Aurelia. Why, who else could it be?


Nanny. Well, I should never have thought it! I am sure, so sensible as you
are, there is nothing your mama need refuse you. I am sure, if I had a child of
my own, as well behaved as you are, I should let her do every thing she had a
mind. But your mama loves dearly to give orders; and, for the sake of her own
maggots, she will refuse you the most innocent things in the world. How can any
body take a pleasure in contradicting such a sweet child! You cannot think how
it grieves me to see you in such trouble.


Aurelia (beginning to cry again.) I dare say, Nanny, I shall die with grief!


Nanny. So I am afraid, too. How red and swelled your eyes are! I am sure it is
very wrong of you, and very cruel, not to let the people that really love you,
try to give you some comfort. If my little Miss Sophy had only been half as
unhappy, she would have opened her whole heart to me.


Aurelia. But I must never open mine to you, Nanny!


Nanny. It is not for my own sake, I am sure, that I want you to do it. --
Perhaps it is because your mama makes you stay here at home, when she is gone
out herself to take a walk.


Aurelia. No, no; she has promised me upon her word, that she will not take a walk
without me.


Nanny. But what is it then? You seem to grow worse and worse. Shall I go and
bring your little cousin to you? You shall play with him, to put you in spirits
again.


Aurelia (sighing.) No, no; I must never have that pleasure any more!


Nanny. Nay, it will be no hard matter to get you that. A young lady should not
be left alone so. I suppose your mama does not want to make a nun of you?


Aurelia. But I am forbid to see him.


Nanny. Forbid to see him! very pretty, indeed! Why, what has your mama got in
her head? This is just exactly like Miss Sophy's mama: she took the very same
maggot; she would not permit her to see the least in the world of little Billy.
But we knew better than to mind her. O, how cunningly we used to cheat her!


Aurelia. And how did you do it?


Nanny. Why, we always watched for the time of her making her visits; and then
Miss Sophy used to go and see little Billy, or else little Billy used to come
and see Miss Sophy.


Aurelia. And did not her mama find it out?


Nanny. No; I always kept a look-out for them myself.


Aurelia. But if I was to go and see my cousin, suppose mama should come home,
and say, Where is Aurelia?


Nanny. I should only tell her you were playing in the garden; or, if it should
happen to be a little late, I should say you were gone to bed, and fast asleep:
and then I should run out slyly, and bring you home.


Aurelia. Ah! if I thought mama would know nothing of it! --


Nanny. Only trust to me, and she shall never discover it. Will you take my
advice? Go and spend the evening with your cousin, and leave the rest to my
management.


Aurelia. I should like to try it for once. But then you will promise that mama
--


Nanny. Go, go; don't be afraid.


AURELIA now gave way, and, with a little further encouragement, went to see
her cousin. Her mama returned home soon after, and immediately enquired for
her. Nanny answered that she was tired of being alone, but had eat a very
hearty supper, and was gone to bed.

IN this manner, Aurelia deceived her unsuspecting mother several times. Alas!
thoughtless little girl! was it not rather herself that she deceived by such
behavior? Till now, she had always been gay and happy; she delighted in the
presence of her mama, and flew joyfully to meet her, if she had been separated
from her even for a moment. Where, now, was this pleasure fled? She was
continually saying to herself: O! if mama was to know where I have been! She
trembled even at the sound of her voice. When ever she saw her grave or uneasy,
O! thought she, I am undone! Mama has discovered my disobedience! Neither was
this all her unhappiness. The artful Nanny perpetually told her of the
generosity which had been shown her by Miss Sophy, how often she had given her
money and presents, and with what confidence she always had trusted her with
the key of the tea-chest. Aurelia was all eagerness to deserve from Nanny the
same praise for generosity and confidence that she bestowed upon Miss Sophy.
She took every opportunity of stealing tea and sugar for her, of her mama; and
she even contrived to get for her the keys of the cellar and store-room.

SOMETIMES, however, she listened to the reproaches of her conscience. I am
acting very ill, said she to herself; and all that I am doing may sooner or
later be discovered: and then I shall lose all mama's love entirely! Frightened
at this thought, she flew to Nanny, and warmly protested she would give her
nothing more. O, just as you please, Miss, answered Nanny; but have a care! you
may perhaps repent this! Your mama is coming, -- and I shall let her know how
well you have minded her orders.

AURELIA could then only cry, and do every thing that Nanny was pleased to
command. Formerly it was the place of Nanny to obey Aurelia; but now it became
the place of Aurelia to obey Nanny. She was obliged to bear with all her
insolence and rudeness, and had not a creature to whom she dared even complain.

ONE day, this artful and wicked maid came to Aurelia, and said, I have a great
longing to taste that tart that is locked up in the buffet; and I want a bottle
of wine besides. So you must go and look in your mama's drawers for the keys.

Aurelia. But, my dear Nanny, --


Nanny* O, none of your dear Nannys! only go and do what I ask you.


Aurelia. But mama may see me; or, if she should not, God will, Nanny; and then
he will punish us well!


Nanny. And did not he see you too, every time you went to your cousin? Yet I
don't find that he has punished you for it.


AURELIA had received from her mother the most excellent lessons of religion;
she was firmly persuaded that God has always his eyes upon his creatures, that
he recompenses our good actions, and only forbids our committing bad ones,
because they are really hurtful to ourselves. It was from mere childish folly
that she made her visit to her cousin against the consent of her mama. But it
almost constantly comes to pass, that when we are led into one error, we fall
soon after into errors without end. She thought herself now compelled to do
every thing that the maid directed, lest she should be provoked, by a refusal,
to betray her. It may easily, therefore, be imagined how much she had to bear
from her.

SHE one day shut herself up in her chamber, merely to have the liberty of
crying at her ease. O good God! cried she, sobbing, what a sad thing it is to
disobey you! Poor unhappy little girl that I am! I am become quite the slave of
my maid! I can do no longer what is my duty, because I must do every thing
which that wicked woman bids me. I am obliged to be a story-teller, and a
thief, and a cheat! O take pity upon me, good God! and save and deliver me!

SHE then hid her face, which was bathed in tears, with both her hands, and
began earnestly to reflect upon what course she could possibly take. At length,
suddenly rising, she called out: Yes, I am now resolved upon it; and even if
mama were to banish me from her for a whole month, or even -- But no, no, she
will not! she will be softened, I know, and she will call me her dear Aurelia
again. I can trust to her goodness: but oh! what this task will cost me! how
shall I bear her looks and her anger? No matter; I will go to her this moment,
and confess every thing.

SHE then hurried out of her chamber, and seeing her mama walking alone in the
garden, she flew up to her, threw herself into her arms, and, while she
embraced her, wetted her cheeks and her bosom with her tears: but shame and
distress kept her from speaking.

Mrs. Beaumont. My dear Aurelia, what is the matter with you?


Aurelia. Oh mama!


Mrs. Beaumont. What is it you are crying for?


Aurelia. My dear, dear mama!


Mrs. Beaumont. Tell me, my love, what is it thus disturbs you?


Aurelia. Oh, if I thought you would forgive me --


Mrs. Beaumont. I do forgive you, since your repentance seems so true, and so
humble.


Aurelia. My dear mama, I have been very, very disobedient! I have several
times, for all you commanded me not, been to see my cousin Harry.


Mrs. Beaumont. Is it possible, my Aurelia? What! you, who used to tremble so
much at displeasing me?


Aurelia. Ah! I shall no longer be your Aurelia, mama, when you know every
thing!


Mrs. Beaumont. You alarm me: Go on with your account. Surely you must have
been seduced from your duty. You never yet gave me reason to be seriously angry.


Aurelia. Yes, mama, I have been seduced indeed! It was Nanny -- O Nanny --


Mrs. Beaumont. How! Nanny!


Aurelia. Yes, mama. And to keep her from telling you of what I had done, I
used to steal away from you the key of the cellar and the tea-chest. I have
taken from you I don't know how much tea and sugar, and wine, for her!


Mrs. B^aumont. Then am I a most unhappy mother indeed! to have suffered crimes
and injuries such as these from my own daughter! Leave me, unworthy girl! I
must go myself to your father, and consult with him upon what must be done with
you.


Aurelia. No, mama, I cannot leave you! I know you must punish me; but only
promise me that some time or other you will love me again!


Mrs. Beaumont. Ah, miserable child! you will indeed be punished enough!


MRS. Beaumont at these words walked away, and left Aurelia in utter despair
upon a green bank on which she had thrown herself: she went instantly to her
husband; and they considered together upon what means must be used to save
their child from ruin.

SOON after, they went for Nanny; and, having reproached her with the utmost
severity and indignation, Mr. Beaumont ordered her instantly to leave the
house. It was in vain she cried, and begged to be treated with less hardness;
and in vain she made a thousand promises never to offend in the same manner for
the future: Mr. Beaumont was resolute. You know well, cried he, with what
kindness I have behaved to you, and with what patience I have borne with your
faults. I hoped to have engaged you, by my indulgence, to have seconded my
cares in the education of my child; instead of which, it is you yourself who
have led her to theft and disobedience. I look upon you as a monster. Quit my
sight instantly, and think well of your own reformation, if you hope to save
yourself from falling into the hands of a far more terrible Judge.

AURELIA's turn was next. She came into the presence of her parents in a state
that might well excite compassion. Her eyes were inflamed with crying, and all
her features were swolen. Her cheeks were pale with terror, and her whole frame
trembled as if she had been in the shivering ^it of an ague. Unable to utter a
single word, she waited in mournful silence to hear the sentence of her father.

YOU have deceived, cried he, in a voice of severity, you have deceived and you
have offended your parents. What could induce you to listen to a worthless
servant, in preference to a mother who so tenderly loves you, and who wishes
nothing upon earth so much as your happiness? Were I to punish you with all the
indignation with which you have filled me, and to banish you for ever from my
sight, as I have done the accomplice of your fault, is there any body, do you
think, who could accuse me of injustice?

Aurelia. No, papa, you can never be unjust to me: and if you punish me with
all the severity that you can, I shall bear it all; but only begin first by
taking me once more in your arms, and once more calling me your poor Aurelia!


Mr. Beaumont. No, I can by no means so soon forgive you. The confession which
you have made of your own accord, prevails with me not to banish you from my
sight; but I cannot call you again my child, and my Aurelia, till you have
merited my kindness by a long repentance. Attend well to your own behavior.
Punishment always follows faults, and you will soon find yourself your own
punisher in having committed them.

AURELIA did not well understand her papa's meaning in these last words. She
expected yet greater severity, and she approached him almost brokenhearted;
she kissed his hands, and again promised the most perfect duty and submission
for the future.

SHE kept her word: but alas! the punishment with which her father threatened
her, soon followed. The worthless Nanny spread every where the most injurious
reports. She related what had passed between them, with the addition of many
frightful falsehoods. She declared that Aurelia, by servile and pressing
entreaties, and a thousand presents which she stole from her father and mother,
tried so continually to corrupt her, that she had been at length prevailed upon
to contrive secret meetings for her with her cousin Harry; that they saw one
another, unknown to their parents, regularly every night, and that it was
frequently extremely late before Aurelia returned home. And to this account she
added so many horrid circumstances, that every body conceived the most
disadvantageous opinion of Aurelia.

SHE was forced to bear, therefore, the most cruel mortifications. When she
went into the company of other little girls, she saw them all whisper one
another, and look at her with an air of the utmost disdain, or else with the
most insulting smiles. If she stayed later than usual any where, they would
say, "I suppose she waits till the time comes for her meeting her cousin
Harry!" If she had a fashionable ribbon, or any new ornaments, they would
exclaim: "O, people who can get at their mama's keys, may very well contrive to
buy new things!" And if she had the most trifling dispute with any of them,
they would cry: "You had better hold your peace, Miss Aurelia, for you think so
much of your cousin Harry, that you don't know what you talk of."

THESE reproaches were so many pointed needles to tear the heart of Aurelia.
And frequently, quite overpowered by her sorrows, she would throw herself, in
an agony, into her mother's arms, and entreat pity and comfort from her.

HER mother generally answered: You must suffer, Aurelia, with patience, the
punishment which your errors have drawn upon you; and you must pray to Heaven
to pardon your faults, and to shorten the time of your correction. These trials
may mend you for all the rest of your life, if you attend to them properly. God
has commanded all children to honor their father and their mother, and to
submit in every thing to their orders. This command is for their own happiness.
Poor little things! they know nothing of the world themselves; they cannot
foresee the consequences of their own actions: God, therefore, has put the care
of you into the hands of your parents, who love you as they love themselves,
and who have experience and reflection to enable them to save you from the
dangers which every way surround you. This, however, you did not choose to
believe: and now you find, with but too much affliction, the wisdom of God in
his commands, since your disobedience to them has cost you so dear. Ah! my
Aurelia, may your suffering at least be your improvement! Every commandment of
God is equally wise: he ordains nothing that is not for our advantage; he
forbids nothing that would not do us injury. It is ourselves, therefore, that
we hurt, every time we commit any evil. You may often find yourself in
situations where you cannot, at first, perceive either how vice may harm, or
virtue serve you. Always, at these times, call back to your mind your own
sufferings from one single failure in duty, and regulate every action of your
life by this infallible maxim: "Whatever is contrary to virtue,
"is contrary to happiness."



AURELIA now followed with strictness all the advice of her mother: and the
more she had to suffer from the errors of her conduct, the more attentive she
became to all she said or did. And, in the end, from the manner in which she
bore this disgrace, she not only silenced all her censurers, but even acquired
the glorious name of the faultless Aurelia.

THE OLD BEGGAR.
Mr. BEAUMONT ( to a servant.) WHY don't you let the good old man come in?


The old Man. Your servants would have given me entrance, Sir; it was my own
fault that I kept back.


Mr. Beaumont. And why?


The old Man. I am ashamed to answer! -- but I am doing a thing to which I have
not been accustomed; -- I am come, Sir, -- to beg your charity!


Mr. Beaumont. You look very honest; why then should you be ashamed of being
poor?' Many among my own friends are poor too; and, if you will, you shall be
counted one of the number.


The old Man. You must forgive me, Sir; I have not time for that honor.


Mr. Beaumont. Why, what have you to do?


The old Man. That which is our most important business in this lower world; to
die. I may own it as we are alone; I have now but one week more to live.


Mr. Beaumont. How can you know that?


The old Man. How I know it, Sir, I have no means of explaining to you; but I
know it because I feel it, and that is a way not to be mistaken. Happily nobody
will lose by my death; for my daughter and her husband have maintained me
themselves for these last two years.


Mr. Beaumont. They have only done their duty.


The old Man. I was once rich enough not to fear becoming a weight to any body:
but I lent my money to a gentleman who called himself my friend, and who lived
a gay and thoughtless life with the help of it, till he saw me reduced to want.
Excuse me, Sir; you are a gentleman too yourself; yet what I say is the truth.


Mr. Beaumont. I have always as much pleasure in hearing the truth, as you can
have in telling it; and even if it were to speak against myself, I would not
have it disguised.


The old Man. I should have been wiser to have worked on 'till I died. But I
was grown feeble and helpless, and I looked upon that as a sign from God that I
might now rest from labor. 'Till then, I had never flown from it; it had kept
me in health all my young time, and I had never any other physician. But that
which strengthens one in youth, wears one out in age. I thought, therefore, I
would work no longer. Yet, when I had lost all my money, I wanted to try at it
again; and I struggled with all my heart to do as I had done before: but no! --
when I came to make use of my arms, I seemed as if I had lost them! -- Forgive
me, Sir, these few tears in calling it back to my mind; but I never had a
moment of so much unhappiness in my life, as when I first found that I was so
weak, and so broken, that I could do nothing for my own living.


Mr. Beaumont. You applied then, I suppose, to your children?


The old Man. No, Sir, they were so good that they applied to me. I had only
one daughter, but her husband has proved a true son to me. All that they are
worth is like my own. They took care of me, though I had not a crown to leave
them. May God give them a place at his heavenly table, as they have given one
to me at their table upon earth!


Mr. Beaumont. And have they now left off taking care of you?


The old Man. No, Sir; but they are now grown poor themselves. They have met
with some accidents that have brought them to ruin: but for all that, they have
been borrowing money to make me live in quiet for the rest of my days; and this
is the only thing they ever did to disobey me. I wish, however, to have ready
the small pittance necessary for my burial, that at least I may be no burden
to them after my death. And this is the reason of my asking charity: for though
I am old as a man, I am but young as a beggar.


Mr. Beaumont. And where do you live?


The old Man. Pray, Sir, excuse me; I cannot tell that, neither for my own
sake, nor my children's.


Mr. Beaumont. Pardon the question. It was an improper curiosity; but, depend
upon it, I will take no farther means to satisfy it.


The old Man. I don't doubt you, Sir. In a week, however, if you look up
toward heaven, you will see, I hope, where I shall live; for then it will no
longer be a secret.


Mr. Beaumont (giving him money.) Take this, good old man, and may God bless
you with it!


The old Man. All this, Sir? No! it is more than I require: a crown is as much
as I want. Any thing further would be of little use to me. There will be no
cravings, no desires, in heaven.


Mr. Beaumont. Give the rest, then, to your children.


The old Man. God forbid! my children are able to work; and while that is the
case, they need want for nothing.


Mr. Beaumont. Fare you well, good old man, go now, and take some rest.


The old Man (returning all the money, except one cro^on-piece.) Take back
this, Sir.


Mr. Beaumont. You make me ashamed, friend!


The old Man. O, Sir! I am ashamed myself! It is but too much to have taken a
crown. Keep the rest for those who have longer time to beg than I have.


Mr. Beaumont. Your situation really touches me!


The old Man. I hope it has touched God! your generosity will touch him also,
Sir, and you will find yourself repaid for it.


Mr. Beaumont. Will you have any thing to eat or drink?


The old Man. I have already had some bread and milk.


Mr. Beaumont. You shall, at least, then, take some refreshment home with you.


The old Man. No, Sir, I will not so far abuse Providence. One glass of wine,
however, I should be thankful for.


Mr. Beaumont. You shall have it, my friend; and as many more glasses as you
like.


The old Man. No, Sir, one only: I can take no more. You well deserve that I
should drink, at your house, the last drop of wine I shall swallow in this
world; and I will make it known in Heaven where it was that I drank it. Ah!
bountiful God! not even a glass of water is bestowed upon the poor, that thou
do not recompense!

(Mr. Beaumont goes himself for a bottle of wine: the Old Man, left alone,
raises his hands toward Heaven.) My last taste of wine! Just God! I pray thee
one day to return it twofold to him from whom I receive it.


Mr. Beaumont ( bringing a bottle and two glasses.) Take this glass, my good
old man: I have brought one also for myself. We will drink together.


The old Man. I thank thee, my God, for all the blessings thou have granted me
in this life! ( He drinks a little, and then stops and turns to Mr. Beaumont.)
May Heaven grant you, Sir, as happy an end as mine!


Mr. Beaumont. Stay and spend the night here, good man. Not a creature, if you
dislike it, shall see you.


The old Man. No, Sir, I cannot. Time is precious.


Mr. Beaumont. Can I do any thing further for you?


The old Man. I wish you could, Sir, upon your own account: but for myself, I
want nothing more in this world (looking at himself) or, at least, nothing but
a glove. I have lost my own.


Mr. Beaumont (feeling in his pocket, and giving him a pair.) Here, take these,
friend.


The old Man. Keep that, Sir; I only want one.


Mr. Beaumont. And why should you not take the other?


The old Man. This hand can still bear the cold very well: it is only the left
hand that suffers from it; and that has been struck with the palsy these two
years. (He puts the glove upon his left hand, and holds out the other uncovered
to Mr. Beaumont.) Adieu, Sir; I shall not forget you.


Mr. Beaumont. Nor I you. Come, my good friend, you must let me follow you: it
will be painful to me, now, to keep my word with you, of letting you go alone.


The old Man. Your keeping it, then, Sir, will be so much the better for you.
(He draws back his hand, and is going.)


Mr. Beaumont. Give me your hand once more, good old man! it is full of the
blessings of the Almighty!


The old Man. I hope myself to present him with yours in Paradise.


(He goes away.) THE PLEASURES AND ADVANTAGES OF SOCIABILITY.
HAROLD had received from Nature a melancholy disposition, with a penetrating
understanding. When he walked out with his uncle, every thing that he saw,
awakened some reflection, and gave rise to new thoughtfulness. His cousins
frequently complained, that while he seemed himself so much engaged, he took no
trouble in contributing to the general amusement of the house. They even
resolved, among themselves, to beg that their father would not let him walk out
with them any more: but a gentler method of correcting him, came afterward
into their minds. They agreed together to practice, for some days, the very
same conduct toward him, that he practiced toward others. One of them went to
see some fine pictures; another, some new buildings; and a third, a collection
of natural curiosities: but when they returned home, they kept to themselves
all the accounts, which they had formerly been eager to relate, of what they
had seen or heard; and instead of that mutual communication of the pleasures of
the day, which had made their evenings lively and agreeable, they had nothing
now in common, but formal gravity, and a tiresome silence. Harold remarked this
change with equal surprise and vexation. He felt the want of that gaiety, and
openness of conversation, which, though he rarely gave way to, made, in fact,
all his entertainment. Accustomed, however, to reflection and consideration, it
taught him immediately the injustice of his own behavior: and he soon became
as communicative, as he had hitherto been reserved. In giving way to that
social openness, with which Nature has gifted mankind for their mutual
blessing, attachment, and union, his own heart first tasted the sweets of
friendship and benevolence; while the vigor and vivacity of his genius found
fresh employment and satisfaction, from the information he gathered, in return
for what he imparted.

THE LITTLE PRATE-APACE.
LEONORA was a little girl of quick parts and vivacity. At only six years old,
she could both work and handle her scissars with much dexterity, and her mama's
pincushions and huswifes were all of her making. She could read, with ease and
readiness, any book that was put into her hand: she could also write very
prettily, and she never put large letters in the middle of a word, nor scrawled
all awry, from corner to corner of her paper. Neither were her strokes so
sprawling, that five or six words would fill a whole sheet, from the top to the
bottom; as I have known to be the case with some other little girls of the same
age.

HER papa and mama had as much reason to be pleased with her obedience, as her
master had with her industry. She lived in the greatest harmony with her
sisters, behaved to all the servants with civility, and to her play-fellows
with the utmost goodnature and desire of obliging. The old friends of the
family, and the strangers who made a new acquaintance with it, seemed equally
delighted with her manners and accomplishments.

WHO could believe, that with such qualities, such talents, such good-breeding,
she who possessed them could be insupportable? Such however was, unhappily, the
misfortune of Leonora.

ONE fault, though a single one, of which she was guilty, almost wholly
destroyed the effect of all her acquirements: her troublesome fondness of
talking soon made every one forget the merit of her mind, and the goodness of
her heart. The little Leonora was the greatest prate-apace in the universe.

IN the morning, for example, when she took her work, she would first begin
with saying: Well, it is high time now to be a little busy. What would mama
say, if she were to come and see me sitting with my hands before me? O dear!
what a monstrous long piece I have got here to sew! Well, thank Heaven, I am no
sluggard, so I shall soon contrive to see the end of it. Ah! here now the clock
strikes; one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine: -- Well, I have
two hours yet before I need go to the harpsicord. One may do a good deal of
work in two hours. I know mama will give me some sweetmeats to reward me. O
what pleasure I shall have in eating them! I love nothing so much as
sweetmeats, though French plumbs are very good too. Papa gave me some the other
day. But I think almonds and raisins are best; or, at least, better than any
thing else, except sweetmeats. Now, if Dolly would but come to day, I should
show her my new trimming. She is a very good-natured girl, that Dolly, only she
loves talking too much -- one cannot get in a single word for her. Why now where
is my thimble? Sister, have not you seen my thimble? I dare say Jenny has taken
it away with her. That tiresome creature is always doing some mischief. Who can
work, now, without a thimble? The needle will be always running into one's
finger. And then one's finger will be bleeding, and that will hurt one so! and
dirty all one's work besides. Jenny! Jenny! why where are you now? Do you know
any thing of my thimble? No, here it is -- all entangled in my thread.

IN this manner, the little thing would chatter incessantly all day long. When
her father and mother were conversing together upon subjects of the utmost
importance, she would come with her idle prattle and interrupt their discourse.
At dinner she was frequently only beginning her soup, when the rest of the
family had finished their meal. She forgot both to drink and to eat, in her
eagerness to be eternally talking.

HER father every day, and repeatedly, reprimanded her for this fault: but both
reproaches and remonstrances were equally vain. Neither had correction any
better effect.

AS she suffered nobody to be heard but herself, she was frequently sent up
stairs alone into her own chamber, in order to be kept out of the way. At other
times, they made her, during dinner, sit at a little table by herself, as far
off from the family as possible. Leonora was sorry and ashamed, but she did not
the more reform. She always found something to say aloud to herself, when she
could seize upon no one else to hear her. Rather than be silent, she would
begin to prattle with her knife and fork.

AND what did she gain by persevering in this troublesome habit? Nothing, my
little friends, as you will soon see, but mortification and hatred. I will tell
you, now, what she was one day obliged to endure.

HER father and mother were invited by a friend, to go and spend a few days in
the country. It was in the autumn; the weather was delightful; and there had
never, in any season, been a greater abundance of peaches, nectarines, apples,
and pears.

LEONORA had the fullest expectation of making one in this party. She was
greatly surprised, therefore, when her father bid her little sisters, Julia and
Cecilia, prepare for the journey, and, at the same time, turning to her, told
her she must stay at home. She f^ew, all in tears, to her mother, and called
out: O mama, what have I done to make papa in such a passion with me?

YOUR papa is not in a passion with you, answered her mother; but there is no
possibility of enduring you in any society. You interrupt all our peace and
comfort by your impertient prating.

MUST I never speak one word then? said Leonora.

THAT, answered her mother, would be nearly as great a fault as this, of which
we desire to correct you. But you must always wait for your turn, and not
perpetually interrupt your father and me, and people who are both older and
wiser than you can be. You ought, also, to break yourself of that idle and
troublesome trick of saying every thing that comes into your head. When you
wish to ask any question really for your instruction, you should do it in few
words, and at once: and when you have any little account to give, always
consider first in your own mind, whether your friends, or whoever you are
speaking to, are likely to wish to hear it.

LEONORA, however deficient she might be in reasons, would at least have found
abundance of words in her own justification, had she not heard her papa's
voice, calling aloud to her mother and sisters, that the carriage was waiting.

LEONORA saw them set off, with many sighs; and followed the carriage with her
eyes, which were swimming in tears, as long as it was in sight: and when she
could see it no more, she went and seated herself in a corner, and spent the
first quarter of an hour in nothing but crying. O wicked tongue! said she, it
is to you I owe all my misfortunes! But I will take care you shall never, never
for the future, say one single word more than you ought.

IN a few days the family returned. Her sisters brought home baskets full of
nuts and grapes; and, as they had excellent dispositions, their first pleasure
was to beg Leonora to partake of their presents: but Leonora was so lost in
melancholy, that she would not even taste them. She went up to her father, and
said to him: Ah! my dear papa, forgive me for making you punish me so; for I am
sure you have been as sorry for it as myself: and so I think we have both been
sufferers; but indeed, indeed, papa, I will never be such a prate-apace any
more.

HER father embraced her tenderly; and the next morning, she was permitted to
breakfast at table with the rest of the family. She spoke very little, and all
she said was modest and to the purpose. It is true, she found it very
difficult, at first, to keep her tongue in such order; for, unused to any
control, it was continually in motion, rolling from side to side of her mouth.
But the day after, this restraint grew less painful to her, and every following
day still less and less; till, by degrees, she was able wholly to conquer her
insupportable love of chattering. And now she perfectly understands how to bear
her part in society, without ever being impertinent, tiresome, or intruding.

The STRAWBERRIES and CURRANTS.
ARCHIBALD had often been told by his father, that children know little or
nothing of what is fit for them, and that they can never grow wise but by
following the counsel of those who are older than themselves. But this was a
lesson which he was unwilling to understand, or else, which he did not remember.

A division had been made of a little square piece of ground in the garden,
between his brother Percival and himself; and each had his own half at his
entire disposal, with full permission to sow or to plant in it whatever he
pleased.

PERCIVAL immediately recollected his father's instructions. He went,
therefore, to the gardener, and said to him: Robert, be so good as to tell me
what I can plant in my little garden, and how I must manage to make things grow
in it.

ROBERT gave him some roots, and picked him out some of his best seeds.
Percival flew to put them in the earth: and Robert had the goodnature to
overlook and to direct his proceedings.

ARCHIBALD only shrugged his shoulders at the compliance of his brother. Should
you like, said the gardener, that I should do something also for you?

O, to be sure, cried Archibald, I have great need of your advice!

HE then went himself, and gathered some flowers, and planted them by the stalk
in the ground; while Robert (...) ^im wholly to himself.

THE next morning, Archibald went to visit his flowers, and saw them all
drooping, withered, faded, and bending down to the earth. He instantly,
however, planted more; but he saw, the next day, that they had shared the same
fate.

HE soon grew weary of this work. It was paying rather too dear for the
pleasure of having flowers in his garden. He ceased, therefore, to take any
further trouble with it, and the ground was quickly covered with thistles and
weeds.

ABOUT the latter end of the next spring, he perceived, upon his brother's
ground, something red, that seemed budding in the midst of thick clusters of
green. He went to examine it; and found the finest strawberries, beautiful in
their color, and delicious in their taste. O dear! cried he, if I too had but
planted some of these in my garden!

NOT long after, he observed some little round things, of a deep vermillion,
hanging in bunches between the leaves of a thick bush. He instantly went up to
them. They were currants, so fine, ripe, and inviting, that only to look at
them might create an appetite. Ah! cried he again, if I had but planted some of
these, too, in my garden!

YOU may eat of them, as if they were entirely yours, said his brother.

IT was all in your own power, said the gardener, to have had some equally
good. So pray take care for the future not to despise the advice of people who
have had more experience than yourself.

Butterfly, pretty Butterfly!
BUTTERFLY, pretty butterfly! come and rest on the flower that I hold in my
hand!

WHITHER go thou, little simpleton? See thou not that hungry bird that
watches thee? His beak is sharpened, and already open to devour thee. Come,
come then, hither; he will be afraid of me, and he will not then dare approach
thee.

BUTTERFLY, pretty butterfly! come and rest on the flowers that I hold in my
hand!

I will not pull off thy wings, nor torment thee: no, no, no; thou art little
and helpless, like myself. I only wish to look at thee nearer. I want to see
thy little head, and to examine thy long body, and thy spread wings, mottled
and speckled with a thousand different colors.

BUTTERFLY, pretty butterfly! come and rest on the flower that I hold in my
hand!

I will not keep thee long; I know thou have not long to live. When the summer
is over, thou will be no more; and for me, I shall only then be six years old.

BUTTERFLY, pretty butterfly! come and rest on this flower that I hold in my
hand! Thou have not a moment to lose from enjoying this short life; but thou
may feed and regale thyself all the time that I look at thee.

A GOOD HEART EXCUSES MANY ERRORS. A DRAMA IN ONE ACT.
PERSONS.
Mr. VINCENT. RALPH, his son. MARIANNE, his daughter. FREDERICK, his nephew.
DOLLY, his niece. A Servant. PETER, an old coachman.
The Scene is in an apartment in Mr. Vincent's house.

A GOOD HEART EXCUSES MANY ERRORS.
SCENE I.
Mr. VINCENT. THIS is one's reward for taking the charge of other people's
children! How have I loved that Frederick! He was almost dearer to me than my
own son; and now the little wretch to play me such tricks! How is it possible
he can be so greatly altered from the first promise of his infancy! he seemed
to have such goodness of heart, such vivacity, such spirit! the courage of a
lion, with the gentleness of a lamb! One could not help loving him. Ah! let him
never again come in my sight! I will not even hear his name.

SCENE II.
Mr. VINCENT, DOLLY. DOLLY. DID you send for me, my dear uncle? Here I am,
ready for your orders.


Mr. Vincent. I have rare news for you of that pretty gentleman your brother.


Dolly (turning pale.) Of Frederick?


Mr. Vincent. Here, read this letter of Ralph's: no, stay, I Will read it to you
myself. (He reads.)

"My dear papa,
"I am extremely sorry to have nothing but disagreeable things to tell you; but
it is better you should hear them from me, than from any body else. Our dear
Frederick"...


O, he deserves well to be called dear, indeed!

"Our dear Frederick has behaved very ill. Some days ago, he sold his watch,
and, what is worse, the greater part of his classical books, as well as all his
books of devotion. I will tell you how I came to know it. An old bookseller,
who lets us have books at second-hand, came the other day to offer me the
Christian's Exercise. As mine is almost worn out, by frequent reading, I was
very glad of the opportunity to buy another. He showed it me. I instantly knew
it to be Frederick's; and so much the more certainly, because his name was
scrawled in the title page. I bought it for sixpence; but I said nothing, that
I might not disgrace him among our school-fellows. So I only carried it to our
tutor, who sent for the bookseller, and enquired of whom he had the book.

THE bookseller confessed he had purchased it of my cousin. Frederick could not
deny it, and said he had sold it because he wanted some money; and that, in the
mean time, till he could buy another, he had borrowed one of a friend who
happened to have two.

OUR tutor insisted upon knowing what he had done with the money. Frederick
told him a long tale; but I suspect it was a mere falsehood. Now, thought I to
myself, I should like to find out if he has not also disposed of some of his
other things. And the first that came into my head was that watch which you
gave him for a new year's gift, that he might keep some account how he spent
his time, which, as you may remember, he never much thought about. I asked him,
therefore, what it was o'clock? He looked confused, and answered, that his
watch was at the watch-maker^s. I then ran directly to the watch-maker's, to
satisfy myself. But there was not a word of truth in it. I then reasoned to him
about it, as one friend should to another. He replied, that it was no business
of mine, and that his watch was in a much better place where he had put it,
than keeping it in his fob; and that he did not want to look at the hour to
tell him what he had to do. So who knows what may have happened to him still
worse? for there is no finding out every thing."


There, Dolly! what do you say now?


Dolly. Indeed, my dear uncle, I must own I am as little pleased with my
brother as you are; but for all that....


Mr. Vincent. Patience, patience! this is not the whole. The worst part of the
story is to come. (He reads.)

"Now, Sir, please to hear what he has been doing since. The day before
yesterday, in the afternoon, he went out without a king leave, and at night he
did not return. When the supper-bell was rung, he did not come into the
eating-hall; and, in short, he spent the whole night abroad, and never came
home till the next morning. You may easily imagine how he was received. He was
desired to say where he had been. He had all his stories ready invented
beforehand: yet, even if all he said were true -- But, to cut things short, he
is to appear tonight before a general meeting of all the masters; and if he is
served as he merits, he will be shamefully expelled, or, at the least, sent
away in disgrace. What I am most sorry about, is his ingratitude for your
goodness, and the scandal he brings upon us all, and the bad way of life he is
got into. I cannot possibly believe that he has not told a falsehood in the
place where he says he spent the night."


WELL, but why don't he tell me where that was?

"I wish he would confess the truth: though perhaps that may be still worse,
and show him yet more deserving your displeasure. He threatens, now, to make
his escape, and go to you...."


YES, yes, let him come! let him once more set his foot upon my threshold, and
he shall see what will be the consequence! He may go again to the same place
where he has passed his other nights. Mind me, Dolly, for it is you I am
speaking to; never pretend to say a word more to me in his favor. They may put
him in prison, or send him away, or expel him disgracefully, it is all the same
to me. I shall trouble myself no more about him. He may go, if he will, to a
sea-port*town, and turn cabin-boy to some ship^d embark for the East Indies. --
For how long a time did I look upon him as if he were my own son!


Dolly. Yes, my dear uncle, you have been a father to us both: and our own
parents, I am sure, could not have taken more care of us, or have treated us
more kindly.


Mr. Vincent. I have done it with the greatest pleasure; I have no merit in it
at all. When your poor mother was alive, she always acted the same, during my
long voyages, by my own children. It was therefore my duty to return it. And I
never in my life repented it till today; but....


Dolly. O Sir! if my brother has forgot himself just for a moment, it is only
from the hastiness of his disposition. You know, uncle, you had him for a long
time under your own eyes; and I am sure you must remember, that whenever he did
any thing that was not right, his repentance, and his sorrow for having made
you angry, were always greater than his fault.


Mr. Vincent. Yes; and how many many fool's frolicks have I forgiven him! Did
not he burn his eyebrows, and his hair, with his crackers? Did he not break a
great looking-glass, by letting it fall out of the window, at the next door?
Did he not tumble himself into a slough, one day, when he had just put his best
coat on? Did he not drive my handsome new chariot into a ditch? And did not I
pardon him every thing? I thought all these mischievous pranks were only owing
to giddiness, and not to a disposition naturally bad: but to sell his watch,
and his books, to spend the whole night out of school, and rebel against his
masters, and then to have the assurance to think of coming back to my house! --


Dolly. But do, dear uncle, have the goodness to hear what he may have to say
in his defense.


Mr. Vincent. I hear him! Heaven keep me from ever seeing him again! I shall go
and give orders throughout the whole village for every body to run at him with
a pitchfork, if ever he dare show himself here-abouts again.


Dolly. O no, you can never be so hard-hearted as that! you can never refuse
the petition of a niece who loves and honors you like a father!


Mr. Vincent. You shall soon see if that will be so difficult to me, Miss Dolly.


Dolly. Would you have me believe, then, uncle, that you did not use to love my
poor mother; and that now you don't love me neither?


Mr. Vincent. No, no, I have no fault to find with you: and the ill behavior
of your brother shall make no change in my regard for you. But if you have the
least respect for me, don't torment me any more with your entreaties. You must
be contented with my affection for yourself.


Dolly. How can I be contented, uncle, when I see my brother out of your favor?


Mr. Vincent. Has not he deserved well to be out of it? Why should not he
confess what he had done with the money, and where it was he ran away to?


Dolly. Indeed you may find by the very letter itself that he did make the
confession: only Ralph would not believe him.

(She takes Mr. Vincent's hand, and cries over it.) Ah! my dear uncle!...


Mr. Vincent (a little softened.) Well, well, I Will do one thing more for your
sake; I Will wait for the school-master's letter.


SCENE III.
Mr. VINCENT, DOLLY, a SERVANT. Mr. VINCENT. WHAT do you want?


Servant. Here Is a messenger, Sir, desires to speak with you.


Mr. Vincent. Has he brought any thing for me?


Servant. Yes, Sir, a letter from the school.


(He gives it to him.) Mr. Vincent (looking at it.) So, so, this is what I
expected; it is from his master. I know his hand. Where Is the messenger? let him
wait for an answer.


Servant. Would you have him come up stairs, Sir?


Mr. Vincent. No, I shall go down to him. I choose to have some talk with him by
myself.


(He goes out: Dolly is following him; but the servant makes her a sign to turn
back.) SCENE IV.
DOLLY, AND THE SERVANT. SERVANT. STAY, stay, Miss Dolly!


Dolly. What do you want with me?


Servant. Your brother is come!


Dolly. My brother?


Servant. At least, if he is not quite come, he is not far off.


Dolly. How do you know?


Servant. The messenger told me; he met him on the road. Pray, Miss, what is it
poor Master Frederick has done?


Dolly. Nothing he need be ashamed of; so pray don't suspect he has.


Servant. I thought so myself! We all love him dearly, God knows, and would
give up our very lives to serve him. Whenever we did the least thing in the
world for him, he was sure to make us amends. He was always ready to speak a
good word for us, if his uncle was in anger; and he was the first to do good to
all the poor people in the village. I cannot think how his master can have the
heart to be in a passion with him! But I know how it is; they want to punish
him for some little comical frolic; and he has such a fine spirit, that he
scorns to bow down to them.


Dolly. Where did the messenger see him?


Servant. About seven miles off. He was fast asleep under a willow-tree, by the
side of a little brook.


Dolly. Poor dear Frederick!


Servant. The messenger stayed by him till he waked. You may think how much
Master Frederick was surprised at seeing him. He took it for granted the man
was only following him to force him back again; and he told him he would sooner
be torn in pieces than go with him.


Dolly. O, how well I know his resolution and courage!


Servant. The messenger told him he had such a regard for him, that, whatever
anger he might incur, even though he should lose his employment, he would not
do any thing to vex him. And then he owned to him what he was coming here
about, and what stories were being reported of him.


Dolly. And what did my brother resolve upon?


Servant. Why, though he was almost tired to death, he began walking on with
him; and they traveled together till they came to the borders of the wood; and
then Master Frederick ran into it, and hid himself in the hermitage. He is now
waiting the return of the messenger, to hear how your uncle takes it all.


Dolly. O that I could but speak to him!


Servant. I dare say he wishes that, as much as you do.


Dolly. My uncle often walks that way; suppose he should meet him while he is
in this passion! O, run and bid him lie down and hide himself behind the hay in
the barn: and I will come to him as soon as ever my uncle is gone out.


Servant. Don't be afraid, Miss Dolly; I Will see him safe there myself, and show
him where he may be snug. ( He goes out.)


SCENE V.
DOLLY alone. HOW he is always putting me in some fright! yet I can never help
loving him, for all that.


SCENE VI.
MARIANNE AND DOLLY. DOLLY. O MY dear cousin, how much I want to talk with you!
And yet, I Am sure I have nothing but very bad news to tell you.


Marianne. I know it all. Papa has just given me my brother's letter to read;
and one is come from the schoolmaster, that has made him more angry with
Frederick than ever.


Dolly. And I am sure I don't know which way in the world to defend him!


Marianne. I will venture any wager that he is innocent. You know how artful
Ralph is; he commits all the faults himself, and then has the cunning to throw
them upon other people. This is not the first time he has tried to set papa
against Frederick. Often and often, by some secret complaints of him, he has
had him sent out of the house; and then afterward, when every thing has come
to light, it has been found that no body was to blame but himself. I can see
clearly, even by this letter, that it is all some treachery of his own, and
that Frederick has only been a little unthinking and giddy.


Dolly. How sweetly does your kindness always give me comfort! Yes indeed, my
brother is naturally good, frank, cordial, generous, and unsuspecting: but
then, I must confess, cousin, he is hasty, and daring, very thoughtless, and
very hard to be made to give up his own opinions; and he takes no trouble to
please any body that does not behave to him as he likes.


Marianne. And Ralph is envious, artful, cunning and fawning. He is just like a
cat, that gives one at first a nice soft velvet paw, and then the moment one
begins to think it one's friend, out comes a great claw, with long nails! How
readily would I change my brother, with all his pretended goodness, for yours,
with all the faults that they can charge him with! I am sure I wish with all my
heart he was here.


Dolly. And suppose he should come?


Marianne. O where, where is he? I Will run to him -- I am dying to see him!


Dolly. Hush, hush! I think I hear my uncle scolding!


Marianne. Frederick is your own brother, to be sure, and it is but fair you
should see him first: so I Will stay here with papa, and try to soften him a
little. But go directly, Dolly, to the poor runaway, and give him a few words
of hope and comfort.


Dolly. Yes, and a good lecture too, I assure you, for he deserves it well. (
She goes.)


SCENE VII.
Mr. VINCENT, MARIANNE. Mr. VINCENT. THIS young rogue has put me in such a
rage, that I cannot for my life settle myself to answer the school-master's
letter, nor send away the messenger. However, he may as well stay till
tomorrow morning: and by then I will try to compose myself a little.


Marianne. What! dear papa, are you still so angry with my poor cousin! Has he
been doing something so very, very bad?


Mr. Vincent. It becomes you mighty well, to be sure, to excuse him: I see you
are no better nor wiser than himself; and if you had been in his place, I
suppose you would have done worse. And yet, what a good example you both of you
have before your eyes!


Marianne. Who is that, papa?


Mr. Vincent. My good Ralph.


Marianne. O yes, certainly, my brother is vastly good! and vastly generous! we
should do extremely well, all of us to copy after him!


Mr. Vincent. I know well enough that Dolly and you have always owed him a
grudge; and, by your management, I began to be prejudiced against him myself.
But the schoolmaster has sent me today so good an account of him --


Marianne. O dear papa! and was he not always praised here in the same manner
by his tutors? They know very well that he has a rich father; and so they
always hope to get presents for themselves, by flattering his son.


Mr. Vincent. Well, well, perhaps they may sometimes have cajoled me a little
about him: but at least, however, he has played me no tricks since his infancy,
and Frederick has played me a thousand.


Marianne. But his tricks do nobody any harm, papa; they don't hurt a creature
but himself.


Mr. Vincent. You Will put me in a rage, girl! Did he hurt no creature but
himself, when he drove my new chariot into the ditch, and beat it about till
half the gilding came off; a chariot that cost so much?


Marianne. O, it was only a little unlucky frolic, papa, and very excusable at
his age. Peter was driving the chariot about, and Frederick teazed him to take
him upon the box; but when they had gone a little way together, the whip
happened to drop. Peter got down to pick it up: the horses felt a slack rein,
and began running away; happily, however, the fore wheels came off, and so no
harm was done, except to the carriage.


Mr. Vincent. What! I suppose that was not enough for you? And pray, in this
fine exploit, who was the sufferer but me!


Marianne. Frederick, papa; for he had his head broke; and poor Peter was worst
off of all, for he lost his place by it.


Mr. Vincent. I cannot yet think of it, but I tremble with rage! That one
adventure alone cost me more than a hundred guineas.


Marianne. And how much sorrow too, papa, did it cost poor Frederick? He has
never done fretting to this moment, that he should have made Peter be
discharged.


Mr. Vincent. They are a couple of good-for-nothing fellows, and fit company
for each other. I always see that you fix upon the worst people you can find to
take their parts. It Is pity you were not a boy yourself, that you might have
been a comrade with your precious cousin. You would have made fine work between
you!


Marianne. But at least, papa --


Mr. Vincent. Hold your tongue; you only tire me with your nonsense. I shall go
to breathe a little fresh air. So see for Dolly, and then come after me. (He
goes out, but leaves his hat.)


SCENE VIII.
MARIANNE. I SHALL have a great deal of trouble to soften him! However, I will not
despairs. He is never harsh in any thing but words.


SCENE IX.
MARIANNE, DOLLY. DOLLY ( peeping in, and holding the door with her hand.) HIST!


Marianne. Well?


Dolly. Is my uncle gone?


Marianne. Just this moment. Where Is Frederick?


Dolly. He Is waiting upon the back stairs.


Marianne. Let Us make him come up into our own room.


Dolly. O, not for the world! Betty is there.


Marianne. Why should not he come in here, then? Nobody will interrupt us, now
papa is out.


Dolly. Very true; and it will be easier for him to make off, if he should want
it. Stay a little, and I Will go and fetch him.


SCENE X.
MARIANNE. O HOW I shall like to hear him tell how it all happened! and how
glad I shall be to see him again! It Is a whole year since he left us. O! -- I
hear him!


( She runs to the door to meet him.) SCENE XI.
MARIANNE, DOLLY, and FREDERICK. MARIANNE. AH! my dear cousin!


Dolly. To be sure he deserves to be so caressed for all the uneasiness he has
given us!


Marianne ( holding out her hand to him.) He is come to us once more, and that
makes me forget every thing,


Frederick. My dearest cousin I find, then, you are just the same as I left
you? You were never so hard upon me as my sister.


Dolly. I am not so hard upon you as your uncle is, I am sure.


Frederick. First of all, tell me what he says? Is it really true that he is so
very angry with me?


Dolly. If he were only to know that we have you now hid up with us, we should
be turned out of the house ourselves, and might find what lodging we could.


Marianne. Yes, indeed! so be very careful how you let him see you yet, he
might trample you under his feet, for aught I can tell, in his first fury.


Frederick. What can the master have written to him?


Dolly. Why, great praise of your pretty pranks, you may be sure!


Marianne. My brother had already told him something of the matter in a letter
by yesterday's post.


Frederick. What! has Ralph written to him? I ought not to want any defense,
then. He knows as well as I do how every thing happened. I trusted him with it
all.


Marianne. O, if you were to be judged by his account of you!


Frederick. I am a rogue and a cheat, then, if I am not innocent.


Dolly. That Is saying nothing, for you cannot help being one or other.


Frederick. And have you really, then, believed me guilty? What is my crime?
Having sold my watch?


Dolly. Is that all, though? who knows but your shirts, and your coats, and
your --


Frederick. Why, I own I should have sold them too, if I had wanted more money.


Dolly. Upon my word, this is a pretty way of clearing yourself! And then to
pass whole nights out of school!


Frederick. One night, sister.


Dolly. And rebel against a proper correction.


Frederick. No, rather say against a severe outrage, that I did not deserve. If
I had submitted to it, there would always have been a blot in my uncle's
opinion of me; and if they had expelled me, I would never have appeared before
you any more.


Marianne. But what, my dear cousin, have you to say in your own behalf? You
ought to tell us every thing, that we may explain it all to papa.


Frederick. Hear me, then. Two or three days ago, they told us there was to be
a fair in the next village. The tutor gave us leave to go to it, for a little
diversion, and to see what curiosities we could find there.


Dolly. O, then, you sold your watch and your Christian's Exercise, to buy
oranges and sugar-plum^ did you! or else to have a sight of apes and monkies?


Frederick. My sister must have a great taste for such sort of things herself,
I should suppose, to suspect that other people would spend all their money in
them. No, it was no such matter. But I happened to be dry, and so I went into
an inn where they sold beer --


Dolly. Why, that is still worse.


Frederick. Indeed, sister, you are very cross. I wish you would let me go on.
While I was sitting there --


Marianne (listening at the door.) O we are ruined! Papa's coming! I hear his
step!


Dolly. Hide yourself, hide yourself!


Frederick. No, no, I will see my uncle, and tell him all.


Marianne. O no, dear cousin! he is not in a humor to hear you. In pity to me,
run --


Frederick. Do you wish it?


Marianne. Yes, yes; let me manage for you myself.


(She pushes him by the shoulder out of the door l^^ding to the back stairs,
shuts it, and returns.) SCENE XII.
Mr. VINCENT, MARIANNE, DOLLY MARIANNE. WHAT! papa, are you come home already
from your walk?


Mr. Vincent. I come for my villainous hat. I don't know where I have left it.


Dolly (looking about.) O, here it is, Sir.


(She gives it to him.) Mr. Vincent. Why had not you the sense to bring it
after me?


Dolly. Why, I believe I was blind, for I never saw it.


Marianne. Besides, one cannot think of every thing.


Mr. Vincent. O, to be sure, you have a vast number of things to think of!


Marianne. Why, indeed, papa, I cannot get poor Frederick out of my head.


Mr. Vincent. Am I never to have done being pestered with that name in my ears?


Marianne. Very well, then, papa, I will not talk of him any more. But had not you
better finish your walk before the dew makes it too wet?


Mr. Vincent. No, I shall not go out again. (Marianne and Dolly look at one
another, and shake their heads very sorrowfully.) It Is too late. Besides, they
say my old coachman is below, and wants to speak to me.


Marianne and Dolly. What! Peter?


Mr. Vincent. Ill as he served me, the mischief is over now, and he has had his
punishment; so I will not refuse to hear what he has to say.


Marianne. He can wait very well, papa, till you come back from your walk.


Mr. Vincent. No, no, I Will get rid of him at once. Besides, upon the whole --
(Marianne and Dolly whisper.) Miss Marianne, when your father speaks to you,
and, Miss Dolly, when your uncle speaks to you, I think you might as well
listen to him. Upon the whole, I say, -- (Dolly is sliding off.) Where are you
going, Dolly?


Dolly (confused.) Only down stairs, uncle.


Mr. Vincent. Very well, then, tell Peter to come up. (Dolly goes.)


SCENE XIII.
Mr. VINCENT, MARIANNE. Mr. VINCENT. UPON the whole, I say, I cannot help a
little pitying that fellow. I never had such a good coachman in my life. One
might see one's face upon the horses' coats; he kept them so fine. And he did
not go, like the rest of those fellows, drinking up their oats in the
public-houses.


Marianne. O, if you had not turned him away papa, how much sorrow and fretting
you would have saved poor Frederick!


Mr. Vincent. Don't speak to me of him any more. It Is all his fault that I
parted with Peter, and that I have now never a coachman I can keep; for he has
spoiled me for all others. I shall never get such a one in his place.


SCENE XIV.
Mr. VINCENT, MARIANNE, DOLLY, PETER. DOLLY. SEE, uncle, here is Peter.


Peter. I ask your honor's pardon; but I hope you are not resolved upon being
angry with me always; and that you will not take it much amiss that I took the
liberty to call in, as I passed through the village, just to beg your honor to
give me a character.


Mr. Vincent. Why, did I not give you one?


Peter. Your honor gave me never a one, but only just to say: "Here, this is
your money; go out of my house this instant, and never come again into my
sight." So that your honor gave me no time to beg for my character in writing.


Mr. Vincent. That was only because you did not deserve to be treated any
better. You know you ruined me my new chariot. I wish with all my heart both
you and Frederick had your necks twisted off for your pains!


Peter. Why, what could I do, Sir? a coachman's wit is in his whip, as one may
say, and mine had slipped out of my hands. I shall take better care in time to
come.


Mr. Vincent. Well, well, I shall think no more of it now. How do you get your
living?


Peter. Ah! your honor! since I left your house, I have never done well in any
one thing! When I went away, as you know, Sir, I hired myself to Major
Braffing. Such a major! not one word could come out of his mouth, without
holding up his cane! Well, God give him peace!


Mr. Vincent. What, is he dead?


Peter. Yes, to the great joy of all his soldiers. He never gave me an order,
but he swore like a Turk. His horses, however, had good measure of oats; but
his men had many a knock, and hardly a morsel of bread.


Marianne. Poor good Peter! how could you live in his service?


Peter. Why, where could I go? The same thing that kept me then, would keep me
still, if I could have stayed; for the case was, that there was employment for
my wife as well as for me, for she was the washer-woman: and she used at least
to go halves with me in keeping the children. But every body was afraid of the
major, though the major was afraid of nothing but death; and that felled him
down, whether he would or no. And now I am quite out of employ, and cannot tell
where to lay my head.


Mr. Vincent. Why, don't you know I never leave any body to die of hunger; and
much less an old servant of my own?


Peter. Ah, your honor! so I always though it; but those angry words "Never come
into my sight again!" were always sounding like a thunderbolt in my ears. I
should not have minded ten of the major's oaths h^^s so much.


Marianne. And have you never got a place since?


Peter. O my dear young lady, it is not here the same thing as in a great city.
In such a village as this, and all here-abouts, the people are so poor, that
they have more need of their oats for themselves than for their horses. So I
hired myself out by the day to work in the fields; my wife was always at her
spinning; and my children went about begging charity. But, all of us together,
we got so little, that at the end of the week, we could not manage to pay for a
little truckle-bed we hired in a garret: so, in a little time, we had nothing
but the sky to cover us, and the ground to lie upon! My poor wife, between
sickness and sorrow, has breathed her last! (He wipes his eyes.)


Mr. Vincent. You are served right, then! Why could you not ask me to help you?


Marianne ( to Dolly.) See how papa is coming round again! This is a good sign
for Frederick!


Peter. Ah, Sir! she was such a good wife! never was there such a huswife
before! When I used to come up at night, without having earned one farthing,
and thought I must go to bed without tasting a morsel of food, I used to find
she had eaten but half her own dinner or supper, to leave the other h^^f for
me. And when I used to be foaming with rage, like a madman, and ready to break
every thing in the room, she knew the way to bring me back to God, and make me
an honest man again. But she is dead now, and I cannot bring her to life again!
That was the beginning of the worst of my misfortunes; but I am sure I don't
know what will be the end of them!


Dolly. Poor Peter!


Peter. So, as I have nothing more to hope for in that place, I set out, one
fine evening, to see what I cou^^ do somewhere else. I carried my little girl
behind me, and took my boy in my hand. We traveled a good part of the night;
and the rest of it, we slept under a tree. The next morning, by break of day,
we came to a village. By good luck there happened to be a fair there, and so I
got a little money by carrying about parcels. Put now, Sir, comes the time to
hear me! for I met with quite an angel from Heaven! -- Master Frederick! --


Mr. Vincent. An angel! Frederick an angel! what, that runaway! --

(Marianne and Dolly take one another by the hand, and go close up to Peter,
with looks of joy and curiosity, calling out together:) Frederick! Frederick!


Peter. Yes, indeed, my dear master; so treat me as ill as you please, but pray
don't go to abuse that noble, generous, young gentleman. I would rather you
should tread me under your feet.


Dolly. O tell us, tell us how it was, Peter!


Peter. My little girl went to beg some charity at the door of a public-house;
and there she saw, as she looked in, Master Ralph and Master Frederick drinking
some beer at one of the tables.


Mr. Vincent. A pretty taste, indeed! drinking beer in a public-house!


Dolly. My dear uncle, he wanted a little refreshment.


Mr. Vincent. And what had he to do in that place?


Marianne. He went to the fair. Why, papa, you find Ralph was there, too.


Peter. He presently knew my girl; and he got up from the table, in spite of
all his companion could say to hinder him. He gave the poor thing a glass of
wine, and took her hand and came out with her, to make her tell him all that
had happened to us. And then he bid her bring him to where I was. They found me
in the next street, pumping some water into my hat, to refresh myself a little,
because of the heat. I thought I should have gone mad with joy, when I saw him.
All dirty and ragged as I was, I took him in my arms before them all; and I
believe they were afraid I should have suffocated him, I hugged him so
heartily. However, he hugged me as much again. But, at last, as a mob got about
us, he told me to take him somewhere that we could be alone together; and so I
took him to a garret which I had bespoke to sleep in.


Marianne. Ah, papa, I Will lay a wager now --


Mr. Vincent. Hold your tongue. Well, Peter?


Peter. I told him all the same I have been telling your honor; and the good
young gentleman fell a crying, and took on mightily. It is I, said he, ought to
beg for you, for it was I that was the cause of your misfortune. However, I
will not go to sleep till I have done something for you. Here, poor Peter, take
this; you shall have all that I have in my pockets; and then he felt in them,
and emptied them into my hands. At first I would not take it, and he was very
angry. I told him I supposed it was only the money they had given him for his
amusements, and that, as to me, I was used enough to hardships. He quite
gnashed his teeth, and stamped with his feet, and, I dare say, would have
beaten me, at last, if I had not taken his purse.


Mr. Vincent. And how much was in it?


Peter. About six shillings. And he would only keep sixpence of it. It shall
never be said, cried he, that an honest old servant of my uncle, that never
robbed nor murdered, was obliged, in his old age, to go a begging, and had not
so much as a roof to shelter him. Get yourself a room; and before three days
are at an end, I will come to you again, and bring you enough to live upon,
till I can write for more to my uncle. We have both of us put him in a passion;
but I know he is too good, and too generous, to give you up to want.


Mr. Vincent. Are you sure, Peter, that he said that?


Peter. If your honor chooses, I Will swear it.


Marianne. No, no, we can easily believe it. Go on with your account.


Peter. And what do you do with your children? said he, while he was playing
with my boy. What do I do with them? said I; why, they run along the streets
and roads, carrying flowers, and little brooms, and the like, to sell; and when
nobody will buy any, they beg charity. That Is very bad for them, said he; for
at that rate they will only grow up to idleness or roguery. You must make your
boy learn some honest trade, and put your girl out to work with some honest
people.


Marianne. Frederick was quite in the right, was not he, papa?


Peter. Very true, said I; but how am I to offer them in all these rags? If I
had only fifty shillings, or there-abouts, I should know well enough how to
dispose of them. There is a weaver here who employs children, if I could only
give him a guinea, or so, beforehand. And here is an herb-woman, too, who
would as willingly take the girl, to sell her flowers, and so forth, but I had
only just enough to buy her a gown, or so. And then I might go and try to get
into service again myself, in some rich house, and not be forced to stroll
about in this way like a vagabond.


Mr. Vincent. And what did Frederick answer?


Peter. Not a word, Sir, but went away: however, two days after, he came back
again. Where is the weaver, said he, that would take your son? Carry me to him
directly. I then showed him the way, and he went and talked to him in private.
And now, said he, where is the herb-woman? So then I showed him the way there
too. He left me at the door, and went and talked to her in the garden, and then
came back to me, without saying a word, and walked off with me. But when he had
gone about a hundred steps, he stopped short, and, catching hold of me, called
out: Good old man, set your mind at rest about your children. And then, after
that, he bid me go to a slopshop, that he pointed to me, a good way off; where
he had paid for this surtout and coat that you see I have got on. -- And I
think, in my own mind, I look as great as a lord in them!


Marianne. O my dear cousin! my good, good Frederick?


Mr. Vincent (wiping first one eye, then the other.) I see, now which way the
watch went.


Peter. But this is not all, Sir. For did not I surprise him in putting money
in my pocket privately? I was quite positive to give it him back; but if ever I
saw him fall into a passion, that was the time. He told me, Sir, that it was
your honor that sent it him, on purpose for me: but when I told him I would
run here out of hand to thank you for it, he said you would make believe you
knew nothing about it. Ah, thought I, his honor is such a good master! perhaps
he may take me again into his service! However, I did not dare come, as Master
Frederick bid me not.


Mr. Vincent. O Frederick! O my dear Frederick! you have still, then, the same
noble and generous heart I always saw in you when you was but a brat!


Dolly. And what was it determined you, at last, upon coming again to my uncle?


Peter. I Will tell you, Miss. They would not take my boy, after all, without a
certificate of his birth: so I was obliged to come and ask it of the parson.
And just as I got into the village, it seemed as if Master Frederick had
brought good luck to me, for I was told that Mr. Boynton wanted a coachman. So
I went, and offered myself to his service, and he said he had no objection to
taking me, provided I could bring him a good character from my last master. Now
I could not go into the other world to ask one of the major; so I made bold to
try if I might speak to your honor. I don't know but you may judge proper to
refuse it me, but I shall always be glad to think I have had an opportunity to
give you my humble thanks for the favors you was so good as to send me by
Master Frederick.


Mr. Vincent. No, my good Peter, you owe those favors to nobody but him. And
he almost stripped himself in order to clothe you. But then he owes you, in
exchange, the return of my affection. From what a misfortune you have saved
him! But for you, Peter, -- yes, but for you, I should have banished him from
my sight for ever!


Peter. You don't say so, Sir? Why, then, I am the most happy man in the whole
world! He has got me out of my difficulties, and now I have got him out of his
difficulties in my turn! And so we are both of us obliged to one another, just
the same!


Mr. Vincent. That vile rogue Ralph had nearly made me hate him. I wonder how I
could think of minding that little fibbing impostor, after so many tricks as he
has played me! But then, still, the schoolmaster! the schoolmaster!


Marianne. Why, papa, he may have deceived him, just as he deceived you.


Mr. Vincent. But, good God, they write me word that he has made his escape!
Suppose he should be in a fit of despair! Suppose some accident should happen
to him!


Peter. A horse! I Will get me a horse, and bring him back to you, Sir, if he is
at the very further end of the world! (Going to run off.)


Dolly (holding him.) But is it quite true, my dear uncle, that you will
forgive him; and that you will shake hands with him, and make friends with him?


Mr. Vincent. Yes, that I would, if he had sold all the clothes off his back,
and was to come home as naked as my hand! (Dolly makes a sign to Marianne, and
runs out.)


Marianne. But suppose he should be here, papa?


Mr. Vincent. Here! why, has any one seen him? Where is he? where is he?


Peter. Ah! if he was here! if he was but here! I should give a jump quite up
to the ceiling!


Marianne. Well, then, papa, -- don't you see him?


SCENE XV.
Mr. VINCENT, MARIANNE, PETER, DOLLY, FREDERICK. ( Frederick throws himself at
his uncle's feet. Peter kneels down by his side, and puts one arm round Mr.
Vincent, and the other round Frederick, embracing and leaning over them, and
shouting aloud for joy. Marianne and Dolly kiss one another, and run about in
transports.) FREDERICK. O UNCLE! my dear uncle! will you then forgive me?


Mr. Vincent (in a voice but half audible, while he embraces him.) Forgive
thee? my boy! Thou deservest that I should love thee a thousand times better
than ever, and never suffer thee again to be out of my sight!


Frederick. O no, never, never, my dearest uncle! (He rises, and runs up to
Peter, and putting his arms round his neck, says:) O, if you had seen the
unhappiness of this man and his children! and if you had yourself been the
cause of it all, as I was! --


Peter. No, it was myself! it was my own doing! my own fault all of it! What
business had I to let you clamber up upon the box, and then leave you to the
mercy of a pair of mettlesome horses? And yet, who could deny you any thing?
No, I could not have said you nay, if the carriage had run over my body. So
mind now, Master Frederick, never ask me any thing I ought not to do; for be it
what it will, I must grant it, though I were forced to go and throw myself into
the river, for my pains.


Mr. Vincent. But why, Frederick, could you not tell me of all this, instead of
selling your watch, and your books, and perhaps all your clothes? That was
quite a wrong step for such a boy as you, that can know nothing of the price of
things.


Frederick. Certainly, uncle; but every moment I left that poor family to
suffer, I seemed committing much sin. And besides, as you had turned away Peter
in anger, I was afraid you would forbid me to help him; and then, by disobeying
your orders, I should only have done still worse.


Mr. Vincent. You would have disobeyed me, then, hey?


Frederick. Indeed, I must, uncle, -- but in nothing else in the world.


Mr. Vincent. Let me kiss you again, my dear spirited boy! -- Yet, for all
that, I have still one thing that disturbs me. They tell me in the letter that
you were out one whole night. Where did you pass it?


Frederick. It was when I carried the money to Peter. The master was out; and I
knew that the doors would be locked at ten o'clock. I intended to have got home
before that time; and so I should, if I had not lost my way in the dark.


Dolly. Poor dear brother! where did you lie, then?


Frederick. I found out an empty house, that was quite in ruins; and I laid
myself along upon a large stone, and I never slept so well in my life; I was so
happy to have done good to Peter!


Marianne. How ill-natured of Ralph, to know all these things, and never tell
us them,!


Mr. Vincent. From this moment, I withdraw from him all my affection; and you
alone --


Frederick. O no, my dear uncle! I could not be made happy at another person's
expense; and much less at my own cousin's.


Dolly (taking his hand.) My dear brother! how much I ought to love you!


Mr. Vincent. Well, well, then, let him stay at his school. As to you, you
shall leave me no more. I will always keep you to myself. I don't care if I
send masters of all sorts for you two hundred miles off.


Peter. My worthy master is the same as ever he was!


Mr. Vincent ( slapping him on the shoulder.) Peter, have you hired yourself to
Mr. Boynton?


Peter. How could I, Sir, he has had no character of me.


Mr. Vincent. Why, then, he never shall have one. I find it will be making both
Frederick and you happy, to let you belong to us again. But be sure you don't
let him get any more on the box! We'll see and take care, too, of your children.


Peter (sobbing with joy.) My dear master! -- Sir, I mean, -- and shall I
really come to live here again? Is'n't it a dream? O Master Frederick! -- And
then my children, too -- But I must go this moment, and look again at my poor
dear horses!


OLD JOHN.
MR. BELLAMY, AND PEREGRINE, HIS SON. PEREGRINE. PAPA, I can tell you of a very
good servant when you turn away old John.


Mr. Bellamy. And who commissioned you to take any such trouble? Why should you
think I intend to turn him away?


Peregrine. What, papa, shall you always keep that old fellow? I am sure a
younger man would do much better for us.


Mr. Bellamy. How now, Peregrine! This is a bad reason for discharging an old
servant. An old fellow, you call him; O Peregrine! you ought to be ashamed of
yourself. Is it not in my service that he is grown old? is it not even very
probable that his attendance upon you in your childhood, and the concern and
anxiety which he felt for your frequent illnesses, have made him grow old
before his time? How unreasonable, therefore, and how ungrateful it would be,
to take an aversion to him on ac^ount of his age! and do you fancy yourself at
all more justifiable in telling me that a younger man would suit us so much
better? A decision such as that requires far more experience than you can yet
have had, and a judgment at which you cannot have arrived. I will, however,
convince you, in a few minutes, of the very superior advantages an old servant
has over a young one, for fidelity, for exactness, and for knowledge of his
business.


Peregrine. I believe it, to be sure, papa, if you say so. But then his wearing
that wig! it seems so droll to see a man standing behind your chair, and
waiting upon you, with a wig on! I can never look at him without being ready to
burst out a laughing.


Mr. Bellamy. This is a bad account of your own disposition, Peregrine, and
such a one as I did not suspect you of deserving. Do you not know that he lost
his hair in a long and dangerous illness? Is not laughing at him, then, an
insult on God, who inflicted upon him that illness?


Peregrine. But then he is such a grumbler, papa! and besides, he is not half
so nimble as any of the others are.


Mr. Bellamy. No, no, Peregrine, he may be grave, or thoughtful; but I am sure
he is no grumbler. Neither, indeed, is he quite so alert as a young lad of
eighteen or twenty; but are you therefore to hate him? Oh Peregrine! the very
idea makes me shudder! You may also, then, hate me too, should Heaven indulge
me with a long old age?


Peregrine. O no, indeed, papa; I am not so wicked.


Mr. Bellamy. You do not think it any wickedness, then, to hate poor old John,
because his age prevents him from being so active as he was formerly?


Peregrine. I am in the wrong, I own, papa; and, indeed, I am very sorry, now,
to recollect how --


Mr. Bellamy. Why do you stop? What is it you are sorry to recollect?


Peregrine. If I should confess what I have done, papa, you would only be angry
with me, and then I should get punished.


Mr. Bellamy. You know very well, Peregrine, that I do not love to chastise
you, and that it is a method of correction I employ very seldom. It is by
reasoning, and by gentleness, that I endeavor to direct and to govern both you
and your sister. I am ignorant what the fault is that you have committed; I
cannot, therefore, make you a promise that you shall not be punished for it.
But is that the condition you would prescribe for making your confession? Do
not you know my affection for you? I shall give you no other pledge: on that,
however, you may rely as much as upon a promise.


Peregrine. Why then, papa, I will own to you, that I -- I called old John --
an old rascal.


Mr. Bellamy. Is it possible! and could you really so far forget what is due to
so worthy a man? Did he hear you?


Peregrine. Yes, papa; that is what makes me so sorry.


Mr. Bellamy. You have reason, indeed, to be sorry; but it is not sufficient to
repent merely because your insult to an innocent fellow creature was heard by
him; you should feel the same remors^ (...) you abused him in his absence.


Peregrine. And so I do, papa; but the thing I am so sorry for, is having used
him so ill to his face; for -- for --


Mr. Bellamy. Go on Peregrine; you have begun to open your heart to me; do not
stop.


Peregrine. I will not, papa; -- for when I had treated him so, he fell a crying,
and said: Are not the misfortunes of old age bad enough to bear? must I also be
made the scorn of childhood?


Mr. Bellamy. Poor old John! I know well it was just the sort of injury to
wring his very heart. It is, indeed, very hard, at his time of life, to be made
the sport of a child; and how much more hard, when from a child whom he has
known and attended from his birth, and to whom he has done services and good
offices that can never be repaid!


Peregrine. Ah, papa, how much I have been to blame! I will go and ask his
pardon! and I promise you, for all my life long, that he shall never have to
complain of me again.


Mr. Bellamy. You will do very right; and on those terms alone can you obtain
forgiveness for yourself from God, or from your father. We are all weak
creatures, and, for a few moments, may easily be hurried from our duty by our
passions. But when we come again to ourselves, our repentance for our faults
ought to make the deepest impression upon us; we should force our pride to
submit to offering reparation for them, and study with all our might to save
ourselves from the same failings in future. But I would fain know what could
have led you to this outrage against poor John! Had he offended you?


Peregrine. Yes, papa; or at least I thought he had. I was playing with my
squirt, and I made aim at his face with some peace I had put in it. Have done,
then, Master Peregrine, cried he, or I will tell your papa of you. And I was so
provoked with him for threatening me, that I called him that name.


Mr. Bellamy. It was by design, then, that you endeavored to mortify him?


Peregrine. I cannot deny that, papa.


Mr. Bellamy. This, then, is what adds to your fault; and this, I suppose, drew
the tears from his eyes?


Peregrine. O papa, if you will give me leave, I Will run to him directly, and
make my peace; I sha'n't be easy now till I have got his pardon.


Mr. Bellamy. Go, then, my dear: not a moment should ever be lost in fulfilling
our duty. I will wait for you here. (Peregrine runs out, and soon after
returns, with a look of much satisfaction.)


Peregrine. Now, papa, I am quite happy again. Old John has forgiven me with
all his heart. O, I don't believe I shall ever do such a bad thing as this any
more!


Mr. Bellamy. May God keep you from it! but without his aid, you cannot promise
yourself any firmness of resolution.


Peregrine. And what ought I to do, that God may keep me from it?


Mr. Bellamy. You must pray to him to guide and assist you, and he will not
refuse you.


Peregrine. I will pray to him, then, from the bottom of my heart. But, papa,
there is one other thing I have done without asking your leave, and perhaps it
may make you angry?


Mr. Bellamy. What is it?


Peregrine. I have been giving old John that crown-piece you made me a present
of at my birthday.


Mr. Bellamy. And why should I be angry? On the contrary, I am pleased that you
should do a good action of your own accord, and without any injunction. You may
always dispose as you like of what money I give you. It is your own. You could
not have made a better use of my present. A prudent generosity can never be
practiced too early. Did it not make old John very happy?


Peregrine. Yes, he cried for joy; and I felt myself quite glad to see it.


Mr. Bellamy. I am pleased you had that feeling my love. A good heart must
always delight in having had power to soften the sufferings of a
fellow creature. The exercise of every virtue is an incitement to joy; but
there is none which inspires so sweet or so lasting a satisfaction as
beneficence.


Peregrine. If ever I should have a fortune of my own, I am resolved to give
all the help that ever I can to every body that I see in distress.


Mr. Bellamy. And the last prayer, my son, that I shall offer up to God, will
be that he may strengthen you in (...) performance of this design, and join the
means to the inclination that may enable you to fulfill it.


Peregrine. And will it always make me as happy, papa, as it has done today?


Mr. Bellamy. It is, perhaps the only pleasure which never grows weaker. Let
your chief attention be to enjoy it in your own family. If your servants are
worthy people, you may better secure their attachment to you by good offices,
than by money. Not, however, that you should neglect, from time to time, making
them some little presents; and if you are careful to give them at proper
seasons, and with a good grace, you may insure yourself a friend in every
domestic in your house.


Peregrine. Why, papa, have not they their wages?


Mr. Bellamy. Their wages are merely the pay of their work: but a present is a
matter of favor, and will not only excite their gratitude, but induce them to
go beyond what is actually their duty in serving you.


Peregrine. I don't quite understand you, papa.


Mr. Bellamy. I will explain myself, then by the instance of old John. I give
him his wages, his clothes, and his food, in return for his time, his labor,
and his service: but when he has given me his time, his labor, and his
services, is he not out of my debt? Does he owe me yet more? Nevertheless, you
well know he takes care of every thing in my house; that he has made himself
superintendant over the rest of the servants, and that he frequently saves me
from losses and imposition. And this he does purely from personal regard to me,
without any particular order from myself, and merely in gratitude for the
^^ndnesses he has received from me, and the presents which I have occasionally
made him. When you are old enough to mix in the world, you will hear complaints
of the ingratitude and carelessness of servants wherever you go. But believe
me, Peregrine, the fault is generally in the masters, who seem almost always
more desirous to be feared than to be loved.


Peregrine. Now I understand you perfectly, papa; and when I am grown up, I
intend to follow your advice and your example.


Mr. Bellamy. You will never have any reason to repent it. I inherited them
myself from my own father, and I shall never forget what he has said to me upon
this subject.


Peregrine. O papa, if it would not tire you, how I should like to hear what it
was!


Mr. Bellamy. I will tell it you with pleasure, both as a recompense for your
repentance, and your generosity to honest John.


CAPTAIN FORD, a brave officer who had re^^red from service, lived upon his own
estate, with an excellent wife, and five children, who were every one o^^^em
worthy of such parents. All the inhabitants of the neighboring villages felt
the utmost respect for them; and the perfect harmony which reigned in the whole
family, made the sight of it pleasant* and even affecting to all beholders. The
sweetness of Captain Ford's disposition, joined to the order and decorum
preserved throughout his house, insured to him the good will and admiration of
whoever had the happiness of knowing him. All the young lads who lived near his
estate were eager to enter into his service; and whenever there was a vacancy
in his household, by the death or discharge of any domestic, the place was
instantly sought, as if it had been an employment of high honor. Cheerfulness
and content were marked upon the countenances of all who belonged to him. They
seemed but like humble and dutiful children waiting upon their father. His
commands were always so just, and so easy, that no one had even a wish to
disobey them. They lived together in as strict a union as if they had been
brothers: or, if they had ever any dispute, it was but of zeal for the service
of their master, and of regard for his interest.

MR. Fenwick, an old comrade of Captain Ford, who had likewise retired to live
in the country, though at a great distance from the estate of his friend, made
him a visit one day, as he was passing near his house in his way to the
capital. After various other subjects, the conversation fell upon the many
difficulties and inconveniences of housekeeping. Mr. Fenwick declared that
watching and superintending servants was the greatest of all fatigues, and that
he had never met with any who were not either insolent, lazy, or careless of
their master's concerns. I have no such complaints, said Captain Ford, to make
of mine. I have not, for these ten years past, had one serious subject of
displeasure in my own house. I am quite satisfied with my servants, and they
seem equally satisfied with me. You have uncommon good-luck, then, answered Mr.
Fenwick; and you must certainly have learnt some secret, first of making
servants good, and then of keeping them so. The secret, answered Captain Ford,
is a very simple one, and I will show it to you. He then brought forth a strong
box. What does this mean? cried Mr. Fenwick. Captain Ford, without making any
reply, opened the box; and he then saw six drawers, with these inscriptions.
Extra expenses. -- My own. -- My wife's. -- My children's. -- Servant^' wages.
-- Grat^ities. -- As I have always a year's income beforehand, Captain Ford
now answered, I divide it into six parts at the beginning of every
twelvemonth. in the first drawer, I put a certain sum, to be strictly reserved
for unexpected demands and occasions. In the second, is what I allow for my own
private purse. The third contains what is necessary for housekeeping, and my
wife's pin-money. The fourth, all that the education of my children, which is
the best I can give them, ought to cost me. The fifth, the servants' wages. And
the sixth, what I think proper to dispense in presents and gratuities to them.
It is to this last drawer that I owe the happiness of never having a bad
servant. Their wages are only for what their service makes their due; but the
little gifts which I occasionally distribute among them, are for good offices
not included in their actual duty, but which their personal affection for me
leads them to do, beyond either my orders or expectations.'

DORINDA and ANTONY.
ON a beautiful day in the midst of summer, Mr. Wilkins promised his two
children, Dorinda and Antony, that he would take them to walk out with him in a
very pretty garden, at some little distance from his house. He went, therefore,
into his dressing room to get ready, and desired the two children to wait for
him in the parlour.

ANTONY, transported with the pleasure he expected from this little expedition,
began running and jumping about, giddy with joy, till the skirt of his coat
brushed down a very rare and curious flower, which his father was cultivating
with infinite care and attention, and which, at noonday, in order to shelter
from the burning heat of the sun, he had unfortunately removed into the room.

O brother! what have you done? cried Dorinda, picking up the flower, which was
broken off from the stem.

SHE had it still in her hand, when her father, having changed his dress,
returned into the parlour.

WHAT does this mean, Dorinda? exclaimed Mr. Wilkins, very angrily; have you
been gathering that flower, which you have seen me take so much pains to
cultivate, on purpose to preserve its seed? Dear papa, cried Dorinda,
trembling, don't be angry, pray!

I shall not be angry now, answered Mr. Wilkins, recovering his temper; but
lest you should happen to have the same fancy for gathering flowers in the
garden to which I am going, and which does not belong to me, you must not be
surprised that I think it necessary to leave you at home.

DORINDA looked down, and said nothing; but Antony would no longer be silent.
He approached his father, while his eyes swam in tears, and said to him: It was
not my sister, papa, it was I that broke off the flo^^r: so it must be for me
to stay at home; but pray let Dorinda go.

MR. Wilkins, touched by the ingenuousness of his children, and by the
affection which they showed for each other, tenderly embraced them, and said:
You are both of you my darlings, and you shall go with me together.

DORINDA and Antony jumped for joy. They were then taken to the garden, where
all the most curious plants were pointed out to them. Mr. Wilkins observed,
with much satisfaction, that while they were walking in the flower-beds,
Dorinda pressed her frock tight down on each side with her hands, while Antony
h^^d up the flaps of his coat under his arms, from the fear of doing any
mischief.

THE flower which Mr. Wilkins had lost, would probably have given him some
pleasure; but he received infinitely more in viewing the fraternal tenderness,
the candor and the discretion which flourished in his children.

THE LITTLE SNARLER.
OH, most unhappy children, who have had the misfortune to contract vicious
habits! It is to reform, and to console you, that I relate the history which
you have now to read. It will teach you, that it is always possible for you to
amend yourselves, when you have the spirit and courage to resolve upon it from
the bottom of your hearts.

ROSAMOND, till she reached her seventh year, was the joy and delight of her
p^. At that age, when the first ^^w^ing of opening reason ought to show us the
^i^^ou^^^ss of our failings, Rosamond, unhappily, only (...) a new defect;
which cannot better he deser^^^d, than by comparing it with the perpetual
grow^ing of a little snarling cur, who runs yel^^^^ after every body he sees,
and appears to make it his constant aim, to snap at their legs, and bite them.

IF, by any mistake, or accident, one of her play-things happened to be
touched, she frowned, and looked discontented, and muttered between her teeth
for a quarter of an hour.

IF she was reproved, however gently, she hastily arose, st^mped with her feet,
and threw the chairs, tables, and furniture, about the room.

BY degrees, neither her father, her mother, nor any body in the house, could
tell how to endure her.

IT is true, she sometimes repented her misbehaviour, and shed tears in secret
at finding herself become an object of general aversion, even to her parents;
but the bad habits into which she had fallen, soon regained their full power,
and her disposition grew every day more peevish and hu^oursome.

ONE night, which happened to be Christmas eve, she saw her mother going into
her own room with a basket under her cloak.

ROSAMOND attempted to follow her; but Mrs. Freeman ordered her to return to
the drawing room. At this command, she looked more cross and pouting than ever,
and shut the door with such violence, that she shook every window-frame in the
house.

HALF an hour after, her mother sent for her. What, then, was her surprise, to
see the room i^ated with twenty wax-candles, and the table spread with the most
beautiful toys! she could not utter a syllable, from her transports of pleasure
and admiration.

COME hither, Rosamond, said her mother, and read, in this paper, for whom it
is these things are designed. Rosamond approached, and perceived, in the midst
of the toys, an open note. She took it, and saw, in capital letters, the
following words: FOR AN AMIABLE LITTLE GIRL, AS A REWARD FOR HER GOODNATURE.

ROSAMOND looked down, but said nothing. Well, Rosamond, said her mother, for
whom do you think that is meant? Not for me, answered Rosamond, while the tears
start^d into her eyes.

HERE is another note, cried Mrs. Freeman: see if you have any better claim to
that.

ROSAMOND took it, and read: FOR A GRUMBLING LITTLE GIRL, WHEN SHE CONFESSES
HER FAULTS, AND PROMISES, AT THE BEGINNING OF A NEW YEAR, TO CORRECT THEM.

O, this is me, this is me! cried Rosamond, running up to her mother, and
crying bitterly.

MRS. Freeman wept too herself, from mingled concern at the bad temper of her
daughter, and from joy at the repentance and shame which seemed now awakened in
her.

COME then, cried she, after a short (...) take what belongs to you ^^and may
G^^ ^^o has given you grace enough to see your (...) give you strength to
reform them (...)

NO, my dear mama, answered Ros^: these things ought only to belong to the
person who deserves the first note. Keep them until I am that person myself.
You will (...), I know, when you think me good enoug^*

THIS answer gave Mrs. Freeman much pleasure. She collected the play-things,
and put them all into a cabinet, and then, presenting the key of it to
Rosamond, said: Here, my dear child; you shall yourself open the cabinet, when
you think you are untitled to what it contains.

SIX whole weeks now passed, during which Rosamond was not once out of humor.

ONE day, about this time, she threw her arms round her mother's neck, and, in
a voice hardly loud enough to be heard, fearfully said: May I open the cabinet,
mama? Yes, my love, answered Mrs. Freeman, kissing her with the utmost
tenderness; but tell me, Rosamond, how is it you have managed to correct your
disposition so well, and so speedily? By thinking of nothing else, mama,
replied Rosamond; and indeed I must own it has sometimes cost me dear: but
every morning, and every night, and a hundred times in the day besides, I
prayed to God to give me grace to mend myself.

(...) Freeman wept over her with joy and (...) Rosamond instantly took
possession (...) her play-things, and, in a short time, of the (...) of all her
friends.

(...) mother, soon after, related this happy (...) i^ the presence of a little
girl who was (...) the same fault: and the little girl was so much struck by
what she heard, that she immediately formed the resolution of copying Ros^ and
becoming equally amiable.

(...) project had the same success: and thus Ros^^ond not only grew happier
herself, but pointed out the road of happiness to all who were willing to
follow her example.

AND what sensible and well-brought-up child would not also endeavor to
imitate a conduct, which both honor and felicity are ready to reward?

THE INSTRUCTIVE DISAPPOINTMENT.
IN a beautiful morning in the month of June, Alexis had got himself ready to
accompany his father upon a party of pleasure, which had occupied all his hopes
and thoughts for a fort-night before. Contrary to his usual custom, he had
risen very early, to hasten the preparations for his expedition: but just at
the instant, when he fancied he had arrived at the accomplishment of his
expectations, the sky became dark, the clouds thickened and grew black, and a
most tempestuous wind beat down the branches of the trees, and blew up the dust
in whirlwinds. Alexis ran continually into the garden, to examine the sky; and
then skipt up stairs, three steps at a time, to consult the barometer* but both
the sky and the barometer agreed in disappointing his wishes. Nevertheless, he
scrup^ed not to assure his father they might go in safety, that all these
gloomy threats would disperse into nothing, that the weather would be finer
than before, and that they ought to s^t out without losing another moment.

MR. Pierson, however, who had no blind confidence in the foresight of his son,
thought it wiser to wait a little longer: and soon after, the clouds suddenly
burst, and a torrent of rain fell upon the earth. Alexis, then, ashamed as well
as grieved, burst into a flood of tears, and refused all consolation.

THE rain continued till three o'clock in the afternoon: the clouds then
dispersed, the sun recovered its splendor, the sky its serenity, and all
nature seemed restored to the freshness of spring. The temper of Alexis
cleared, like the horizon, by degrees. His father took him out into the fields;
where the calmness of the air, the warbling of the birds, the beauty of the
meadows, and the sweet perfumes breathing every where around him, soon brought
back peace and good humor into his bosom.

DO you observe, said his father, how delightful a change has just been made
throughout the creation? Recollect but the gloomy face of things, which so
lately saddened us: the earth, you may remember, was parched, and opened in
wide gaps from the long drought: the flowers lost their sweet smell, and bent
their drooping heads; all vegetation seemed at an end. To what must we
attribute this sudden renewal of the beauties of nature? To the rain we have
had, today, papa, answered Alexis: and, in pronouncing these words, he was
instantly struck himself with the folly of his behavior, and the injustice of
his repining. He colored; and his father judged by his consciousness, that his
own reflections would suffice to teach him, for the future, to sacrifice,
without murmuring, his personal gratification, for the general good.

THE SECRET OF PLEASURE.
I WISH I might do nothing but play all day long, mama, cried little Laura to
Mrs. Draper, her mother.

Mrs. Draper. What! nothing else for the whole day?


Laura. Yes, mama, nothing else at all.


Mrs. Draper. I have no desire but to make you happy, my love; but I am sure
playing so long will only tire you.


Laura. Playing tire me, mama! O no, indeed! you shall see if it will.


LAURA then, jumping at every other step, flew in search of all her
play-things. She soon got them together: but she was quite alone, for her
sisters were employed in studying with their several masters till dinnertime.

SHE enjoyed her liberty at first with all possible spirit, and, for one whole
hour, was perfectly happy: but, after that, she began to grow weary, and every
moment took from her some portion of her pleasure.

SHE had already looked at her play-things, one after another, an hundred
times; and now she knew not what to do next. Even her favorite doll displeased
and tired her.

SHE went to her mama, and begged she would tell her of some new amusement, and
play with her a little herself; but, unfortunately, Mrs. Draper was engaged in
settling some affairs of importance; and she was therefore forced to refuse
Laura's request, however unwillingly.

THE little girl then seated herself mournfully, in a corner, where,
uncomfortable and yawning, she waited till her sisters had finished their
lessons, and were allowed to find entertainment for themselves.

THIS time, at last, arrived. Laura ran up to them, and, in a doleful voice,
told them how long the morning had seemed to her, and how impatient she had
been for their coming.

THEY now made choice of their most favorite plays, in order to raise the
spirits of their little sister, who was tenderly loved by them all.

BUT, alas! their kindness was in vain. Laura declared she was quite sick of
all these plays already, and that they did not give her the least pleasure; and
added, she believed they were all in a plot against her, not to choose any game
that she liked.

ADELAIDE, her eldest sister, who was a young lady of ten years of age, and
very sensible and reasonable, now took her by the hand, and said to her, with
great sweetness:

LOOK at us all, Laura, one after another, as we stand here together; and then
I will tell you who among us it is that occasions your discontent.

La^ra. And who is it, then, sister? for I am sure I cannot find out.


Adelaide. That is only because you have not looked at yourself. Yes, my dear
Laura, it is nobody but yourself; you see very well that these plays still
amuse us, notwithstanding we have played at them so often, and that even before
you were born. But we are just come from doing our tasks, which makes every
thing seem new to us. If you had earned your pleasure, as we have done, by
working, you would find it as sweet as we do.


LAURA, who, child as she was, did not want for understanding, was much struck
by her sister's discourse. It taught her that, to be really happy, it was
necessary to mingle useful exercises with pleasant diversions. And I know not
whether, since that time, she would not have conceived a greater dread of a
whole day of mere pleasure, than of one filled up with every employment, such
as was suited to her age.

THE BIRD's NEST.
MAMA, Mama! cried little Simon, one evening, as, quite out of breath, he ran
up to his mother, only look at what is in my hat!

Mrs. Beville. Ha ha, a little bird! and where did you get it?


Simon. I found a nest this morning in the garden-hedge: so I waited till it
was night; and then I slid softly up to the bush, and before ever the bird was
aware, pop! I caught it by the wings.


Mrs. Beville. And was it alone in it is nest?


Simon. No, mama, all its children were there too. But they are so little, they
have got no feathers on yet: so I am not afraid of their escaping.


Mrs. Beville. And what would you do with this bird?


Simon. I shall put it in a cage, and hook it up in my room.


Mrs. Beville. And all the poor little ones?


Simon. O, I shall take them too, and feed them myself. I Will go and run for
them now directly.


Mrs. Beville. I am sorry to tell you, you will not have time.


Simon. O, it is not far off. You know where the great cherry-tree is? Well,
its just opposite to that. I looked well at the place.


Mrs. Beville. But that is not the thing; I am afraid you will be seized
yourself first. The soldiers are, perhaps, at the door already.


Simon. The soldiers, mama! to take me!


Mrs. Beville. Yes, you. The king has just had your father arrested; and the
guard who forced him away, said he should return to fetch you and your sister,
and carry you also to prison.


Simon. O dear, O dear! -- what will they do with us?


Mrs. Beville. You will be confined in a small apartment, and never be allowed
to go out of it.


Simon. O, what a wicked king!


Mrs. Beville. He will have no harm done to you. You will have food and drink
every day. You will only be deprived of your liberty, and of the pleasure of
ever seeing me again.


SIMON (falls a crying.) Mrs. Beville. Why, my love, why what is the matter with
you? Is it so great a misfortune to be shut up in a room, when you will have
all the necessaries of life?


SIMON (sobs too violently to speak.) Mrs. Beville. The king does but behave to
your father, your sister, and yourself, as you have behaved to this bird and
its little ones. You cannot, therefore, call him wicked, without calling
yourself so at the same time.


Simon (still crying.) Oh! -- I Will go and let the bird fly away! --


(He releases the bird, which flies joyfully out of the window.) Mrs. Beville
(folding him in her arms.) Take courage, my child; I have said this merely to
try you. Your father is not in prison, and neither your sister nor yourself are
going to be confined. I wanted but to make you understand how ill you were
acting, in desiring to imprison this poor little animal. Just as you were
terrified yourself when I told you that you were to be seized, this bird was
terrified when you robbed him of his liberty. You little considered how the
husband would have pined for his wife, how the children would have cried for
their mother, and how afflicted they must all have been by such a separation. I
am sure this did not once enter your mind, or, certainly, you would never have
taken the bird. Is it not true, my dear?


Simon. Yes, mama, for I had never thought about all that!


Mrs. Beville. Well, think of it, then, in future; and forget not that these
innocent little animals were created to enjoy their liberty, and that it is
highly cruel to fill a life so short as theirs with bitterness and sorrow. But,
to remember it better, you should get by heart your good friend's verses upon
this subject.


Simon. What! mama, the verses by the Children's Friend? O, read them to me,
dear mama!


Mrs. Beville. I will; here they are:


THE BIRD's NEST.
YES, little Nest, I Will hold you fast,
And little birds, one, two, three, four;
Iv'e watched you long; you're mine at last.
Poor little things; you will 'scape no more.
Chirp, cry, and flutter as you will,
Ah! simple rebels, it is in vain;
Your little wings are unfledged still:
How can you freedom then obtain?
What note of sorrow strikes my ear?
Is it their mother thus distressed?
Ah yes -- and see, their father dear
Flies round and round, to seek their nest.
And is it I who cause their moan?
I, who so often in summer's heat,
Beneath you oak have laid me down,
To listen to their song so sweet?
If from my tender mother's side
Some wicked wretch should make me fly,
Full well I know 'twou'd her betide
To break her heart, to sink, to die!
And shall I, then, so cruel prove
Your little ones to force away?
No, no; together live and love,
See, he ^hey are -- Take them, I pray.
Teach them in yonder wood to fly,
And let them your soft warbling hear,
Till their own wings can soar as high,
And their own notes may sound as clear.
Go, gentle birds, go, free as air!
While often again in summer's heat,
To yonder oak I will repair,
And listen to your song so sweet.
THE PAGE. A DRAMA IN ONE ACT. Imitated from the German of M. Engel.
PERSONS.
THE PRINCE OF ***. Mrs. DERFORD. her sons.
DERFORD, an Ensign, DERFORD, a Page,
Capt. DETTINGEN, her brother. THE MASTER of a Royal Academy. A VALET DE
CHAMBER.
The Theater represents an antichamber in the Palace. A tent-bed is seen
through a folding-door which is open; and upon a stand, at the foot of it, a
lamp and a watch.

THE PAGE. A DRAMA IN ONE ACT.
SCENE I.
(The Prince, in his robe-de-chambre, lying upon a tent-bed, covered over with
a large cloak. The Page, sleeping upon a great chair in the antichamber.) THE
PRINCE (rising.) I THINK I have slept pretty well! The peace, thank Heaven, is
signed; and I can now go to rest, without any fear of being awakened by the
noise of arms. (He looks at his watch.) Two o'clock? it must surely be later. I
have certainly been asleep longer. Page! Page!


THE PAGE (suddenly starting out of his sleep, and rising; and then falling
back upon the great chair.) What! Hey! Who calls? Presently, presently; I Am
coming!


The Prince. Is nobody there? Will nobody answer?


THE PAGE (turning from side to side, and talking to himself.) O, how
comfortably I have slept!


The Prince. I hear somebody's voice; who is there? (He takes up the lamp, and
looks in the great chair.) Is it possible? What! that child here? Ought he to
watch by me, or I by him? What can all my people be thinking of?


THE PAGE (half asleep, but rising, and rubbing his eyes.) Sir!


The Prince. Come, come, little man, wake yourself. See what o'clock it is by
your watch. Mine stands.


THE PAGE (leaning against the back of the chair, and still half asleep.) What,
Sir? did you speak? Sir? What?


The Prince (smiling.) Why, you are dead asleep! What a droll little figure he
makes! He would be a charming subject just now for a painter. I desired you to
see what o'clock it was by your watch.


THE PAGE (coming slowly forward.) My watch, Sir, I beg your Highness' pardon,
but I have not got one.


The Prince. Are you dreaming still? or have you in fact no watch?


The Page. Indeed, Sir, I never had one in my life.


The Prince. How! Never had one! Has your father sent you hither without giving
you what is so necessary; the only thing, that, in your place, you can want?


The Page. My father? Ah! if he were alive!


The Prince. Is he dead?


The Page. He died before I was born. I never knew him, nor saw him!


The Prince. Poor thing! but your guardian, or your mother, ought to have
thought for you --


The Page. My mother, Sir? What, don't you know her then? She has got no money
herself. She is quite poor: all that she had, she spent upon me; but it was not
enough to buy me a watch. (He yawns.) My guardian often said I ought to have
had one; but, for all that, he never gave me one.


The Prince. Who is your guardian?


The Page. Please your Highness, he is my uncle.


The Prince. (smiling.) Very clearly answered! but there are many uncles in the
world. Has not your uncle a name?


The Page. He is one of the Captains in your Highness' guards. He is now out
upon duty.


The Prince. O, very true, I recollect it was he who presented you to me. Here,
my little friend, take this light; be sure you hold it fast. In that closet,
(pointing with his finger) you will see a watch hung up at each side of the
glass. Bring that at your right hand; and pray don't fail to set the room on
fire! Do you hear?


The Page (going.) Yes, please your Highness.


SCENE II.
THE PRINCE CHARMING child! what simplicity! what frankness! If I knew a man
like that child, how I should covet him for my friend! It Is a thousand pities
he is so young: I cannot possibly keep him in my service; I must send him back
again to his mother.

SCENE III.
THE PRINCE, AND THE PAGE. THE PAGE (holding the light in one hand, and the
watch in the other.) IT is five o'clock, Sir.


The Prince. I was not mistaken, then. It will soon be light. ( He takes the
watch.) But is this that which I bid you bring? was this to the right?


The Page. I am sure I thought so, Sir.


The Prince. Why, you little fellow, even supposing that it was, if you had
well understood your own interest, you would still have taken the other; for
this, which is set round with brilliants, can never be proper for a boy such as
you. Could you consult nothing but your own desire of finery and show? Are you
not afraid of sharing the fate of those who lose all, by trying to grasp at too
much? Answer me.


The Page. What, please your Highness? I don't understand you, Sir.


The Prince. I must speak, then, plainer. Do you know the difference of the
right from the left?


The Page (looking at his hands in turn.) The right and the left, Sir?


The Prince (clapping him on the shoulder.) Sweet little fellow! you
distinguish them, perhaps, as little as you do good from evil. Happy ignorance!
Why can we not always preserve it? Go, child, run to your uncle, the Captain,
and desire him to come and speak to me.


(The Page goes.) SCENE IV.
THE PRINCE. WHAT an ingenuous little creature! how perfectly artless! -- This,
however, is but another reason for hastening him back to his family. A court is
the dewlling place of seduction; I should be grieved to have him fall a prey to
it. I will certainly send him away at once. Yet whither can he go, if his
mother is so poor as he represents her, and not in a situation to educate him?
I must enquire into this matter. Dettingen can give me information.

SCENE V.
THE PRINCE AND THE PAGE. THE PAGE. MY uncle will come directly, Sir.


The Prince. Well, but what is the matter with you? you look fatigued to death.
Do you wish to have more sleep still?


The Page. Why yes, I do, a little, Sir.


The Prince. Well, well, if that is the case, go back again to your great chair.
I have been a child myself: and I know how sweet sleep is at your age. Go, I
tell you, go and lie down; I give you leave. (The Page throws himself again
into the great chair, and falls asleep.) So! I thought he would not wait to
hear this permission twice!


SCENE VI.
THE PRINCE, CAPTAIN DETTINGEN, THE PAGE (asleep.) CAPTAIN DETTINGEN. MAY it
please your Highness --


The Prince. Come in, Captain. What think you of the little messenger I sent to
you? How shall I employ him? Can he wait upon me in my own room?


Captain Dettingen (shrugging his shoulders.) He is, indeed, but very little,
Sir!


The Prince. Or shall I send him as a courier on horseback with dispatches?


Capt. Dettingen. I much doubt if he would ever come back!


The Prince. Or keep him to watch here at night?


Capt. Dettingen (smiling.) Yes, Sir, provided your Highness sleeps yourself!


The Prince. What plan, then, can I pursue with the boy? Clearly none!
Probably, indeed, in presenting him to me, you pretended not to suppose he
could be of any use in my service, though I might be of some in making his
fortune. You told me frankly that his mother was not in a situation to bring
him up herself; but is it true that she is even reduced to the utmost poverty?


Capt. Dettingen (putting his hand upon his heart.) Yes, Sir! it is the exact
truth.


The Prince. And by what unhappy means?


Capt. Dettingen. By the very war that has enriched so many others. Her estate,
I must own, was not quite clear; but it is now fallen wholly into the hands of
strangers. Every thing has been pillaged, burnt, and destroyed. Add^d to which,
she has had several lawsuits; for they, like sickness and famine, always
follow war. Happily for her, however, her sons are provided for; the youngest
is Page to your Highness, the eldest is an Ensign in your Highness' guards. As
to their mother -- she lives as she can.


The Prince. Very wretchedly, no doubt?


Capt. Dettingen ( coldly.) Nothing more cer^ain, Sir. She has shut herself up
in a cottage, where she resides quite alone, deserted and forgotten. I never
see her. She is my sister, and I cannot bear the horrible sight of her misery.


The Prince. She is your sister?


Capt. Dettingen. Most unhappily, Sir.


The Prince (with disdain.) Most unhappily? and you never see her? I understand
this very well, Sir! Her poverty makes you blush; or, at least, should you be
touched by it, you fear it might put you to some expense to show your concern?

(Capt. Dettingen looks confused.) What is your sister's name?


Capt. Dettingen. Derford, Sir.


The Prince ( after a pause.) Derford? Had I not a Major of that name in my
troop^?


Capt. Dettingen. Yes, Sir.


The Prince. Who was killed at the opening of the first campaign?


Capt. Dettingen. Yes, Sir. He was father to this child, and to the Ensign. He
was an officer of honor, and courage. He began an assault with the air of a
man who was going only to amuse himself. He had the heart of a lion.


The Prince. Say rather, of a man, Captain, for that is more. I remember him
very well! and I should like --


Capt. Dettingen ( coming forward.) What should your Highness like?


The Prince. To speak to his widow.


Capt. Dettingen. Your Highness may do that immediately, for she is now here.


The Prince. She is now here? S^^d to her, then, and desire her to come to me
as soon as she rises. I will see her myself, and give her back her child.


Capt. Dettingen. Sir --


The Prince. I charge you, say nothing to her of my design. Go. (The Captain
goes out.)


SCENE VII.
THE PRINCE, AND THE PAGE (asleep.) THE PRINCE. GOOD Heaven! reduced to so much
misery by the war! How dreadful a scourge! how many whole families has it
b^ought to ruin! It is better, however, they should suffer from that than from
me; and it was necessity, not inclination, that made me take up arms.

(He rises, and after walking about some time, st^ps by the chair, and looks
earnestly at the Page.) Sweet child, how easy and pleasant his repose! it is
Innocence itself in the arms of Sleep! He believes himself in the house of a
friend, where he has nothing to fear. Such ever is unspoilt nature.

( He walks about again.) As to his mother -- in truth I shall not be inclined
to do much for her, if she resembles this Captain. I will make some trial of
her, that I may know her thoroughly; and then -- but it will be time enough
afterward to determine upon what shall follow.

( He leans upon the back of the chair; and while he is looking with kindness
at the Page, he perceives a letter half way out of his pocket.) What is that?
It seems to be a letter.

(He opens it, and looks at the conclusion.) "Your affectionate mother."

It Is from his mother. Shall I read it? I should like to know her character.
She will not have disguised it to this boy. I Will see what she says to him. ( He
reads.)

"My dearest Son,
"The difficulty you find in writing, has not prevented your complying with my
request, and your letter is even longer than I had hoped to see it. This kind
attention to me proves your du^y and your affection. I am very sensible of
both, and I love you and thank you with my whole heart. You tell me you have
been presented to the Prince; that he has had the goodness to receive you into
his service; that he is the best and most indulgent of masters, and that you
already love him very much."


( He looks at the Page.) And have you written thus to your mother? It is but
doing, then, what I ought, to love in return, and to show you some token of my
regard.

( He reads again.) "You have, indeed, reason to love him, my child; for,
without his generous protection, what would be your lot in this world? You have
lost your father; and though your mother is yet living, you are not the less to
be pitied: fortune has put it out of her power to satisfy your claims upon her;
and this is the heaviest of my misfortunes, and the bitterest of all my
afflictions. If I had only myself to think of, I could be calm in the worst of
evils: but when my child's little form is present to my mind, my heart feels
broken, and my tears will not be restrained."


Much of tenderness, much of sensibility here, according to all appearance: and
if she is as excellent a woman as she is a mother -- and why should she not? --
She is, she must be! I cannot doubt it.

( He reads again.) "I know not how, my love, to point out to you the road of
fortune as I wish to do; I am forced to continue still in solitude, and at a
distance: -- but I will never cease to give you the best advice that my
affection and understanding can dictate; and my voice, to the last moment that
it can be heard, shall always call upon, and conjure you to follow the paths of
honor and virtue. I beg you, my child, as a further proof of that obedience
you have constantly paid me, never to part with this letter, but to keep it
always about you."


( Looking at the Page.) He has well attended to her commands.

( He reads again.) "And when you are in any danger of failing in your duty, or
of forgetting the counsel I gave you when I embraced you for the last time, and
bathed you in my tears -- O my child! fly then to this letter, open it, and
think of your mother -- your unfortunate mother, who has no support in her
retreat, but from her hopes in you!"


How! has she not another son?

"Remember that your behaving ill must make her die with grief, and that you
will then yourself have pierced the heart that loves you more than all things
upon earth."


She is sensible of his danger; and she is right, for his situation is very
unsafe. She ought not to have sent him hither.

"I speak not from suspicion or doubt; your conduct has given me no occasion.
No, my dear child, no: your brother, indeed, has cost me many tears; but you
are more kind and considerate to the tender apprehensions of your mother."


So, so, this is the eldest, the Ensign: I must know more of this.

"You have ever been obedient and respectful; I acknowledge it with tears of
joy. Continue always thus good my son, and become an honest and worthy man; and
then your mother, however poor, however unhappy she may be, will soon learn to
forget both her poverty and her misfortunes in her gratitude!"


Excellent! I am much pleased with her sentiments. Sorrow seems to have
enlarged her soul, instead of sinking it.

"You tell me, in your postscript, that all your companions wear watches. I see
you want one also, though you break off there, and try to disguise your wishes.
This forbearance delights me: I am only grieved I cannot reward it. You know,
my love, that I cannot, and therefore you will excuse. I am summoned to the
capital upon some affairs of importance, and my journey to it will swallow up
all the little money I have yet remaining. It is, however, a necessary expense,
and not to be avoided: but assure yourself that I will do the utmost in my
power to satisfy your desire in a short time. Were I to deny myself every
thing, I could not bear that my heart's dear child should want any
encouragement to virtue. I shall hope, ere long, to see you again, and I am --
your affectionate mother."


Excellent mother! how worthy a better lot! I will keep this letter, and show
it to my wife. But no; it is this boy's only treasure; and why should I rob him
of it?

( He puts the letter back into the Page's pocket.) With what tranquillity he
continues to sleep! Heaven, they say, prepares happiness for its children while
they are at rest. This, at least, is true with him, for his fortune is now made.

( He takes his hand.) Wake, my good boy, wake!

( The Page wakes, and looks some time at the Prince, hardly knowing him.) How
charming a little creature he is! But come, wake yourself, and rise. It is
broad day, and you cannot sleep here any longer. Get up.


The Page (rising slowly.) Yes, Sir.


The Prince. You are fast asleep still. Here, go into my room. ( He goes.) Put
out the lights, and shut the doors.

Now go where you brought the watch from. Be quick! No, no, not that way;
straight forward; make haste! Come back by the other side. Well, are you awake
yet?


The Page. O yes, Sir.


The Prince. Tell me, then, for I look upon you to be an expert and diligent
boy; do you know how to write letters?


The Page. O yes, Sir! I have written two quite long ones.


The Prince. And both, I suppose, to your mother?


The Page (smiling.) Yes, please your Highness, both to my mother.


The Prince. Your eyes sparkle with pleasure when I speak to you of her. How
they love one another in the midst of their misfortunes! ( to himself.) And is
your mother very good to you?


The Page ( taking one of the Prince's hands between both his own.) Oh! if you
did but know her!


The Prince. I intend to know her, my child.


The Page. She is so kind! and so soft! and she loves me so dearly!


The Prince. I wish both her sons were like her. But your brother, the Ensign
-- I am informed, does not behave quite well. -- What say you?


The Page, ( shaking his head) My brother -- Oh! --


The Prince. I am told that he gives her much uneasiness. Is it true?


The Page. Ah, please your Highness, -- but I am ordered to say nothing of it!
-- If his Colonel was to know it -- ( with an air of confidence) O, that
Colonel is such a bad ill-natured man!


The Prince. He shall hear nothing of it, I give you my word. Speak, then: what
was it that happened? what has your brother done?


The Page. O, a great many things! I don't know myself quite right what they
are. All that I can tell is, that mama was very, very angry indeed; and to keep
it a secret, she was forced to give up all she was worth.

( He comes close to the Prince, and adds in a low voice:) If she had not done
that, she told me he might, perhaps, be turned out of the regiment.


The Prince. Be turned out of the regiment! And what for?


The Page. O, please your Highness, that is what I cannot tell.


The Prince. What! not even to me?


The Page. No* because they none of them would ^ver let me know what it was.


The Prince ( laughing.) They were perfectly (...) the right, I think! But no^
for yourself. A^ (...) have never a watch, why did you not ask yo^ mother, in
your letters, to send you one?


The Page. Why, I did once; but I shall not again.


The Prince. What, then, was she angry with you?


The Page. O no, Sir, not all! far from it; for she told me she would be very
saving, with the little she now has left, on purpose to buy me one. I am only
sorry I spoke to her of it. She can hardly live already! Indeed, Sir, it makes
me very sorry to think of it!


The Prince. And so it ought. A good son should never be a weight to his
mother: on the contrary, he should endeavor by all mean^ in his power to
assist her. As to the wat^^, if that were all, you might be happy.

( ^ing out his purse.) Here, my man, here are twelve guineas for you. You may
do what you will with them. Hold out your hand.


The Page ( holding out his hand, while the Prince counts the money upon it.
What! are they all for me, Sir?


The Prince. Every one. But tell me, what do you think you shall do with them?


The Page. Can I buy a watch with them, Sir?


The Prince. Yes, and (...) exceeding (...) one. But however, if (...) well
over, you (...) We have a (...) I were in your (...) first.

( The Pag^ (...) I should em^ (...) buying a ^atch. (...) must now ^o and
span^ back. (g^^ng.)


The Page. Sir! Sir!


The Prince. Well! (...)


The Page. My mother (...) she must go away this (...) I wish I might just say
good-by to her (...) manner) May I, please your Hi^ (...) you let me?


The Prince. No, my dear, there i^ (...) ^sion for that, as your mother is
(...). You will therefore see her presently. Have a little patience. (He goes
out.)


SCENE VIII.
THE PAGE. SHE is (...) hither! I shall see her presently* What can that be
for? -- but it does (...) so long as I can but see her! -- One, (...)


(He (...) guineas.) (...) (...) I was never (...) it already in (...) it
tinkle at (...) myself! But (...) said, he (...) in my place! (...) But he who
(...) room (...) what want (...) And he (...) to be an (...) thought (...)
Twelve (...) ^^re, I must (...) If my poor (...) very useful to (...)


(...) his heart between his (...) (...) (...) watch!


(...) his h^^ds fall.) (...) (...) my mother! -- such a good, (...)! -- And
how thin she looked but (...) so pa^^! so ill! -- Perhaps if I was to give her
this money, it might make her well at once! Shall I give it all up to her, or
not?

(With a determined voice:) Yes, I will! I am quite resolve upon it I -- but I
wish she would come directly because (...) perhaps I may want to keep it again. A
(...) -- Oh! I have set my heart so (...) one.

(Putting his (...)) But mum! -- (...)


(...)
Mrs. (...) THE PAGE ^ AH! my (...)


Mrs. (...) (Looking (...) I hardly know why, (...) much alarmed. What can the
(...) want with me?


Capt. Dettingen. Why, (...) don't you? he only wants (...) you.

(She looks with (...) the (...) caressing her with (...) The folly was in
(...) What could the (...) other Pa^es grow (...) and the^ are fit for service*
(...) (looking at him with contempt) it is such a poor little wretch, he can
never be good for any thing. The (...) ^ilk you fed him with was (...) by your
(...). It Is a plant that is (...) therefore get stronger.


(...) Derford (sighing.) Oh, brother!


(...) Dettingen. Remember, however, this; (...) see the Prince, be sure you
say nothing (...) of this boy. It will be to no (...) much better solicit him
for (...). Something may be made of him; (...).


(...) How! s^it for the Ensign! (...) now sent for (...)


(...) (...) ^rify me! -- has he (...)


(...) (...) so; I think, indeed, (...).

(...) upon his (...), and shakes his head.) (...) do you suppose would be the
conse^ if he knows that this young Pickle (...) decamp, and had taken up money?
(...) it had not been for my management ^ Well! I suppose, in the end, I (...)
the victim of my own good offices, and (...) ^^e put under an arrest for them.
(...) with all my heart, I had never troubled (...) all about either of your
children; (...) I will meddle in the matter no more.

(...) gr^bling; and half coming back, (...)) (...) you hear me? I shall never
meddle any (...) them as long as I live. ( He goes.)


SCENE X.
Mrs. DERFORD, THE PAGE. THE PAGE ( seeing his mother's distress.) MY uncle is
always in an ill humor. But don't mind him, mama, let him say what he will.


Mrs. Derford. Be quiet, be quiet, my child; you know not --


The Page. O, I know ^^^ter th^^ ^e (...). The Prince is quite different to
(...) he does no harm to any (...) ^^^trary, mama. -- Look, (...) she^ the
twelve (...) the m^ney, mama! -- he gave it (...)


Mrs. Derford. Is it (...)


The Page. He took it out (...) purse, all filled with gold, just before (...)
in. O, if the Prince had a mind, (...) he, (...) but a and! he is (...), you
(...) know!


Mrs. Derford. But why did he give you (...) I cannot understand it. He must
(...) had some motive.


The Page. Yes, ^ma, so he had (...) must know, this morning his watch di^
(...) he was out hunting all day yesterday, and (...) had forgot to wind it up:
so this morning (...) look, mama, that is the place. Well, he ca^ me to him, and
bid me see what it was oc^ by my watch; and as I had never a one --


Mrs. Derford. He gave you that money?


The Page. Yes; he gave it me to buy one.

( He shows her the money again.) Twelve guineas, mama!


Mrs. Derford. Look at me and tell me, -- may I believe this?


The Page. Ye^, indeed. But I am in no such great hurry to have a watch,
because I can have one at any time.

( Snatching her hand.) Take it, mama; take this money, and put it in your own
purse.


Mrs. Derford. What, my child! -- what! --


The Page. I am so sorry, mama, to see you always (...). (...) mama! I wish I
had a (...) of money, and then you should never (...) any more! for all that I
had, y^^, every (...) of it, I should give it all to you, my dear mama, with my
whole heart!


Mrs. Derford ( ^ing over him.) Would you, my child? --


The Page. What joy I should have, my dear mama, to see you laugh, and be happy!


Mrs. Derford ( embracing him.) I am so already, my love! I would not give up
the pleasure I feel at this moment, for all the wealth in your Prince's
possession.

( She embraces him again.) O, little can you judge of the feelings excited in
the heart of an unhappy mother, by the compassionate tenderness of a darling
son!


The Page. ( again taking her hand.) But you (...) accept this money, at least?
my dear mama! I am sure you will not refuse me that?


Mrs. Derford. Yes, my love, I will take it. You may perhaps be imposed upon by
others, and therefore I will myself see --


The Page. What, mama! to get me a watch?


Mrs. Derford. If you continue with the Prince, you will really require one.


The Page. No, no, I shall not. The Prince has watches every where, and he told
me himself I should not want one.


Mrs. Derford. Yet he gave you this money that you might buy one?


The Page. That does not signify, for he said so, afterward, indeed.


Mrs. Derford. You are deceiving me, my dear? and you should never (...) a ^e
word, not even from love to your mot^er.


The Page. A falsehood! You don't believe me, then? Well, I only wish the
Prince was here himself! If he would but (...)* O! ^^re he is!


SCENE XI.
THE PRINCE, Mrs. DERFORD, THE PAGE. THE PAGE ( running up to him.) IS it not
true, Sir, that you gave me the twelve guineas first of all to buy a watch?


The Prince ( smiling.) Yes, my dear.


The Page. And did not you tell me afterward that I should not want one?


The Prince. True again!


The Page (turning to his mother.) There, mama, there! do you hear?


Mrs. Derford. Your Highness will, I hope, forgive the simplicity of a child,
who is ignorant of the respect which --


The Prince. Forgive it? I am enchanted with it! and I only wish it were
universal. It is Nature in its first beauty. Speak freely, my little friend!
Your mother, then, would not believe you?


The Page (a little angrily.) No, Sir; she would not believe me first; and then
after that, she would not take the money.


The Prince. How? she would not take the money! And did you, then, so little
value my present, as to wish to part with it? I did not expect to hear this.


The Page. Sir? --


The Prince. Had I thought it, I should not have felt myself inclined to have
done much more for you. Be honest, however, and own the truth to me.


The Page. ( looking at his mother.) Oh, Sir! -- if you did but know how poor
she is!


The Prince ( taking his hand.) Good-hearted little f^llow! you have
^^^rificed, then, the sole object of your own wishes, to give succor to your
mother? It would be barbarous to suffer an action, such as that, to deprive you
of your watch. Here ( holding to him his own) take this! and were it the only
one I possessed in the world, I would not but bestow it as the recompense of
your tenderness.


The Page ( receiving it with joy.) O thank you, thank you, Sir! -- But does it
go?


The Prince. Yes, yes, be perfectly satisfied; it goes extremely well.


( The Page runs up to his mother, to show her the watchboy.) The Prince. Come,
my good boy, put the watch up for the present. But since you so well understood
how to employ the little money I just now made you master of, here, ( giving
him his purse) take also this; you will find in it an hundred guineas to
replace the twelve you had at first.


The Page ( astonished.) What, Sir!


The Prince. Do you hesitate? Take it, I tell you.


The Page. What! the purse, and all that is in it too? O no! it is too much, (
offering to empty it.)


The Prince. Certainly too much, were it all designed for yourself: but I only
put it into your hands to dispose of it. And who can you think of, that might
find it most useful?


The Page. Who might find it most useful?

( He looks from the Prince to his mother, and then at the Prince again.) Ah!
take it, my dear mama!


Mrs. Derford ( approaching the Prince.) Your Highness --


The Prince. I must entreat you, Madam, t^ wave all ceremony of thanks. You
will fin^ but very little; and I much fear I shall d^ a greater evil than this
may do you good (...) you must be sensible yourself, that ^ child is too young
and too helpless to co^^^nue with me. He is not yet of an age to be of any
possible service to others. To speak, therefore, frankly, I hope you will not
make any difficulty in again receiving him. -- You are silent?


Mrs. Derford. Forgive me, Sir ^


The Prince. What? -- Speak.


Mrs. Derford. Forgive me, I ^ire you. -- I am wrong to blush at a poverty I
have not brought upon myself; and which, therefore, without any shame, I might
openly and sincerely confess ^ your Highness.

(She approaches the Prince, and pauses.) Alas, Sir! I must own myself too poor
to educate, or to maintain my child! I have long looked toward the future with
an aching eye: and now indeed, I will be wholly a prey to sorrow! O, if I must
carry back this last and only object of all my cares, to the sad refuge of my
own misery -- this child, as yet too young to be sensible of the loss he has
suffered -- (she endeavors to restrain her tears) in -- his father! -- Ah,
Sir! forgive a mother's weakness!


The Page ( in a voice of grief, and taking the Prince's hand.) Sir! mama is
crying.


The Prince. Well, -- but if you go and live with her? --


The Page ( in a tone of supplication.) You will not send me away, Sir?


The Prince. Shall ^ot? do you then think will not? Sweet little fellow! I am
delighted (...) your confidence in me. Well, Madam, (...) stay. -- It will,
however, surely be a pity, (...) ^^ld his morals, his innocence -- but no,
there man be nothing perhaps to fear.


Mrs. Derford ( looking at him with earnestness.) His innocence, Sir?


The Prince. No matter, no matter; you may perhaps imagine I wish to withdraw
my consent; but pray make yourself easy.


Mrs. Derford (fearfully.) But yet, will your Highness think ^^e too
presumptuous should I venture -- Ah! Sir! may I not supplicate you would
explain yourself?


The Prince. All I mean, Madam, is, that for a long time past, I have been
ex^ly dissatisfied with my Pages. Their society and their example, therefore,
may perhaps -- but, however, it is nothing beyond a perhaps, and we can but
try. --


Mrs. Derford (snatching her (...) with eagerness.) O, no, no!


The Prince (with pretend^ (...)) No! -- Well, just as you please, (...)


Mrs. Derford. The innocence of ^y child, is, of all things, most pr^ci^^^ to
(...). Ah! I shudder to and to what danger (...) him!


The Prince. You must (...) --


Mrs. Derford. I can consider nothing, Sir! I see my child in the mid^ fla^es.
-- If I can but snatch him from th^^, what matters it that he be left naked in
my arms?


The Prince. But wit^^^t either money or education, what is to become of him?


Mrs. Derford. Whatever it may please God. I resign myself to his decrees! If
he is not able to support his birth, let him plough in the fields! O let him,
so he preserve but his innocence; let him die in the very bosom of poverty!


The Prince ( in his natural voice.) This, indeed, is thinking nobly: and I see
how thoroughly you merit all that my situation in life can enable me to do for
you.

In what can I serve you? Tell me, what assistance can I give you? Speak
openly; ask what you please; believe me, Madam, you have now a friend before
you.


Mrs. Derford ( with emotion.) Ah, Sir! --


The Prince. Tell me, in the first place, what is your situation at present?
What is the condition of your estate?


Mrs. Derford. It is utterly impossible for (...) to save it.


The Prince. Your debts, then, are considerable (...), you have lawsuits. Have
(...) of (...) them?


(...) None, Sir. There is one (...) the succ^^^^on, which (...) to ha^^ (...)
decided in my (...) which my right is i^contestible; (...) riches and power! I
quitted (...) a compromise; (...) I (...) succeed.


The (...) ^^joice that you could not; for you shall nowhere ample justice,
without making any (...) to obtain it. I plight my (...) to you that this shall
be done. You must also favor me with ^cepting a pension of a hundred (...) a
year. I only wish I could as (...) ^ir^^^^t all your other difficulties.


Mrs. Derford ( casting herself at his feet.) Oh! Sir! your Highness is too,
too good! -- How can I ever --


The Prince ( raising her.) What are you doing? Rise, rise, Madam. I merely
acquit myself of what I owe to the memory of the officer whose widow you are:
and I only do for you that which I wish to do for every one whose virtues so
deeply penetrate my heart. Tell me, do you hesitate any longer in taking back
your child?


Mrs. Derford. Is it possible, Sir, I can forget --


The Prince. And you, my little friend, are you willing to return to your
mother?


The Page ( holding his watch in his hand.) To go back to mama? O yes, Sir.


The Prince. I know, however, that you love me: you would willingly, therefore,
stay with me also?


The Page. O very, very willingly, Sir.


The Prince. But, in giving you again to your mother, I must part from you
myself: and you have so earnestly entreated me to keep you! -- Your mother,
too, has thrown you so wholly under my protection! -- Well, I must try some
other means to conciliate matters. Stay here, Madam, a little while; I shall be
with you in a moment. ( He goes out.)


SCENE XII.
Mrs. DERFORD, THE PAGE. Mrs. DERFORD ( throwing herself into the great chair.)
O BLESSED day! O unexpected happiness!


The Page. Well, dear mama, well, are you quite happy now?


Mrs. Derford ( tenderly drawing him to her.) My child! my dearest child!


The Page. But you don't seem to be glad, my dear mama? Why, you ought to be
quite in high spirits.


Mrs. Derford. My own felicity makes me blush: it reproaches me for the little
confidence I have placed in Providence, and for the bitter affliction I have
felt that ever I gave you birth. It was but a moment after hearing of the loss
of your father, I looked upon you with compassion and terror; I wept that I had
brought you into the world! ( She takes him in her arms, and embraces him.) Yet
it was thou that were destined to comfort and support thy miserable mother! and
by thy own little hands were her tears to be dried! O Heaven, what can I now
desire? Nothing, nothing, but to be satisfied of your brother's future lot, and
then my happiness would be perfect.


The Page. My brother's lot! What do you mean, mama?


Mrs. Derford. Should the Prince know what he has done --


The Page. Why, if he did know it, he would take no notice of it. You see, my
dear mama, how generous and good he is.


Mrs. Derford. Yes, my love, to us, who are guilty of no fault.


The Page. Besides, mama, he has promised me to keep the secret, and never let
the Colonel hear of it.


Mrs. Derford ( alarmed.) How! has he promised you that?


The Page. He has indeed. So now you need not be frightened any more.


Mrs. Derford. I am quite confounded! You have told him, then --


The Page. O, hardly any thing, mama; only just what I knew. But he asked me
himself about my brother's behavior, and so I could not tell stories. You know
you always bid me not do that, mama.


Mrs. Derford. But, my love, my dear child --


The Page. Why what, mama! are you uneasy? are you vexed?


Mrs. Derford. Am I uneasy! good Heaven, am I uneasy! Ah! should the Prince
enquire further, -- should he learn -- thou may perhaps have undone thy
mother, and thy brother; thou may have plunged us into a gulf of affliction
and ruin!


The Page ( ready to cry.) A gulf of affliction?


Mrs. Derford. Some one is coming. ( She embraces and soothes him) Say nothing:
dry up your tears; they will but serve to make the evil yet more serious. Be
quiet, be composed!


SCENE XIII.
Mrs. DERFORD, The PAGE, The PRINCE, followed by Capt. DETTINGEN, and Ensign
DERFORD. THE PRINCE. COME in, Gentlemen.

( To the Ensign.) You, then, are young Derford, son to the brave Major!


The Ensign ( bowing very low.) Yes, Sir.


The Prince. To me that is a great recommendation. Your father was a man of
high honor, and an officer of noble courage. Doubtless his example has
awakened your emulation, and you make it your study to render yourself worthy
of being called his son?


The Ensign. I only do my duty, Sir.


The Prince. And that is doing every thing. The greatest of men cannot do more.
You see here, Sir, your mother. Her virtues, and the fair promise I see in your
amiable little brother of inheriting them, have given me the most advantageous
idea of all your family; and it is owing to this that I have desired to
assemble you all before me.


The Ensign ( still bowing.) Your Highness does me the utmost honor.


The Prince. I do you no more than I conclude you deserve.


The Ensign. Your Highness judges of me most favorably.


The Prince. In short, Sir, I only wait for a fuller conviction that the
judgment I am inclined to form of you, is right, in order to make your
fortune. That easy and assured air, however, which so well becomes you --


The Ensign. O Sir --


The Prince. Bespeaks -- you must permit me to be explicit, -- a soul that is
either very noble, or utterly corrupt. There is no suspecting the son who is
born of such parents; no, it is not possible. Tell me, then, Sir, what is there
I can do for you? One step higher would not much advance you: what say you?


The Ensign (rubbing his hands.) No, certainly, Sir.


The Prince. But if we should jump over that step? -- A Captain's rank, and a
company, seem always the grand aim of every young officer. But first, however,
(turning suddenly to Captain Dettingen) what have you to say, Sir, of your
nephew?


Capt. Dettingen ( confused.) Me, Sir! what have I to say of him?


The Prince. One would suppose some harm?


Capt. Dettingen. No, Sir, on the contrary, much good. I think he has courage,
and will make a brave --


The Prince ( looking at the Ensign with an air of satisfaction.) Indeed? Is
this true?


Capt. Dettingen. Besides, he is of an exceeding good height, and figure.


The Prince. Certainly; he is a very fine young man. But what are his morals?
What is his conduct? I am ashamed, indeed, to question you upon such trifles:
yet I wish to know his character.


Capt. Dettingen ( smiling.) Why, Sir, perhaps rather too much gaiety,
sometimes -- a little rash and hasty; but then, as your Highness knows, that
does not misbecome a soldier.


The Prince. As I know, Sir? Upon my word, this is quite new to me! Nothing
more remains, then, Madam, but that you give me your testimony. What do you say
yourself for your son? --

( They are all silent.) Nothing?


Mrs. Derford. What, Sir, should I say?


The Prince. What you really think of him; the truth.


Mrs. Derford. Is that, Sir, possible? If he merits my praise, ought I to give
it in his presence? or if he deserves my blame, ought he to receive it before
the master of his destiny?


The Prince ( smiling.) Well parried, Madam! You join to the tenderness of a
mother, all the address of a woman. It is impossible not to admire you. Sir, (
turning gravely to the Ensign) every body has some method of his own; I, also,
have mine. When I mean to promote any officer, I begin by putting him under
arrest. What think you of this way?


The Ensign ( alarmed.) Your Highness --


The Prince. It Is my custom. Give up your sword to the Captain. Behavior more
modest might have made me pardon all; but this confident air, this forward
assurance -- with a conscience such as yours! -- What can be hoped from a young
man so bold and so unmoved, who must be certain he has merited my displeasure,
and who knows how unworthily he has treated the best of mothers: but who,
notwithstanding -- Captain Dettingen, see that he is kept under arrest for a
month. I ask no explanation of what is past; I am de^erred, Madam, by my esteem
for you, by the manner in which I gained my information, and yet more, by the
circumstances which make me presume that his fault is of a very serious nature.

( In a voice of firmness and severity:) Captain Dettingen, if any thing wrong
should happen in future, I insist upon being told of it instantly. Mark me,
Sir, instantly! My intention is to promote the young man hereafter; and neither
you, Captain, nor you, Madam, must attempt any alteration in my plan of
proceeding.

( To Mrs. Derford:) I charge you upon no account to give to him even the
smallest trifle by way of present. His pay ought to satisfy him. Let him learn
to limit his expenses.

( He makes a motion to him with his hand to retire.) Go, Sir; and submit to
the punishment you have deserved.

( The two officers go out.)
SCENE XIV.
The PRINCE, Mrs. DERFORD, The PAGE. THE PRINCE ( looking at her.) YOU seem
melancholy!


Mrs. Derford (respectfully.) Alas, Sir, am I not a mother?


The Prince. But you are not one of those weak mothers, who, to save their
children from a little present pain, would not have t^ errors corrected?


Mrs. Derford. That, indeed, would be mistaken fondness. No, Sir, my sole fear
is, less he should have lost for ever the favor of his Prince.


The Prince. No, no, take courage, Madam. My view is merely to make him merit
the services I mean to do him. Youth has much claim to indulgence; and I most
willingly, for the present, forgive his errors and follies; but I cannot do it
always. The pardon which for once may awaken the love of virtue by repentance,
if repeated, may only strengthen a disposition to vice. But for the rest, be
not under any uneasiness. The young man will be brought into the right path;
and my good offices toward him shall keep pace with his reformation.

( Turning to the Page.) As to this child, what do you think are my intentions
for him?


Mrs. Derford. I cannot tell, Sir; but I well know they must be all for his
happiness and advantage. Oh, Sir! the day has never passed, that I have not
paid the tribute of veneration to your Highness' virtues; but I am now first
sensible how short it has been of your noble desert.


The Prince. What are you saying? I see you do not know me. My design is but to
give a brave officer to the State, and a faithful servant to myself; and to
bring up a friend for my son, who shall one day be as willing to sacrifice his
life to him, as his father was to me.


SCENE XV.
The PRINCE, Mrs. DERFORD, The PAGE, An ATTENDANT. THE ATTENDANT. PLEASE your
Highness, the Master of the Royal Academy.


The Prince. Bid him come in. I flatter myself, Madam, you will only have to
hear my design, in order to approve it.


SCENE XVI.
The PRINCE, Mrs. DERFORD, The PAGE, And the MASTER. THE MASTER ( lowing low.)
I ATTEND your Highness' pleasure.


The Prince. Good Morrow to you, Sir; I am glad to see you. Will you please to
inform me what is the yearly pay for children of high rank at the Academy?


The Master. Of high rank, Sir? why, according to circumstances.


The Prince. Pray answer to the point.


The Master. Fifty pounds, Sir.


The Prince. Very well. I mean to put this child under your care. And as I
i^^end to supply the place of a father to him, I desire that he may have every
thing that a man of the first condition would order for his son. But, pray tell
me who has the charge of watching over these young people? for that is the most
essential point in their education.


The Master. The assistant masters, Sir.


The Prince. And, no doubt, they are equal to that employment? However, as I do
not know them, it is upon you solely I shall depend. I have the greatest
confidence in you. Are you willing to undertake, yourself, the care of this
child's education?


The Master. It is but my duty, Sir.


The Prince. I do not ask it of you as a duty; I wish to know if you can
consent to it with pleasure?


The Master. In my duty, Sir, I always find my pleasure.


The Prince. Very well; you may then rely upon my gratitude.

( To the Page, taking him by the hand:) Come hither, my little friend. You see
this gentleman? He is good and amiable. Will you go and live with him?


The Page ( after looking a little while at the master) Yes, Sir.


The Prince. But understand, at the same time, in what light you are to
consider him. He will be your master, and your benefactor. He will be entitled
to your implicit obedience, and your affectionate respect. And if ever he has
any reason to be displeased with you --


The Pa^^ O no, Sir! indeed he never shall!


The Prince. You have seen that I can be no less severe than indulgent; the
least complaint, therefore --


THE PAGE ( To the master, taking hold of his hand.) Indeed, Sir, you shall
never have to complain of me! only believe me.


The Prince. What do you think of the boy?


The Master. It is enough, Sir, that I receive him from the hands of your
Highness, to make him as dear to me as my own son.


The Prince. He may go with you, then, immediately. You give your consent,
Madam?


Mrs. Derford. Good Heaven, Sir, my consent! --


The Prince. Go, then, my boy! Walk ever in the paths of virtue and honor, and
make yourself perfectly easy about every thing else; your wants shall all be
fully supplied. But why do you look so sad?


THE PAGE ( respectfully kissing his hand) Long live your Highness! and may you
be very happy, Sir!


The Prince ( tenderly.) And you too, my young friend, my new son, may you,
too, be happy! How grateful his little heart is already! I shall now, Sir,
release you. And do you Madam, accompany him, and satisfy yourself of what
becomes of your son.


Mrs. DERFORD ( throwing herself at his fe^t.) Can I, Sir, force myself away,
without expre^^ing --


The Prince. What are you about? I do not like this! --


Mrs. Derford. Permit me, Sir, to --


The Prince ( raising her.) No, no, rise, Madam; I cannot bear to see any body
in that posture.


Mrs. Derford. I must, then, obey your Highness, and retire. ( Lifting her
hands up toward Heaven.) It is to God that I must prostrate myself, to
supplicate him long to preserve the life of the most generous of Princes and of
men.


THE PRINCE ( graciously following her a few steps.) Adieu, Madam; and all
happiness attend you!


FINIS.

