A LETTER; IN WHICH TWO OF THE Rev. Mr. FLETCHER's PRINCIPLES ARE COMPARED, AND
PROVED TO BE INCONSISTENT WITH EACH OTHER. AND IN WHICH IS ALSO, AN ATTEMPT TO
SHOW WHAT IS THE TRUTH, BY DENYING WHICH THIS AUTHOR CONTRADICTED HIMSELF.

BY PLATT BUFFET, OF SMITH-TOWN, LONG ISLAND.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY JOHN HARRISSON, (YORICK'S HEAD) NO. 3, PECK-SLIP. -- 1794
--

PREFACE.
THE author of the following letter, has been desired, by some of the followers
of Mr. Fletcher, to state in writing his objections to that author's works. But
to point out all the absurdities attending such a mixture of truth and
falsehood, would require much time and pains. The (...) of the letter therefore
has, as yet, attempted to expose but one contradiction attending that author's
principles. But this, if it be a real contradiction, is sufficient, it is
presumed, to convince persons of sense and candor, that Mr. F -- r's writings
contain no consistent scheme of christian doctrines.

This letter when first written was by no means designed for the press; but
only as a letter to a private friend at his own request. But as some to whom it
was first read, expressed a desire to have it printed; and as it will in this
way, be, not only better understood, but more extensively read; and as Mr. F --
r's works are rapidly spreading among us, and many are hastily embracing his
doctrines, the letter is submitted to public perusal and examination.

Our ablest divines view Mr. F -- r's works as beneath their notice. And it is
true, that he is a very absurd and inconsistent writer. But it is equally true
that his writings, being very agreeable to corrupt human nature, are doing much
mischief in some parts of Long Island. It is highly necessary therefore, that
some body take a little pains to expose some of his absurdities and
inconsistences.

Some perhaps will object that the author of the letter is a young writer,
ambitious to excel, and has therefore published this, with a view merely to
display his abilities. That this is not the case, he will not undertake to
prove with his pen. He means to judge others by their fruits in general; and
exctpes thus to be judged himself.

But suppose he has published this with no other view than merely to display
his abilities; what then? Will it certainly follow that Mr. F -- r has not
contradicted himself? Or will it certainly follow that the contradiction is too
trifling to be worthy of notice?

In answer to the first part of the objection, that the author of the letter is
a young writer it may be observed, that perhaps he will be found old enough to
point out at least one grand contradiction attending Mr. F -- r's principles:
And perhaps more if the cause of religion should require it. Besides, if from
the following letter, it shall appear that a young writer can point out such a
contradiction of principles in that author's works, what may we not suppose an
old writer could do?

It will be further objected, perhaps, that this letter will offend the
followers of Mr. F -- r? If it should offend any of them, let the impartial
judge whether such will not be offended principally because one of their errors
of sentiment is made manifest to themselves and others? And if this should be
the case, will they not have reason to doubt their own pious sincerity, in
proportion as they may be offended? Let such read, John iii. 20 and 21. This
letter will offend none, it is presumed, but such as are much under the influence
of prejudice. And if we must not point out and expose errors for fear of
offending such, all writing and preaching to defend the truth, must be laid
aside.

LETTER, etc.
MY DEAR SIR,
YOU doubtless recollect that you lately desired me to state to you in writing
my objections to Mr. Fletcher's scheme. I beg then you would do me, and
yourself the kindness to read with impartiality, condor, care and attention the
following pages:

You may observe that this author is bitterly opposed to all necessity in moral
matters. One important and essential principle in his scheme is this, That all
absolute necessity either of our doing moral evil, or of our being the subjects
of moral evil, is absolutely inconsistent with our being either blamable or
punishable for such moral evil: Or in other words; That God cannot,
consistently with his perfections, blame or punish s for doing or being what we
cannot avoid. I will cite some of his own assertions to this effect.

And that the absolute necessity of all human actions is incompatible with a
moral law and a day of judgment, is (says he) an axiom in every prejudiced
mind. Vol. iii. page 201. And conscience declares, that it is unjust and cruel
to inflict fearful, eternal punishments upon beings that have only moved and
acted by absolute necessity. Vol. iii. page 206. Absolute necessity and a
righteous judgment are absolutely incompatible. Vol. iii. page 206. If through
the saving grace of God which has appeared to all men, we were not again endued
with an awful power to choose life, and to be faithful, it would be as
injudicious to punish or recompense mankind, as to whip a dead horse for not
moving, damn fire for burning, or grant water an eternal reward for its
fluidity. Vol. iii. page 91. And when you insinuate, that the lawgiver of the
universe will send all workers of iniquity to hell, for not doing what is
lawful and right to save their souls alive, or for not avoiding sin, when he
never gave them the least power personally so to do, you pour almost as much
contempt upon his perfections, as if you said that he will one day raise all
creeping insects to judge them according to their steps, and to cast into a
place of torment as many as did not move as swift as a race horse. Vol. iii.
page 92. But the scheme which I oppose, instead of leaving men without excuse,
opens their mouths and fills them with the best apology in the world. Absolute
necessity and complete impossibility, caused by another before we were born. An
apology this which no candid person can ever object to. Vol. iii. page 172.

Such you know, Sir, is his language throughout a considerable part of the
third and fourth volumes. And the principle he advances in the places, I have
here cited, is a principle upon which he lays great stress, as every one must
be sensible who has ever perused this author. Indeed, almost or quite all his
reasoning against the absolute decrees of God, the sovereignty of grace and the
like, is found upon this principle.

You see then that one important and essential principle in his scheme is, That
all absolute necessity either of our doing moral evil, or of our being the
subjects of moral evil, is absolutely inconsistent with our being either
blamable or punishable for such moral evil: Or, That God cannot, consistently
with his perfections, blame or punish us for doing or being what we cannot
avoid.

Now, Sir, I will endeavor to show, from this author's own words, that another
important and essential part of his scheme is founded upon a principle which is
absolutely inconsistent with the above mentioned principle; and directly
contradictory to it. The principle upon which this part of his scheme is
founded is the following one: That absolute necessity of our doing moral evil,
or of our being the subjects of moral evil, is perfectly consistent with our
being both blamable and punishable for such moral evil: Or in other words; That
God could, consistently with his perfections blame and punish us for doing such
moral evil as we could not avoid. And if I fully and clearly show that one part
of Mr F -- r's scheme is founded upon this last mentioned principle, I hope you
will have candor enough to acknowledge that he has absolutely contradicted
himself, and that one part of his scheme is absolutely inconsistent with the
other.

In the first place then, he holds that the fall of Adam brought mankind into a
state, in which they could, without a Savior, have done nothing but moral
evil. They must necessarily have gone on in nothing but sin and wickedness. For
he undertakes to vindicate what Mr. Wesley asserted (viz.) The total fall of
man, and that by nature man's will is only free to evil. See vol. i. (...) 16
and 21. And Mr F -- r expressly says, that he agrees with Mr. Hill in this;
That the will of man, considered as fallen in Adam, and unassisted by the grace
of God, is only free to evil -- free to live in the element of sin, as a sea
fish is only free to live in salt water. Vol. ii. page 210. And in another
place. without him (that is Christ) we have (says he) nothing but helplessness;
we can do nothing but sin. Vol. ii. page 200. Again. The language of a penitent
sinner, is (says he) Lord, I pray and hear, I fast and receive, I give alms,
and keep the Sabbath, but after all I am an umprofitable servant. I must work
out my own salvation with fear and trembling, and yet without thee I can do
nothing. I cannot change my heart. I cannot root up from my breast the desire
of praise, the thirst of pleasure, and the hankering after gold, vanity,
beauty, or sensual gratifications which I continually feel. Without thee I
cannot force my stubborn heart to repent, believe and love; to be meek and
lowly, calm and devout. Lord deliver me from this body of death; Lord save or I
perish. Vol. iii. page 52. And in another place the author has these words. I
protes in opposition to Pharisaic pride, that we have no power to do good works
pleasant and acceptable to God, without the grace of God preventing us, that we
may have a good will, and working with us when we have that good will. Vol. iv.
page 135. Once more. From what has been observed it follows (says he) that
before any one can believe in the gospel sense of the word, he must be
convinced of sin by the spirit of God He must feel himself a guilty, lost, and
helpless sinner, unable to recover the favor and image of God by his own
strength and righteousness. Vol. iii. page 44.

Many more passages of the same import I could easily cite from this author:
But these I trust are sufficient to show he holds that the fall of Adam brought
mankind into a state in which they could, without a Savior, have done nothing
but moral evil: That they must necessarily and unavoidably have gone on in sin
and wickedness.

In the second place, this author holds that mankind would have been blamable
and punishable for their necessary and unavoidable sin and wickedness, had a
Savior never been provided, this appears from his expressions which I have
already cited: Such as these; The will of man considerered as fallen in Adam,
and unassisted by the grace of God, is only free to evil -- free to live in the
element of sin, as a seafish is only free to live in salt water. Without him
(that is Christ) we have nothing but helplessness; we have nothing but sin,
etc. By evil, and by sin and the like here, we are undoubtedly to understand
that for which mankind are blamable and punishable; otherwise it cannot be
moral evil: It cannot be sin. If then without Christ mankind have nothing but
helplessness; nothing but sin, and their wills be free only to evil and the
like, it follows that without a Savior mankind would necessarily and
unavoidably have been both blamable and punishable. They would have been,
according to what Mr. F -- r holds, under an absolute necessity of going on in
sin, so as to have been guilty, blamable, and punishable. And he evidently
grants all this in saying that a person before he believes in the gospel, Must
feel himself a guilty, lost, and helpless sinner, etc.

But we need not rest the matter here: For in other places he is very full and
express to the purpose. He holds that all mankind are, by nature and without
Christ, under the first covenant made with Adam. And he holds that it is
impossible for any mere man since the fall to keep this covenant. At the same
time he holds that all mankind, without Christ; are under the curse, children
of wrath, and condemned for not keeping it. This first covenant (says he) we
have all broken in our first parents; for in Adam all died -- By one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for
that all have sinned.; Romans v. 12. We are then all born or conceived in sin;
Ps. li. 5. And consequently we are by nature children of wrath; Ephesians. ii. 3. But
this is not all: This root of original sin produces in every man many actual
iniquities; whereby we imitate Adams rebellion, so we make the guilt of it our
own, and fasten the curs^ ^^tending that guilt, upon our own souls. Romans vii.
25. Therefore, while we remain in our natural state, or to speak more
intelligibly, while we continue in sin, guilt, and total impenitency, we not
(...) trample the covenant of grace under foot, but we stand upon the covenant
of works; and consequently lie under the dreadful curse, which is already
denounced against every transgressor of the law Gal. iii 10. Vol. iii. page 40.

Is this then the case? Have we all broken the first covenant in our first
parents! Have we all sinned in this way? And are we by nature children of
wrath? And does this root of original sin produce in every man many actual
iniquities, so that we fasten the curse upon our own souls? And he under the
dreadful curse which is already denounced against every transgressor of the
law? Have we all then broken the first covenant, and for breaking it are we
thus, children of wrath and under the dreadful curse and the like? Would not
all the posterity of Adam then, have been blamable and punishable for their
necessary and unavoidable sin and wickedness, had a Savior never been
provided? If Mr. F -- r was now here, how would he avoid this consequence? Does
it not inevitably follow from his own premises? Surely he would not pretend
that Christ has, by his coming, brought us under the first covenant, and made
us thus guilty, blamable and punishable for breaking it? If he should pretend
this, he would contradict himself in another particular: For he holds that
Christ came to free us from the first covenant, and from the guilt, blame, and
condemnation which we have incurred by breaking it. See vol. iv. page 162. If
then Christ had never come, all the posterity of Adam would have been under an
absolute necessity of being sinful guilty, blamable, punishable; and of being
condemned for ever.

Equally full and express to the purpose he is in another place. Under the
first covenant, absolute, unsinning, universal obedience in our own persons is
(says he) required; and such obedience we, in our fallen state, can never
perform. Vol. iii. page 43. But surely God does not require more of us than he
can justly blame and punish us for not doing. It would be blasphemy to suppose
that he does: For it would be nothing less than supposing him to require more
than he ought to require or could justly require. It follows then, that had a
Savior never been provided, God could justly, and in fact would have blamed
and punished mankind for their necessary and unavoidable guilt, and wickedness.

Once more, The second covenant or the gospel is (he tells in another place) a
dispensation of free grace and mercy to poor, lost, helpless sinners, who
seeing and feeling themselves condemned by the law of innocence; and utterly
unable to obtain justification upon the terms of the first covenant, come to
Jesus Christ, etc. Vol. iii. page 42. Here then I ask what would these have
done if no Savior had been provided? Must they not necessarily and unavoidably
have been condemned by the law of innocence? And must not this condemnation
have necessarily and unavoidably come upon all the fallen race of Adam?

Again: Total death, or a full departure of the Holy Spirit. This (says Mr. F
-- r) passed upon Adam and all mankind in him, when he lost God's moral image;
fell into selfish nature, and was buried in sin, guilt, shame and horror. Vol.
i. page 259. According to this author, therefore, spiritual death passed upon
all mankind in Adam when he lost God's moral image. And thus judgment came
upon all men to condemnation; so that even infants must be justified by Christ
or be damned. We therefore find him speaking of the justification which passes
upon infants, thus; That which passes upon all infants universally, and is thus
described by St. Paul; as by the offense of one judgment came upon all men to
condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
men, unto justification from original sin. etc. Vol. i. page 263. And in
another place, speaking respecting the four degrees of justification, he has
these words respecting that which passes upon us in our infancy. All these
degrees of justification are equally merited by Christ. We do nothing in order
to the first, because it finds us in a state of total death. Vol. i. page 264.

But infants could not stand in need of this justifitation by Christ if they
were not guilty, blamable and punishable. It follows then that if Christ had
never come and merited these degrees of justification, the very infants must
have been blamable, punishable and condemned. But could infants have prevented
the offense of their first parent Adam? It will not be pretended It follows
then that, if a Savior had never been provided, all the posterity of Adam, who
might have died in their very infancy would have been under an absolute
necessity of being, guilty, blamable and punishable. Nay, all such must
according to Mr. F -- r, have necessarily been condemned forever. This is going
a great stretch indeed. This author ought to blush at mentiontioning even the
name of "Rigid calvinists." For I trust there are few who will equal (...) in
rigidness with regard to this matter.

Does it not appear then that all the posterity of Adam would, according to Mr.
F -- r, have been blamable and punishable for their necessary and unavoidable
guilt, and wickedness? I could easily produce many more of his assertions of
the same import. But these I trust are amply sufficient to show that, according
to this author, God could justly have blamed and punished mankind for such sin,
guilt and wickedness as they could not possibly have avoided, in case a Savior
had never been provided. All the posterity of Adam would have been under an
absolute necessity of being guilty, and consequently of being condemned.

But how does all this agree with the first mentioned principle of his (viz.)
that Absolute necessity and a righteous judgment are absolute, incompatible,
and the like: Or which I take to be the same thing, that absolute necessity
either of our doing moral evil, or being the subjects of moral evil, is
absolutely inconsistent with our being either blamable or punishable for such
moral evil. If I can understand language here is an express and manifest
contradiction in these two principles belonging to Mr. F -- r's scheme. And,
Sir, how does he help himself out of this dilemma? How does he free his scheme
from this entanglement? Will you say he holds that God has provided a Savior,
and by him freed all the posterity of Adam from this absolute necessity of
sinning, of being guilty, blamable and punishable, and of being condemned? I
grant it. He does hold to this. We therefore find him expressing himself in the
following manner:

Every anti Calvinist may, and I for one do believe, that in every man born
into the world, and considered according to the first covenant, original
corruption, (nor Adam's transgression) deserves God's wrath and damnation at
the hands of an holy and righteous God, without dreaming that any man shall
ever be damned for it: Seeing that according to God's mercy and goodness
displayed in the second covenant. Christ the second Adam, is come to taste
death for every man and to be a Savior of all men; so that for his sake the
free gift is come upon all men unto justification of life. Vol. ii. page 245.

It seems then that original corruption in every man born into the world, and
considered according to the first covenant, deserves, (according to this
author's own words) God's wrath and damnation at the hands of an holy and
righteous God. But is it possible for Adam's posterity to avoid original
corruption? He does not pretend it. Why then may not the posterity of Adam be,
not only blamable and punishable, but damned for what they could not possibly,
avoid? Because, Christ the second Adam (says Mr. F -- r) is come to taste death
for every man, and to be a Savior of all men; so that for his sake the free
gift is come upon all men unto justification of life This is his solution of
the difficulty. Let us then pay particular attention to it. Let us carefully
examine this answer and see whether it is really helping the matter.

Here then let it be observed, that Mr. F -- r holds that the gift of a Savior
was a free gift as in the words just cited from him. And you, Sir, know very
well I trust, that he holds to the same throughout his writings. He holds that
the gift of a Savior was a free gift and wholly of free grace. He holds that
the capacity which Christ has given all mankind to repent and choose life, and
that the power which Christ has given all mankind to believe and repent; and
that the day of salvation, with a talent of living light, and rectified free
agency and the like, are all of free grace. I could produce a great variety of
his own assertions to prove what I here assert. But it is needless for no one,
who has ever perused this author, will, I presume, pretend to deny that he
holds all mankind have these favors of free grace.

If then the gift of a Savior be a free gift and wholly of free grace, it
follows that God was under no obligations to give us Christ; nor any of the
blessings which flow to us through him. Consequently he might justly have
withheld the gift of a Savior, and all these blessings from mankind, and left
them in their fallen condition. And then what would have been the condition of
mankind? All the posterity of Adam would have been under an absolute necessity
of being totally corrupt, and of going on in sin and wickedness. And they
would, according to what Mr. F -- r tells us, have deserved God's wrath and
damnation even for their original corruption. And surely they would have
deserved as much as this for their actual transgressions of the law of
innocence.

Does this author then help the matter in this way? No person of sense and
candor will suppose it: For according to his own principles, God might justly
have withheld the gift of a Savior and all free grace. And if so, it follows
that every man born into the world would have deserved God's wrath and
damnation even for that original corruption which they could not possibly have
avoided; but must necessarily have had. And besides their original corruption
they would have had many actual iniquities. And most certainly these would have
deserved as much as their original corruption.

But how does these things harmonize with this author's favorite principle,
that, Absolute necessity and a righteous judgment are absolutely incompatible?
And how do they harmonize with the following assertion of his: If, through the
saving grace of God which has appeared to all men, we were not again endued
with an awful power to choose life, and to be faithful, it would be as insidious
to punish or recompense mankind, as to whip a dead horse for not moving, damn
fire for burning, or grant water an eternal reward for its fluidity. Let candor
and common sense judge whether here be not a most awful jaring of principles.
Does not Mr. F -- r hold to two principles which must be at eternal war with
each other?

We oppose (says he) the doctrine of absolute necessity, or the Calvinian must
as being inseparable from Manicheism; and we assert that there is no needs must
in the eternal death of any man; because Christ imparts a degree of temporary
salvation to all, with power to obey, and a promise to bestow eternal salvation
upon all that will obey. Vol. iv. page 88.

From what this author here says it seems that the reason why there is no Needs
must in the eternal death of any man, is the coming of Christ and imparting a
degree of temporary salvation to all with power to obey and a promise to bestow
eternal salvation upon all that will obey. This, as well as what he says
otherwhere, implies that if Christ had never come, there would have been a "
Needs must" in the eternal death of some. It implies that there would have been
a " Needs must" in the eternal death of all Adam's posterity. But as the gift
of Christ was, as Mr. F -- r allows, a free gift and of free grace, God was
under no obligations to give us Christ, or to provide any Savior for mankind.
Consequently he might justly have withheld the gift of a Savior, and left
mankind with a needs must in the eternal death of every one of Adam's
posterity; and of all mankind after the sail. Does not this author then oppose
himself in opposing the doctrine of Absolute necessity? We must renounce the
mistakes of rigid Calvinists, (says he) or give up the doctrines of justice. It
appears to me as though some of the followers of Mr. F -- r must renounce some
of his mistakes, or give up the doctrine of perfection.

In short; according to one part of this author's scheme, the great necessity
of a Savior to mankind, arises from their being under an absolute necessity of
sinning, of being guilty, blamable, perishable and condemned forever without
one. So that not only the necessity, but even the grace of the gospel to Adam's
posterity, is founded upon this very supposition that God might justly have
blamed and punished his creatures, for doing that which they would have been
under an absolute necessity of doing; and for being what they would have been
under an absolute necessity of being. At the same time this writer has founded
another important part of his scheme upon the supposition or principle, That
God cannot, and never could in any case, consistently with his perfections,
blame or punish his creatures for doing or being what they could not avoid.

Does then this author help the matter in the least by saying, that God has
freely given to mankind a Savior, to free them from that absolute necessity of
sinning, and of perishing (...) they would otherwise have been under? On the
contrary; Does he (...) make the matter worse? Does not the very gift of a
Savior show that all the posterity of Adam were in a lost, helpless, and
undone condition? Does not the gift of a Savior prove that they (...) possibly
have avoided sin go (...) blame and (...) without one? Consequently (...) not
prove that God might justly have (...) all the posterity of Adam in a state of
(...) necessary guilt, blame and (...) if it were, as Mr F -- r (...) a
gracious gift (...) his (...) course (...) a Savior, (...) that, in this way,
he has, if possible, entangled it the more.

And indeed he himself appears to have been in some measure sensible of the
impossibility of reconciling his jaring principles in this way. We therefore
find him quitting this ground, and having recourse to another expedient. But
let us follow him.

And we assert (says he in Vol. iv. page 38) that if God had not graciously
designed to replace all mankind in a state of initial salvation from sin and
hell, according to the various dispensations of his redeeming grace, he would
have punished Adam's sin by a personal damnation. Nor would he have suffered
him to propagate his fallen race, unless the second Adam had extended the
blessings of redemption so far as to save from eternal misery all who die in
their infancy; and to put all who live long enough to act as moral agents, in a
capacity of avoiding hell by working out their own eternal salvation in the day
of their temporary salvation; a day this, which inconsistent Calvinists call
the day of grace.

Here is something extraordinary indeed for one who has boasted of his talents
at reasoning as Mr. F -- r. Here we see him, so far from standing his ground,
that he is evidently giving way to this grand difficulty attendending his
scheme. He tells us that if a Savior had not been provided, God would not have
suffered Adam to propagate his fallen race It Is as much as if he had said; God
could consistently with his perfections, have suffered Adam to propagate his
race in such a state that they might have been under an absolute necessity of
being sinful, guilty, blamable and justly punishable, had a Savior never been
provided: But I do not believe he would have suffered it. This is granting that
God could justly have blamed and punished Adam's posterity for doing that which
they could not possibly have avoided; and for being such creatures as they
would have been under an absolute necessity of being. But how does this agree
with the following assertion of his: If, through the saving grace of God which
has appeared to all men, we were not again endued with an awful power to choose
life, and to be faithful, it would be as injudicious to punish or recompense
mankind, as to whip a dead horse for not moving, damn fire for burning, grant
water an eternal reward for its fluidity. In short, how does this agree with a
principle upon which he has founded an important part of his scheme, (viz.)
that "Absolute necessity and a righteous judgment are absolutely incompatible?"

But perhaps, Sir, you will say that Mr. F -- r's meaning here was not that God
could, but that he could not, consistently with his perfections, have suffered
Adam thus to propagate his fallen race without providing a Savior? Then it
comes to this, that God, as soon as he suffered Adam to propagate his fallen
race, was under obligations to provide a Savior for all his posterity. But if
so, how was the gift of a Savior to mankind a purely free and gracious gift?
It certainly was not, according to this, wholly of a free grace to Adams
posterity

But as Mr. F -- r holds that the gift of a Savior was a free gift and a
purely gracious gift to all mankind; it follows that God might, consistently
with his justice and all his other attributes, have suffered Adam to propagate
his fallen race, without ever providing any Savior for them. And then all the
posterity of Adam would have been left under the first covenant: According to
which An absolute, unsinning, universal obedience in our own persons is
required; and such obedience, we in our fallen state, (says this author) can
never perform. Suppose then God had never provided a Savior, what would have
been our condition? We should, if what he (...) be true, have been required by
the Deity to perform that in our own persons which we never could have
performed: Nay, all the posterity of Adam would have deserved God's wrath and
damnation even for their original corruption And this they could not poss^^^^
have avoided, since it would have been brought upon them by their first parent
Adam. Would not all the posterity of Adam then, have been upon Mr F -- r's
principles, justly blamable, punishable and damnable for that which they could
not possibly have avoided? Let reason, candor and common sense judge. I once
more then ask with what appearance of consistency or propriety he could assert
thus. If through the saving grace of God which has appeared to all men, we were
not (...) endued with an awful power to choose life, and to be faithful, it
would be as injudicious to punish or recompense mankind, as to whip a dead
horse for not moving, dam^ fire for burning, or grant water an eternal reward
for its fluidity? Or with what prop^^^^^ could (...) assert, that Absolute
necessity and a righteous judgment are absolutely incompatable?

Thus, (says this writer, Vol. ii. page 245) by looking at our divine compass,
the word of God, we (...) through the straits of error, keeping at an equal
distance from the rocks against which Calvinists run on the right hand, and
Pelagians on the left. From Mr. F -- r's steerage through the straits of error,
one would suppose he looked at his divine compass blindfolded: For he has made
a very crooked path; and is in my humble opinion, taken up by a rock at last.
And over this rock, I presume, he will never run. Sir, do you not think, that
this author ought first to have cast the beam out of his own eye, before he had
undertaken to pull the mote out of other peoples eyes? That is; ought he not to
have reconciled Mr. F -- r with Mr. F -- r, before he had undertaken to
reconcile the Calvinists and Arminians by endeavoring to persuade them to
embrace his plan.

What has this author said to extricate himself from this dilemma? I can find
nothing. From his having recourse first to one solution of the difficulty and
then to another, it is evident he felt his scheme in distress. He did not fall
into this grand inconsistency by mere inattention. He was necessarily and
unavoidably driven to it, in case he held the free grace of the gospel and his
favorite principle, that Absolute necessity and a righteous judgment are
absolutely incompatible: For if, in supporting this principle, he had been
consistent with himself throughout his writings, he must have said, at all
times, that God could never, if a Savior had not been provided, have required
more of the posterity of Adam, than they could have done. And if so; they might
have obtained righteousness by the law: For they could have done what they
could. And, upon this principle, God could have required no more. And If there
had been a law given which could have given life, verily righteousness. (says
the Apostle) should have been by the law. Gal. iii 21. And, If righteousness
come by the law, then Christ is dead in vain. Gal. ii. 21. Thus to all Adam's
posterity Christ would have been dead in vain. This consequence would have been
manifest to the most (...), if this author had been consistent with himself
with regard to his favorite principle: Nay more; he must have expressly
contradicted his first gospel axiom that All our salvation is of God in Christ,
and therefore of grace. Upon this principle, our salvation would not have been
in Christ; and at the same time of grace: For all the posterity of Adam could
have discharged the whole of their duty without Christ. Consequently, they
could have obtained salvation without Christ.

If, on the other hand, this author had universally granted moral necessity to
be consistant with blame and punishment, praise and reward, then he would had
little or no room left to object against the absolute decrees of God, the
sovereignty of grace and the like. His prejudices therefore against the truth
led him to contradict himself; and adopt two principles, both of which are
essential to his scheme, and yet at eternal war with each other. This then is
your much boasted of Mr. F -- r with all his triumphing and parade of learning.

I have not attempted to point out but one contradiction in this author's
works. And if any person will show me that here is not a contradiction; then I
will show him a number of places in which he his in fact contradicted both
himself and the scriptures. But I suppose it would not trouble in the least,
those who agree with Mr. F -- r, if I were to point out a thousand
contradictions in his works. For Opposite docdrines are (says he), as essential
to the fullness of Christ's gospel, as the two eyes, nostrails, and cheeks,
which compose our faces, are essential to the completeness of human beauty. See
vol. iii. page 241. No wonder then that this writer holds to opposite doctrines
in supporting the gospel. Indeed he is perfectly right if this be the case: If
there be opposite doctrines in the gospel he must necessarily hold to opposite
doctrines, if he mean to support the gospel. But Sir, what sort of a gospel is
Mr. F --. endeavoring to support? He calls it Christ's gospel. But surely he
cannot mean the gospel of Christ Jesus the righteous, the eternal Son of God,
who spoke as never man spoke? No; he must have found some new Christ whose
gospel with opposite doctrines he is laboring to support. And whose new gospel
can this be? By looking at the front-page of the first volume, we find he has
given his works the following title: A Vindication of the Rev. Mr. Westey's
Last Minutes. We see then whose gospel Mr. F -- r is laboring to support. This
must undoubtedly be the gospel to whose fullness opposite doctrines are so very
essential. And no doubt this was the "compas^ at which Mr. F -- r looked when
he underto^^ to fall through the straits of error. No wond^^ then he has split
upon a rock and made shipwre^^. And no wonder that many others who take t^^
compass for a guide, finally make shipwreck (...) only with respect to a scheme
of christian doctrines, but even of faith and good conscience.

Perhaps, Sir, you are ready to object he^^ and say that I have not as yet
attempted so mu^^ as to show where the truth lies, as to prove th^^ Mr. F -- r
has contradicted himself? I acknowledge it. Nor would it be consistent with
(...) present design of brevity, to go into a full explanation of the subject
respecting natural and moral necessity and inability. However, that y^^ may not
conceive erroniously with regard to (...) sentiments, and that I may, as far as
I am capable help you to a knowledge of the truth, I wi^^ give you as concisely
as possible, my ideas upon t^^ subject with some of my reasons for believing
(...) I do.

There are two general kinds of necessity a^^ inability. One is called natural.
It has refere^^^ to nature as the word is used in opposition to the will. If a
person be unable to do an action, (...) be under a necessity of not doing it,
for want (...) bodily powers, understanding or some natural faculty, he is
under a natural necessity of not doing it. His inability to do this action is
of the n^^^ral kind. And we readily grant that such an ^^ability and such a
necessity are absolutely inconsistent with commands and prohibitions, prai^^
and blame, rewards and punishments.

The other kind of necessity and inability is called moral; because it has
reference to the heart or will, which is the moral faculty. To illustrate this,
let us suppose a person should be commanded to do an action which he could not
do; not for want of bodily powers, understanding or any natural faculty, but
wholly for want of a will or heart to do it. This person would be under a moral
necessity of not doing this action. His inability to do it would be wholly of
the moral kind. Thus, They that are in the flesh (that is, in an unregenerate
state) cannot please God. Romans viii. 8. But why? Is it for want of bodily
powers, or any natural faculty? No; but only for want of a will to please him.
Their inability, therefore, to please God is wholly of the moral kind. And if
God should give these persons a will to love him, so as to please him, and
should maintain this will in them, they would be under a moral necessity of
loving and pleasing God.

This moral kind of necessity and inability may be as absolute as the natural.
And in many respects it resembles the natural kind. But it is very different in
its nature. For the most absolute moral necessity and inability are perfectly
consistent with commands and prohibitions, praise and blame, rewards and
punishments: Whereas, natural necessity and inability are absolutely
inconsistent with these things.

That absolute moral necessity and inability are perfectly consistent with
praise and reward, appears from the state of the Deity: For the scripture
expressly declares that God cannot lie; and that the judge of all the earth
cannot but do right. His will is perfectly holy. And he cannot have any other
but a holy will. Consequently, he is under an absolute moral necessity of being
holy. But no one, I presume, will pretend to say that God is not worthy of
praise and reward for his holiness. It follows then that the most absolute
moral necessity to do good, is perfectly consistent with praise and reward. The
same appears from a consideration of the state of holy men and angels in
Heaven. And from the same consideration it appears that absolute moral
necessity to do good, and absolute moral inability to do evil, are consistent
with commands and prohibitions: For though saints and angels in Heaven are
under an absolute moral necessity of being holy, and an absolute moral
inability to do evil, yet they are all subjects of commands and prohibitions.
This is plain from the general tennor of scripture.

That absolute moral necessity to do good, so as to persevere in holiness, is
consistent with praise and reward; commands and prohibitions, might be proved
also from the state of those who are regenerated. For, "Whosoever is born of
God does not commit sin; (says the apostle John) for his seed remains in him:
And he cannot sin because he is born of God." But, Sir, if you will not allow
this argument to be conclusive, you cannot deny but that I have mentioned some
which are conclusive with regard to this matter.

Since then absolute moral necessity to do good is perfectly consistent with
commands and prohibitions, praise and reward, why should not absolute moral
necessity to do evil, be consistent with commands and prohibitions, blame and
punishment? No reason I presume can be given. But there is no need of resting
the matter here: For the arguments to prove this fact are various, and such as
amount, I conceive to absolute demonstration. I will mention two or three; of
which I desire particular notice may be taken.

In the first place then. All, I presume, will agree to the following
propositions. God commands all mankind to render at all times universal
obedience to the law we are under; to live and the entirely free from sin And
he considers us blamable and punishable for every transgression, however small.
But for want of good hearts all mankind cannot thus render at all times,
universal obedience. Notwithstanding all Christ has done, it is impossible for
all mankind to live and die moral agents without transgressing the law they are
under some time or other It follows then that absolute moral necessity to do
(...) is consistent with commands, with blame and punishment. (...) inevitably
follows, if there be, or ever has been a single individual of mankind thus
under necessity from an evil heart, of transgressing at any time, in any
instance, the law he is or was under, whether that be the law of liberty, the
Mosaic or Adamic law. Indeed, it is so far from being the case that all mankind
can thus live and die without sinning, that no mere man since the last ever has
been or ever will be (...) notwithstanding all Christ has done, thus to render
universal obedience from the time he became or shall become a moral agent to
the time of his death All, on account of evil hearts, do necessarily and
unavoidably sin sooner or later. This is a (...) evident from scripture. And it
is what Mr. F -- r himself allows in a great variety of places, as every one
must be sensible who has ever read his works. It appears then to a
demonstration that moral necessity to do evil, and moral inability to do good,
are perfectly consistent with commands and prohibitions, blame and punishment.
The same appears from a consideration of the state of the devils and damned,
and of those who are given up to a reprobate mind: For they are all blamable
and punishable, not only for the sins which brought them into that state, but
also for those which they now commit; and which they are under an absolute
necessity of committing. From a great variety of such arguments and from many
express passages of scripture to this effect that, "They that are in the flesh
cannot please God," and that many cannot, like the apostle, do the things that
they would and ought to do; it is evident that absolute moral necessity to do
evil, and absolute moral inability to do good, are perfectly consistent with
commands and prohibitions, blame and punishment. The same then we may safely
lay down as an eternal maxim of truth abundantly taught in the holy oricles of
God

Now, Sir, if you will take this maxim; and make it your compass, as being a
plain doctrine of scripture, you will steer clear of the rock upon which Mr. F
-- r has split, and made shipwreck. And I presume you can avoid it in no other
way: For suppose God had suffered Adam to propagate his fallen race without
ever providing a Savior for them. They would as Mr. F -- r tells us, have had
nothing but helplessness; nothing but sin. They must necessarily have gone on
in sin and wickedness. But this necessity would have been wholly of the moral
kind; or such as would have proceeded from the state of their wills. And such a
necessity we have found to be perfectly consistent with blame and punishment,
and consequently with a righteous judgment. Therefore, God could, consistently
with his perfections, have blamed and punished the fallen race of Adam, for
their actual and personal wickedness; notwithstanding they would have been
under an absolute moral necessity of committing it. Allowing this to be the
case, we may clearly see how it is that, after the fall, righteousness could
not come by the law to any man. Consequently we may see the great necessity of
a Savior, and also the grace there is in the gift of Christ as a redeemer.

From what I have here said, you may form some idea, Sir, of the great
distinction which is made between natural necessity and inability, and moral I
have here but just hinted to you the difference. If you are disposed to make
further enquiery respecting this matter, I would refer you to what President
Edwards has said upon the subject in his piece on the human will. The whole of
it is worthy of your close attention. At the same time, by reading this book,
and comparing the same with your favorite author's representation of it, you
will see for yourself one of Mr. F -- r's gross misrepresentations. The most
charitable conclusion is that this writer had never read it.

From what I have here suggected you may see also, if you act a candid part,
where the fallacy lies of Mr. F -- r's reasoning against the Calvinistic
doctrines of the sovereignty of grace, the absolute decrees of God,
regeneration, faith and repentance. The whole force of a great part of his
arguments against these doctrines, depends upon the truth of this one
proposition, That there is no difference between moral necessity and inability,
and natural, as to nature. In all his reasonings, declamations, and addresses
to the passions of mankind with regard to these things, he made a practice of
comparing the necessity and inability which arise from the state of the will or
heart; to the necessity and inability which arise from the state of the bodily
powers or natural faculties. That this is in fact the case every one must be
sensible who has ever read this author's works.

But, Sir, where has Mr. F -- r shown that these two kinds of necessity and
inability are not thus different in their nature? He has not so much as
attempted it in any of his works whch I have read: Whereas this ought to have
been one of his first steps. Since, therefore, he has taken no notice of this
distinction between natural necessity and moral, we who make it, and maintain
that it is taken from scripture, shall, till it is shown to be groundless,
consider as vain and futile all his arguments, declamations, and addresses
whose whole force depend upon there being no such distinction in nature. The
greater part of the learned world make this distinction. And I trust that the
scriptures make it. And it is a distinction upon which much indeed depends. If,
therefore, you would act a fair and candid part, never more use arguments whose
whole force depends upon there being no such distinction; till you have shown
that it is groundless.

Finally, from what has been said, you may see also how difficult it is to form
a consistent scheme of religion, or to reconcile the doctrines of scripture
with each other, without granting that moral necessity and moral inability are
consistent with commands and prohibitions, praise and blame, rewards and
punishments. No writer ever labored harder perhaps to exclude all kinds of
necessity and inability from his scheme, than Mr. F -- r has done. But with
what success, I leave for the candid, who may read what I have here written, to
judge. For my own part I am fully and firmly of the opinion that the doctrines
of scripture can be reconciled with each other, in no other way than by
allowing that moral necessity to do evil is consistent with commands, with
blame and punishment; and that moral necessity to do good is consistent with
commands, with praise and reward. But I profess to be one whole mind is open to
conviction. And I hope that you will manifest yourself to be a serious and
candid enquirer after divine truth. May He, then, who is the Wise Disposer of
all events, lead to a saving knowledge of the truth, you,

Sir, And your friend and humble servant, PLATT BUFFET.

FINIS.

