[THIS little piece was written about the end of the winter 1793-4, on the
occasion of a growing alarm of the yellow fever being again in Philadelphia.
Fear began to spread in the city* and, had it extended to the members of the
national legislature, so as to have occasioned their removal from town, it
would have been attended with considerable disadvantage to the public affairs.
Copies were distributed among the gentlemen of congress, and to a few of the
city. But it happened that several, who could not have been purposely
overlooked, did not receive any: and applications have been made for copies
when there were none left. To answer these, a few copies more, with notes, are
struck off.]

YELLOW FEVER.
THE yellow fever, or tropical endemic causus, and the small pox, are
inflammatory in the attack; and are communicated by specific contagion. The
poison of the former, as it seems, is conveyed directly to the stomach with the
saliva, or any thing swallowed, and acts upon it, and upon the pylorus and
duodenum, by corrosion; which first raising an inflammation on the parts, these
afterward become gangrenous. This poison acts as other acrid poisons taken
into the stomach. The disease is a corrosion of the stomach, the pylorus, and
the duodenum; all else of the complaints, are they more than symptoms
consequent of that corrosion* See an account of dissections, page 9.


The contagious poison of the small pox acts more like that infused into the
blood by the bite of poisonous animals, which contaminates the mass.

The constituent parts of these poisons, or by what process of nature they are
generated, few pretend to know; and though some may fancy they know them, yet
it is beyond the conjecture of most.

Whilst we are ignorant of the cause of the yellow fever and small pox, we may
however admit that they are infectious, though not alike in all circumstances.
The tropical endemic yellow fever is not always contagious. It exists in the
West India islands for years together without being notably so. Strangers from
northern climates are very liable to take it on their arrival there; and it
goes hard with them. Their being so very susceptible, is owing more to their
intemperance, and exposure to night air, dews and rains, than to contagion.
After some number of years, it is ushered in with aggravated circumstances. It
thus becomes very contagious, and is a distinct and most fatal disease. Such
was the yellow fever in Philadelphia in 1793, and in the West Indies in 1793
and 1794. The milder or common yellow fever of the islands can never be
conveyed to the continent, because it is not contagious, and the contagious
kind seldom exists in the islands: -- thence the long intervals of its
appearance on this continent. All plagues have their periods. When the peculiar
circumstances that occasion or admit of the aggravation in the yellow fever
give way, the disease becomes no longer contagious, but sinks into the common
and less virulent tropical yellow fever. It is said, an excess of heat or of
cold will destroy certain diseases. The dreaded Natolian plague (commonly
called " The Plague") has existed, at times, in the higher but mild latitudes,
hitherto, without having ever originated any where else than in Natolia. It is
often in northern Egypt and on the coast of Barbary: but it is said to be
always carried thither from its Natolian source. M. Savery calls Constantinople
and Smyrna the Foci of it. Was this kind of plague ever known to exist between
the tropics? It has been carried to England, and other countries of heat and
cold, where it raged. All the countries of its existence are in the temperate
climates. Did it ever exist in countries of continual heat? On the other hand,
the yellow fever, in its virulent state, originates only within the tropics,
the lower latitudes of perpetual heat: but it is of a nature to act in the
higher latitudes, under a combination of certain peculiar circumstances, when
introduced from its native source. There must be such a combination to produce
and support these contagious and dreadful diseases. Other circumstances arrest,
and in the end annihilate them.
The small pox may be communicated in all states of the air, but the yellow
fever can exist only in a hot air, as histories of it show: and there are also
strong reasons for believing from those histories that frost kills the
infectious matter of it, as surely as it kills certain other exotics. Many
people, in the time of the late epidemic in Philadelphia, looked for rain,
which they believed would be fatal to the infection. In Granada, "As the change
to moisture was remarkably great and sudden, much expectation was formed that
the virulence of the infection would be done away or abated: but neither
happened." Chisholm.
Others regarded not the coming of rain, otherwise than as it might be attended
with or followed by cold; and they looked only for mere cold, whether attended
with rain or not, because histories of this fever assured them that cold had
always been fatal to the infection. It is admitted that floods of rain, by
diluting and washing off the stagnant putrid water of a low country, relieve
from the remitting, the bilious, and the putrid fevers common to such countries.

Although the yellow fever originates in countries of perpetual heat, yet it
may be brought from thence into this country of both cold and heat, as it
heretofore has been: there are, however, two particulars especially necessary
to that end; that it be in the peculiar air of a large town, and that the
season be hot. It may well be presumed it cannot act, in this country at least,
but under this combination; because it never yet has appeared on the continent,
unattended with those circumstances. If the matter of this contagion suffers
cold, it suffers death; as may be collected from facts uniformly heretofore
happening in this country. When it was in Charleston, S. C. in 1748, it
received its death stroke from cold air on the fourteenth of October; and about
the same time of October it lately experienced the like, on the change of air
from an uncommon heat, for that season, to the proper degree of autumnal cold.
The cool air, especially at night, in the last week of September, 1793,
produced such a change in the degree of infection and complaints of the sick in
Philadelphia, that the physicians expressed an agreeable surprise, on the great
abatement of both: but the return of warm close weather, with a shift of wind
from the northern quarters to the southern, in the beginning of October, gave
so fatal a malignancy to the disease, as occasioned more frequent deaths, for
some days, even after the return of cooler weather: but, it seems it had
generally effected too much to admit of recovery, of the then sick, in any
state of the air afterward.

For supporting the aforegoing principles, we need only be assured that the
yellow fever has never been communicated in country places or small towns on
this continent; and that as often as it has been amongst us, it always appeared
to be imported, always vanished in the cool season of autumn, and never
recurred with the ensuing summer, nor until again ushered in from the West
Indies. Reports say indeed, that it has been taken in country places, in some
few instances. But on inquiry, it appears there has been a want of knowledge to
distinguish the yellow fever from diseases of the country, the symptoms being
partly alike. In other instances, people have received the infection in
Philadelphia, but have pretended they had not been in the city: others alarmed,
have imagined they had it, when they have only had a little cold or common
complaint, or mere apprehension may have induced the supposition. It seems
there still is a suspicion in some physicians, founded on the narrations of
other people, that there were a few instances of the infection taken in country
places. But to ascertain facts of this nature, and distinguish them with
accuracy, for a physician to judge of them with certainty, is not very easy in
common. Diseases originating in or greatly affecting the stomach, are attended
with symptoms much alike, from the common intermittent to the yellow fever. Any
thing corrosive or acrimonious, acting forcibly on the coats of that bowel,
must immediately affect the nerves, which there abound, and readily communicate
sensations to the very extremities. The beginning of the worst of the yellow
fever has been taken, in Philadelphia, for only a cold or obstructed
perspiration. Perspiration, by the bye, being refused a passage through its
natural outlet, becomes depraved and even acrimonious. It then soon affects the
fibers and the nerves, and induces spasm (whether it be perceptible or not)
attended with tremours, headache, heaviness, restlessness, anxiety, pains,
nausea or vomiting. If happily the perspirable matter is into driven into the
canal, it is thence discharged in the character of diarrhoea. But, if its
stimulous produces fixed spasm on the intestines, whilst the pores of the skin
still remain closed, costiveness then occurs, and the perspirable matter is
every way shut up. It seems, that from the spasm of the stomach, extended,
arises the costiveness usual in the yellow fever; which remains, till recovery
or putrefaction releases the fibers from the spasm. When putrefaction happens
to effect this -- then it is that bystanders become astonished on seeing the
spontaneous discharges, which are immense, in fluids that had been
accumulating, and were imprisoned by the spasm now suddenly let loose on an
entire loss of tone in the fibers.


People and merchandise have been continually arriving from the West India
islands, the source of the yellow fever for ages past; yet the disease was
never communicated to the people of this city, but in the heat of summer, and
that only thrice in above sixty years; probably the seldomer, from the
contagious matter having generally spent itself, or evaporated in the time of
performing the voyages.

To satisfy the mind that the late epidemic, in Philadelphia, was introduced
from a tropical climate, sober reason requires but to know, that it is a
disease natural to the West India islands; that it never was known to originate
in this country; but has been admitted, without a doubt of any one till now, to
have been always brought from thence; that it has been, this year, raging in
those islands more than usual; that there never was before such a plenty of
means for bringing it from thence, and that it first broke out in a part of the
city near which ships from those islands, that had unusual numbers of sick
people on board, discharged their cargoes. From all which circumstances there
arises an irresistible presumption, that the late contagious fever, called the
yellow fever, was imported from the West India islands. The introduction of the
yellow fever from Boullam, in Africa, into St. George's, in Granada, was by the
ship Hankey, in February, in the year 1793, and it was called the " Boullam
fever," or "Boullam malignant pestilential fever." Doctor Chisholm thinks it is
the same with that which raged in Philadelphia in that year. He illustrates
this idea by the instance of a vessel, belonging to Philadelphia, introducing
the disease into St. Pierre, Martinique, in October, 1793, and by a vessel from
New London touching at St. Pierre, and carrying the infection to Granada in
February, 1794. He adds, that on the sick being put under his charge, he found
the disease was his old enemy, the malignant pestilential fever, (meaning no
doubt the same with that introduced from Boullam into Granada in the preceding
February) which he successfully treated with mercury. It raged in Granada in
1793, and generally among the West India islands, more or less, through that
and the next following year.

The Boullam fever, in 1793, February, was imported into Granada from Boullam.
In July following, into Philadelphia from the West India islands. In October
following, into Martinique from Philadelphia. Being identically the same in
qualities, it was as readily returned from hence to the islands, as it was at
first brought from thence to the great towns of the continent. A vessel of
Philadelphia lost her supercargo at Granada, who died there of the Boullam
fever so early as April, 1793.




It has been inconsiderately imputed to Philadelphia, that it is more liable to
receive the yellow fever than other large towns of America. It is made by
people who had collected from recent hasty publications, that it had been three
or four times in this city, without their being informed how often it had been
in other towns. This fever, it seems, has been at least as often in Charleston,
S. C. and New York. The accurate doctor Lining speaks of four times that it was
in Charleston; in the years 1732, 39, 45, and 48. Charleston being nearer the
ocean, the tropic, the Havanna, and the West India islands, seems more liable
to receive the infection than a town further from them, and near a hundred
miles inland, that in general is remarkably healthful, and which would probably
scarcely ever receive it, were it not that it is more populous, and therefore
has more of the air peculiar to large towns, which is so necessary, together
with the heat of a summer, to give action to the contagious matter, on its
speedy arrival fresh from its tropical source.

It is also said that the yellow fever has been introduced into this country in
ships from Rotterdam and Ireland, crowded with passengers: but this a great
mistake. The hospital fever has often been introduced by them into America, but
never once the yellow fever, which is not a disease of northern climates. The
hospital or gaol fever is thought to arise from animal effluvia. Prisons,
hospitals and ships are crowded with men, and abound with excrementitious
animal effluvia pent up from fresh air. The gaol fever is peculiar to such
places, and is very infectious.

It is wished those persons who are apprehensive that contagious matter of the
yellow fever is wrapped up in furniture, and they know not what, and that it
will break out next summer, would be at the pains to inform themselves from the
histories of the disease heretofore published, of the manner and the time when
it usually arrived or broke out, and when it died away on this continent. It
will pacify them. They will especially be assured that some number of years
passed away between the times of its recurring in our country.

THE public is obliged to doctors Physic and Cathrall for an account, early
given, of their dissections of persons who died of the yellow fever which raged
in Philadelphia in the year 1793; the purport whereof follows, together with
remarks thereon by the editor.

B.
1. The brain in all its parts, has been found in a natural condition.

Remark. The disease is local to the stomach and parts near it. The brain is
distant from the seat of it. The first, second, third and ninth of the
following instances of dissection were of such persons as died early in the
disease. Note well the ninth observation of the doctors.

2. The viscera of the thorax are perfectly sound. The blood however, in the
heart and veins, is fluid; similar in its consistence to the blood of persons
who have been hanged or destroyed by electricity.

Remark. The early death from spasm of the stomach -- a stroke local that
effects not general disease, may account for this: and moreover, in hot weather
coagulation occurs not very soon.

3. The stomach and beginning of the duodenum are the parts that appear the
most diseased. In two persons who died of the disease on the fifth day, the
villous membrane of the stomach, especially about its smaller end, was found
highly inflamed, and this inflammation extended through the pylorus into the
duodenum, some way. The inflammation here was exactly similar to that induced
in the stomach by acrid poisons; as by arsenic, which we have once had an
opportunity of seeing in a person destroyed by it.

Remark. This illustrates the reality of the matter of a specific contagion
acting immediately on the stomach. A part whereof may tend downward, and here
and there attach to the intestines. If some of it is, in certain cases,
enveloped in the passing excrement, so as to be carried off at the common
outlet, yet enough of it may adhere, and act on the bowels to the worst
purposes.

4. The bile in the gall bladder was quite of its natural color, though very
viscid.

Remark. The fluids are not the immediate subjects of this disease. -- The
preceding are in instances of early deaths, in the state of a contraction or
inflammation of the stomach. The following are of later deaths, where gangrene
has occurred, after the inflammatory state.

5. In a person who died on the eighth day of the disease, several spots of
extravasations were discovered between the membranes, particularly about the
smaller end of the stomach, the inflammation of which had considerably abated.
Pus was seen in the beginning of the duodenum, and the villous membrane of this
part was thickened.

Remark. The inflammation abates as gangrene approaches. Was not the production
of pus owing to an effort of health? The thickening was an indication of
putrefaction.

6. In two other persons who died at a more advanced period of the disease, the
stomach appeared spotted in many places with extravasations, and the
inflammation disappeared. It contained, as did also the intestines, a black
liquor, such as had been vomited and purged before death. -- This black liquor
appears clearly to be an altered secretion from the liver: for, a fluid in all
respects of the same qualities was found in the gall bladder. This liquor was
so acrid that it induced considerable inflammation and swelling on the
operator's hands, which remained some days. The villous membrane of the
intestines, in these last two bodies, was found inflamed in several places.

Remark. The effects of the poison, though mostly local to the stomach and
duodenum, sometimes appear in other parts of the bowels; and they act
destructively where there is the readiest susceptibility. The poison first is
in contact with the stomach: and after having effected a corrosion and
inflammation there, which is followed by a gangrene of that bowel, it or some
part of it may descend, as it seems, and raise an inflammation on the inferior
bowels, where it chances to adhere, even after the stomach is destroyed. The
general mass is not immediately contaminated by the attack on the stomach, so
as to become gangrenous or putrid: otherwise, could a subsequent inflammation
be produced (...) the other bowels?

7. The liver was of its natural appearance, excepting in one of the last
persons, on the surface of which a very few distended veins were seen, although
other abdominal viscera were of healthy appearance.

Remark. The spasms and corrosions of the stomach are considerable. Such as
must soon induce general disorder of the body, and extensive (...) effects both
in the solids and the fluids, though not always alike or in the same parts.

8. The external surface of the stomach, as well as of the intestines, was
quite free from the inflammation; the veins being distended with blood, which
appeared through the transparent peritoneum, gave them a dark color.

Remark. This is further in favor of the locality of this disease. How
confined! -- All is effected first by contact with the fibers and nerves of the
stomach. The symptoms were diffuse; and in the end the fluids with the solids
become extensively morbid.

9. The stomach of those who died early in the disease, was always contracted:
but in those who died in a more advanced period of it, where extravasations
appeared, it was distended with air.

Remark. The corrosive poison early injures the fibers of the stomach, and
occasions spasm; first of the minuter parts with which it comes into contact;
and this presently extends so considerably and so forcibly as to contract the
whole or a great part of that bowel, during the inflammatory state, and until
gangrene dissolves the contraction of the fibers. The consequent putrefaction
is then attended with a distension of the parts. Such sudden, strong, and
extensive contraction must arrest the natural and necessary functions; and
death comes with speed, before time is given for gangrene to effect it.




