A MEMORABLE INSTANCE OF THE DIVINE PROTECTION AND DELIVERANCE OF JAMES
DICKENSON, AND JANE FEARON. (Both of Cumberland in England) On a religious
visit to Scotland. Giving an Account of their Miraculous Escape from being
Robbed and Murdered, in the early part of their Labors in the Gospel. Related
by themselves to SARAH TAILOR when each of them was about eighty years of age,
and she was about eighteen one assisting the other in recalling the particulars
as they related them.

PRINTED AT DOVER.

(...)-OFFICE -- 1794.

A Memorable instance of the Divine Protection and deliverance, of JAMES
DICKENSON and JANE FEARON, on their religious visit to Scotland, etc.
IT was in the borders of that nation they were traveling with a person who
they had chosen for a guide to a certain town they proposed to reach that
night; which being a very long stage, and it raining very heavy, Jane Fearon
growing very fatigued wished to put up before they reached the town if a
suitable place could be obtained, which their guide assured them could not, but
being exceedingly wet and weary, and coming up to a good looking house enquired
of them whether they could obtain a lodging and entertainment till the
abatement of the storm, and being answered in the affirmative, they determined
to tarry there, notwithstanding the persuasions of their director to pursue
their journey (he being acquainted with the designs of the people of the house)
he finding it was their determination to stop, bid them farewell, telling them
they would have no further need of him, but did not like to explain himself in
hearing of the people of the house, and left them with regret, (...) -- On
their alighting they were conducted into a large room with a fire in it, which
opened into the kitchen or common room, where the family kept; their horses
were taken care of and their wet things put to dry, and apparently they were
likely to be very well accommodated; a posset was made for them, and a cold
meat pie brought for their supper; but at their setting down at the table they
grear very uneasy, however one not knowing how the other felt (each determined
to keep to themselves their feelings) till at length Jane said, that her
apprehensions were so great, and her opinion of the family so bad, that she
fully believed that the pie which was on the table was made of human flesh,
which, however, Dickenson scarcely believed was the case, saying he thought it
nourishing at that time.

As they were talking Jane observed three ill-looking men come in, and with a
low voice told the landlady that they had good horses; aye, answered she, and
good saddle bags too. Jane's uneasiness increasing, Dickenson's mind became
closely engaged to seek for the cause, and for divine counsel how to proceed,
and under this exercise was favored to believe that if they kept close to that,
and strictly attended to its pointings they should be preserved and, way made
for their escape, on which he enquired about their lodgings, telling them they
had some writing to do and wanted candles for that purpose and proposed to
retire to their appartment, when they were shown into a chamber on the side of
a yard with two beds in it, but without any bolts to the doors, and observing a
form or bench in the room, tried therewith to fasten one of the doors and found
it would answer the purpose by fixing the end of it against one of the beds;
after which Jane sat down and manifested their distress by wringing her hands
and saying she believed they should never get out of that house alive, on which
Dickenson sat down by her, and advised her to be still, telling her that he had
been under equal distress of mind from their first setting down in the house,
and that under that exercise, seeking for the best help, his mind had been
favored by that which never deceived him, to believe that if they carefully
minded its pointings, they should be directed how to escape, on which they sat
down in perfect silence for some considerable time, attentively waiting for
best direction, when at length Dickenson said the time for them to flee was
then, and having observed the door opposite to the one they had already secured
let out of the house by a pair of stone stairs into the road, believing that
was the way for them to get off, he bid Jane put off her shoes as he did also,
and softly opening the door perceived by a light through a chink in the stairs
to their terror, a woman sharpening a large knife and making other preparations
for their murder, as they supposed, and going softly down the steps, kept on
the road till out of hearing of the house, they then quickened their pace, and
he taking Jane by the arm, they ran about half a mile, when they discovered a
sort of hovel or cott, and it still raining excessive hard, they tried to take
refuge there, whereby to refresh themselves a little and shelter themselves
from the turbulence of the weather, there being some straw left there for the
cattle, but found by the painful sensation renewed on their minds that they
were not sase there, (notwithstanding their excessive weariness, and Jane being
ready to faint with discouragement) Dickenson urged the necessity of their
exerting themselves, under the firm hope that they should be preserved, and
they went forward as fast as they could till they came to the side of a water,
the courses of which followed to a bridge, over which they attempted to pass,
but felt restrained when they got upon it, and James said that was not their
way, so turned about and followed the edge of the river about half a mile
further, the water increasing in breadth; they there stopped, and Dickenson
said they must cross at that place, which exceedingly alarmed Jane, having
given way to so much discouragement that she scarcely could hope that they
should not totally sink under their present situation, and told Dickenson that
she apprehended if they went into that water they should be drowned, but he
endeavored to cheer her, reminding her of the evidence he had of their
preservation if they kept a steady eye to best direction, which he believed had
led them thus far, and that through the water was the only way for their
retreat, and that he believed they should get safe to the other side, whereupon
with the assistance of his arm she ventured and they got safe to the other
side, and walking some distance they came to a sand bank, here setting down
they congratulated each other that they had so far escaped from these inhuman
people; but James was not yet easy in his mind, he said they were not safe yet,
and must go farther, to which Jane replied, "I must go by thy faith, for I know
not what to do."

They going a little farther, found another sand bank wherein was a cavity
where they set down. After they had been here a while, Dickenson said I am now
quite easy and believe we are perfectly safe, and feel in my heart a song of
Thanksgiving and Praise; -- Jane replied I am so far from that, I cannot so
much as say Lord have mercy on us.

When they had been here about half an hour they heard some people on the
opposite side of the river, upon which James finding Jane was alarmed and
fearing they should be discovered, softly told her their lives depended upon
their silence. Then attentively harkening to what the people said, heard them
distinctly speak to their dog, and say, Seek 'em Keeper! and supposed them to
be the men they had seen at the house, accompanied with a dog, that the dog
refusing to go over the bridge, had followed the scent of their feet along the
river side to the place where they crossed, when stopping, the people again
repeated seek 'em Keeper! which they heard; and they saw the people with a
lanthorn, they also heard them say they had there crossed the river, to which
the other replied that is impossible, unless the Devil took them over, for the
river was brim full.

After wearying themselves a considerable time in their search, they went away,
and they saw them no more.

When day light appeared, they saw a man on a high hill at a distance looking
about him every way, they continued quiet in their retreat till some time after
sun rise, when upon taking a view of their situation, they discovered that
under the first sand bank from whence they removed, they might have been seen
from the opposite shore -- which they had been insensible of, as they could not
make the observation the night before, when they considered what they should do
to recover their horses, saddle bags, etc. James said, I incline to return to
the house but Jane proposed their going to a town in order to get assistance to
go with them, to which James observed, that the town was ten miles off, and
that they were strangers, and had nothing to do with -- Jane still hesitating,
James said, I still incline to return to the house, fully believing our horses,
clothes etc. will be ready for us, without asking a question; and that the
people we saw last night, we shall see no more. -- The other said, friend I
think I dare not go back again, James said, thou may safely, for I have seen
it in that, that never fails me, upon which they returned to the house, and
found their horses standing in the stable, saddled, and their bags upon them,
their clothes dried and ready to put on, and saw no person but one old woman,
in a corner on a rock by the fireside, whom they did not remember of seeing
the night before; they asked her what they had to pay, discharging and
proceeding on their journey. Sometime after, Dickenson traveling the same way,
in truths service, passed the place where the above house stood, but found it
was pulled down and totally destroyed; which coming to the inn at the town,
they had thought to have gone too when they put up on account of the heavy
rain, as before mentioned, he enquired what was become of the people, and the
cause of the house being so in ruin. When he was told, that sometime after he
and Jane was there, some travelers who had been observed to go there were
missing, and having been long under a very bad name, the people strongly
suspecting they were murdered, rose with one general consent, and beset the
house, taking up the people, and on searching the house, and its environs,
found the bodies of the above, and those of many others, in different states of
decay, which had evidently been murdered; and I think some part of the bodies
wanting, with a great quantity of clothes supposed to have belonged to them, on
which the people were tried, and I believe five of them were executed, and the
house totally demolished.

Our friend Samuel Smith, brought the above account in manuscript with him on
his return from his religious visits, to the friends in Great Britain.

James Dickenson was one of the most eminent ministers in our religious
society, and visited America three times. In the short journal published of his
life and travels, in the year 1694 he mentions his visiting Scotland in company
with another Friend, and notes their being delivered from the hands of
unmerciful men, but does not give further particulars, for the omission
doubtless there was a cause.


