A TREATISE ON THE Synochus Icteroides, OR YELLOW FEVER; AS IT LATELY APPEARED
IN THE CITY OF PHILADELPHIA.

EXHIBITING A CONCISE VIEW OF ITS RISE, PROGRESS AND SYMPTOMS, TOGETHER WITH
THE METHOD OF TREATMENT FOUND MOST SUCCESSFUL; ALSO REMARKS ON THE NATURE OF
ITS CONTAGION, AND DIRECTIONS FOR PREVENTING THE INTRODUCTION OF THE SAME
MALADY, IN FUTURE.

BY WILLIAM CURRIE, FELLOW OF THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS, AND MEMBER OF THE
AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY THOMAS DOBSON, No. 41, SOUTH SECOND-STREET.

M,DCC,XCIV.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY THOMAS MIFFLIN, Governor of Pennsylvania.
SIR,
NOT the splendour of your station, but the qualities of your heart, so
conspicuously displayed during the prevalence of the late destructive malady in
this city, induce me to inscribe the following treatice to your excellency. You
are therefore requested to accept it; not as a compliment, but as a tribute to
which you are justly entitled, from

Your most sincere, And very humble servant, THE AUTHOR.
PHILADELPHIA, January 20th 1794.
PREFACE.
AS every invention, discovery, or improvement, is more or less useful and
interesting, in proportion as it contributes to the preservation of health,
life, prosperity, and satisfaction; and as the author of the following pages is
persuaded, that very material improvements were made in the treatment of the
synochus icteroides or yellow fever, which lately prevailed in this city, and
proved so destructive and distressing to its inhabitants, he thinks it his duty
to lay the same before the public, together with his observations and
sentiments on other circumstances, relative to that disease; that if it should
ever appear here again (as there is too much reason to apprehend, unless much
caution is observed to prevent it, from our constant intercourse with the West
Indies, where strangers are seldom long exempt from it) physicians may not
again be at a loss for a directory, derived from actual experience and
observation. He however does not pretend to have been the improver of the
treatment, or the discoverer of the means most effectual in the cure, which is
recommended in the following pages. On the contrary, he believes they were
adopted from the joint deliberations of the college of physicians, in
consequence of some of its members having observed their good effects when the
disease first appeared, and was mistaken for a higher grade of the bilious
remittent fever of the autumnal season. Instead of attending to systematic
arrangement in the following little production, he has contented himself with
enumerating symptoms and circumstances as they occurred to him, while engaged
in practice; and offering his sentiments in the order in which they happened to
arise. By this method he hopes to escape the imputation of pedantry: and though
those who prefer the studied and formal arrangement of the schools, to the
simplicity and order of nature, may condemn his manner, he hopes the matter it
contains, and the importance of the subject, will secure him the approbation of
all those who prefer utility to formality and fashion. To men of taste indeed,
some apology is due for the imperfections of its style and composition; but if
want of leisure and frequent interruption are ever admitted as an apology for a
trespass of this nature, he is certainly entitled to some indulgence on the
present occasion; especially as he can assure them, that truth has been his
aim, his end the public good.

JANUARY 24th, 1794.
A SKETCH OF THE RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE DISEASE.
THE disease which we are about to describe, made its first appearance in Water
street between Mulberry and Sassafras streets, the beginning of August 1793,
and appears to have been imported by a vessel which arrived in this port, and
lay at a wharf in that neighborhood the latter end of July. See Mr M. Carey's
account of the rise and progress of the disease, lately published.


From this source it spread gradually by contagion over the greatest part of
the city; and was more or less rapid in its progress, according as people had
more or less intercourse with the sick, and according as the weather was more
or less cold: for though it was propagated by contagion, the sensible qualities
of the atmosphere had a surprising effect in rendering the contagion more or
less active, as well as in its influence on the symptoms of those laboring
under the disease.

The greatest number confined with the disease, was about the middle of
October; but as the weather became cold and frosty, its declension was so rapid
that it appeared as if extinguished by a mi^acle: for by the tenth of November,
there was scarcely a person to be found with it.

The whole number that died of this disease in the city, appears from the
registers of deaths kept by the different religious societies, to have been
about 3500. In the registers of the deaths which have been kept by those
societies, there is no discrimination made between those who died of the yellow
fever and of other diseases; and the whole number of deaths appears to have
been 4048, from the 1st of August to the 10th of November; of which above ^00
are supposed to have died of other diseases. At one period there appears to
have been more than eight thousand persons confined by it at the same time;
though at that time near twenty thousand of the inhabitants had retired from
the city.

That the long continuance of heat and drought which preceded this disease had
no share in its generation, is certain, from its being confined for some time
to that part of the city where it commenced: for almost every case which
occurred for the first week or two, could be traced to that source, and was
propagated to others in succession.

This fever corresponded in most of its leading and characteristic symptoms,
with the synochus icteroides occidentalis, or yellow fever of the West Indies.
A fever of the same kind has prevailed here three times before, viz. in the
years 1740, 1747 and 1762.

In the year 1740, it was introduced by means of a trunk of wearing apparel,
which had belonged to a gentleman who died of it in Barbados. The family to
whom the trunk was sent first took the disease; and from them it spread into
the town, and destroyed above two hundred people; as we are informed by the
celebrated LIND, in his treatise on fevers and infection.

The only account I have been able to obtain respecting its appearance in 1747,
is what is contained in Mr Lardner's letter, of which the following is a copy.

PHILADELPHIA, Sept. 3d, 1747. (O. S.)
SINCE my last, a contagious fever has raged amongst us, which admits of no
relief, cure, or abatement; never intermitting to the last moment of life. It
has carried off three of my most intimate acquaintance; among which are my dear
friends Andrew Hamilton and Mr Currie. Philadelphia has been a melancholy
place, and many whose business and family would permit them, have fled the
city. But the air is now become much cooler, and those under the disorder
revive. The symptoms (a pain in the head and back, vomiting, etc.) are less
violent, and the fever gradually abates. Messrs. Allen and Turner's family are
yet under the disease; the one having lost a near relation, and Mr Allen
himself not out of danger.

September 24th. The yellow fever is still amongst us: yesterday was buried
young Samuel Powell who died of it.


It is astonishing that the physicians of that time left nothing on record
respecting so destructive a malady. Perhaps if the notes of Doctors Zachary,
Graham, Kearsley, and Cadwallader were inspected, some important facts might
yet be discovered. Dr Griffiths' mother who had the disease at that time is
still alive.

The third time of its appearance it was introduced (according to the notes of
Dr Redman of this city) about the latter end of August, by a mariner from the
Havanna: it came to its height about the 25th of September, and from that time
gradually declined, and was entirely extinguished by the middle of October.
Neither the state of the weather, nor the number of deaths which occurred at
that time, are known, no register having been preserved.

The fever at that time was circumscribed to Pine or Union street Northerly,
and three or four squares from thence Southerly, and extended from Water
street, to Third or Fourth street Westerly. Its first and greatest ravages were
about the New Market, which lay near the source where the disease originated.
It spread at that time, as the one we are about to describe did, from family to
family, as they happened to have intercourse one with another.

A fever of the same kind, also prevailed at Charleston, South Carolina, in the
years 1732, 1739, 1745 and 1748; an account of which has been given by Dr.
Lining, and published in the second Vol. Physical and Literary Essays of
Edinburgh. The disease each time that it prevailed in Carolina, was traced to
some person lately arrived from some of the West India Islands.

We are also informed by Dr Lind, in his treatise on hot climates, that a
similar disease occurred in Cadiz, in Spain, the latter end of the summer of
1764, of which an hundred persons sometimes died in a day; that its ravages
were at that time entirely confined to that city, and that those who retired to
the country escaped it.

Though the disease we are about to describe was highly contagious, the
influence of the contagion was circumscribed to a narrow sphere, for none but
those who approached near to the sick, or to such articles as had been in
contact with them, or within the sphere of their effluvia so as to be
impregnated thereby were affected.

All that shut themselves up in their houses, retired into the country, or
avoided entering into infected houses, and all intercourse with the sick, or
infected substances, or with those who visited the sick (for the idle curiosity
of servants, particularly of the hired girls, was the means of propagating the
disease more than any other circumstance), though constantly abroad in the open
streets, escaped the disease without exception. The prisoners in the jail and
work house -- the pensioners in the poor house, and the patients and attendants
at the hospital, from whence all intercourse with the infected was excluded,
also entirely escaped the disease.

There was something however, in the state of the atmosphere in the city, or in
the constitutions of the inhabitants, peculiarly favorable to the operation of
the contagion, very different from that of the country; for when any person
with the disease was removed a few miles into the country, and even died of it,
there is scarce an instance of its having been communicated to any person in
the same house, whereas when any one in a family took it and remained in the
city, others, and sometimes the whole of the family, soon after took the
disease This was also the case the last time it occurred at Charleston, as
recorded by Dr. Lining -- and also at Cadiz in 1764, mentioned by Lind.
.

Those exposed to the contagion generally began to be affected between the
third and eighth day; we recollect several that were certainly attacked on the
fifth day, one on the third, and two not till the tenth day after exposure.
These were ascertained by such circumstances, as could not have deceived us.
Those who had retired into the country, and again returned to the city during
the prevalence of the disease, were affected more readily and earlier than
others, after such exposure.

The state of the mind seems to have had great influence, in hastening or
retarding the effects of the contagion; those under the influence of fear,
which was the case with the majority, were sooner affected after exposure to
the contagion, than those who were less concerned. Every other debilitating
power had a similar affect, such as an abstemious regimen, too much fatigue,
frequent purging, blood-letting, and exposure to the night air, without
exercise sufficient to keep up a vigorous circulation. But a lax state of the
bowels, and a moderate tone of the solids, appear to have contributed to render
the disease more mild when it did attack those who were not greatly under the
influence of terror. Neither age nor sex were exempt, not even infants at the
breast -- but those that were fat, corpulent and indolent, were most
susceptible of the contagion, and suffered accordingly.

While this formidable disease was making such ravages in the city, the country
for some miles around was never more healthy, especially in dry and elevated
situations. In the low and marshy grounds, indeed, this was not the case; for
at Harrisburgh on the Susquehanna, at Dover on the Delaware, and a few other
places, bordering on rivers or large creeks, whose channels were almost
exhausted of their waters, by the long continuance of heat and drought, bilious
fever, choleras, dysenteries and cholics, were never known to be so prevalent
and mortal.

The French West Indians, particularly those from St. Domingo, who had taken
shelter here, from the storms of a sanguinary war, almost to a man escaped the
disease, though they made no use of any precaution for the purpose; while those
from France were as liable to it as the Philadelphians.

The reason that the West Indians were not liable to it, is perhaps owing to
the resemblance of the season to that of the climate from whence they came; and
to the effects produced by the frequent excretions of bile to which they are
particularly subject, rendering the duodenum and biliary ducts insensible to
the poison. For it is a singular though a notorious fact, that the disease
seldom or ever affects any but strangers or new comers from a colder or more
temperate climate, in the West Indies; as we are informed by almost all the
writers on the subject. But we were strangers or new comers to it to all
intents and purposes, with this diffeence, that it was brought to us instead of
our and being taken to it; and for that reason were subject to its influence.
There are however some instances mentioned by Hillary of its being communicated
by contagion at Barbados, and of a few Creoles being affected by it. But this
he says was very rare, and after the disease had become very malignant.

The latest writer on this subject, Dr Jackson, informs us that no negro
immediately from the coast of Africa has been known to be attacked by this
disease; neither have Creoles that have resided constantly in the Islands. Yet
Creoles or Africans who have been absent a considerable time, and resided in
colder climates, whether in Europe or the higher latitudes of America, are not
by any means exempted from it when they return to the Islands. Europeans,
particularly males, suffer from it soon after their arrival in the Islands; but
in general, after residing there a year or two, they are very rarely attacked
by it. Nor has it scarcely ever been known to attack the same person twice,
except accidentally, after his return from a different and colder climate. The
remitting fever, on the contrary, attacks persons of all descriptions, whether
natives or foreigners. Nor are those who have once had it exempt from its
future attack: a fact which proves that there actually exists some essential
difference between the two diseases; or at least it shows, that the revolution
of a season or two destroys in the constitutions of foreigners, a certain
aptitude or disposition for the one disease, which it still retains for the
other. Perhaps this may be principally owing to the effects produced on the
biliary ducts and duodenum, by the frequent and copious secretion of bile, to
which the inhabitants of Tropical climates are particularly subject: whereby
they are rendered insensible to the contagion of this disease.
The negroes that were natives of America were also liable to it, though not in
the same proportion as the whites. This was not the case, according to the
observations of Dr Lining, when it prevailed in Charleston; for at that time
there was not an instance of any negro being affected by it, though as much
exposed to the contagion as the whites. This with some exceptions, is also the
case with respect to the negroes in the West Indies; though Dr. Blane says he saw
a black woman die with all the symptoms of it at Barbados, having caught it
from nursing some seamen that were ill of it. The same author is of opinion,
that the disease cannot be generated in any place, unless the heat has been for
some time above 75 degrees. It is asserted by Dr Lining, that those who have
once had the disease, cannot take it a second time: but we have seen several
instances of its occurring a second time here, where the circumstances were so
unequivocal, that it could not be fairly ascribed to a relapse.

As soon as the contagion had reached the central part of the city, the disease
spread with astonishing rapidity. In the course of August, there were more than
300 funerals; toward the close of the month, twenty were buried of a day.
During the greatest part of this month, the mercury in the thermometer ranged
from 80 to 90, in the afternoons; the sky generally clear, and the winds
Westerly. From the 25th to the end of the month the weather was cloudy, and a
small quantity of rain fell.

In September, the disease increased amazingly. In the course of the month,
about 1400 citizens were added to the list of mortality; toward its close,
from 50 to 90 were buried of a day, though the mercury now seldom rose above
80. The weather was mostly fair; a few days were cloudy, but there was no rain.
The wind still westerly. Throughout the month the heat was generally moderate,
and the weather uniform, except from the 19th to the 23d, when it was unusually
calm, "deprived of the refreshing breeze," during which the mortality was
greater than at any other period in that month.

From this time to the middle of October, the disease proceeded with an
increase of mortality, owing to the enlargement of the circle of contagion.
From the 1st to the 17th, more than 1400 fell victims to the malady -- but from
the 17th, to the 1st of November, the bills of mortality lessened rapidly,
though not regularly. The whole number of the deaths in this month, amounted to
near 2000, though one third of the inhabitants had for some time before
deserted the city, and retired into different parts of the country, as choice
or chance directed.

The thermometer was very variable all this month, generally below 80, but
above 50 until the 27th, from which time to the end of the month, it was always
below 50, and one day below 40. The weather for the most part fair, though some
rain fell on the 12th and 31st, and it was cloudy from the 25th to the end of
the month. The wind generally from the N. and N. W. till the latter end of the
month, but from that time N. N. E. Toward the last of the month, the contagion
declined apace, the funerals being reduced to between 12 and 20 a day. From
this time the weather became more wet, cold and frosty, and the disease
declined so rapidly, that on the 9th of November, the funerals in all the grave
yards only amounted to six. From this time every thing seemed to sink into that
kind of placid calm, which generally succeeds a dying storm. The citizens who
had retreated from the danger, now ventured back, and the streets and various
departments of business, immediately resumed their former life and energy --
commerce again spread her white wings, and pensive mourning melancholy, has
since given place to the cheerful face of joy.

DEFINITION.
The SYNOCHUS ICTEROIDES or YELLOW FEVER, derives its name from the
inflammatory symptoms, with which it begins, becoming putrid in its progress;
and from the yellowness in the eyes and skin, with which it is generally
accompanied.

DESCRIPTION OF SYMPTOMS.
THE disease (whose symptoms are now to be delineated), was generally preceded
by a slight indisposition, such as muscular debility, and sense of lassitude,
on exercise or motion, drowsiness, slight pain and giddiness in the head, pain
in the back and loins, defective appetite, dyspeptic symptoms, such as
flatulent eructations, loss of appetite, etc. After this prelude, which seldom
continued more than 6 or 8 hours, and sometimes without any such prelude at
all, a chilly fit, alternated with glowing flushes of heat, came on, generally
in the after part of the night, or ^ore part of the day; which, after a
duration, for the most part short, though sometimes of 12 or 14 hours
continuance, gave place to those symptoms which designate a confirmed fever of
the inflammatory type, which increased in violence as the day advanced; and
continued with little or no variation, till toward morning, when some
alleviation with respect to violence was generally observable, but in scarcely
any instance was there so much abatement as could be properly called a
remission.

The pulse, after the feverish state became established, was generally quick
and tense, and during the exacerbation, it was also full and strong. In the
carotid and temporal arteries in particular, it was strong and throbbing;
respiration hurried; the skin very hot and dry; and the face highly flushed;
the eyes remarkably red, hot, and painful, as if irritated by small grit or
sand; accompanied with a torturing pain in the head, back, loins, and large
joints, shooting from temple to temple, and extending from the loins to the
hips and down the thighs; the thirst considerable, but not insatiable; the
tongue white, moist, and clammy; the bowels either costive, or discharging
thin, watery, and sometimes bloody, stools; the urine high-colored, cloudy,
and small in quantity; the stomach distended, painful, tender, and irritable,
especially after taking any kind of drink or aliment; frequently affected with
sick qualms, and more or less propensity to puke, but seldom bringing up any
thing; a sense of stricture and oppression at the precordia, as if tight bound
with a belt; great restlessness, with moaning and sighing; and frequently
shifting of posture in search of ease; some confusion of the intellects,
attended with constant pervigilium; but seldom so much derangement of the
reasoning faculty as to amount to violent delirium; frequent hemorrhages from
one or both nostrils, during the afternoon exacerbations in young persons of
both sexes; and in those of one of the sexes at two different periods of life.
In some the head was most affected; in others the stomach. In persons under
puberty, symptoms of hydrocephalus internus frequently occured in the course of
this stage. In men verging on old age, the disease usually began with symptoms
resembling apoplexy, unless prevented by a discharge of blood from the
hemorrhoidal vessels.

When stools were procured by art, the first were generally soft and white, but
seldom bilious. The contents thrown out from the stomach were generally the
drinks or aliment last received. Sometimes mixed with matter of a seagreen
color and bitter taste, but often without either. The suffusion and inflamed
appearance of the eyes, constantly increased in proportion to the violence of
fever and date of the disease.

The preceding symptoms which may be considered as limiting the first stage of
the disease, continued with more or less violence from one to three days, and
sometimes longer; and then abated suddenly, succeeded soon after by the
appearance of a yellow tinge in the eyes, face, and neck, or by a copious
evacuation of bilious matter by stool; and the patient speedily recovered,
except that his stomach remained weak, and his appetite defective for some
time: or no bilious stools taking place at the time, or soon after the
icteroitous appearance became observable, the disease proceeded to the second
stage, in which there was a diminution of force in some of the symptoms; an
increase in others; and an accession of new ones. The inflammatory symptoms
which before, in many respects resembled those of the idiopathic gastritis, now
became mixed more or less with symptoms of nervous affection. The pulse though
still quick, was no longer full or tense; the respiration also continued quick
and hurried; and the skin, though less hot, was more dry and parched, except
during the act of vomiting, and then the moisture was only partial, chiefly
about the neck and forehead. The tongue now appeared more dry and foul,
particularly in the middle; the thirst became insatiable; the stomach so
irritable, and the reaching and propensity to puke so constant, that nothing
could be retained on it, but was cast up the instant it was swallowed,
accompanied with violent straining and noise; but the matter thrown up appeared
very little if any changed in appearance, except being mixed with mucus and
more ropy than when drank: the stomach was also constantly affected with a
constant burning heat, which occasioned the most excruciating agony and
distress. The anxiety at the precordia also hourly increased, and soon became
insupportable torture: the sighing, restlessness, and tossing to and fro became
perpetual; the eyes and countenance were expressive of the deepest anguish and
despair; and a delirium resembling mania was by no means uncommon. As these
symptoms became more distressing, the yellowness which before was faint and
partial, assumed a deep orange or saffron color, and extended itself over the
whole surface of the body; so that the patient resembled one with an obstinate
and inveterate jaundice. When these symptoms had continued with increasing
violence to the end of the second, or beginning of the third, day, sometimes
earlier, and sometimes later, they all suddenly vanished, and left the patient
for a time perfectly easy and tranquil. But this falacious truce, so flattering
to the inexperienced, as well as to the patient, was soon succeeded by a
different, and though less acutely painful, more hopeless and desperate train
of symptoms, which marked the third and last stage of this domestic tragedy.
The whole surface of the body now became of a cadaverous coldness, with the
pulse slow and soft, in some not exceeding 40 strokes in a minute, but as
regular as in health. The respiration was slow and deep; and the yellowness of
the eyes and skin appeared of a deep tawny or dull copper-colour; the tongue
much cleaner and moister than in either of the former stages; the vomiting was
also less frequent, but in a much larger quantity when it did occur; and the
patient always had some respite after emptying his stomach, till a large
quantity of fluid was again accumulated; when it was again spouted up in an
enormous quantity, and general^y of a dark color and turbid consistence,
resembling coffee-grounds; and when stools occurred at this time, they
generally had the same appearance; but sometimes resembled tar or molasses. The
patient was generally at this time affected with a kind of cheerful delirium,
imagining himself well: he could seldom be retained in bed, but walked about
till exhausted with fatigue. The delirium was generally succeeded, the day
following, or the day after, by coma, from which the patient was occasionally
roused by vomiting and uneasy dreams; and when roused, started up, and
attempted to get out of bed; and when prevented, immediately sunk down again
into a state of slumbering insensibility; and if asked, when roused from his
coma, how he did, his constant reply was "very well!" As the debility
increased, the face and breast became spotted, as if sprinkled with ink; and a
deep dusky yellow and purple color, resembling blood settled in a bruised
part, pervaded the whole surface of the body. The respiration now became deep
and slow, frequently interrupted by a sobbing kind of sighing and constant
hiccup. These were succeeded by dimness of vision -- difficulty of swallowing
-- loss of speech -- rattling in the throat -- short and convulsive breathing
-- sunk and irregular pulse -- cold sweats -- and finally death.

But in more protracted and less violent cases, instead of the black vomiting
and coma, the patient frequently became affected with symptoms resembling those
which are commonly met with in a protracted and inveterate scurvy: In these the
countenance appeared bloated and livid, as well as yellow, and blood
perpetually oozed from different parts of the body; particularly from the nose,
gums, and hemorrhoidal vessels. Some had apthae or superficial ulcerations, in
the roof of the mouth, and in the throat, and parts which had been blistered;
and some had a frequent vomiting, or rather gulping up of dark grumous blood
from the fauces and stomach, or a discharge of it by stool. Several in this
situation, lived many days without any other morbid appearance, except a
constant and distressing watchfulness; sitting up or walking about constantly,
but without any appetite or extraordinary thirst, or apparent delirium; till,
exhausted by a sudden hemorrhagic discharge, or by a more gradual drain of
blood, they sunk insensibly into the arms of death, without a struggle or a
groan.

When the disease terminated favorably, it was generally before the fifth day,
frequently on the second or third; and when it terminated fatally, it was
generally on the fourth, fifth, or sixth day; sometimes earlier and sometimes
later; but when the patient survived the seventh day, without the accession of
the black vomiting, coma, or scorbutic symptoms, or great and increasing
debility, the disease generally terminated favorably.

This was the most usual appearance and progress of this formidable and too
often fatal disease, through its several stages. But there were very surprising
variations in the appearance it assumed, both in respect to the duration of the
several stages, and the state of the symptoms, according to the particular
constitutions and temperaments of different patients, the state of the weather,
the manner of treatment, etc.

A sketch of these we shall now proceed to enumerate. In some cases signs of
debility in all the functions, and a putrescent tendency in the whole system,
were apparent at a very early period of the disease. In these cases the anxiety
at the precordia was constant, the sighing frequent -- the yellowness of the
eyes and skin became conspicuous very early -- the exacerbations and remissions
of fever scarcely perceptible -- the pulse quick and weak, skin dry and
parched, restlessness and pervigilium great, vomiting constant, and on the
second or third day of a black color -- the stools also black and gelatinous
-- the stomach constantly affected with a violent cardialgia, or a burning
heat, which the miserable sufferer said felt as if scalded or burnt by a coal
of fire; no posture gave ease, and whatever was swallowed, except very small
draughts of toast and water, weak barley water, or simple spring water,
increased the agony to the most exquisite torture. It was in this form of the
disease, that the method published by Dr Kuhn, particularly applied. And it was
the form in which the disease most frequently appeared all the month of August.

In other cases the generality of the symptoms resembled those of the autumnal
remittent, combined with jaundice -- and in some no yellowness or black
vomiting occurred at all; but in these the eyes were almost always highly
inflamed for a day or two, but when a diarrhoea, accompanied with a discharge
of bile spontaneously occurred, or was procured by purgatives or glisters, the
yellowness or icteroitous appearance was frequently prevented.

It was often difficult to distinguish this disease at the beginning from the
influenza, which was prevalent in the city, and spread over all the Southern
states and over the Western territory, before the yellow fever had made much
progress in the city. The influence of terror also occasioned great variation
in its symptoms. That the usual disease of the season, the remitting fever, was
often blended with this disease, is by no means improbable. For though two
epidemics arising from a change or alteration in the sensible qualities of the
air, or from any invisible miasma diffused abroad to a considerable extent in
the atmosphere, cannot exist together, yet there ^s nothing more certain than
that a contagious disease, and a disease depending on climate, season, and
soil, may exist at the same time and in the same place. Of this we have several
examples in the works of Lind, Russel, etc.

A preternatural discharge of bile, was by no means a common circumstance in
any form or at any period of the disease, as has been already observed.
Dissections made not only at Cadiz and the West Indies, but also in this city,
demonstrate that this is owing to an inflammatory affection of the stomach,
duodenum and ductus choledochus: And it is more than probable, that the black
matter brought up by vomiting, was the sphacelated surface of those parts mixed
with coagulated blood, bile, and the contents last taken into the stomach. The
white color of the stools so common in the beginning of the disease, also
indicated an obstruction to the excretion of bile. When the fever was
protracted, accumulations of bile frequently took place, as was evident from
the tension of the right hypochondrium, and the foetid and copious discharges
colored with that fluid, which frequently appeared after an active purge.

Dr. Jackson relates that while he resided in Jamaica, between the years 1774
and 1782, he opened several persons who died of this disease, and observed that
the stomach and intestines had a dirty yellow appearance, and were highly
putrefied, and much distended with wind -- the liver and spleen generally
enlarged in size, and the color of the liver often of a deeper yellow than any
other part of the abdominal viscera -- the gall bladder for the most part
moderately full, and of a thick consistence and black color -- the biliary
ducts enlarged and filled with a similar fluid, while the vessels of the liver
bore the marks of uncommon distention. A dark colored turbid fluid was always
observable in the cavity of the stomach, similar to that usually thrown up in
the last stage of the illness; and the villous coat of that organ was also
abraded in various places, and at the same time, spots were observed on
different parts of its surface, which appeared to be incipient mortifications.
The superior portions of the intestinal canal, had also frequently a similar
appearance. From these and other dissections, much light has been thrown upon
the seat, and nature of this disease. See Jackson on the fevers of Jamaica, p.
265.


PROGNOSIS.
IN THE FIRST STAGE.
The favorable Signs were,
HEMORRHAGES from the nose, with relief of the head during the exacerbations. A
gradual reduction of the pulse, heat, and oppression at the precordia. A
diarrhoea or laxative stools, mixed with bile coming on before the third day.

When in the decline of this stage, there was a constant retching to vomit,
without bringing up any thing or vomiting the drinks only, accompanied with a
burning heat and tenderness at the stomach, with pain or oppression; it was
almost a certain indication that the yellowness, or bilious effusion, would
soon make its appearance. When the alleviation of the symptoms, especially of
the oppression and weight at the precordia or epigastric region took place, and
were accompanied with, or succeeded by, a bilious diarrhoea, it always afforded
a favorable prognostic.

Unfavourable Signs.
STRONG, hard, and quick pulse, with ferocious delirium, and pervigilium; or
quick, small and irregular pulse, with low delirium, great muscular debility,
exquisite pain at the stomach, oppression and sense of stricture at the
precordia, great thirst, constant nausea and retching, and restleness;
obstinate costiveness, and the stools when procured of a soft consistence, in
lumps, and of a whitish color. A want of action in the bowels, and great
insensibility to purges and glysters, also gave room for much apprehension.

IN THE SECOND STAGE.
The favorable Signs were,
AN abatement of the vomiting, anxiety and oppression at the precordia --
relief from the burning pain at the stomach -- natural heat in the forehead and
limbs, open bowels and natural colored stools -- turbid urine, etc.

Unfavourable Signs.
AN increase of muscular debility, oppression, anxiety, incessant vomiting, a
rapid increase of the icteroitous aspect, restlessness and frequent sighing,
costiveness or bloody stools, accompanied with a painful tenesmus; hollow eyes,
shrunk countenance, and shrill feeble voice; an obstinate and painful
pervigilium; the patient continuing wide awake, in a state of the most uneasy
agitation, with his senses and reason but little impaired. But the symptoms
expressive of the greatest danger were, an invincible irritability of the
stomach, which prevented it from retaining any kind of drink, aliment, or
medicines, and a gradual recession of heat from the surface of the body.

IN THE THIRD STAGE.
Favorable Signs.
A GRADUAL return of heat to the surface of the body, cessation of delirium,
and change of color in the matter vomited up.

Unfavourable Signs.
ALMOST all the symptoms in this stage indicated a fatal event, particularly
the sudden cessation of pain and fever; coldness of the face and limbs, and the
black vomitings, or black stools; constant singultus, coma, and hemorrhagy; a
sense of great weight and stricture about the epigastric region; deep and
frequent sighing; and great failure of strength denoted danger in every stage.
When in this stage deep coma took place, it generally denoted a speedy
dissolution.

OF THE METHOD OF CURE.
FROM the preceding account of the various forms in which the synochus
icteroides appeared, the reader will at once perceive, that no one mode of
treatment could be with propriety pursued; but that it was requisite to vary
it, as the symptoms indicated an inflammatory or putrid type, as well as to
adjust it to the several stages of the disease. But in all cases which began
with inflammatory symptoms, whether they ended in those which indicated
putridity or not, the following treatment was found most certain and
successful. Blood-letting generally afforded relief in all cases, when the
activity of the arterial system was evident; and the head and epigastrium were
at the same time much affected: and this operation was found serviceable when
repeated every six or eight hours, for the first twenty-four or thirty-six
hours after the establishment of the paroxysm; and in every subsequent
exacerbation so long as those symptoms continued in any considerable degree The
first blood drawn in the fever seldom showed any white glutinous covering or
size, but after the second bleeding, this appearance was seldom absent; though
it was never thick or very tough. The crassamentum was bulky, slat, and smooth,
and never rose into that cup-like or sand-box ^^rm which is common in cases of
pneumonic inflammation.
. To those who condemn bleeding under such circumstances, we may say with
Sydenham, when speaking of the plague, "they either did not bleed early enough,
or too sparingly." To those accustomed to see frequent cases of idiopathic
gastritis, where the danger is seldom indicated fully by the pulse, the
propriety of this practice will be at once obvious. In conjunction with
blood-letting, mercurial purges were found more certain in their effects and
more serviceable than any other kind; especially when exhibited in doses of
from six to twelve grains, and repeated every six or eight hours till a copious
discharge by stool took place; and more especially when their operation was
promoted by mild laxative enemas, administered three or four hours after each
dose of the mercurial purge. Those who have not had an opportunity of observing
the good effects of this practice, will perhaps think it a very hazardous one.
But when they consider the difficulty of retaining the saline and less active
purges on the stomach, and the very great difficulty of procuring copious
evacuations by stool, without which the topical affection which obstructs the
passage of the bile could not be removed, nor the propensity to puke relieved;
they will change their sentiments; for, notwithstanding the inflamed and
irritable state of those parts, calomel in large doses, passed the pybones, and
occasioned less irritation till it had reached the intestines, and was less
liable to be cast up than any other purgative.

But, however preconceived theories might influence others, we who were not
prejudiced in favor of any particular hypothesis, and who had daily
opportunities of seeing its effects, not only in our own practice, but in that
of others, are convinced that it was more certain in its operation, and in
general as safe as any other.

In a few persons of delicate or infirm constitutions, indeed it proved
injurious; and particularly when administered after the inflammatory symptoms
had subsided. When it proved injurious before the inflammatory symptoms were
removed, it appeared to have induced an inflammation in the intestines, and a
very painful and troublesome tenesmus. And when it proved injurious in a later
stage, it was in consequence of the debility occasioned by its operation or the
ptyalism, which too frequently succeeded the too frequent and injudicious
exhibition of it. Unless speedy and decided measures are taken in this stage of
the disease, all our future endeavors to remove it, will generally be
ineffectual. And surely, in a disease which had foiled every method formerly
employed, some innovation was justifiable. These cases, however, were very rare
in comparison with those wherein it operated gently, and to good effect. As we
never administered it when putrid symptoms were prevalent or the debility very
great, or in any stage of the disease, but the first; we cannot speak with any
certainty of its effects, under any other circumstance or period.

We seldom had occasion, even in the first stage of the disease, when
inflammatory symptoms were prevalent, to exhibit mercurial purges after copious
evacuations were procured, but found those of a milder kind, such as sal. cath.
crem. tart. or castor oil, generally sufficient to keep the bowels in a
laxative state, when the stomach would bear them, and when it would not,
glisters made of an infusion of senae leaves, manna and common salt, with the
addition of a little oil, generally answered the purpose. We found the most
difficult part in the treatment, consisted in putting the stomach in a
condition to retain any thing; the saline draught in the act of effervescence,
so useful for that purpose in other fevers, seldom produced any permanent
effect in this; magnesia taken in a draught of sweetened water, seemed to have
a better effect when immediately followed by a draught of acid beverage; but
there was nothing so certain as a copious diarrhoea when it could be procured.
If in any case, the patient recovered by the means recommended by the West
India writers, and adopted by several, particularly by the French physicians
who practiced here during the prevalence of the disease, this fortunate even
appears to have been more owing to a favorable state of the constitution, or
to a lower degree of the disease, than to the efficacy of their feeble and
imperfect method of treatment.
When on the first or second day of the disease the face was greatly flushed,
the vessels of the tunica adnata very red and turgid, and the patient was
affected with ferocious delirium, resembling that which occurs in phrenitis, he
generally died in a short time, unless immediately and copiously blooded,
purged and restricted to a cooling and abstemious regimen.

The antiphlogistic regimen was always found to agree better than that of the
vinous or cordial kind; not only while the pulse continued full and active, but
when it was low and quick, previous to the accession of typhous symptoms. The
patient was accordingly directed to drink toast and water, lemonade,
tamarind-water, barley-water, and any other diluting, mild, sedative drink,
that was grateful to the palate, and rested easiest on the stomach.

Fresh air was constantly admitted into the sick room, and cold vinegar and
water frequently sprinkled upon the floor. This was found much more refreshing
than flashing gunpowder, or burning nitre and charcoal in the chamber; as
these latter, though they furnish a quantity of pure air, always increased its
heat; and thereby counterbalanced the good effects that might otherwise have
been derived from them. The bed and body-linen were also directed to be changed
every day, or every second day at farthest.

When a repetition of blood-letting during the first and second day of the
complaint, did not remove the pain in the head and back, and the distress at
the stomach, and when every thing was vomited up as soon as taken; recourse was
immediately had to purging clysters, and to the application of epispastics to
the stomach and legs, or to the back and inside of the thighs: the latter
method is prefered by Dr Hume of Jamaica, to any other; from a supposition,
that an inflammation raised on an inferior part, always relieves that
subsisting in a superior one. At present it is supposed to be owing to a change
of action, from one part of the system to another.

Opium was also frequently employed in a solid form as directed by Hillary of
Barbados, with a view of relieving the vomiting; but in general was found to
aggravate it. The saline draught given in the act of effervescence, or magnesia
as already mentioned, had a better effect, but was by no means certain: nor in
fact was any thing else found to have any permanent effect on this symptom,
except glysters, brisk purges, and blisters. But these when judiciously and
early applied seldom failed of affording relief.

Baths of various kinds were occasionally employed, but seldom with such
manifest effect as to induce us to say much in their favor, except washing the
limbs with simple water of tepid warmth, to keep the skin soft, and take off
stricture and resistance from the surface. When the topical affection of the
stomach was relieved, a solution of Rochelle salts, in thin veal or fowl broth,
with the addition of a little common marine salt, was in general more certain
and less irritating than any other laxative. (A dram of this salt requires
about two ounces of boiling water to dissolve it perfectly.) The inflamed state
of the stomach deterred us from employing emetics, or any antimonial
preparations: but from the trials of others, we are convinced that they seldom
were of service, but often the reverse. When purges produced copious, foetid
and bilious stools early in the disease, it generally terminated favorably and
speedily.

In the second stage of this fever, (which however, seldom took place when the
remedies beforementioned were early and judiciously employed and duly persisted
in), we found a very different treatment proper, from that which was necessary
in the first stage; for the inflammatory state now, for the most part, rapidly
verged toward gangrene; and the muscular weakness was such as to render
bleeding inadmissible; and the irritable state of the stomach precluded all
expectation from purgatives, as they were rejected as well as every thing else
the instant they reached the stomach. Our only resource, therefore, was in warm
antiseptic fomentations, applied by means of flannel cloths to the stomach,
thighs, legs and hands, sinapisms to the feet, aromatic and essential oils, or
spices stewed in brandy to the stomach; or the application of blisters, and the
frequent exhibition of laxative glisters; and after a free evacution, the
injection of bark decoction, and a few drops of laudanum, with some farinaceous
or mucilaginous liquor, into the intestines -- (here perhaps, washing the
patient's whole body with cold water, and afterward wrapping it in a blanket
wrung out of a hot decoction, and the subsequent application of blisters, would
have been beneficial; but we were afraid to try them). Vinous and cordial
drinks as well as all kinds of aliment, invariably aggravated this symptom, and
increased or produced the cardialgia; but small draughts of cold water
generally gave instant case. When by these means the topical inflammation of
the epigastric region was removed, all the symptoms gradually subsided, and the
patient recovered. But when these means failed, and the black vomiting came on,
accompanied with coldness, and a cadaverous appearance of the extremities, and
a dark yellow and purple aspect of the countenance, our practice was to employ
a strong decoction of peruvian bark -- an infusion of camomile flowers, and
toast and water lightly acidulated with the elixir of vitriol, and in some
cases a mixture of brandy and water -- and to direct glisters composed of a
strong decoction of bark, with the addition of fifteen or twenty drops of
laudanum, to be administered every two or three hours; applying at the same
time, sinapisms and jugs of hot water, to different parts of the patient's
body. We also directed all the drinks to be given in a t^pid state. Hot spiced
wine, wine and water, and various other liquors were often tried, but in
general with such bad success, that we cannot recommend them in such
circumstances. Hot brandy toddy, however, with the addition of a large quantity
of powdered nutmeg, in conjunction with external heat and acrid stimulating
applications, often had evident good effects.

When indeed the disease began with great prostration of strength, and other
symptoms which denote a typhous diathesis, we found wine not only safe, but
more useful than any other article. In these cases also, the early use of the
bark in various forms, together with the liberal use of laudanum and volatile
salts were of service; but that which was most particularly so, was the
shower-bath of salt water, applied quite cold three times aday, the patient
sitting in an arm chair, in a large tub for the purpose, his head being
previously shaved or covered with a thin bathing cap of oiled cloth. But after
the accession of this stage, in which the black vomiting and coldness of the
limbs were the most predominant symptoms, all attempts to relieve were
generally ineffectual. The principal aim to be kept in view in this state of
the disease, is to recall and support the determination of the fluids to the
surface. Death may be prevented, even after black-vomiting has appeared with
all its terrors, if a remedy can be found powerful enough to excite the action
of the extreme vessels, and to recall the determination from the internal parts,
to the surface of the body. For this purpose, we are told by Dr Jackson, that
he has employed alternately warm and cold bathing with success: he has even
wrapped the body in a blanket, soaked in water, in which a large portion of
salt was dissolved; or which had been steeped in hot brandy or rum; enjoining
at the same time the liberal use of wine or any other grateful cordial, to be
taken as warm as possible in small and repeated draughts. He also mentions
having heard of several well-attested instances of persons being relieved of
the black vomiting and their lives saved, by plentiful draughts of rum and
water. In other cases he thinks washing the whole body first with cold water,
and then wrapping it in the blankets steeped in hot brandy or rum, and giving
warm cordial drinks answered still better. (See his Treatise, p. 226.) We found
brandy and water and beeftea rested better on many stomachs, and strengthened
them more than any thing else, after the removal of fever and pain, and all the
other symptoms except debility and dyspepsia.


When the disease did not appear to be confined more particularly to any one
part of the system than another, but was universally diffused; and when nervous
symptoms with great prostration of strength, were conspicuously predominant,
which was frequently the case during the greatest part of the month of August,
the treatment recommended by Dr Edward Stephens, a physician of great repute at
St Croix, was employed with more success than any other; of which the following
is an abstract. "The nausea and vomiting may be relieved by an infusion of
camomile flowers, given frequently until the stomach is sufficiently emptied of
all crude matters. Small doses of a cordial mixture composed of the oil of
peppermint and compound spirits of lavender, may then be taken until the
sickness abates. (...) notwithstanding, the irritability of the stomach should
continue, recourse must be instantly had to the cold bath, which must be used
every two hours or oftener if the urgency of the symptoms should require it:
after each immersion a glass of old Madeira or a little brandy burnt with
cinnamon may be administered.

Flannel cloths wrung out of spirit of wine, impregnated with spices, may be
applied to the pit of the stomach and changed frequently. An injection
containing an ounce of powdered bark, mixed with thin salep or sago, to which a
tea-spoon-full of laudanum has been added, should be administered. These
injections may be continued every two or three hours, omitting the laudanum
after the first -- as soon as the stomach can bear medicines and nourishment,
the bark may be administered in small doses -- and as much madeira wine may be
given as the patient can bear, without affecting his head or heating him too
much. All emetics and violent cathartics should be avoided. If the bowels
should not be sufficiently open, a laxative clyster may be necessary, or a few
grains of powdered rhubarb added to each dose of bark, until the desired effect
is produced. If diarrhoea should prevail, it must be checked by starch
injections, blended with laudanum, by the tincture E. kino, Japonica, or a
decoction of cascarilla; for a diarrhoea, especially when profuse, is always
injurious when the disease is in an advanced stage, or when the debility is
great.

If stupor, coma, or delirium should come on, a large blister should be applied
between the shoulders, small ones to the thighs, and stimulating cataplasms to
the soles of the feet. When hemorrhages appear, the elixir of vitriol may be
joined with the bark, but great care should be taken to prevent it from
affecting the bowels.

If the pulse should be much sunk, the prostration of strength great, and
subsultus tendinum take place, small doses of the liquor mineralis Hoffmanni,
or even vitriolic ether, diluted with water may be given. Musk and camphor in
this situation, have also proved effectual. Upon the whole this outline may be
summed up under the recited circumstances, by saying that the cold bath, bark
and wine, a spacious well ventilated room, frequent change of bed and body
linen, and attention to rest, and quiet if properly persevered, is all that can
be done with any prospect of success."

We were led with other physicians of this city, to make trial of mercurial
purges in the early stage of this disease, from having observed their good
effects in bilious remittents, when symptoms of accumulated bile were present;
and are surprised that the West India practitioners never made trial of it in a
disease, which the generality of them acknowledge is the most desperate and
mortal to which mankind are liable, and which has heretofore baffled all their
skill; especially as some of them imagine it to be only a higher grade of the
bilious remittent, of tropical climates; and as mercurial cathartics are
recommended occasionally for the removal of bilious accumulations, by several
modern authors, particularly by Balfour, Blane and Clark. Dr. Williams indeed,
(who published as treatise on the yellow fever at Jamaica in 1750), though he
makes no mention of mercury, says he found jallap or seammony in doses of 20 or
30 grains, given after an antiemetic draught, and repeated as often as it was
thrown up till it operated freely by stool, more effectual, not only in
relieving the incessant propensity to puke at the beginning of the disease, but
in mitigating every painful and febrile symptom, and adds that though he can
adduce no modern authority in support of ^is practice, he can recommend it from
his own experience. We can say the same of mercurial purges, with this
addition, that when they operated copiously, which was generally the case when
a laxative glyster was injected, a (...) after them, the vomiting or the
propensity thereto became more moderate, and in many cases was entirely removed.

With respect to blood-letting, there is much contrariety of sentiment among
the West India physicians; the generality of them restraining the operation to
the first and second days, from the commencement of the disease, and to a very
sparing quantity: whereas Dr. Mosely advises it without limitation, even
addeliquium, and a repetition so long as the pulse continues preternaturally
quick, and the skin; exhibits much feverish heat. And Williams advises opening
the temporal artery, when the pain in the head is great, and the fever high.
But though Mosely is of the same opinion with Williams, with respect to purging
for relieving the irritability of the stomach, so long as the feverish heat is
evident, without regarding the state of the pulse, he makes no mention of
mercurial purges, but places his chief dependence on a solution of vitriolated
tartar and emollient glysters; and as soon as that is accomplished, has
immediate recourse of the bark in various forms, as may be most grateful to the
stomach.

Blane and Jackson have given a more accurate description of the disease, but
Mosely certainly understood its nature and treatment better than either, though
he may perhaps sometimes have carried his plan too far for the constitutions of
the generality of citizens. For hardy athletic mariners we believe it was the
best mode of treatment that was known at the time he practiced in Jamaica.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE ORIGIN AND NATURE OF THE CONTAGION.
THERE is no disease on which the influence of climate and season is so
conspicuous as on the yellow fever.

In the islands and countries within the tropics, where the disease is
generated, the physicians who practice in those parts have no idea of its being
contagious; but because it rarely attacks the natives of that climate, and is
confined to foreigners from a colder climate, they ascribe it to the effects of
fatigue and heat, exposure to night air, or to some irregularity, etc. Numerous
observations however prove, that it is highly contagious when conveyed to other
countries, especially in populous cities with close built streets, when the
heat of the weather is equal to, or exceeds that of, tropical climates. For
examples of this, the reader is referred to Lind on Hot Climates; to Lining's
account of its several occurrences at Charleston, published in the 2d volume of
the physical and Literary Essays of Edinburgh; and to the history of its rise
and progress as it lately appeared in Philadelphia, published by Mr Carey.
Former observations also show, that the contagion has always been so
effectually destroyed by cold and frosty weather, that it has never been known
to revive the following spring or summer.

As the contagious miasmata, or deleterious corpuscles of this contagion, or
whatever else it may be supposed to consist of, is neither visible nor can be
rendered cognizable to the senses by any means hitherto invented, we can only
determine its existence and judge of its nature from its effects. And as the
source from whence it is ^^rived, and the means by which it is generated, have
never been investigated or even suspected as we know of, we can only form a
judgment of that circumstance from analogy, which at best is but a
problematical guide.

The yellow fever, though it agrees with the typhus, jail or hospital fever,
and the pestilence in being capable of affecting sound persons under certain
circumstances, who happen to approach within a certain distance of its source,
or of substances which have already been within that distance, and imbibed the
contagious effluvia, differs materially from the former, in not being capable
of producing any morbid effect in cold and frosty weather, unless the heat of
the chamber where it may chance to lurk, be raised and continued for some hours
above fifty or sixty degrees, or according to the learned and observing Blane,
75 degrees -- and from the latter in not losing its power, and declining as the
heats of summer, in countries where they are very hot come to the^^ height, as
well as by the cold of winter -- and from both in the manner of its attack, and
the appearance of the symptoms in the progress of the disease. And though it
resembles the influenza in the suddenness of attack, it differs from it
materially in the facility of communication, the rapidity of its progress, and
the extensiveness of its sway -- the one being confined to cities, and taking
some months to finish its progress -- the other spreading over whole
continents, in the course of as many weeks.

Nor does it agree in its effects with the miasmata, which arise from
putrefying substances, or from a marshy soil in any one circumstance, except
being extinguished by cold and frosty, and perhaps rainy weather. See remarks
on this subject, published in the Federal Gazette, dated November 18th, and
Dunlap's American Advertiser, December 2^th, 1793.
For the miasmata of marshes, are diffused through the atmosphere to a
considerable distance from their source, and affect numbers at the same time,
and the diseases produced thereby, are not contagious; whereas the miasmata
which occasion the yellow fever, are confined to a very narrow sphere, and only
affect those that happen to come within that sphere, or in contact with, or
near to such persons, or such substances as have been within that sphere, so as
to receive the contagious effluvia; and the disease produced by these miasmata
is contagious, and propagated in succession from one to another, in proportion
as there is more or less intercourse between the sound and the sick, provided a
state of the atmosphere, with respect to heat and some other circumstances,
exist at the same time favorable for propagating the contagion. What these
circumstances are, will be mentioned in the sequel. But if this disease is
neither a modification of the pestilence -- the typhus -- the influenza -- or a
higher grade of the bilious remittent fever. -- What is it? From what source
does it originate, or by what means is it generated? That it originates within
the tropics, and seldom if ever in any other climate is generally admitted --
but from what source or how generated, is the question.

It is well known to every one conversant with medical subjects, that other
contagious miasmata are frequently generated in close crowded or unventilated
places, particularly in jails, hospitals and ships of war, unless the body and
bed clothes are frequently changed and kept clean, and the air frequently
renewed, in consequence of the effluvia constantly issuing from the lungs and
pores of the skin, at the same time that a portion of the pure and vivifying
principle of the air, is gradually exhausted by the same circumstance. It is
also a fact well established, that persons thus circumstanced, frequently
communicate a disease to those who chance to come into the same place, or in
contact with such substances as have been within a certain distance of them, so
as to imbibe a quantity of the effluvia issuing from them, especially when
rendered volatile by heat, without being in any apparent degree affected in
their health themselves. For examples of this the reader is requested to
consult the works of Pringle, Lind and Blane, writers deservedly of the highest
authority in medicine.


May not the contagion of the yellow fever therefore be generated in the dirty,
confined, and suffocating cabins of the unfortunate slaves, (who are deprived
of the means as well as the relish for cleanliness and agreeable appearance,
which actuates the minds of independent freemen), exalted into a pestilential
quality by long continued heat; and may not the constitutions of the
inhabitants from the same cause, in conjunction with the purity of the air from
constant ventilation, be rendered incapable of being affected by it; while
strangers, whose constitutions are differently disposed, seldom escape?

The putrefaction of dead animal matter can, have no share in generating the
disease, as it gives out nothing but a little hydrogen or inflammable air
different from vegetable substances in that process.

To suppose with Drs Warren and Desportes that the contagion by which the
disease is produced and propagated, was first introduced into the Islands by a
crew of sick persons that arrived there about the year 1730, from Siam in the
East Indies; and that it has been fostered there ever since, as the small pox
has been in other countries, would have some appearance of plausibility, if
like that disease it made no distinction between natives and foreigners; and a
greater or less number of the inhabitants were always affected by it: but as
that is not the case, such an opinion must be groundless. For instead of
affecting the natives, it is almost entirely confined to mariners from long
voyages, and foul and crowded ships; and to soldiers confined in hospitals, or
crowded together in huts or barracks. And when it happens to be conveyed to
other countries, its influence is entirely exerted upon the inhabitants of
cities; and is observed to be most contagious in those parts where the air is
most confined and impure -- when the days are very hot and the nights cool.
Hence it appears, that in order to give effect to the contagion of this fever,
it is necessary that there should be a certain constitution of the air, in
conjunction with great heat.

Let us therefore enquire into the circumstances which give this morbific
constitution to the atmosphere, that if the contagion should ever be introduced
here again, we may not only escape its effects by retreating into the country,
but if possible, disarm it of its power, and prevent it from spreading, and
affecting those who remain in the city.

That all contagious diseases receive their full force from a particular
constitution or condition of the atmosphere, appears certain, from a
multiplicity of concurring observations made by different authors at different
periods and in different countries. In what this particular constitution of the
atmosphere consists, which in one year and in the same situation favors the
spreading of contagion, and in another year in the same season and in the same
place, checks or extinguishes it, has been variously explained by different
writers: but as no explanation hitherto attempted is perfectly satisfactory, we
beg leave to offer one which we think less exceptionable. See on this subject
particularly the works of Sydenham, Russel, and Lind.


During a long continuance of dry and hot weather, the atmosphere becomes more
or less charged with exhalations from various sources, in proportion to the
moisture of the soil, etc. which are more or less injurious to health, in
proportion to the quantity of animal and vegetable substances in a state of
putrefaction, which cover or are mixed with the soil, the respiration of
animals, the combustion of fuel, etc. while it is at the same time robbed by
these processes of a considerable portion of its vivifying principle, at
present known by the name of oxygen gas, or pure air.. It is certain that the
air is saturated by some other substance, or deprived of a portion of its
vivifying principle by some means or other; otherwise we know from the most
unquestionable observations, that it would always neutralize, correct,
dissipate, or precipitate the matter of contagion, however minute and subtle
the corpuscles may be of which it consists. For it is well known that no
contagious disease can spread, or become epidemic, on mountains, or on open and
extensive plains, where the soil is dry, cleared, and cultivated; whereas it is
with difficulty it can be prevented in populous cities, with close built
streets and narrow alleys, or in low champaign countries, where ventilation is
obstructed by surrounding woods.

In populous cities in sultry weather the exhalations, from the vaults,
privies, sinks, sewers, gutters, shambles, slaughter-houses, tan-yards, from
respiration, and the combustion of fuel, and a variety of other processes of
nature and art, are inconceivably great. Nor can such exhalations fail of
filling the air with a noxious mass of invisible corpuscles; at the same time
that the process by which they are generated spoliates the same atmosphere of a
principle, on the presence of which, both life and flame depend for their
continuance.

-- "It is not air
That from a thousand lungs reeks back to thine.
Sated with exhalations rank and ^ell,
The spoil of dunghills, and the putrid thaw
Of nature; when from shape and texture, she
Relapses into fighting elements:
It is not air, but floats a nauseous mass
Of all obscene, corrupt, offensive things;
Which still ranker grows with sickly rest,
And poisons the balsamic blood."
ARMSTRONG on Health. MEANS FOR PREVENTING THE INTRODUCTION OF CONTAGION INTO
SEAPORT TOWNS.
THE most effectual means of preventing the introduction of contagious diseases
into any seaport town, is to erect at a convenient distance therefrom, four
separate hospitals, with large airy apartments. One of these hospitals to be
appropriated for persons with dubious symptoms. A second for persons manifestly
infected. A third for convalescents from the disease. A fourth for purifying
the body, the wearing apparel, and bed clothes: this last should be provided
with bathing tubs, and materials for fumigating. A bathi^g chamber and fresh
clean apparel should also be provided near to each hospital, for each patient,
before his admission into either; except his weakness or fever should make the
bath hazardous. Each apartment should be separated by means of a partition, to
prevent any effect from each other; and should have windows that will both
slide up and down, for the admission of fresh, and expulsion of foul, air. (For
the manner of constructing these, see Mackiterick's Medical cautions.)

These hospitals should be at some distance from each other, on as elevated and
dry a situation as can be conveniently found. When a suspected ship arrives,
the whole crew should be compelled by law to perform quarantine for 14 days at
least; the sound to remain on board; the sick or indisposed in a marine
hospital or infirmary. By this it would be ascertained with certainty, whether
there was contagion on board or not.

MEANS FOR PREVENTING THE SPREADING OF CONTAGIOUS DISEASES, WHEN THEY HAPPEN TO
BE INTRODUCED INTO A CITY.
WHEN a contagious disease breaks out in a city, the most certain means of
preventing it from becoming epidemic, or from spreading, is to prohibit all
intercourse between the sound and the infected; and to commit the diseased to
the care of persons commissioned for that purpose. As soon therefore, as the
disease appears in any family, both the sound and the sick should be
immediately separated and removed to other apartments, at some distance from
the town, and a considerable distance from each other, and the house where the
disease appeared should immediately be purified by the means hereafter directed.

Infirmaries for this purpose should be built at the public expense, on dry and
elevated situations, particularly on the high and gravelly banks of rivers or
constant streams of water, open on all sides to the free access of the air,
provided with every necessary, and supported at the public expense. But persons
in affluent circumstances though compelled to leave the city, should be allowed
to retire to private infirmaries at their own expense, provided they conformed
to the rules of the public infirmaries, in every other respect.

Every family in the neighborhood where the infection prevailed, should also
be obliged under a heavy penalty, to remove to another part till all danger
from contagion be over; and no person be permitted to return to an infected
house, or to use any article where the contagion existed, till purified by the
means hereafter directed. Nor should any person who has recovered from the
disease be permitted to return to the city, or to his own house, till he has
after such recovery, repeatedly undergone the ablution of both the warm and
cold bath, changed every article of his clothing, and performed a quarantine
of at least 14 days, so as to render his return perfectly safe to the community.

If proper attention had been paid to these directions, which have been
collected from the most respectable sources; and the substance of which was
earnestly advised by the college of physicians, the calamity by which all
descriptions in this city so lately suffered, would have been prevented. And
that a strict and punctual observance thereof in future, will prevent the like
calamity, we are as certain as we are of any axiom in natural philosophy.

In a letter from Dr Waterhouse, the present respectable professor of the
theory and practice of medicine in the university of Cambridge, Massachusetts,
dated September 28th, 1778, we find the following information respecting the
means which have been found effectual for preventing the small pox from
spreading among the inhabitants of Newport, the capital of Rhode Island, when
it happened to be introduced there, by means of any vessel; and will apply
equally well in preventing any other contagious disease from becoming epidemic.

When a vessel arrives in the harbor with the small pox on board, every person
with the disease is immediately taken by officers appointed for the purpose, to
Coaster's harbor, a little island about three miles from Newport, where there
is an hospital and every necessary provided for their reception and
accommodation. And the vessel having a jack hoisted in her shrouds, is obliged
to perform quarantine.

None of the bedding or wearing apparel made use of by the patients during
their stay at the hospital, are permitted to be brought away; nor are the
patients who recover from the disease, allowed to leave the hospital, till they
have undergone several ablutions in warm water, and till at least one week has
elapsed after their recovery, let the disease be ever so light.

When any person in the town is suspected of having taken the infection, the
family is obliged, under a heavy penalty, to give immediate notice to one or
more inspectors. If these, in conjunction with a physician, pronounce the
disease to be the small pox, the family has little more to do with the patient;
but he is from that time to the termination of the disease, wholly under the
direction of these officers, who remove him to Coaster's harbor. Formerly they
carried the sick person on a sleigh in a box in form of a large chest, with a
small bed in it; the cover of which was perforated with holes sufficient to
supply the patient with air. But the inhabitants perceiving that this
formidable apparatus had all ill effect on timorous minds, discontinued the
box, and substituted a sedan chair. It has happened more than once, that the
disease was so far advanced before it was known to be the small pox, that the
patient could not be removed without the greatest hazard. In that case the
street was boarded up; an advertisement published in the newspapers, and
guards placed to prevent any person from approaching within a certain distance
of the house.

MEANS FOR DESTROYING CONTAGION.
HEAT, fumigation and lime-washing appear to be the most effectual means of
destroying the contagion adhering to the walls, floors, and furniture of
houses, and to bedding, wearing apparel, and to other materials which have been
exposed to it.

For this purpose the bedding and wearing apparel being hung on lines across
the room, iron pots placed on bricks in the center, and at each corner of the
chamber or apartment should be nearly filled with alternate layers of powdered
sulphur or nitre, and charcoal; and a piece of oakum dipped in tar, to serve as a
match, being placed in each pot, the fireplace being previously closed, and
the windows shut down, is to be set on fire, and then the door to be shut;
observing to let in fresh air occasionally, and to relight them when
extinguished; but cautiously avoiding going in till the door and windows have
been for some time opened to prevent suffocation.

When this process has been continued for three or four days, the door,
windows, and chimney are to be opened, and left open day and night for at least
a fortnight. By this time every particle of contagion will be perfectly
extinguished, especially if the air of the room had been greatly heated
immediately before the admission of fresh air: for by great heat it is
attenuated and dissipated, and by cooler and pure air entirely changed in its
nature and qualities, if there is any faith to be put in the experiments of the
committee of physicians appointed by the empress of Russia, to superintend the
hospitals, when a pestilential fever prevailed at Moscow in the year 1771,
related by Mertens in his medical history of that disease: or if the
observations of the experienced Lind, and the intelligent Russel, are to be
credited.

For greater security, the walls of the house where infected persons have lain,
should always be white-washed with lime, and a quantity of the same article
should be thrown into the privies, as it is a certain corrector of contagion
and putrefaction, as well as destructive to every species of animalcule.

APPENDIX.
Copy of the report of the College of Physicians, in answer to the Governor's
enquiries, respecting the origin of the late epidemic; and their directions for
extinguishing latent infection.
SIR,
IT has not been from a want of respect to yourself, nor from inattention to
the subject, that your letter of the 30th ult. was not sooner answered; but the
importance of the questions proposed, has made it necessary for us to devote a
considerable portion of time and attention to the subject, in order to arrive
at a safe and just conclusion.

No instance has ever occurred of the disease, called the Yellow Fever, having
been generated in this city, or in any other part of the United States, as far
as we know; but there have been frequent instances of its having been imported,
not only into this, but into other parts of North America, and prevailing there
for a certain period of time; and from the rise, progress, and nature of the
malignant fever, which began to prevail here about the beginning of last
August, and extended itself gradually over a great part of the city; we are of
opinion that this disease was imported into Philadelphia, by some of the
vessels which arrived in the port after the middle of July. This opinion we are
further confirmed in, by the various accounts we have received from
unquestionable authorities.

TO PURIFY THE CITY FROM LATENT INFECTION,
WE beg leave to recommend, that every house, particularly those in which there
have been any sick, should be thoroughly cleansed and kept open for some weeks,
so as to admit fresh air through every aperture. The walls should be
white-washed, and gunpowder burned in all the apartments. The beds and woollen
apparel of the infected, should either be destroyed or smoaked with gunpowder
in a close room, and afterward exposed to the open air and rain. Unslaked lime
should be thrown down the necessaries; the streets should also be kept clean,
especially in the confined parts of the city.

In answer to your last question, permit us to observe, that we trust the early
attention of the legislature will be directed to the port, with respect to the
officers and other necessary arrangements, and on such an occasion the College
will ever cheerfully cooperate with them, in their endeavors to prevent the
introduction of contagious maladies in future.

By order of the College of Physicians. JOHN REDMAN, President.
NOVEMBER 26th, 1793.

