FRONTISPIECE.
(...)


A NEW HISTORY OF THE GRECIAN STATES FROM Their earliest Period to their
extinction by the OTTOMANS. CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF THEIR MOST MEMORABLE
SIEGES AND BATTLES; AND THE CHARACTER AND EXPLOITS OF THEIR MOST CELEBRATED
HEROES, ORATORS, AND PHILOSOPHERS.

EMBELLISHED WITH COPPER-PLATE CUTS.

DESIGNED FOR THE USE OF YOUNG LADIES AND GENTLEMEN.

LONDON, PRINTED: LANSINGBURGH, (New York), REPRINTED BY SILVESTER TIFFANY,
for, and sold by, THOMAS SPENCER, at his Book-Store, Market-street, Albany, M
DCC XCIV.

PREFACE.
THE very flattering Reception my History of the Roman Commonwealth has
received, has encouraged me to attempt, on the same plan, and with the same
views, A History of the Grecian States: those States which, though
inconsiderable in their extent, gave law to the surrounding nations, and
brought savage man, who till then wandered in the wilds of ignorance and
barbarity, into the pale of civil society, and forced the rude customs of
savages to yield to the refinements of the polite arts and sciences. Though her
losty domes are now no longer visible, though her stately and magnificent
cities have been long since levelled with the earth, and the martial spirit has
ceased to exist on Grecian soil; yet the deeds of her Heroes, Legislators, and
Philosophers, will die only with Time itself.

After what has been advanced in the Preface to my Roman History, little need
further be said in apology for this publication. I shall, therefore, only just
mention the three heroes of my Frontispiece.

HOMER was the most celebrated and illustrious of all the Poets of antiquity;
and yet we are not certain of what part of Greece he was a native; nor do we
know exactly the time of his birth, though he is generally supposed to have
lived about eight hundred and forty years before Christ. No nation in the world
has produced poems comparable to his.

XENOPHON was so celebrated a Greek Historian, that they called him the Attic
Be. He was a scholar of Socrates, and no less the warrior than the scholar. He
wrote several books, of which some are still in being, and their style is
considered as a master piece. His Cyropaedia, which he dedicated to Cyrus, has
not its equal.

The character of DEMOSTHENES, the most celebrated Athenian Orator, will be
found in different parts of this work. We have here only to add, that, when
Antipater succeeded Alexander, he fled to save his life; and, in order to avoid
falling into his enemy's hands, he swallowed poison, which he had prepared and
kept for that purpose in his pen, and so ended his days.

CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. A view of the earliest State of Greece -- The Laws of Lycurgus -- The
Death of that great Legislator Page 9 CHAP. II. The Athenians appoint Draco
their Lawmakers He is succeeded by Solon -- Salamis taken -- The Seven Wise Men
-- The Areopagus, and Council of Four Hundred -- Pisistratus usurps the
Government of Athens -- the Death of Solon Page 19 CHAP. III. Character of
Aristides and Themistocles -- Battle of Marathon -- Singular Bravery of
Cyndaerus -- The Persians make on ineffectual Attempt to surprise Athens --
Honors paid to Miltiades -- Death of that brave General -- Piety of his Son
Cimon Page 26 CHAP. IV. Xerxes sets out for the Conquest of Greece -- His
Vanity and Presumption -- ^^s immense Army -- Builds a Bridge across the
Hellespont -- Lands in Europe and marches into Greece -- The Lacedaemonians wait
for him at the Straits of Thermopylae -- Noble Death of Leonidas and his
Followers -- The Greeks gain an Advantage over the Persian Fleet -- Athens
taken and demolished -- Battle of Salamis -- Xerxes retreats disgracefully from
Greece Page 34 CHAP. V. Mardonius, the Persian General defeated and killed --
The Persians finally quit Gr^^^c -- Character of Aristides -- A terrible Plague
breaks out at Athens -- Character of Pericles -- He changes the Government of
Athens into a Kind of Monarchy -- Death of Pericles -- Character of Alcibiades
-- His Death -- Character of Socrates -- His Speech against the Accusations of
Melitus -- Death of Socrates -- -- Veneration paid to his Memory Page 45 CHAP.
VI. Agesilaus chosen King of Sparta -- Defeats the Persians -- Sparta takes the
Lead of Athens -- The Thebans take the Lead of the Spartans -- Character of
Epimanondas -- Battle of Leuctra -- Celebrated Battle of Mantinea -- Death of
Epimanondas Page 68 CHAP. VII. First rise of Macedonia from Obscurity -- Philip
institutes the Macedonian Phalanx -- The Birth and Education of Alexander --
Philip loses one of his Eyes -- Demosthenes warns the Athenians of their Danger
-- Singular Instance of Ingratitude -- Alexander saves the Life of his Father
Philip -- Battle of Chaeronea -- Demosthenes flies from the Field of Battle --
Death of Philip Page 81 CPAP. VIII. Alexander succeeds his Father Philip --
Takes the City of Thebes, and plunders it -- Appointed Generalissimo against
the Persians -- Lands in Asia without Opposition -- Battle on the Banks of the
Grannicus -- Takes several Places -- Cuts the Gordian Knot -- Magnificence and
Pomp of the Army of Darius Page 96 CHAP. IX. Darius defeated at the Battle of
Issus -- His Mother, Wife, and Children, taken Prisoners -- Alexander treats
them with great Honor and Generosity -- Abdalonymus made King of the Sidonians
-- The City of Tire taken by storm Page 107 CHAP. X. Alexander refuses
Overtures of Peace made by Darius -- Alexander's Cruelty at Gaza -- Death of
Statira, Darius's Queen -- Battle of Arbela -- Alexander enters Babylon, and
then Persepolis -- Death of Darius Page 114 CHAP. XI. Alexander pursues his
Conquests -- Abandons himself to Sensuality -- Puts some of his old Friends to
Death -- Kills Clytus -- Is exposed to great Danger of his Life in India --
Sets out on his Return to Babylon -- His Death Page 113 CHAP. XII. From the
Death of Alexander, to the Extinction of the Grecian States by the Ottomans
Page 130 Chronological Table of the principal Occurrences and Events during the
Existence of the Gr^cian States Page 141
THE HISTORY OF THE GRECIAN STATES.
CHAP. I.
GREECE, in its earliest infancy, was a combination of little states, each
governed by its respective sovereign, yet all uniting for their mutual safety
and general advantage. Their intestine contentions, however, were carried on
with great animosity; and, as it happens in all petty states under the dominion
of a single commander, the jealousies of the princes were a continual cause of
discord. From this distressful situation, those states, by degrees, began to
emerge; a different spirit began to seize the people, and, sick of the
contentions of their princes, they desired to be free. A spirit of liberty
prevailed ^^ over Greece, and a general change of government was effected in
every part of the country, except in Macedonia. Thus monarchy gave way to a
republican government, which, however, was diversified into as many various
forms as there were different cities, according to the peculiar character of
each people.

Though these cities seemed to differ from each other in their laws and
interests, yet they were united by one common language, one religion, and a
national pride, that taught them even to consider all other nations as
barbarous and feeble. Even Egypt itself, from whence they had derived many of
their arts and institutions, was considered in a very subordinate light. To
make this union among the states of Greece still stronger, there were games
instituted in different parts of the country, with rewards for excellence in
every pursuit. These sports were instituted for very serious and useful
purposes: they afforded an opportunity for the several states meeting together;
they gave them a greater real for their common religion; they exercised the
youths for the purposes of war, and increased that vigor and activity, which
were then of the utmost importance in deciding the fate of a battle.

Their chief bond of union, however, arose from the council of the Amphictyons,
which was instituted by Amphictyon, king of Athens, about the year 2500, and
was appointed to be heid twice a year at Thermopylae, to deliberate for the
general good of those states, of whose deputies it was composed. The states,
who sent deputies to this council, were twelve, namely, the Thessalians, the
Thebans, the Dorians, the Ionians, the Perhaabeans, the Magnates, the Locrians,
the Oetans, the Pthiotes, the Maleans, the Phocians, and the Delopians. Each of
these cities, which had a right to assist at the Amphictyonic council, was
obliged to send two deputies to every meeting. The one was entitled the
Hieroumuemon, who took care of the interests of religion; the other was called
the Pylagoras, and had in charge the civil interests of his community.

This confederacy united the Greeks for a time into a body of great power, and
greater emulation. By this association, a country, not half so large as
England, was able to dispute the empire of the earth with the most powerful
monarchs of the world; by this association, they not only made head against the
numerous armies of Persia, but dispersed, routed, and destroyed them, reducing
their pride so low, as to make them submit to conditions of peace, as shameful
to the conquered as glorious to the conquerors. But, among all the cities of
Greece there were two, which by their merit, their valor, and their wisdom,
particularly distinguished themselves from the rest: the^^ were Athens and
Lacedaemon. As these cities served for examples of bravery or learning to the
rest, and as the chief burden of every soreign war devolved upon them, we
shall proceed to give the reader a general idea of the genius, character,
manners, and government, of their respective inhabitants.

Though the kingdom of Lacedaemon was not so considerable as that of Athens,
yet, as it was of much earlier institution, it deserves our first attention.
Lacedaemon was, for a long time, governed with turbolence and oppression, and
required the earl of severe lows and ^g^^ou. (...). There sev^ ^tiev^ and
rigorous discipline were at last imposed upon it by Licurgus, one of the first
and most extraordinary legislators that ever appeared among mankind. There is
perhaps nothing more remarkable in profane history, yet nothing so well
attested, as what relates to the laws and government of Lycurgus. What indeed
can be more amazing, than to behold a mutinous and savage race of mankind
yielding submission to laws, that controuled every sensual pleasure, and every
private affection! To behold them give up for the good of the state, all the
comforts and conveniences of private life, and making a state of domestic
privacy more severe and terrible, than the most painful campaigns and the most
warlike duties! Yet all this was effected by the perseverance and authority of
a single legislator, who gave the first lessons of hard resignation in his own
generous examples.

Lycurgus was the son of Eunomus, one of the two kings who reign e^ together in
Sparta: During the minority of Charilaus, Licurgus acted as regent: but
resolving to make himself acquainted with all the improvements of other
nations, he traveled into Crete, passed over into Asia, and from thence went
into Egypt. But while he was thus employed abroad, his presence was greatly
wanted at home, where every thing was hastening to anarchy and ruin. On his
return, he found the people wearied out with their own importunities, and ready
to receive any new impreslious he might attempt. He first communicated his
design of altering the whole code of laws to his particular friends, and then
by degrees gained over the leading men to his party, until things being ripe
for a change, he ordered thirty of the principal men to appear armed in the
marketplace. Charilus, who was at this time king, at first opposed the
revolution, but was soon persuaded to join in the measure.

To continue the kings still with a shadow of power, he confirmed them in their
rights of succession as before; but diminished their authority by instituting a
senate, which was to serve as a counterpoise between the prerogative and the
people. The kings however, had still all their former marks of outward dignity
and respect. The government hitherto had been unsteady, tending at one time
toward despotism, at another to democracy; but the senate instituted by
Lycurgus served as a check upon both, and kept the state balanced in
tranquillity.

To keep the people in plenty and dependence, seems to have been one of the
most re fined strokes in this philosopher's legislation. The generality of
people were at that time so poor, that they were destitute of every kind of
possession, while a small member of individuals were possessed of all the lands
and the wealth of the country. In order, therefore, to banish the insolence,
the fraud. and the luxury of the one, as well as the misery, the repining, and
the factious despair of the other, he persuaded them majority, and forced the
rest, to give up all their (...) and to the commonwealth, and to make a new
division of them, that they might all live together in perfect equality. Thus
all the sensual goods of life were distributed among the governors and the
governed, and superior merit alone conferred superior distinction.

It would, however, have answered no permanent purpose to divide the lands, if
the money had been still suffered to accumulate. To prevent, therefore, all
other distinctions but that of merit, he resolved to level down all fortune to
one standard. He did not, indeed, strip those possessed of gold or silver of
their property; but, what was equivalent, he cried down its value, and suffered
nothing but iron money to pass in exchange for every commodity. This coin also
he made so heavy, and fixed at so low a rate, that a cart and two even were
required to carry home a sum equivalent to twenty pounds English, and a whole
house was necessary to keep it in. By these means, money was soon brought into
disuse, and few troubled themselves with more than was sufficient to supply
their necessaries. Thus not only riches, but their attendant train of avarice,
fraud, rapine, and luxury, were banished from this simple fiare.

Even these institutions were not thought sufficient to prevent that tendency,
which mankind have to private excess. A third regulation was therefore made,
commanding that all meals should be in public. He ordained, that (...) the men
should eat in one common hall without distinction; and, lest strangers should
attempt ^o corrupt his ci^^es^ by their examples, a law was expressly made
against their entrance into the city. By these means, frugality was not only
made necessary, but the use of riches was at once abolished. Every man sent
monthly his provisions to the common stock, with a little money for other
contingent expenses.

So rigorous an injunction, which thus out off all the delicaries and
refinements of luxury, was by no means pleasing to the rich, who took every
occasion to insult the lawgiver on his new regulations. The ^mults it excited
were frequent; and in one of these, a young fellow, whose name was Alexander,
struck out one of Lycurgus's eyes; but he had the majority of the people on his
side, who, provoked at the outrage, delivered the young man into his hands, to
treat him with all proper severity. Lycurgus, instead of ^stifying any brutal
resentment, won over his aggressor by all the arts of ability and tenderness,
till at last, from being one of the proudest and most turbulent ^^en of Sparta,
he became an example of wisdom and moderation, and an useful assistant to
Lycurgus in promoting his new institutions.

Thus undaunted by opposition, and steady in his designs, he went on to make
reformation in the manners of his country ^^en. As the education of youth was
one of the most important objects of a legislator's care, he first instituted,
that such children as, upon a public view were deemed deformed or weekly, and
unfitted for a future list of vigout and satigue, should be exposed to perish
in a cavern near mount Taygetus. Those infants that were born without any
capital defects, were adopted as children of the state, and delivered to their
parents to be nursed with severity and hardship. From their tenderest age, they
were accustomed to make no choice in their eating, nor to be afraid in the
dark, or when left alone; not to be peevish or fretful, to walk barefoot, to
lie hard at nights, to wear the same clothes winter and summer, and to fear
nothing from their equals. At the age of seven they were taken from their
parents, and delivered over to the classes for their education. Their
discipline there was little else than an apprenticeship to hardship,
self-denial, and obedience.

All ostentatious learning was banished from this simple common wealth: their
only study was to obey, their only pride was to suffer hardships. There was
yearly a custom of whipping them at the altar of Diana, and the boy that bore
this punishment with the greatest fortitude came off victorious. Every
institution seemed calculated to harden the body, and sharpen the mind for war.
In order to prepare them for stratagems and sudden incursions, the boys were
permitted to steal from each other; but, if they were caught in the fact, they
were punished for their want of dexterity.

At twelve years old, the boys were removed into another class of a more
advanced kind. There, in order to crush the seeds of vice which at that time
began to appear, their labor and discipline were increased with their age.
They had now their skirmishes between parties, and their mock fights between
larger bodies. In these they often fought with hands, feet, teeth, and nails
with such obstinacy, that it was common to see them lose their eyes, and often
their lives, before the fray was determined. Such was the constant discipline
of their minority, which lasted till the age of thirty, before which they were
not permitted to marry, to go into the troops, or to bear any office in the
state.

With regard to the virgins, their discipline was equally strict with the
former. They were inured to a constant course of labor and industry, until
they were twenty years old, before which time they were not allowed to be
marriageable.

Valor and generosity seemed the ruling motives of this new institution; arms
were their only exercise and employment, and their life was much less austere
in the camp than in the city. The Spartans were the only people in the world,
to whom the time of war was a time of ease and refreshment; because then the
severity of their manners was relaxed, and the men were indulged in greater
liberties. With them the first principles of war was never to turn their backs
on their enemies, however disproportioned in forces, not to deliver up their
arms until they resigned them with life.

Such was the general purport of the institutions of Ly^^rgus, which from their
tendency gained the esteem and admiration of all the surrounding nations. The
Greeks were ever apt to be dazzled rather with splendid than useful virtues,
and praised the laws of Lycurgus, which at best were calculated rather to make
men warlike than happy, and to substitute insensibility instead of enjoyment.

When Lycurgus had thus completed his military institution, and when the form
of government he had established seemed strong and vigorous enough to support
itself, his next care was to give it all the permanence in his power. He
therefore signified to the people, that something still remained for the
completion of his plan, and that he was under the necessity of going to consult
the oracle of Delphos for its advice. In the mean time, he persuaded them to
take an oath, for the strict observance of all his laws until his return, and
then departed with a full resolution of never seeing Sparta more. When he was
arrived at Delphos, he consulted the oracle, to know whether the laws he had
made were sufficient to render the Lacedaemonians happy; and being answered,
that nothing was wanting to their perfection, he sent this answer to Sparta,
and then voluntarily starved himself to death-Others say he died in Crete,
ordering his body to be burnt, and his ashes to be thrown into the sea. The
death of this great lawgiver gave a sanction and authority to his laws, which
his life was m^^ble to confer. The Spartans regarded his ^^d as the most
glorious of all his actions, and a nob finishing of all his former services.
They built a temple, and paid divine honors to him after his death; they
considered themselves as bound by every tie of gratitude and religion to a
strict observance of all his institutions; and the long continuance of the
Spartan government is a proof of their persevering resolution.

CHAP. II.
THE Athenians having, for more than a century, seen the good effects of laws
in the regulation of the Spartan commonwealth, about the year 3380, became
desirous of being governed by written laws. They pitched upon Draco, a man of
acknowledged wisdom and unshaken integrity, but rigid even beyond human
sufferance. Draco not succeeding in this business, Solon was applied to for his
advice and assistance, as he was the wisest and justest man in all Athens. His
great learning had acquired him the reputation of being the first of the seven
wise men of Greece, and his known humanity procured him the love and veneration
of every rank among his fellow citizens. Solon was a native of Salamis, an
island dependent on Athens, but which had revolted to put itself under the
power of the Megareans. In attempting to recover this island, the Athenians had
spent much blood and treasure, until at last v^^^^ed out with such ill-succes^,
a law was made, rendering it capital ever to advise the recovery of their lost
possession. Solon, however, undertook to pusuade them to another trial; and,
feigning himself mad, he ran about the streets, using the most violent gestures
and language; but the purport of all was, to upbraid the Athenians for their
remissness and effeminacy, in giving up their conquests in despair. In short,
he acted his part so well, by the oddity of his manners, and the strength of
his reasoning, that the people rosolved on another expedition against Salamais;
and, by a stratagem of his contrivance, in which he introduced several young
men upon the island in women's clothes, the place was surprised, and added to
the dominion of Athens.

But this was not the only occasion, on which he exhibited superior address and
wisdom. At a time when Greece had carried the arts of eloquence, poetry, and
government, higher than they had yet been seen among mankind, Solon was
considered as one of the foremost in each perfection. The sages of Greece,
whose same is still undiminished, acknowledged his merit, and adopted him as
their associate. The correspondence between these wise men was at once
instructive, friendly, and sincere. They were seven in number, namely, Thales
the Milesian, Solon of Athens, Chilo of Lacedaemon, Pittacus of Mitylene,
Periander of Corinth, Bias and Cleobulus, whose birth-places are not
ascertained.

These sages often visited each other, and their conversations generally turned
upon the methods of instituting the best form of government, or the arts of
private happiness. One day, when Solon went to Miletus to see Thales, the first
thing he said, was to express his surprise that Thales had never desired to
marry, or have children. Thales made no answer then, but a few days after
contrived that a stranger, supposed to arrive from Athens, should join their
company. Solon, hearing from whence the stranger came, was inquisitive after
the news of his own city, but was only informed, that a young man died there,
for whom the whole place was in the greatest affliction, as he was reputed the
most promising y^^^^ in all Athens. "Alas! (cried Solon) how much is the poor
father of the youth to be pitied! Pray, what was his name?" "I heard the name,
(replied the stranger, who was instructed for the occasion) but I have
forgotten it: I only remember, that all people talked much of his wisdom and
justice." Every answer afforded new matter of trouble and terror to the
inquisitive father, and he had just strength enough to ask, if the youth was
the son of Solon. "The very same," replied the stranger; at which words Solon
she wed all the marks of the most inconsolable distress. This was the
opportunity which Thales wanted, who took him by the hand, and said to him with
a smile, "Comfort yourself, my friend, all that has been told you is a mere
fiction, but may serve as a very proper answer to your question, why I never
thought proper to marr^"

One day, at the court of Periander of Corinth, a question was proposed, "Which
was the most perfect popular government?" "That (said Bias) where the laws have
no superior." "That (said Thales) where the inhabitants are neither too rich
nor too poor." "That (said Anacharsis the Scythian) where virtue is honored
and vice detested." "That (said Pittacus) where dignities are al^^ys conferred
upon the virtuous, and never upon the base." "That (said Cleobulus) where the
citizens fear blame more than punishment." "That (said Chilo) where the laws
are more regarded than the orators." But Solon's opinion seems to have the
greatest weight, who said^ "Where an injury done to the meanest subject is
^^^sult upon the whole constitution."

Upon a certain occasion, when Solon was conversing with Anacharsia, the
Scythian phisolopher, about his intended reformation in the state, "Alas (cried
the Scythian) all your laws will be found to resemble spiders webs: the weak
and small flies will be caught and entangled, but the great and powerful will
always have strength enough to break through."

A matter still more celebrated is Solon's interview with Croesus, king of
Lydia. This monarch, who was reputed the richest of all Asia Minor, was willing
to make an ostentatious display of his wealth before the Greek philosopher, and
after showing him immense heaps of treasures, and the greatest variety of other
ornaments, he demanded, whether he did not think the possessor of them the most
happy of all mankind. "No, (replied Solon) I know one more happy, a poor
peasant of Greece, who, neither in affluence nor in poverty, has but few wants,
and has learned to supply them by his labor." This answer was by no means
agreeable to the vain monarch, who by this question hoped only for a reply that
would tend to flatter his pride. Willing, therefore, to extort one still more
favorable, ^^e asked, whether, at least, he did not think him happy. "Alas!
(cried Solon) what man can be pronounced happy before he dies!" The integrity
and the wisdom of Solon's replies appe^^^d in the event. The kingdom of Lydia
w^^invaded by Cyrus, the empire destroyed, and Croesus himself was taken
prisoner. When he was led out to execution, according to the barbarous manner
of the times, he then too late recollected the maxims of Solon, and could not
help crying out when on the scaffold upon Solon's name. Cyrus, hearing him
repeat the name with great earnestness, was desirous of knowing the reason: and
being informed by Croesus of that philosopher's remarkable observation, he
began to fear for himself, pardoned Croesus, and took him for the future into
confidence and friendship. Thus Solon had the merit of saving one king's life,
and of reforming another.

Such was the man, to whom Athens applied for assistance in reforming the
severity of their government, and instituting a just body of law. His first
attempt was, therefore, in savor of the poor, whose deb^s l^^abohshed at once,
by an express law of insolvency. His next step was to repeal all the laws
enacted by Draco, except those against murder. He then proceeded to the
regulation of offices, employments, and magistrates, all which he left in the
hands of the rich; and he distributed the rich into three classes, ranging them
according to their incomes. The Areopagus, so called from the place where the
court was held, had been established some centuries before, but Solon restored
and augmented its authority. Nothing was so august as this court, and its
reputation for judgment and integrity became so very great, that the Romans
sometimes referred causes, which were too intricate for their own decision, to
the determination of this tribunal. Nothing was regarded here but truth: that
no external objects might pervert justice, the tribunal was held in darkness,
and the advocates were denied all attempts to work upon the passions of the
judges. Superior to this, Solon instituted the great council of four hundred,
who were to judge upon appeals from the Areopagus, and maturely to examine
every question before it came to be debated in a general assembly of the people.

He abolished the custom of giving portions in marriage with young women,
unless they were only daughters. The bride was to carry no other fortune to her
husband than three suits of clothes, and some household goods of little value.
It was his aim to prevent making matrimony a traffic: he considered it as an
honorable connection, calculated for the mutual hapiness of both parties, and
the general advantage of the state.

These were the principal institutions of this celebrated lawgiver, and though
neither so striking, nor yet so well authorized as those of Lycurgus, they did
not fail to operate for several succeeding ages, and seemed to gather strength
by observance. In order to perpetuate his statutes, he engaged the people by a
public oath to observe them religiously, at least for the term of an hundred
years: and thus, having completed the task assigned him, he withdrew from the
city, to avoid the importunity of some, and the captious petulence of others;
for, as he well knew, it was hard, if not impossible, to please every
individual. Solon being now employed on his travels in visiting Egypt. Lydia,
and several other countries, left Athens to become habituated to his new
institutions, and to try by experience the wisdom of their formation.

While Solon was thus on his travels, civil contensions disturbed Athens, and
the spirit of party was hastening every thing to ruin. After ten years absence,
Solon returned to Athens, and found the city involved in slavery. Pisistratus
had procured himself a guard formed of his own creatures, who at length seized
on the citidel, while none were left, who had sufficient courage or conduct to
oppose him.

In this general consternation, which was the result of folly on the one hand,
and treachery on the other, the whole city was one scene of tumal^ and
disorder, some flying, others inwardly complaining, others preparing for
slavery with patient submission. Solon was the only man, who, without fear or
shrinking, deplored the folly of the times, and reproached the Athenians with
their cowardice and treachery. "You might with ease (said he) have crushed the
tyrant in his bud; but nothing now remains but to pluck him up by the roots. As
for myself, I have at least the satisfaction of having discharged my duty to my
country and the laws: as for the rest, I have nothing to fear; and now, upon
the destruction of my country, my only confidence is in my great age, which
gives me the hopes of not being a long survivor." In fact, he did not survive
the liberty of his country above two years; he died at Cyprus, in the eightieth
year of his age, lamented and admired by every state of Greece. Besides his
skill in legislation, Solon was remarakble for several other shining qualities:
he was master of eloquence in so high a degree, that from him Cicero dates the
origin of oratory in Athens. He was also successful in poetry; and Plato
asserts, that it was only for want of due application, that he did not come to
dispute the prize with Homer himself.

CHAP. III.
FROM the death of Solon, to about the year of the world 3500, Athens continued
to be the scene of party cabals, and usurped tyranny; but, about this period,
two young citizens began to distinguish themselves at Athens, namely Aristides
and Themistocles. These youths were of very different dispositions; but from
this difference resulted the greatest advantages to their country. Themistocles
was naturally inclined to a popular government, and omitted nothing that could
render him agreeable to the public, or gain him friends. His complaisance was
boundless, and his desire to oblige sometimes outstepped the bounds of duty.
His partiality was often conspicuous. Aristides was remarkable for his justice
and integrity. Being a favourer of aristocracy, in imitation of Lycurgus, he
was friendly, but never at the expense of justice-In seeking honors, he ever
declined the interests of his friends, lest they should, in turn, demand his
interest when his duty was to be impartial. The love of the public good was the
great spring of all his actions, and with that in view no difficulties could
daunt, no success or elevation exalt him. On all occasions he preserved his
usual calmness of temper, being persuaded, that he was entirely his country's,
and very little his own.

At this time, Darius, king of Persia, was turning his arms against Greece,
while these illustrious Athenians were inspiring their fellow citizens with a
noble confidence in their bravery, and made every preparation for the expected
invasion, which prudence and deliberate valor could suggest.

In the mean time, Darius' generals made themselves masters of the islands in
the Aegean sea, and laid siege to Eretria, which they at last took by storm,
owing to the treachery of some of the principal inhabitants. The town was
plundered and burnt, and the inhabitants put in chains, and sent as the first
fruits of war to the Persian monarch; but he, contrary to their expectations,
treated them with great jenity, and gave them a village in the country of Cissa
to live in.

This was soon followed by the battle of Marathon, the first great battle the
Greeks had ever engaged in. It was not like any of their former contests
arising from jealousy, and terminating in an easy accommodation: it was a
battle that was to be decided with the greatest monarch of the earth. This was
an engagement that was to decide the liberty of Greece, and, what was of
infinitely greater moment, the future progress of refinement among mankind.
Upon the event of this battle depended the complexion, which the manners of the
West were hereafter to assume, whether they were to adopt Asiatic customs with
their conquerors, or to go on in modelling themselves upon Grecian refinements.
This therefore may be considered as one of the most important battles that ever
was fought, and the event was as little to be expected as the success was
glorious.

Miltiodes, who was now invested with the supreme command of the Greek army,
like au experienced general, endeavored, by the advantage of his ground, to
make up for his deficiency in strength and number, his whole army consisting
but of ten thousand. He was sensible, that by extending his front to oppose the
enemy, he must weaken it too much, and give their dense body the advantage. He
therefore drew up his army at the foot of a mountain, so that the enemy should
not surround him, or charge him in the rear. On the flanks, on either side,
becaused large trees to be thrown, which were cut down for that purpose, and
these served to guard him from the Persian cavalry, that generally wheeled on
the flank in the heat of an engagement. Datis, the Persian general, was
sensible of this advantageous disposition; but relying on his superiority of
numbers, and unwilling to wait till Miltiades should receive reinforcements, he
determined to engage.

The signal was no sooner given than the Athenians, without waiting the Persian
onset, rushed in upon their ranks with desperate rapidity, as if wholly
regardless of safety. The Persians considered this first step of the Athen: ans
as the result of madness, and were more inclined to despise them as maniacs.
than oppose them as soldiers. However, they were quickly undeceived. It had
never been the custom of the Grecks to run on with this headlong valor; but
comparing the number of their own forces with that of the enemy and expecting
safety only from rashness, they determined to break through the enemy's ranks,
or fall in the attempt. The greatness of their danger added to their courage,
and despair did the rest. The Persians, however, stood their ground with great
intrepidity, and the battle was long, fierce, and obstinate. Miltiades had made
the wings of his army exceedingly strong, but had left the main body weaker,
and not so deep; for having but ten thousand men to oppose such a numerous
army, be supposed the victory could be obtained by no other means than by
strengthening his flanks. He doubted not but that, when his wings were once
victorious, they would be able to wheel upon the enemy's main body on either
side, and then easily rout them. The Persians, therefore, finding the main body
weakest, attacked it with their utmost vigor. It was in vain that Aristides
and Themistocles, who were stationed in this post of danger, endeavored to
keep their troops to the charge: courage and intrepidity were unable to resist
the torrent of increasing numbers, so that they were at last obliged to give
ground. In the mean time the wings were victorious; and now, just as the main
body was fainting under the unequal encounter, these ca^^e up, and gave them
time to recover their strength and order. Thus the scale of victory quickly
^urned in their favor, the Persians began to give ground in turn, and, being
unsupported by fresh forces, they fled to their ships with the utmost
precipitation. The confusion and disorder was now universal, the Athenians
followed them to the beach, and set many of their ships on fire.

The Flight of the! Persians at. Marathon


On this occasion it was that Cyndoeyrus, the brother of the poet Aeschylus,
seized with his hand one of the ships that the enemy was pushing off from the
shore. The Persians within, seeing themselves thus stopped, cut off his right
hand that held the prow; he then laid hold of it with his left, which they also
cut off; at last, he seized it with his teeth, and in that manner expired.

Seven of the enemy's ships were taken, above six thousand Persians were slain,
without reckoning those who were drowned in the sea as they endeavored to
escape, or those who were consumed when the ships were set on fire. Of the
Greeks, not above two hundred men were killed, among whom was Callimachus, who
gave his vote for bringing on the engagement. The Persian forces, before the
battle, cousisted of six hundred ships, and an army of an hundred and twenty
thousand men. Their instructions were, to give up Athens to be plundered, to
burn all the houses and temples and to lead away all the inhabitants into
slavery. The country was to be laid desolate, and the army was provided with
chains and fetters for binding the conquered nations.

Thus ended the famous battle of Marathon, which the Persians were so sure of
gaining, that they had brought marble into the field, in order to erect a
trophy there. This battle was fought in the year of the world 3514.

A part of the army, immediately after the battle, marched forward to Athens,
to protect it from any attemps the enemy might make, which proved a very
prudent measure; for the Persian fleet, instead of sailing directly back to
Asia, made an attempt to surprise Athens, before they supposed the Greek troops
could arrive from Marathon. The Athenian troops, however, took the precaution
to move directly thither, and performed their march with so much expedition,
that, though it was forty miles from Marathon, they arrived there in one day.
In this manner the Greeks not only expelled their enemies, but confirmed their
security. By this victory, the Grecians were taught to know their own strength,
and not to tremble before an enemy only terrible in name.

The gratitude of the Athenians to Miltiades spoke a nobleness of mind, that
far surpassed expensive triumphs, or base adulation. Sensible that his merits
were too great for money to repay, they ^^used a picture to be painted by
Polygnotus, one of their most celebrated artists, in which Miltiades was
represented, at the head of the ten commanders, exhorting the soldiers, and
setting them an example of their duty. This picture was preserved for many
ages, with other paintings of the best masters, in the portico where Zeno
afterward instituted his school of philosophy. Every officer, as well as
private soldier, who fell in this battle, had a monument erected to his memory
on the plains of Marathon.

Though the gratitude of the Athenians to Miltiades was very sincere, yet it
was of no long continuance. This fickle and jealous people, naturally
capricious and now more than ever careful of preserving their freedom, were
willing to take every opportunity of mortifying a general, from whose merit
they had much to fear. Being appointed, with seventy ships, to punish those
islands that had favored the Persian invasion, he sailed to Paros, and
invested that place. Here, having broken his thigh by an accident, he was
obliged to raise the siege, and return home. On his arrival at Athens, the
whole city began to murmur, and he was accused of having taken a bribe from
Persia. As he was not in a condition to answer this charge, being confined to
his bed by the wound he received at Paros, the accusation took place against
him, and he was condemned to lose his life. However, in consideration of his
former services, his sentence was commuted into a penalty of fifty talents, the
sum which it had cost the state in fitting out the late unsuccessful
expedition. Not being rich enough to pay this sum, he was thrown into prison,
where his wound growing worse, from bad air and confinement, it turned at last
to a gangrene, and put an end to his life and misfortunes. Thus perished a man,
who has been very justly praised for his condescension, moderation, and
justice. To him Athens was indebted for all its glory, he being the man who
first taught her to despise the empty menaces of the boastful Persians. Cimon,
his son, who was at this time very young, signalized his piety on this
occasion. As this ungrateful city would not permit the body of Milt^ades to be
buried until all his debts were paid, this young man employed all his interest
among his friends, strained his utmost credit to pay the fine, and procured his
father an honorable interment.

CHAP. IV.
DARIUS, king of persia, died amidst the preparations he was making for a
second expedition into Greece; but he was succeeded by a son, who inherited all
his ambition, without any share of his abilities. He was a young man,
surrounded by flatterers, and naturally vain and superficial. Having drained
all the East to compose his own army, and the West to supply those of the
Carthagenians, who were come to his aid, he set out from Suca, in order to
enter on this war, ten years after the battle of Marathon, and in the year of
the world 3523.

Sardis was the place, where the various nations that were compelled to his
banner were to assemble. His fleet was to advance along the coast of Asia Minor
toward the Hellespont; but as, in doubling the cape of Mount Athos, many ships
were detained, he was resolved to cut a passage through that neck of land,
which joined the mount to the continent, and thus gave his shipping a shorter
and safer passage. This canal was a mile and a half long, and hollowed out from
a high mountain. It required immense labor to perform so great a work: but his
numbers and his ambition were sufficient to surmount all difficulties. To urge
on the undertaking the faster, he treated his laborers with the greatest
severity; while, with all the ostentation of an eastern prince, he gave his
commands to the mountains to sink before him: "Athos, (said he) thou proud
aspiring mountain, that liftest up thy head unto the heavens, be not so
audacious as to put obstacles in my way. If thou give them that opposition, I
will cut thee level to the plain, and throw thee headlong into the sea!"

Early in the spring, he directed his march down toward the Hellespont, where
his fleet lay in all their pomp, expecting his arrival. Here he was desirous of
taking a survey of all his forces, which composed an army that was never
equalled either before or since. It was composed of the most powerful nations
of the East, and of people scarce known to posterity, except by name. The
remotest India contributed its supplies, while the coldest tracts of Scythia
sent their assistance. Medes, Persians, Bactirans, Lydians, Assyrians,
Hyrcanians, and an hundred other countries of various complexions, languages,
dresses, and arms. The land army, which he brought out of Asia, consisted of
seventeen hundred thousand foot, and fourscore thousand horse. Three hundred
thousand more that were added upon crossing the Hellespont, made all his land
forces together amount to above two millions of men. His fleet, when it set out
from Asia, consisted of twelve hundred and seven vessels, each carrying two
hundred men. The Europeans augmented his fleet with an hundred and twenty
vessels, each of which carried two hundred men. Besides these, there were a
thousand smaller vessels, fitted for carrying provisions and stores. The men
contained in these, with the former, amounded to six hundred thousand: so that
the whole army might be said to amount to two millions and a half, which, with
the women, slaves, and settlers, always accompanying a Persian army, might make
the whole above five millions of souls. Such was the state of this proud
monarch's forces.

Lord of so many and such various subjects, Xerxes found apleasure in reviewing
his forces: beholding all the earth covered with his troops, and all the sea
crowded with his vessels, he felt a secret joy diffuse itself through his
frame, from the consciousness of his own superior power. But all the workings
of this monarch's mind were in extreme: a sudden sadness soon took place of his
pleasure, and dissolving into a snower of tears, he give himself up to the
reflection, that not one of so many thousands would be alive an hundred years
after.

In the mean time Xerxes had given orders for building a bridge of boats across
the Hellespont, for the transporting of his army into Europe. This narrow
strait, which now goes by the name of the Dardanelles, is near an English mile
over. However, soon after the completion of this work, a violent storm arising,
the whole was broken and destroyed, and the labor was to be undertaken anew.
The fury of Xerxes, upon this disappointment, was attended with equal
extravagance and cruelty. His vengeance knew no bounds, the workmen who had
undertaken the task, had their heads struck off by his order; and that the sea
also might know its duty, he ordered it to be lashed as a delinquent, and a
pair of fetters to be thrown into it, to curb its future irregularities. Having
thus given vent to his absurd resentment, two bridges were ordered to be built
in the place of the former, one for the army to pass over, and the other for
the baggage and beasts of burden. The workment, now warned by the fate of their
predecessors, undertook to give their labors greater stability ^t they placed
three hundred and sixty vessels across the strait, some of them having three
banks of oars, and others fifty oars a-piece. They then cast large anchors on
both sides into the water, in order to fix those vessels against the violence
of the winds and current. They then drove large piles into the earth, with huge
rings fastened to them, to which were tied six vast cables, which went over
each of the two bridges. -- Over all these they laid trunks of trees, cut
purposely for that use, and flat boats over them, fastened and joined together,
so as to serve for a floor, or solid bottom. When the whole work was thus
completed, a day was appointed for their passing over; and as soon as the first
rays of the sun began to appear, sweet odours of all kinds were abundantly
scattered over the new work, and the way was stre^ed with myrtle. At the same
time, Xerxes, turning bis face tow-res the east, worshipped the sun, which is
the god of the Persians. Then, throwing his libations into the sea, together
with a golden cup and Persian scyn^^tar, he went forwards, and gave orders for
the army to follow. This immense train were no less than seven days and seven
nights passing over, while those who were appointed to conduct the march,
quickened the troops by lashing them along; for the soldiers of the East, at
that time, and to this day, are treated like slaves. Thus this immense army
having landed in Europe, and being joined by the several European nations that
acknowledged the Persian power, Xerxes prepared for marching directly forward
into Greece.

He continued his march through Thrace, Macedonia, and Thessaly, every knee
bending before him till he came to the straits of Thermopylae, where he first
found an enemy prepared to dispute his passage. This army was a body of
Spartans, led on by Leonidas their king, who had been sent thither to oppose
him. None of the Grecian states were found bold enough to face this formidable
army but Athens and Lacodaemon. One cannot, without astonishment, reflect on
the intrepidity of these two states, who determined to face the innumerable
army of Xerxes with such disproportioned forces. Their whole army amounted to
only eleven thousand two hundred men. Aristides was called from banishment, and
placed at the head of their forces.

It was soon resolved to send a body of men to guard the pass at Thirmopylae,
where a few would be capable of acting against numbers. Thirmopylae was a
narrow pass of twenty five feet broad, between Thessaly and Phocis, defended by
the remains of a wall, with gates to it. This place was pitched upon, as well
for the narrowness of the way, as for its vicinity to the sea, from whence the
land forces could occasionally receive assistance from the fleet. The command
of this important pass was given to Leonidas, one of the kings of Sparta, who
led thither a body of six thousand men. They were all along taught to look upon
themselves as a forlorn hope, only placed there to check the progress of the
enemy, and give them a foretaste of the desperate valor of Greece. Even
oracles were not wanting to check their ardour; for it had been declated, that
to precure the safety of Greece it was necessary that a king, one of the
descendants of Hercules, should die. This task was cheerfully under^ken by
Leonidas; and as he marched but from Lacedoemon, he considered himself as a
willing victim offered up for the good of his country. However, he joyfully put
himself at the head of his little hand, took possession of his post, and with
deliberate desperation wai^ed at Thirmopylae for the coming up of the Persian
army.

In the mean time, Xerxes approached with his numerous army, flushed with
s^ceest, and confident of victory. His camp exhibited all the marks of Eastern
magnisicence and Asiatic luxury. As he expected to meet no obstructions on his
way to Greece, he was surprised to find, that a handful of men would dare to
dispute his passage. He waited four days to give the Greeks time to retire; but
they continued their post a musing themselves in their usual way. -- He sent to
them to deliver up their arms; but Leonidas, with a truly Spartan spirit,
desired him to come and take them. Xerxes offered, if they would lay down their
arms, to recieve them as friends, and to give them a country much lager and
better than what they fought for. "No country (they replied) was worth
acceptance, unless won by virtue; and as for their arms, they should want them,
whether as his friends or enemies."

Xerxes, thus treated with contempt, at length ordered a body of Medes to
advance, who began the onset, but were repulsed with great loss. The number of
the assailants only served to increase their confusion; and it now began to
appear, that Xerxes had many followers, but few soldiers. These forces being
routed by the Grecian troops, the Persian immortal band was brought up; but
these were as unsuccessful as the former. Thus did the Greeks keep their ground
for two days, and no power on earth ^eemed capable of removing them from their
advantageous situation. The Persians, however, by the treachery of a Grecian
deserter, got possession of an advantageous post, which commanded the rear of
the Spartans.

Leonidas, apprized of this misfortune, and seeing that his post was no longer
tenable, advised the troops of his allies to retire, and reserve themselves for
better times and the future safety of Greece. As for himself, and his fellow
Spartans, they were obliged by their laws not to fly; that he owed a life to
his country, and that it was now his duty to fall in its defense. Having thus
dismissed all but his three hundred Spartans, with some Thesbians and Thebans,
in all not a thousand men, he exhorted his followers, in the most cheerful
manner, to prepare for death. "Come, my fellowsoldiers, said he, let us dine
cheerfully here, for tonight we shall sup with Pluto." His men, upon hearing
his determined purpose, set up a loud shout, as if they had been invited to a
banquet, and resolved every man to sell his life as dearly as he could. The
night now began to advance, and this was thought the most glorious opportunity
of meeting death in the enemy's camp. Thus resolved, they made directly to the
Persian tents, and, in the darkness of the night, had almost reached the royal
pavilion, with hopes of surprising the king. The obscurity added much to the
horror of the scene; and the Persians, falling upon each other without
distinction, rather assisted the Grecians t^an defended themselves. Thus
success seemed to crown the rashness of their enterprise, until the morning
beginning to dawn, the light discovered the smallness of their numbers. They
were then soon surrounded by the Persian forces, who fearing to fall in upon
them, s^^^ng their javelins from every quarter, till the Greeks, not so much
conquered as tired with conquering, fell amidst heaps of the slaughtered enemy,
leaving behind them an example of intrepidity never known before. Leonidas was
one of the first that fell, and the endeavors of the Lace-daemon^ans to defend
his dead body were i^^^edible. Of all the train, two only escaped, who were
treated with contempt and infamy.

The loss of Xerxes in this battle was said to amount to twenty thousand men,
among whom were two of his brothers. Xerxes, therefore, dismayed at an
obstinacy that cost him so dear, was for some time more inclined to try his
fortune at^ea, than to proceed immediately into the country, where he was
informed, eight thousand Spartans, such as he had but lately fought with, were
ready to receive him. Accordingly, the very day of the battle of Thirmopylae,
there was an engagement at sea between the two fleets. The Grecian flee^
consisted of two hundred and seventy-one vessels: that of the enemy had lately
lost four hundred vessels in a shipwreck, but were still greatly superior to
the Grecian fleet.

Xerxes, to repair his loss by a victory, ordered two hundred Persian vessels
to take a compass, and surprise the Grecians lying in the straits of Eubaea;
but the Grecians, being apprised of their designs, set sail by night, and so,
by a counter surprise, fell in with them while they were thus separated from
the main body, took and sunk thirty, forced the rest to sea, and there, by
stress of weather, they were all soon after sunk or stranded. Enraged at these
disappointments, the Persians bore down the next day with the whole fleet, and
drawing up in form of an half moon, made an offer of battle, which the Greeks
as readily accepted. The Athenians having been reinforced with three and fisty
sail, the battle was very obstinate and bloody, and the success pretty nearly
equal on both sides, so that both parties seemed content to retire in good
order.

After this, Xerxes, having entered the country of Phocis with his numerous
army, plundered and burned every town throught which he passed. Having sent off
a considerable detachment to plunder the temple at Delpho^, with the rest he
marched down into Attica, where he found Athens deserted by all but a few in
the citadel. These men despairing of succor, and unwilling to survive the loss
of their country, would listen to no terms of accommodation: they boldly
withstood the first assault, and, warmed by the enthusiasm of religion, began
to hope for success. However, a second assault carried their feeble outworks,
they were all put to the sword, and the citadel reduced to ashes.

In the mean time, the confederate Greeks determined in council, that they
should prepare to receive the Persians on the isthmus by land, and in the
straits of Salamis by sea. Xerxes, after having demolished and burned Athens,
marched down toward the sea, to act in conjunction with his fleet, which he
had determined should once more come to an engagement with the enemy. The
Grecian sleet consisted of three hundred and eighty ships, the Persian sleet
was much more numerous; but whatever advantage they had in numbers, and the
size of their ships, they fell infinitely short of the Greeks in their naval
skill, and their acquaintance with the seas where they fought.

Themistocles, watching a favorable opportunity, gave the signal for battle,
when the Grecian fleet sailed forward, in exact order. Xerxes, imputing his
former ill success at sea to his own absence, was resolved to be a witness of
the present engagement from the top of a promo^^ory, where he caused a throne
to be erected for that purpose. The Persians, therefore, advanced with such
courage and impe^uosity, as struck the enemy with terror; but their ardor
abated when the engagement became closer. The numerous disadvantages of their
circumstances then began to appear: the wind blew directly in their faces; the
height and heaviness of their vessels made them unwieldy and useless; even the
number of their ships, in the narrow seas where they fought, only served to
embarrass and increase their confusion. The lonians first gave way, then the
Phoenicians, and Cyprians, when the rest retired in great disorder, and fell
foul of each other in their retreat. The Greeks pursued the Persian fleet on
every side; some were intercepted at the straits of Attica, many were sunk, and
more taken. Above two hundred were burnt, all the rest were dispersed; and the
allies, dreading the refentment of the Greeks, as well as of the Persian king,
made the best of their way to their own country. Such was the success of the
battle of Salamis, in which the Persians received a severer blow than they had
ever before experienced from Greece.

Xerxes being heartily tired of this disgraceful business, left his generals to
take care of hi^^army, and hastened with a small retinue to the seaside, which
he reached forty-five days after the battle of Salamais. When he arrived at
that place, he found the bridge broken down by the violence of the waves, in a
tempest that had lately happened. He was, therefore, obliged to pass the strait
in a small boat; which manner of returning, being compared with the
ostentatious method in which he had set out, rendered his disgrace still more
poignant and afflicting. The army, which he had ordered to follow him, having
been unprovided with provisions, suffered great hardships by the way. After
having consumed all the corn they could sind, they were obliged to live upon
herbs, and even upon the bark and leaves of trees. Thus harrassed and fatigued,
a pestilence began to complete their misery; and, after a fatiguing journey of
forty-five days, in which they were pursued rather by vultures and beasts of
prey, than by men, they came to the Hellespont, where they crossed over, and
marched from thence to Sardis. Such was the end of Xerxes's expedition into
Greece: a measure begun in pride, and terminated in infamy and disgrace.

CHAP. V.
THE joy of the Greeks, on the victory of Salamais, was general and loud, and
Themistocles was loaded with glory. Mardonius, (...) Xerxes had left in Greece
with a numerous army, was soon after killed in battle, and all his forces
completely routed. Thus ended the invasion of Greece, nor ever after was the
Persian army seen to cross the Hellespont. -- During these events, Xerxes lay
at Sardis, expecting a reversion of his fortune; but messengers cou^^g every
hour, loaded with the news of some ^^tal disaster, and finding himself unable
to retrieve his aflairs, he retired further into the country, and endeavored
to drown in luxury and riot the uneasy reflections of his successless ambition.
To the want of success abroad was added the contempt of his subjects at home;
and this brought on a train of treasons, insurrections, sacrilege, murder;
incest, and cruelty: so that the latter part of his reign was as scandalous, as
the first part of it had been unfortunate.

The state of Athens, being thus in a great measure freed from its fears of a
foreign enemy, began to cherish intestine animosities, and its citizens
labored with every art to supplant each other in aiming at places of trust and
anthority. But the conduct of Aristides, in the discharge of his duty on all
occasions, confirmed the great opinion mankind had formed of his integrity.

Aristides presided over the treasury with the care of a father over his
family, and the caution of a miser over what he holds dearer than his life. No
man complained of his ac^^ninistration, and no part of the public money wa^
exhausted in vain. He, who thus contribut^^ to make government rich, was
himself poo^^ and so far was he from being ashamed of poverty, that he
considered it as glorious to him as all the victories he had won. Aristides
asserted, that he only might be said to want, who permitted his appetites to
transgress the bounds of his income: and that he, who could dispense with a few
things, thus rendered himself more like the gods who want nothing.

Thus he lived, just in his public, and independent in his private character.
His house was a public school for virtue, and was open to all young Athenians
who sought wisdom, or were ambitious of power. He gave them the kindest
reception, heard them with patience, instructed them with familiarity, and
endeavored, above all things, to give them a just value for themselves.
History does not mention the exact time or place of his death; but it pays the
most glorious testimony to his disinterested character, in telling us, that he
who had the absolute disposal of all the public treasures died poor. It is even
asserted, that he did not leave money enough behind him to pay the expenses of
his funeral, but that the government was obliged to bear the charge of it, and
to maintain his family. His daughters were married, and his son subsisted, at
the expense of the public; and some of his grandchildren were supported by a
pension, equal to that which such received, who had been victorious at the
Olympic games. But the greatest honor that his countrymen paid to his memory,
was in giving him the title of Just, a character far superior to all the empty
title of wisdom or conquest; since fortune or accident may confer wisdom or
valor, but the virtues of morality are solely of our own making.

About the year of the world 3572, a rupture happened between the Athenians and
the Lacedaemonians; and thus the Grecian states, having now no foreign enemy to
disturb them, began to harrass and depopulate each other. But a more terrible
punishment now began to threaten them from nature: a plague broke out in the
city of Athens, a more terrible one than which is scarcely recorded in the
annals of history. It is related, that it began in Ethiopia, from thence
descended into Egypt, then traveled into Lybia and Persia, and at last broke
out like a flood upon Athens. This pestilence baffled the utmost efforts of
art; the most robust constitutions were unable to withstand its attacks; no
skill could obviate, nor no remedy dispel the terrible infection. The instant a
person was seized, he was struck with despair, which quite disabled him from
attempting a cure. The humanity of friends was as fatal to themselves, as it
was ineffectual to the unhappy sufferers. Most of the inhabitants, for want of
lodging, lived in little cottages, in which they could scarce breathe, while
the burning heat of the summer increased the pestilential malignity. They were
seen confusedly huddled together, the dead as well as the dying; some crawling
through the streets, some lying along by the sides of fountains, whither they
had endeavored to repair, to quench the raging thirst that consumed them. Their
very temples were filled with dead bodies, and every part of the city exhibited
a dreadful scene of mortality, without the least remedy for the present, or the
least hopes with regard to futurity. It seized the people with such violence,
that they fell one upon another as they passed along the streets. It was also
attended with such uncommon pestilential vapors, that the very beasts and
birds of prey, though famishing round the walls of the city, would not touch
the bodies of those who died of it. Even in those who recovered, it lest such a
tincture of its malignity, that it struck upon their senses. It effaced the
memory of all the passages of their former lives, and they knew neither
themselves, nor their nearest relations. Such was the effects of this dreadful
pestilence; out of the manner in which it ended, and of the numbers destroyed
by it, we have no certain account.

We shall pass over many particulars of the Peloponnesian war, as they afford
only a wretched scene of the citizens of one Grecian state staining their hands
with the blood of others; but we shall be more particular in mentioning the
actions and character of those heroes and philosophers, who flourished during
that period. Among these, Pericles formed no inconsiderable character. He was
descended from the greatest and most illustrious families of Athens; his
father, Xanthippus, defeated the Persians at Mycale, and his mother, Agaruta,
was niece to Calisthenes, who expellant the tyrants, and ed^stli^^d a popular
government in Athens. He had early thoughts of rising in the state, and took
lessons from Anaxagoras, in the philosophy of nature. He studied politics with
great assiduity, but particularly devoted himself to eloquence, which, in a
popular state, he considered as the fountain of all promotion. His studies were
crowned with success; and the poets, his contemporaries, affirm, that his
eloquence was so powerful, that, like thunder, he shook and astonished all
Greece. He had the art of uniting force and beauty; there was no resisting the
strength of his arguments, or the sweetness of his delivery. Thucydides, his
great opponent, was often heard to say, that though he had often overthrown
him, the power of his persuasion was such, that the audience could never
perceive him fallen.

To this eloquence he added also a thorough insight into human nature, as well
as a perfect acquaintance with the disposition of his auditors. It was a
constant saying with him to himself, "Remember, Pericles, thou art going to
speak to men born in the arms of Liberty, and do thou take care to flatter them
in their ruling passion." He resembled the tyrant Pisistratus, not only in the
sweetness of his voice, but the features of his face, and his whole air and
manner. To these natural and acquired graces, he added those of fortune: he was
very rich, and had an extensive alliance with all the most powerful families of
the state.

The death of Aristides, and some other favorable circumstances, gave
opportunities to his growing ambition: yet he at first concealed his designs
^ith the most cautious reserve, till finding the people increase in his
interest, he set himself at their head, and opposed the principal men of the
state with great appearance of disinterested virtue. The chief obstacle to his
rise was Cimon, whose candor and liberality had gained him a numerous party of
all ranks and denominations. In opposition to him, Pericles called in popular
assistance, and by expending the public money in bribes, largesses, and other
distributions, he easily gained the multitude to espouse his interests.

Having thus laid a secure foundation in popularity, he next struck at the
council of the Areopagus, which was composed of the most respectable persons of
all Athens; and, by the assistance of one Ephialtes, another popular champion,
he drew away most causes from the cognizance of that court, and brought the
whole order into contempt. In this manner, while Cimon was permitted to conduct
the war abroad, he managed all the supplies at home; and, as it was his
interest to keep Cimon at a distance, he took care to provide him with a
sufficiency of foreign employment.

Pericles every day gained new ground, till he at last found himself possessed
of the authority of the whole state. It was then that he began to change his
behavior, and from acting the humble and fawning suppliant, he assumed the
haughty airs of royalty. He now no longer submitted himself to the caprice of
the people, but changed the democratic state of Athens into a kind of monarchy,
without departing, however, from the public good. He would sometimes, indeed,
win his fellow-citizens over to his will; but at other times, when he found
them obstinate, he would in a manner compel them to consult their own
interests. -- Thus between power and pursuasion, public profusion, and private
economy, political falsehoods, and private integrity, Pericles became the
principal ruler at Athens, and all such as were his enemies became the enemies
of the state.

Fickleness and inconstancy, however, were the prevailing characters of the
Athenians; and, as these carried them on to their greatest excesses, they soon
brought them hack within the bounds of moderation and prudence. Pericles had
long been a favorite. but the state having suffered great calamities, he at
last came to be obnoxious: they had deposed him from the command of the army;
but soon repented of their rashness, and reinstated him, a short time after,
with more than former authority. -- However, he did not live long to enjoy his
honors. He was seized with the plague, which, like a malignant enemy, struck
its severest blow at parting. Being extremely ill, and ready to breathe his
last, the principal citizens, and such of his friends that had not forsaken
him, discoursing concerning the loss they were about to sustain, ran over his
exploits, and computed the number of his victories. They did not imagine that
Pericles attended to what they said, as he seemed insensible; but it was far
otherwise, as not a single word of their discourse had escaped him. At last,
cried he, "Why will you extol a series of actions, in which Fortune had the
greatest part? There is one circumstance which I would not have forgotten, yet
which you have passed over: I could wish to have it remembered, as the most
glorious circumstance of my life, that I never yet caused a single citizen to
put on mourning." Thus died Pericles, in whom were united a number of excellent
qualities without impairing each other. He was as well killed in naval affairs
as in the conduct of arraies; as well skilled in the arts of raising money as
of employing it; eloquent in public, and pleasing in private; he was a patron
of artists, at once informing them by his taste and example.

Not long after the death of Pericles, the Athenians and Lacedaemonians made
peace, and every thing now promised a restoration of former tranquillity; but a
new promoter of troubles was now beginning to make his appearance, and from
him, those who wished for peace had every thing to fear: this was ^he
celebrated Alcibiades, the disciple of Socrates, a youth equally remarkable for
the beauty of his person, and the graces of his mental accomplishments.

The strict intimacy between Alcibiades and Socrates is one of the most
remarkable circumstances of his life. This philosopher observing excellent
natural qualities in him, which were greatly heightened by the beauty of his
person, bestowed incredible pains in cultivating so valuable a plant, lest,
being neglected, it should wither as it grew, and in the end degenerate.
Alcibiades, indeed, was exposed to numberless dangers: the greatness of his
extraction, his vast riches, the authority of his family, the credit of his
guardians, his personal talents, and, still more than these, the flattery and
complaisance of all who approached him.

Notwithstanding the strong endeavors that were used to divert this young
Athenian from a correspondence, which alone was capable of securing him from so
many snares, he devoted himself entirely to it. He had the most unbounded wit;
he was fully sensible of Socrates' extraordinary merit, and could not resist
the charms of his sweetly insinuating eloquence, which at that time, had a
greater ascendant over him than the alurements of pleasure. He was so zealous a
disciple of that great master, that he followed him wherever he went, took the
utmost delight in his conversation, received his instructions, and even his
reprimands, with wonderful docility, and was so moved with his discourses, as
even to shed tears, and abhor himself: so weighty was the force of truth in the
mouth of Socrates, and in so odious a light did he show the vices, to which
Alcibiades began to abandon himself.

Alcibiades, in those moments when he listened to Socrates, differed so much
from himself, that he appeared quite another man. However, his head strong
fie^^ temper, and his natural fondness for pl^^^^^, which (...) heightened and
enflamed by the discourses and advises of young people, soon plunged him into
his former irregularities, and tore him as it were from his master, who was
obliged to pursue him as a slave who had escaped correction. This vicissitude
of flights and returns of virtuous resolutions, and relapses into vice,
continued a long time; but still Socrates was not disgusted with his levity,
and always flattered himself with the hopes of bringing him back to his duty.
Hence certainly arose the strong mixture of good and evil that always appeared
in his conduct, the instructions his master had given him sometimes prevailing,
and, at other times, the fire of his passion hurrying him, in a manner, against
his own will, into things of a quite opposite nature. Among the various
passions that were discovered in him, the strongest and most prevailing was a
haughty turn of mind, which would force all things to submit to it, and could
not bear a superior, or even an equal.

Alcibiades, with such a cast of mind as w^ have described, was not born for
repose, and had set every engine at work to reverse the treaty lately concluded
between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians. He was disgusted with the latter,
because they directed themselves only to Nicias, of whom they had a very high
opinion; and, on the contrary, seemed to take no manner of notice of him,
though his ancestors had enjoyed the rights of hospitality among them.

Having found means to carry his point against the Lacedaemonians, he was
declared general, and appointed to command the fleet; but was soon afterward
disgraced. After having experienced strange vicissitudes of fortune, being
sometimes banished or condemned to death by the Athenians, at other times at
the head of their fleets and armies, he at last took shelter at the court of
Persia, where the Lacedaemonians found means to persuade that monarch to
dispatch him. Alcibiades was then in a small town in Phrigia, where he lived
with his concubine Timandra. Those who were sent to kill him, not daring to
enter his house, contented themselves with surrounding and setting it on fire.
Alcibiades having quitted it through the flames, sword in hand, the barbarians
were afraid to stay to come to blows with him, but flying and retreating as he
advanced, they poured their darts and arrows upon him from a distance, and he
fell dead upon the spot. Timandra took up his body, and having adorned and
covered it with the finest robes she had, she made as magnificent a funeral for
it as her condition would admit.

Such was the end of Alcibiades, whose great virtues were stifled and
suppressed by still greater vices. It is not easy to say, whether his good or
bad qualities were most pernicious to his country; for with the one he
deceived, and with the other he oppressed it. In him distinguished valor was
united with robility of blood. He was eloquent, of great ability in affairs,
insinuating, and formed for charming all mankind. He loved glory, but indulged
at the same time, his inclination for pleasure; nor was he so fond of pleasure,
as to neglect his glory for it. He knew how to give into, or abstract himself
from, the allurements of luxury, according to the situation of his affairs.
Never was there ductility of genius equal to his: he metamorphosed himself,
with incredible facility, into the most contrary forms, and supported them all
with as much ease and grace as if each had been natural to him.

The death of Alcibiades naturally leads us to give the character of his
master, one of the greatest philosophers that the world perhaps ever produced,
the immortal Socrates. He was the son of an obscure citizen of Athens, and,
emerging from the meanness of his ^irth, he gave astonishing examples of
courage, moderation and wisdom. He opposed the power of the thirty tyrants, who
had usurped the government of Athens, and spoke loudly against the bigotry and
prosecution of the times. He possessed unexampled goodnature, and an universal
love to mankind. As it was very difficult to correct the a^ed, and to make
people change principles, who revere the errors in which they are grown gray,
he devoted his labors principally to the instruction of youth, in order to sow
the seeds of virtue in a soil more sit to produce the fruits of it. He had no
open school like the rest of the philosophers, nor set times for his lessons.
He had no benches prepared, nor even mounted a pro^^ssor's chair; he was the
philosopher of all times and seasons; he taught in all places, and upon all
occasions; in walking, conversation at meals, in the army, and in the midst of
the camp, in the public assembly of the senate or people. Such was the man,
whom a faction in the city had long devoted to destruction: he had been, for
many years before his death, the object of their satire and ridicule.

Aristophanes, the comic poet, was engaged to expose him on the stage* he
composed a piece called The Clouds, wherein he introduced the philosopher in a
basket, uttering the most ridiculous absurdities. This was the first blow
struck at him; but it was not till twenty years afterward that Melites
appeared in a more formal manner as his accuser, and entered a regular process
against him. His accusation consisted of two heads: the first was, that he did
not admit the gods acknowledged by the republic, and introduced new divinities;
the second, that he ^^^^upted the youth of Athens; and concluded (...)
inferring, that sentence of death ought to be passed against him. How far the
whole charge affected him is not easy to determine* It is certain, that amid so
much zeal and superstition as then reigned in Athens, he never dared openly to
oppose the received religion, and was therefore forced to preserve an outward
show of it; but it is very probable, from the discourses he frequently held
with his friends, that in his heart he despised and laughed at their monstrous
opinions and ridiculous mysteries, as having no other foundation than the
fables of the poets; and that he had attained to the notion of the one only
true God, insomuch that, upon the account both of his belief of the Deity, and
the exemplariness of his life, some have thought fit to rank him among the
Christian philosophers.

Upon the day assigned, the proceedings commenced in the usual forms, the
parties appeared before the judges, and Melitus spoke. The worse his cause, and
the less it was provided with proofs, the more occasion he had for address and
art to cover its weakness. He omitted nothing that might render Socrates
odious; and instead of reasons, which could not but fail him, he substituted
the delusive glitter of a lively and pompous eloquence. Socrates' defense is
considered as so great a masterpiece of ancient oratory, that even the narrow
limits this work is confined to, will not permit of our passing it ever in
silence.

"I am accused (said Socrates) of corrupting the youth, and of instilling
dangerous ^^^^im^ into them, as well in regard to the worship (...) the gods,
as the rules of government. You know, Athenians, that I never made it my
profession to teach, nor can envy, however violent against me, reproach me with
having sold my instructions. I have an undeniable evidence for me in this
respect, which is (...) poverty. I was always equally ready to communicate my
thoughts either to the rich or poor, and to give them entire leisure to
question or answer me. My whole employment is to persuade the young and old
against too much love for the body, for riches, all other precarious things, of
whatsoever nature they be; and against too little regard for the soul; which
ought to be the object of their affection: for I incessantly urge upon you,
that virtue does not proceed from riches, but, on the contrary, riches from
virtue; and that all the other goods of human life, as well public as private,
have their source in the same principle.

"If to speak in this manner be to corrupt youth, I confess, Athenians, that I
am guilty, and deserve to be punished. If what I say be not true, it is most
easy to convict me of my falsehoods. I see here a great number of my disciples:
they have only to appear. But, perhaps, the reserve and consideration for a
master who has instructed them, will prevent them from declaring against me; at
least, their fathers, brothers, and uncles, cannot, as good relations and good
citizens, dispense with their not standing forth to demand vengeance against
the corrupter of their sons, brothers, and nephews. But these are the persons
who take upon them my defense, and interest themselves in the success of my
cause.

"Pass on me what sentence you^ please, Athenians; but I can neither repent nor
change my conduct: I must not abandon or suspend a function, which God himself
has imposed on me. If, after having faithfully kept all the posts wherein I was
placed by our general at Potidaea, Amphipolis, and Delium, the fear of death
should at this time make me abandon that, in which the divine Providence has
placed me, by commanding me to pass my life in the study of philosophy, for the
instruction of myself and others; this would be a most criminal desertion
indeed, and make me highly worthy of being cited before this tribunal as an
impious man, who does not believe the gods. Should you resolve to acquit me,
for the future, I should not hesitate to make answer, Athenians, I honor and
love you, but I shall choose rather to obey God than you, and to my latest
breath shall never renounce my philosophy, nor cease to exhort and reprove you,
according to my custom, by telling each of you, when you come in my way, My
good friend and citizen of the most famous city in the world for wisdom and
valor, are you not ashamed to have no other thoughts than that of amassing
wealth, and of acquiring glory, credit, and diguities, whilst you neglect the
treasures of prudence, truth, and wisdom, and take no pains in rendering your
soul as good and perfect as it is capable of being.

"I am reproached with abject fear and meanness of spirit, for being so busy in
imparting my advice to every one in private and for having avoided to be
present in your assemblies, to give my counsel to my country. I think I have
sufficiently proved my courage and fortitude, both in the field, where I have
borne arms with you, and in the senate when I opposed the violence and cruel
orders of the thirty tyrants.

"For the rest, Athenians, if, in the extreme danger I now am, I do not imitate
the behavior of those, who, upon less emergencies, have implored and
supplicated their judges with tears, and have brought forth their children,
relations, and friends, it is not through pride and obstinancy, or any contempt
for you, but solely for your honor, and for that of the whole city. You should
know, that there are among our citizens those, who do not regard death as an
evil, and who give that name only to injustice and infamy. At my age, and with
the reputation, true or false, which I have, would it be consistent for me,
after all the lessons I have given upon the contempt of death, to be afraid of
it myself, and to belie in my last actions all the principles and sentiments of
my past life?

"But without speaking of my same, which I should extremely injure by such a
conduct, I do not think it allowable to entreat a judge, nor to be absolved by
supplications. He ought to be persuaded and convinced. The judge does not sit
upon the bench to show favor, by violating the laws; but to do justice in
conforming to them. He does not swear to discharge with impunity whom he
pleases, but to do justice where it is due. We ought not, therefore, to
accustom you to perjury, nor you to suffer your selves to be accustomed to it;
for, in so doing, both the one and the other of us equally injure justice and
religion, and both are criminals.

"Do not, therefore, expect from me, Athenians, that I should have recourse
among you to means, which I believe neither honest nor lawful; especially upon
this occasion, wherein I am accused of impiety by Melitus; for, if I should
influence you by my prayers, and thereby induce you to violate your oaths, it
would be undeniably evident, that I teach you not to believe in the gods; and
even in defending and justifying myself, I should furnish my adversaries with
arms against me, and prove that I believe no divinity. But I am very far from
such bad thoughts: I am more convinced of the existence of God than my
accusers; and so convinced, that I abandon myself to God and you, that you may
judge of me as you shall deem best for yourselves."

Socrates pronounced this discourse with a firm and intrepid tone: his air, his
action, his visage, expressed nothing of the accused; he seemed the master of
his judges, from the assurance and greatness of his soul with which he spoke,
without however losing any thing of the modesty natural to him. But how slight
soever the proofs were against him, the faction was powerful enough to find him
guilty, and his death was certainly a concerted thing.

By his first sentence, the judges only declared Socrates guilty; but when, by
his answer, he appeared to appeal from their tribunal to that of justice and
posterity; when, instead of confessing himself guilty, he demanded rewards and
honor from the state, the judges were so very much offended, that they
condemned him to drink hemlock, a method of execution in use among them.

Socrates received this sentence with the utmost composure. Apollodorus, one of
his disciples launching out into bitter invectives, and lamenting that his
master should die innocent, "What, (replied Socrates, with a smile.) would you
have me die guilty? Melytus and Ayntus may kill, but they cannot hurt me."

After his sentence, he still continued with the same serene and intrepid
aspect, with which he had long enforced virtue, and held tyrants in awe. When
he entered his prison, which now became the residence of virtue and probity,
his friends followed him thither, and continued to visit him during the
interval between his condemnation and death, which lasted for thirty days.

The day before the death of Socrates, Crito, his intimate friend, went to him
early in the morning to let him know, that in depended only on himself to quit
the prison; that the ^ailor was gained; that he would find the doors open, and
offered him a safe retreat in Thessaly. Socrates laughed at his proposal, and
answered, that he reverenced the laws of his country, and resolved to obey them
in all things, even in his death.

Socrates employed the last day of his life in entertaining his friends on the
great and important subject of death; he explained to them all the arguments
for believing the soul to be immortal, and refuted all the objections against
it. After he came out of the bath, his children were brought to him, for he had
three, two very little, and the other grown up. He spoke to them for some time,
gave orders to the women who took care of them, and then dismissed them. Being
returned into his chamber, he laid himself down upon his bed.

The keeper of the prison entered at the same instant, and having informed him,
that the time for drinking the hemlock was come, which was at sun set, the
keeper was so much afflicted with sorrow, that he turned his back and fell a
weeping. The fatal cup, however, was at last brought, and Socrates asked what
it was necessary for him to do. "Nothing more (replied the officer) than as
soon as you have drank off the draught, to walk about till you find your legs
grow weary, and afterward to lie down upon your bed." He took the cup without
any emotion, or change in his color or countenance, and regarding the man,
with a steady and assured look, "Well, (said he) what say you of this drink:
may one make a libation out of it?" Upon being told, there was only enough for
one dose, "At least, (continued he) we may say our prayers to the gods, as it
is our duty, and implore them to make our exit from this world, and our last
stage happy, which is what I most earnestly beg of them." After having spoken
these words, he kept silence for some time, and then drank off the whole
draught with an amazing tranquillity and serenity of aspect, not to be expressed
or conceived.

Till then his friends, with great violence to themselves, had refrained from
tears; but after he had drank the potion, they were no longer their own
masters, and wept abundantly. Apollodorus, who had been in tears during almost
the whole conversation, began then to raise great tries, and to lament with
such excessive grief, as pierced the hearts of all that were present. Socrates
alone remained unmoved, and even reproved his friends, though with his usual
mildness and good nature. "What are you doing? (said he to them) Oh! what is
become of your virtue! Was it not for this I sent away the women, that they
might not fall into these weaknesses? I have always heard you say, that we
ought to die peaceably, and blessing the gods. Be at ^ase, I beg you, and show
more constancy and resolution." He then obliged them to restrain their tears.

In the mean time he kept walking to and fro; and, when he found his legs grow
weary, he laid down upon his bed, as he had been directed. The poison then
operated more and more. When Socrates found it began to gain ^^on the heart,
uncovering his face, which had been covered, without doubt, to prevent any
thing from disturbing him in his last moments, "Crito, (said he) we owe a cook
to Aes^olapius: discharge that vow for me, and pray do not forget it." Soon
after this, he breathed his last. Crito went to his body, and closed his mouth
and eyes. Such was the and of Socrates, in the first year of the ninety-fifth
olympaid, and in the seventieth of his age.

It was not till some time after the death of this great man, that the people
of Athens perceived their mistake, and began to repent of it. Their hatred
being satisfied, their prejudices expired, and time having given them an
opportunity for reflection, the notorious injustice of the sentence appeared in
all its horrors. Nothing was heard throughout the city but discourses in favor
of Socrates. The Academy, the Lycaeum, private houses, public walks, and
market places, seemed still to re-echo the sound of his loved voice. "Here
(said they) he formed our youth, and taught our children to love their country,
and to honor their parents. In this place he gave us his admirable lessons, and
sometimes made us seasonable reproaches, to engage us more warmly in the
pursuit of virtue. Alas! how have we rewarded him for such important services!"
Athens was in universal mourning and consternation. The schools were shut up,
and all exercises suspended. His accusers were called to account for the
innocent blood they had caused to be shed: Melitus was condemned to die, and
the rest banished. Plutarch observes, that all those, who had any share in this
black calumny, were held in such abomination among the citizens, that no one
would give them fire, answer them any question, nor go into the same bath with
them; and they had the place cleaned where they had bathed, lest they should be
polluted by touching it, which drove them into such despair, that many of them
killed themselves. The Athentans, not contented with having punished his
accusers, caused a statue of brass to be erected to him, of the workmanship of
the celebrated Lysippus, who placed it in one of the most conspicuous parts of
the city. Their respect an gratitude rose even to a religious veneration: they
dedicated a chapel to him, as to a hero and demi-god, which they called the
chapel of Socrates.

CHAP. VI.
THE Athenians had hitherto taken the lead in the Grecian states; but the
Spartans, who had completely conquered them, became their masters, and sunk
them into obscurity.

At this period, Agesilaus, who was chosen king of Sparta, was sent into Asia
with an army, under pretense of freeing the Grecian cities. He gained a signal
victory over the Persian general, Tissaphernes, near the river Pactoclus, where
he forced the enemy's camp, and found considerable plunder. This success
induced the Persian monarch, instead of meeting Agesilaus openly in the field,
to subvert his interest among the Grecian states by the power of bribery; and
indeed this confederacy was now so weakened, its concord and unanimity so
totally destroyed, that they were open to ever offer. The love of money was now
rooted i^ their affections, and the Spartans were the (...) people that, for a
while, seemed to disdain it; but the contagion still spreading, even they a^
last yielded to its allurements, and every man sought private emolument,
without attending to the good of his country.

The Spartans, however, being freed from the terror of foreign enemies,
proceeded to spread terror among the petty states of Greece, whom they
compelled to pay obedience to their will. These proceedings of the Spartans,
however, gave birth to a powerful confederacy against them; and, through a
succession of engagements, both by sea and land, the Spartans grow every day
weaker, and their enemies more daring.

It soon began to appear, that the Thebans, one of the states of Greece, lately
oppressed by the Spartans, were growing into power; and, while Sparta and
Athens were weakening each other by mutual contests, this state, which had
enjoyed all the emoluments, without any of the expenses of the war, was every
day growing more vigorous and independent. The Thebans, who now began to take
the lead in the affairs of Greece, were naturally a hardy and robust people, of
slow intellects, and strong constitutions. It was a constant maxim with them,
to side either with Athens or Sparta in their mutual contests, and which soever
they inclined to, they were generally of weight enough to turn the balance.
However, they had hitherto made no other use of that weight than to secure
themselves; but the spirit which now appeared among them was first implanted by
Pelopidas, their deliverer from the Spartan yoke; but still further carried to
its utmost height by Epimanondas, who now began to figure in the affairs of
Greece.

Epimanondas was one of those few exalted characters, who have scarce any vice,
and almost every virtue, to distinguish them from the rest of mankind. Though
in the beginning, possessed of every quality necessary for the service of the
state, he chose to lead a private life, employed in the study of philosophy,
and showing an example of the most rigid observance of all its doctrines.
Truly, a philosopher, and poor out of taste, he despised riches, without
affecting any reputation from that contempt; and, if Justin may be credited, he
coveted glory as little as he did money. It was always against his will that
commands were conferred upon him; and he behaved himself, when invested with
them, in such a manner as did more honor so dignities, than dignities did to
him. Fond of leisure, which he devoted to the study of philosophy, he shunned
public employments, and made no interest but to be excluded from them. His
moderation concealed him so well, that he lived obscure, and almost unknown.
His merit, however, discovered him at last. He was taken from his solitude by
force, to be placed as the head of armies; and he demonstrated, that
philosophy, though generally held in contempt with those who aspire at the
glory of arms, is wonderfully useful in forming heroes; for it was, in his
opinion, a great advance toward conquering an enemy, to know how to conquer
ourselves.

Such was the general appointed to command the Theban army, and act in
conjuction with Pelopidas. The Thebans being left out in the general treaty of
peace, and thus having the Spartans and Athanians against them, they appeared
under the utmost consternation, and all Greece looked upon them as lost and
undone. Nothing now remained on both sides but to prepare for action.
Epimanondas immediately raised all the troops he could, and began his march;
but his army did not amount to six thousand men, while the enemy had above four
times that number.

The two armies met at Leuctra, and drew up on a plain. Cleombrotus was upon
the right, at the head of a body consisting of Lacedaemonians, in whom he
confided most, and whose files were twelve deep, to take the advantage, which
his superiority of horse gave him in an open country. Archidamus, the son of
Agesilaus, was at the head of the allies, who formed the left wing.

Epimanondas, who resolved to charge with his left, which he commanded in
person, strengthened it with the choice of his heavy armed troops, whom he drew
up fifty deep; the sacred battalion was upon his left, and closed the wing; the
rest of his infantry were posted upon his right, in an oblique line, which, the
farther it extended, was the more distant from the enemy. By this uncommon
disposition, his design was to cover his flank on the right; to keep off his
right wing, as a kind of reserved body, that he might not hazard the event of
the battle upon the weakest part of his army. He was assured that, if he could
penetrate the Lacedaemonian phalanx, the rest of the army would soon be put to
the rout.

The action began with the cavalry. As the Thebans were better mounted, and
braver troops than the Lacedaemonian horse, the latter were not long before
they were broken, and driven upon the infantry, which they put into some
confusion. Epimanondas following his horse close, marched swi^tly up to
Cleombrotus, and fell upon his phalanx with all the weight of his heavy
battalion. The latter, to make a diversion, detached a body of troops, with
orders to take Epimanondas in flank, and to surround him. Pelopidas upon sight
of that movement, advanced with incredible speed and boldness, at the head of
the Sacred Battalion, to prevent the enemy's design, and flanked Cleombrotus
himself, who, by that sudden and unexpected unexpected attack, was put into
diferder. The battle w^^ very fierce and obstinate; and, whilst Cleombrotus
could act, the victory continued i^ suspense, and declared for neither party.
But when he fell dead with his wounds, the Thebans, to complete the victory,
and the Lacedaemonians, to avoid the shame of abandoning the body of their
king, redoubled their efforts, and a great slaughter ensued on both sides. The
Spartans fought with so much fury about the body, that at length they gained
their (...) and carried it off. Animated by so glorious (...) advantage, they
proposed to return to (...) charge, which would, perhaps have pro^^^ successful
had the allies seconded their ardour; but the left wing, seeing the
Lacedaemonian phalanx broken, and believing all lost, especially when they
heard that the king was dead, took to flight, and drew off the rest of the
army-Epimanondas followed them vigorously, and killed a great number in the
pursuit. The Thebands remained masters of the field of battle, erected a
trophy, and permitted the enemy to bury their dead.

The Lacedaemonians had never received such a blow: the most bloody defeat,
till then, had scarce ever cost them more than four or five hundred of their
citizens; here they lost four thousand men, of whom one thousand were
Lacedaemonians, and four hundred Spartans, out of seven hundred who were in the
battle. The Thebans had only three hundred men killed, among whom were four of
their citizens.

So great a victory was followed with instantaneous effects: numbers of the
Grecian states, who had hitherto remained neuter, now declared in favor of the
conquerors, and increased their army to the amount of 70,000 men. Epimanondas
entered Laconia with an army, the twelfth part of which were not Thebans; and
finding a country hitherto untouched by an enemy, he ran through it with fire
and sword, destroying and plundering, as far as the river Eurotas.

In the mean time, the Spartans, struck with consternation at their late
defeat, applied to the Athenians for succor, who, after some hesitation,
determined to assist them with all their forces; and a slight advantage the
Spartans had gained over the Thebans, in which they did not lose a man, gave a
promising dawn of success. The war was then carried on with unabating vigor on
both sides. The Theban troops were headed by their favorite general
Epimanondas; those of Sparta by Agesilaus, the only man in Greece that was then
able to oppose him.

Epimanondas, having failed in an attack upon Sparta, was resolved, before he
laid down his command, which was now nearly expiring, to endeavor to effect
something that might compensate for his failure. In order to protect Sparta,
Agesilaus had withdrawn all the troops from Mantinca; thither, therefore,
Epimanondas resolved to bend his course. Being determined to attack the town,
he dispatched a troop of horse to view its situation, and to clear the fields
of stragglers; but just before they had reached Mantinea, an army of six
thousand Athenian auxiliaries arrived by sea, who, without taking any
refreshment to their men or horses, rushed out without the city, and attacked
and defeated the Theban horse. In the mean time, Epimanondas was advancing with
his whole army, with the enemy close upon his rear. Finding it impossible to
accomplish his purpose, before he would be overtaken, he determined to halt and
give them battle. He had now got within a short way of the town, which has had
the honor of giving its name to the conflict of that day -- a conflict the
most splendid and best contested, that ever figured in the hostory of any
country.

The Greeks had never fought among themselves with more numerous armies: the
Lacedaemonians consisted of more than twenty thousand foot, and two thousand
horse; the Thebans, of thirty thousand foot, and three thousand horse. The
Theban general marched in the same order of battle, in which he intended to
fight, that he might not be obliged, when he came up with the enemy, to lose,
in disposing of his army, a precious time that cannot be recovered.

He did not march directly, and with his front to the enemy, but in a column
upon the hills, with his left wing foremost, as if he did not intend to fight
that day. When he was opposite to them, at a quarter of a league's distance, he
made the troops halt, and lay down their arms, as if he designed to encamp
there. The enemy, in effect, were deceived by his stand; and, reckoning no
longer upon a battle, they quitted their arms, dispersed themselves about the
camp, and suffered that ardor to be extinguished, which a near approach of a
battle is accustomed to kindle in the hearts of soldiers.

Epimanondas, however, by suddenly wheeling his troops to the right, having
changed his column into a line, and having drawn out the choice troops, whom he
had in his march posted in front, made them double their files upon the front
of his left wing, to add to its strength, and to put it into a condition to
attack in point the Lacedaemonian phalanx, which, by the movement he had made,
faced it directly. He ordered the center and right wing of his army to move
very slowly, and to half before they came up, with the enemy, that he might not
hazard the event of the battle upon troops, of whom he had no great opinion.

He expected to decide the victory by that body of chosen troops, which he
commanded in person, and which he had formed into a column to attack the enemy
in a wedge-like point. He had persuaded himself, that if he could penetrate the
Lacedaemonian phalanx, in which the enemy's principal force consisted, he
should not find it difficult to rout the rest of the army, by charging upon the
right and left with his victorious troops. After having disposed his whole army
in this manner, he moved on to charge (...) enemy with the whole weight of his
column. They were strangely surprised when they saw Epimanondas advance to them
in this order, and resumed their arms, bridled their horses, and made all the
haste they could to their ranks.

Whilst Epimanodas marched against the enemy, the cavalry that covered his
flank, on the left, the best at that time in Greece, entirely composed of
Thebans and Thessalians, had orders to attack the enemy's horse. The Theban
general, whom nothing escaped, had artfully bestowed bowmen in the interval^
(...) his horse, in order to begin the disorders o^ enemy's cavalry, by a
previous discharge of (...) shower of arrows, stones, and ja^^li^^ ^po^ them.
The other army had neglected to take the same precaution; and had been guilty
of another fault, not less considerable, in giving as much depth to the
squadrons as if they had been a phalanx. By these means, their horse were
incapable (...) supporting long the charge of the Thebans, (...) after having
made several ineffectua^ a^^^ks with great loss, they were obliged to^^^re
^elsine^^ ^^eir infantry.

Epimanonda^^ ^^^^e me^^^ time, with his body of foot, had charged the
Lacedaemonian phalanx. The troops fought on both sides with ins^^^ ardor, both
the Thebans and Lacedaemonia^^ being resolved to perish, rather than yield the
glory of arms to their rivals. They began with fighting their spears; but these
being soon broken in the fury of the combat, the charged each other sword in
hand. The resistance was equally obstinate, and the slaughter very great on
both sides. The troops despising danger, and desiring only to distinguish
themselves by the greatness of their actions, chose rather to die in their
ranks, than to lose a step of their ground.

The furious slaughter on both sides having continued a great while, without
the victory inclining to either, Epimanondas, to force it to declare for him,
thought it his duty to make an extraordinary effort in person, without regard
to the danger of his own life. He formed, ^^fure, a troop (...) the bravest and
most de^^^nate about (...); and, putting himself at he (...) made a vigorous
charge upon the (...) where the battle was most warm, and wounded the
Lacedamonian general with the first jave^^ he thre^^. The troops by his
example, having wounded or killed all that stood in their way, broke and
penetrated the phalanx. The Lacedaemonians dismayed by the presence of
Epimatrondas, and overpowered by the height of that ^ntrepid party, were re^^ed
to give gro^^d. The gross of the Theban tr^^^ au^^^d by their general's example
and (...) succes^, love back the enemy use: his right and left and made great
^^ugnter of them. But some of the Spartan troops, perceiving that Epimatrondas
abandoned himself too much to (...) ardour, suddenly rallied, and, returning to
the fight, charged him with a shower of javeli^^. Whilst he kept off part of
those darts, sh^nned some of them, fenced off others, and^^^ fighting with the
most heroic valor, to assure the victory to his army, a Spartan, named
Callicrates, gave him a mortal wound with a javelin in his breast, across his
cuiras. The wood of the javelin being broken off, and the iron head continuing
in the wound, the torment was insupportable, and he fell immediately. -- The
battle begun around him with new fury, the one side using their utmost
endeavors to take him alive, and the other to save him. -- The Thebans gained
their point at last, and carried him off, after having put the enemy to flight.

After several different governents, an^^^t^rnate lesses and disadvantages,
^^e, (...) both sides stood still, and rested upon their The Death of
Epaminondas.
arms; when the trumpets of the two armies, as if by consent, founded the
retreat at the same time. Each party pretended to the victory, and erected a
trophy: the Thebans, because they had deserted the right ^^ing, and remained
masters of the field of battle: and the Athenians, because they had cut the
general's detachment in pieces -- From this point of honor, both sides (...)
refused to ask leave to bury their dead, which with the ancients; was
confessing their des^^t. The Lacedaemonians, however, sent to demand that
permission; after which, the rest had n^ thoughts, but of paying the last
duties to the slain.

In the mean time. Epimonondas had been carried into the camp. The surgeons,
after having examined, the wound, declared, that he would expice (...) soon as
the head of the dart was drawn out of it. These words gave all that were
present the utmost sorrow and affliction, who were inconsolable on seeing so
great a man on the point of death. For him, the only concern he expressed was
about his arms, and the fate of the battle. When they showed him his shield,
and assured him, that the Thebans had gained the victory, turning toward his
friends with a serene and calm air, "All then is well," said he; and soon
after, upon drawing the head of the javelin out of his body, be expired in the
arms of victory.

As the glory of Thebes rose with Epimanondas, so it tell with him; and he is
perhaps, the only instance of one man being able to inspire his country with
military glory, and lead it to conquest, without having had a predecessor, or
leaving an imitator of his example.

The battle of Mantinea was the greatest that was ever fought by Grecians
against Grecians, the whole strength of the country being drawn out, and ranged
according to their disse^^t interests; and it was sought with an obstinacy
equal to the importance of it, which was the fixing the empire of Greece, which
must of course have been transferred to the Thebans, upon their victory, if
they had not lost the fruits of it by the death of their general, who was the
soul of all their counsels and designs. This blasted all their hopes, and put
out their sudden blaze of power almost as soon as it was kindled. However, they
did not presently give up their pretensions; they were still ranked among the
leading states, and made several further struggles; but they were faint and
ineffectual, and such as were rather for life and being, than for superiority
and dominion. A peace, therefore, was proposed, which was ratified by all the
states of Greece, except Sparta: the conditions of which were, that every state
should maintain what they possessed, and hold it independent of any other
power. A state of repose followed this peace; in which the Grecian powers
seemed to slacken from their former animosities, and there was little done for
several years following.

CHAP. VI.
DURING these transactions, a power was growing up in Greece, hitherto
unobserved, but now too conspicuous and formidable to be overlooked in the
general picture: this was that of the Macedonians; a people hitherto obscure,
and in a manner barbarous; and who, though warlike and courageous, had never
yet presumed to intermeddle in the affairs of Greece. Now several circumstances
concurred to raise them from that obscurity, and to involve them in measures,
which, by degrees, wrought a thorough change in the state of Greece.

This state began to make a figure about the beginning of the ninety-sixth
Olympiad. Philip, the father of Alexander the Great, who had been the pupil of
Epimanondas, was no sooner become king of Macedon, than he began to distinguish
himself. He succeeded in every thing he undertook, by the artfulness of his
address, and the force of his eloquence, of which he was a great master. -- He
first gained the affections of his subjects, then trained and exercised them.
and reformed their discipline. It was at this time he instituted the famous
Macedonian phalanx, which did so much execution. It was an improvement upon the
ancient manners of fighting among the Grecians, who generally ^^^w up ^^eir
foot so close, as to stand the shock of the enemy without being broken. The
complete phalanx was thought to contain above sixteen thousand men; but this of
Philip's invention is described by Po^ybins to be an oblong figure, consisting
of eight thousand pikemen, sixteen deep, and five hundred in front, the men
standing so close together, that the pikes of the fifth rank were extended
three feet beyond the line of the front. The rest, whose distance from the
front redered their pikes useless, rested them upon the shoulders of those who
stood before them, and so locking them together in file, pressed forward to
support and push on the former ranks, whereby the assault was rendered more
violent and irresistible.

Philip having, by some means or other, set the Greeks to quarrelling among
themselves, thought it his interest to remain neuter in the commotions he had
partly occasioned. It was consistent with the ambitious policy of this prince
to be intent only upon his own interest, and not to engage in a war, by which
he could reap not the least benefit; and to take advantage of a juncture, in
which all Greece, employed and divided by a great war, gave him an opportunity
to extend his frontiers, and push his conquests, without any apprehensions of
oppolition. He was also well pleased to see both parties weaken and consume
each other, as he should thereby be enabled to fall upon them afterward to
greater advantage.

Philip, as soon as his son Alexander was born, lost no time in acquainting
Aristotle of what had happend. He wrote to that distinguished philosopher, in
terms the most polite and flattering; begging of him to come and undertake his
education, and to bestow on him those useful lessons of inaguanimity and
virtue, which every great man ought to possess, and which his numerous
avocations rendered impossible to be attempted by him. He added, "I return
thanks to the Gods, not so much for having given me a son, as for having given
him to me in the age in which Aristole lives."

Though brevity will not permit us to follow every method Philip took to
enslave all Greece, yet we must not omit to mention a circumstance that
happened at the siege of Merhone, where Philip lost one of his eyes in a very
singular manner. Aster of Amphipolis had offered his services to Philip,
telling him, that he was so excellent a marksman, that he could bring down
birds in their most rapid flight. The monarch made this answer: "Well, I will
take you into my service, when I make war upon starlings;" which answer stung
the archer to the quick. A repartee prove^ often of fatal consequence to him
who makes it. Aster, having thrown himself into the city, let fly an arrow, on
which was written, "To Philip's left eye." This carried a most cruel proof that
he was a good marksman, for he hit him in the right eye; and Philip sent him
back the same arrow, with this inscription. "If Philip takes the city, he will
hang up Aster;" and accordingly he was as good as his word. A skilful surgeon
drew the arrow out of Philip's eye with so much art and dexterity, that not the
least scar remained; and though he could not save his eye, yet he took away the
blemish.

The hasty strides Philip was now making toward enslaving all Greece,
particularly attracted the attention of Demosthenes, who roused the Athenians
from their lethargy of pleasure. This celebrated orator saw, from the
beginning, the ambition of Philip, and the power, of which he was possessed to
carry him through his designs. This illustrious orator and statesmen was born
in the last year of the ninety ninth Olympiad. He was the son of an eminent
Athenian citizen, who raised a considerable fortune by the manufacture of arms.
At the age of seven years, he lost his father; and, to add to this misfortune,
the guardians, to whom he was entrusted, wasted and embezzled a considerable
part of his inheritance. Thus oppressed by fraud, and discouraged by a weak and
effeminate habit of body, he yet discovered an early ambition to distinguish
himself as a popular speaker. His first essay was made against his guardian, by
whom he had been so injuriously treated; but the goodness of his cause was here
of more service than the abilities of the young orator: for his early attempts
were unpromising. He twice afterward attempted to harrangue the people; but he
succeeded so badly, that they even hissed him, when he w^nt away ashamed,
confounded, and quite in despair.

After a length of time, however, after proper instructions* and unwearied
application, he appeared again in public, and succeeded so we^^^ that people
flocked from all parts of Greece to hear him. From thence he was looked upon as
the standard of true eloquence, insomuch that none of his contry men have been
put in comparison with him, nor even among the Romans, any but Cicero. His
eloquence was grave and austere, like his temper; masculine and sublime, bold,
forcible, and impetuous; abounding with metaphors, apostrophes, and
interrogations, which, with his solemn way of invoking and appealing to the
gods, the planets, the elements, and the manes of those who fell at Salamis and
Marathon, had such a wonderful effect upon his hearers, that they thought him
inspired. But Demosthenes could not have made such impressions on them, if his
talent of speaking had not been supported by their opinion of his integrity. It
was that which added weight and emphasis to every thing he said, and animated
the whole; it was that which chiefly engaged their attention, and determined
their councils, when they were convinced he spoke from his heart and had no
interest to manage but that of the community. Of this he gave the strongest
proof in his zeal against Philip, who said he was of more weight against him
than all the fleets and armies of the Athenians, and that he had no enemy but
Demosthenes. He was not wanting in his endeavors to corrupt him, as he had
done most of the leading men in Greece; but this great orator, withstood all
his efforts; and as it was observed, all the gold in Macedon could not bribe
him.

Though Philip's public character was by no means a credit to him, yet the
following act of private justice does him honor. A certain soldier in the
Macedonian army had, in many instances, distinguished himself by extraordinary
acts of valor, and had received many marks of Philip's favor and approbation.
On some occasion, he embarked on board a vessel, which was wrecked in a violent
storm, he himself cast on the shore helpless and naked, and scarcely with the
appearance of life. A Macedonian, whose lands were contiguous to the sea, came
opportunely to be witness of his distress, and with all humane and charitable
tenderness, flew to the relief of the unhappy stranger. He bore him to his
house, laid him in his own bed, revived, cherished, comforted, and for forty
days supplied him freely with all the necessaries and conveniences, which his
languishing condition could require. The soldier, thus happily rescued from
death, was incessant in the warmest expressions of gratitude to his benefactor,
assured him of his interest with the king, and of his power and resolution of
obtaining for him, from the royal bounty, the noble returns which such
extraordinary benevolence had merited. He was now completely recovered, and his
kind host supp^ied him with money to pursue his journey.

Some time after, the soldier presented himself before the king; he recounted
his misfortunes, magnified his services, and, having looked with an eye of envy
on the possessions of the man who had preserved his life, was now so abandoned
to every sense of gratitude, as to request the king to bestow upon him the
house and lands where he had been so kindly and tenderly entertained.
Unhappily, Philip, without examination, inconsiderately and precipitately
granted his infamous request. This soldier now returned to his preserver,
repaid his goodness by driving him from his settlement, and taking immediate
possession of all the fruits of his honest industry. The poor man, stung with
this instance of unparalleled ingratitude and insensibility, boldly determined,
instead of submitting to his wro^gs, to seek relief; and, in a letter addressed
to Philip, represented his own and the soldier's conduct, in a lively and
affecting manner. The king was instantly fired with Indignation, and ordered
that justice should be done without delay; that the possessions should be
immediately restored to the man, whose charitable office^ had been thus
horribly repaid; and, having seized the soldier, caused these words to be
branded on his forehead. "The Ungrateful Guest:" a character infamous in every
age, and among all-nations; but particularly among the Greeks, who, from the
earliest times, were most scrupulously observant of the laws of hospitality.

Philip, having proved unsuccessful in his attacks on the Grecian States,
marched against Athens, king of Scythia, from whom he had received some
personal cause of discontent, and cook his son Alexander with him in this
expedition. Though the Scythians had a very numerous army, he defeated them
without any difficulty. He got a very great booty, wh^^^ consisted not in gold
or silver the use of which the Scythians were not as yet so unhappy as (...)
know, but in cattle, in horses, and in a great number of women and children.

At his return from Scythia, the Triballi, (...) people of Moesia, disputed the
pass with him, laying claim to part of the plunder he was (...) rying off.
Philip was forced to come to a ba^tle; and a very bloody one was fought, (...)
which great numbers on each side were ki^^^ upon the spot. The king himself was
wound (...) in the thigh, and, with the fame thrust, had (...) horse killed
under him. Alexander flew to (...) father's aid, and, covering him with his
shield, killed of put to slight all who attacked him.

The ambition of Philip would not long suff^^ him to remain inactive. Not
daring openly (...) attack the Athenians, he endeavored, under hand, to create
new disturbances in Gree^^ that he might take such a part in them (...) would
best answer his views; and when th^^ flame should be kindled, his point was to
appear rather to be called in as an assistant, tha^ to act as a principal.

However, the mask was, soon thrown off: the Thebans and Athenians soon joined
their fore^ and waited the approach of Philip, who w^^^ leading his army to the
plain of Chaeronea (...) name rendered famous by the event of this improtant
contest. Philip's army was formed (...) thirty two thousand men, warlike,
discipline^ and long enured to the toils and dangers of the field; but this
body was composed of ^iffer^^^ Alexander (...).
nations and countries, who had each their d^^truct and separate views and
interests. The army of the confederates did nor amount to thirty thousand
complete, of which the Athenians and Thebans furnished the greater part; the
rest was formed of the Corinthians and Peloponnesians; but the same motives,
and the same zeal, influenced and animated them. All were equally effected by
the event, and all equally resolved to conquer, or die in defense of their
liberty.

The fatal morning now arrived, which was for ever to decide the cause of
liberty, and the empire of Greece. Before the rising of the sun, both armies
were ranged in order of battle. The Thebans, commanded by Theogenes, a man of
but moderate abilities in war, and suspected of corruption, obtained the post
of honor on the right wing of the confederate Greeks, with that famous body in
the front, called the Sacred Band, formed of generous and warlike youths,
connected and endeared to each other by all the noble enthusiasm of love and
friendship. The center was formed of the Corinthians and Peloponnesians, and
the Athenians composed the lest wing, led by their generals Lysicles and
Chares. On the left of the Macedonian army stood Alexander, at the head of a
chosen body of noble Macedonians, supported by the famous cavalry of Thessaly.
As this prince was then but nineteen years old, his father was careful to curb
his youthful impetuosity, and to direct his valor, and for this purpose
surrounded him with a number of experienced officers. In the center were placed
those Greeks who had united with Philip, and on whose courage he had the least
dependence; while the king himself commanded on the right wing, where his
renowned phalanx stood, to oppose the impetuosity, with which the Athenians
were well known to begin their onset.

The charge begun on each side with all the courage and violence, which
ambition, revenge, the love of glory, and the love of liberty, could excite in
the several combatants. Alexander, at the head of the Macedonian nobles, with
all the fury of youthful courage, first sell on the Sacred Band of Thebes,
which sustained his attack with a bravery and vigor worthy of its former fame.
The gallant youths who com^^^sed this body, not being timely, or not du^^^
imported by their countrymen, bore up for ^ while against the torrent of the
enemy; till as, leng^h, oppressed and overpowered by superior numbers, without
yielding or turning their, backs on their assailants, they sunk down on that
ground where they had been originally, stationed, each by the side of his
darling friend, raising up a bulwark by their bodies against the progress of
the enemy. The young Alexander and his forces, in all the enthusiasti^ ardour
of valor, animated by success, pushe^ on through all the carnage, over all the
heap^^ of slain, and fell furiously on the main body of the Thebans, where they
were opposed with ^^stinate and deliberate courage^; and the contest was, for
some time, supported with mutual violence.

At the same time, the Athenians, on the right wing, fought with a spirit and
intrepidity worthy of the character which they boasted, and of the cause by
which they were animated. Many brave efforts were exerted on each side, and
success was for some time doubtful; till at length, part of the center, and the
left wing of the Macedonians, except the phalanx, yielded to the impetuous
atrack of the Athenians, and ded with some precipitation. Happy had it been on
that day for Greece, if the conduct and abilities of the Grecian generals had
been equal to the valor of their soldiers; but these brave champions of
liberty were led on by the despicable creatures of intrigue and cabal. --
Transported by the advantage now obtained, the presumptuous Lysicles cried out,
"Come of, my gallant countrymen, the victory is ours; let us pursue these
cowards, and drive them to Macedon." Thus, instead of improving the happy
opportunity, by charging the phalanx in flank, and so breaking that formidable
body, the Athenians wildly and precipitately pressed forward, in pursuit of the
flying enemy, themselves in all the disorder and tumult of a rout.

Philip saw this fatal error with all the contempt of a skilful general, and
the secret exultation arising from the assurance of aporoaching victory. He
cooly observed to the officers that stood round him, that the Athenians knew
(...) how to conquer. He ordered the phalanx to change its potition, and, by a
sudden evolution, to gain possession of an adjacent eminence. From thence they
marched deliberately down, firm and collected, and fell, with their united
force, on the Athenians, now confident of success, and blind to their danger.
The shock was irresistible, they were at once overwhelmed, many of them lay
crushed by the weight of the enemy, and expiring by their wounds; while the
rest escaped from the dreadful slaughter by a shameful and precipitate slight,
bearing down, and hurrying away with them, those troops that, had been
stationed for their support. Now Demosthenes, that renowned orator and
statesman, whose noble sentiments and spirited harangues had raised the courage
on this day so eminently excited, betrayed that weakness, which has sullied his
great character. He alone, of all his countrymen, advanced to (...) charge cold
and dismayed; and, on the v^^^ first appearance of a reverse of fortune, in
(...) agony of terror, turned his back, cast away that shield, which he had
adorned with this inscription, in golden characters, "To Good Fortune," and
appeared the foremost in the general ront. The ridicule and malice of his
enemies related, or perhaps invented, another shameful circumstance; being
impeded in his slight by some brambles, his imagination was so possessed by the
presence of an enemy, that he loudly cried out for quarter.

While Philip was thus triumphant on his side, Alexander continued the conflict
on the other wing, and at length broke the Thebans in spite of all their acts
of valor, who now fled from the field, and were pursued with great carnage. The
center of the confederates war thus totally abandoned to the fury of a
victorious enemy. But slaughter enough had been already made; more than one
thousand of the Athenians lay dead on the field of battle, two thousand were
made prisoners. and the loss of the Thebans was not inferior. Philip,
therefore, determined to conclude his important victory by an act of apparent
clemency, which his ambition and policy really dictated. He gave orders that
the Greeks should be spared, conscious of his own designs, and still expecting
to appear in the field the head and leader of that body, which he had now
completely conquered.

This defeat was attributed chiefly to the ill conduct of the generals Lysicles
and Chares; the former whereof the Athenians put to death at the instance of a
judge, named Lycurgus, who had great credit and influence with the people, but
was a severe judge, and a most bitter accuser. "You, Lysicles, (said he) were
general of the army: a thousand citizens were slain, and two thousand taken
prisoners; a trophy has been erected to the dishonor of this city, and all
Greece is enslaved. You had the command when all these things happened; and yet
you dare to live, to view the light of the fun, and blush not to appear
publicly in the forum: you, Lysicles, who are born the monument of your
country's shame!" It does not appear that Charles underwent any kind of
persecution for his share of this action; though, according to his general
character, he deserved it more than his colleague: he had no talent (...)
command, and was very little different from a common soldier. Timotheus said of
him, that, "instead of being a general, he was sitter to carry the general's
baggage."

After the battle of Chaeronea, such orators as opposed Demosthenes, having all
risen up in concert against him, and having cited him to take his trial
according to law, the people not only declared him innocent of the several
accusations laid to his charge, but conferred on him additional honors.

Philip, however, did not long enjoy the fruits of his conquests in Greece.
Pausanius, a young Macedonian nobleman, having received a most shameful insult
from Attilus, a relation of Philip's, he applied to the monarch for redress;
but not being able to obtain it, he resolved on the destruction of Philip.
Pausanius chose the morning in which was to be a gr^^d procession, for the
execution of his revenge on the prince, who had denied reparation to his
injured honor. His design had been for some time premeditated, and now was the
dreadful moment of effecting is. As Philip marched on in all his pride and
pomp, this young Macedonian slipped through the crowd, and, with a desperate
and revengeful resolution, waited his approach in a narrow passage, just at the
entrance into the theater. The king advanced toward him, Pausanius drew his
poniard, plunged it into his heart, and the conquence of Greece, and the terror
of Asia, f^ll pro^^^^ of the ground, and instantly expired.

The murderer flew toward the gates of (...), where there stood horses to
f^^o^ (...) escape, which Olympias, Philip's wife, is said to have prepared.
Here it should be observed, that Philip had disgraced Olympias, for (...) had
and disagreeable temper, and had taken Cleopatra to his bed. The tumult and
confusion was such as might be expected from so fatal an event: some of the
Macedonians crowded round the fallen king with efficious and ineffectual care,
while others pursued Pausanius. Among these were Perdiccas, Attalus, and
Leonatus, who coming up with him just as he was preparing to remount his horse,
from which he had been thrown by his foot tangling in a vine, they fell upon
him, and dispatched him. His body was immediately hung on a gibbet; but, in the
morning, it appeared crowned with a golden diadem: the only means by which
Olympias could express her implacable resentment. In a few days, indeed, she
took a further occasion of publishing her triumph and exultation in her
husband's fall, by paying the same funeral honors to Pausanias, which was
prepared for Philip: both bodies were burnt on the same pile, and the ashes of
both deposited in the same tomb. She is even said to have prevailed on the
Macedonians to pay annual honors to Pausanias; as if she snared, that the share
she had taken in the death of Philip should not be sufficiently known to the
world. She consecrated to Apolio the dagger, which had been the instrument of
the fatal (...), inscribed with the name. Myrtalis, the ^ame which she had
borne when their loves first began. Thus died Philip, whole virtues and vices
were directed and proportioned to his ambition.

CHAP. VIII.
IN the year of the world 3648, and 356 before the birth of Christ, Alexander,
the son of Philip, ascended the throne of Macedon; and took possession of a
kingdonm rendered flourishing and powerful by the policy of the preceding
reign. Alexander, upon his accession to the throne, saw himself surrounded with
extreme dangers; the barbarous nations, with whom Philip contended during his
whole reign, thought this change for their advantage; and, despising the youth
and inexperience of the young monarch, resolved to seize this opportunity of
regaining their freedom. Nor had he less to fear from the Greeks themselves,
who now thought this a convenient opportunity to restore their ancient form of
government; revenge their former injuries, and reclaim those rights they had
enjoyed for ages. Alexander; however, resolved to prevent their machinations,
and to give them no time to complete their confederacies against him. He made
all possible haste to check the arms of the barberians, by marching his troops
to the banks of the Danube, which he crossed in one night -- He defeated the
king of the Triballi in a g^^^^ battle, made the Ge^ae fly at his approach,
(...) subdued several other barbarous nations, some by the terror of his name,
and others by the force of his arms.

The first object of Alexander's ambition was the conquest of Persia: and he
now expected, that he should have leisure and opportunity to prepare for so
great an enterprise. He was however, soon called to a new undertaking; for the
Athenians, Thebans, and Lacedaemonians, united against him, hoping by the
assistance of Persia, to recover their freedom. Expedition and activity were
the characteristies of Alexander. Having heard of the union formed against him
by the Grecian States, he crossed over the craggy top of Mount Ossa, to elude
the Thessilonians, who had possessed themselves of the defiles lying between
Thessaly and Macedon; and moved on with such rapidity, that his appearance in
Greece gave the first news of his preparation for war. A great battle was soon
fought, in which the Thebans exerted themselves with a bravery and ardour much
above their strength; but they were at last surrounded on all sides, the
greatest part of them were cut to pieces, and the city taken, plundered and
destroyed. However, he set at liberty the priests; all such as liad a right of
hospitaliry with the Macedonians; the descendants of Pi^dar, the famous poet,
who had done so much to Greece; and such as had opposed the revolt: but all the
rest in number about thirty thousand, he sold; and upwards of six thousand
(...) been ^^iled in battle.

This dreadful example of severity toward so powerful a city as Thebes, spread
the terror of his arms through all Greece, and made all things give way before
him. He summoned at Cornish the assemblies of the several states and free
cities of Greece, to obtain from them the same supreme command against the
Persians, which had been granted to his father a little before his death. No
assembly ever debated on a more important subject: it was the western world
deliberating upon the ruin of the east, and the method for executing a revenge
which had been suspended for more than an age. The assembly held at this time
gave rise to events, the relation of which will appear astonishing, and almost
incredible; and to revolution; which contributed to change the disposition of
most things in the political world. The deliberations of the assembly were
short: the Spartans were the only people who ventured to remonstrate: though
several others were inimical to the interests of the Macedonians; but they were
forced to submit, and Alexander was appointed general sinuo against the
Persians.

Having thus far accomplished his wishes, and after having completely settled
his affairs in Macedonia, he set out ^or Asia in the beginning of the spring.
His army consisted of little mo^e than thirty thousand foot, and four or five
thousand horse; but they were all brave men, well disciplined, and enured to
fatigue. They had made severa^ campaigns under Philip (...) were each of them,
in case of necessity capable of commanding. Most of the officers were near
threescore years of age, and the common men fifty; and when they were either
assembled, or drawn up at the head of a camp, they had the air of a venerable
senate. Such was the army that was to decide the fortune, not only of Greece,
but of all the eastern world.

When the news of Alexander's landing in Asia, without opposition, was brought
to Darius, he testified the utmost contempt for the Macedonian army, and
indignation at the presumption of their generals. In a letter which he wrote,
he reprehended his andacious insolence, and gave orders to his various
governors, in the different parts of his dominions, that, if they took
Alexander alive, to whip him with rods, make prisoners of his whole army, and
send them as slaves to one of the most deserted parts of his dominions. Thus
confiding in the glittering but barbarous multitude he commanded, he disposed
of the enemy as already vanquished; but confidence goes but a short part of the
road to success. The great numbers he had gathered only brought unwieldy
splendour into the field, and, instead of procuring him security, increased his
embarrassments.

Alexander, in the mean time, marched on at the head of his heavy-armed
infantry, drawn up in two lines, with the cavalry in the wings, and the baggage
following in the rear. Being arrived on the banks of the Grannicus, he there
found the Persian horse, which were very numerous, on the opposite shore,
forming a large front, in order to oppose Alexander, whenever he should attempt
to pass. The two armies continued a long time in sight of each other, on the
banks of the river, as if dreading the event. The Persians waited till the
Macedonians should enter the river, in order to charge them to advantage upon
their landing; and the latter seemed to be making choice of a place proper for
landing.

At last, Alexander ordered his horse to be brought, commanded the noblemen of
the court to follow him and behave gallantly. He himself commanded the right
wing, and Parmenio the left. The king first caused a strong detachment to march
into the river, himself following it with the rest of the forces. He made
Parmenio advance afterward with the left wing, the trumpet sounding, and the
whole army raising cries of joy. The Persians, seeing this detachment advance
forward, began to let fly their arrows* and march to a place where the
declivity was not so great, in order to keep the Macedonians from landing. but
now the horse engaged with great fury, one part endeavoring to land, and the
other striving to prevent them. The Macedonians, whose cavalry were inferior in
number, besides the disadvantage of the ground, were wounded with the darts
that were shot from the eminence; not to mention, that the flower of the
Persian horse were drawn together in this place. The Macedonians, therefore, at
first gave ground, after having lost the first ranks, which made a vigorous
defense. Alexander, who closely followed them, reinforced them with his best
troops, headed them himself, animated them by his presence, pushed the
Persians, and routed them; upon which the whole army followed after, crossed
the river, and attacked the enemy on all sides.

Spithrobates, lieutenant governor of Ionia, and son-in-law to Darius
distinguished himself above the rest of the Persian generals by his superior
bravery. Being surrounded by forty Persian lords, all of them his relations, of
experienced valor, and who never moved from his side, he carried terror
wherever he went. Alexander observing in how gallant a manner he signalized
himself, clapped spurs to his horse, and advanced toward him. They immediately
engaged, and each having thrown a javelin, wounded the other slightly.
Spithrobates fell furiously sword in hand upon Alexander, who, being prepared
for him, thrusts his pike into his face, and laid him dead at his feet. At that
very moment Rafaces, brother to that nobleman, charging him on the side, gave
him so furious a blow on the head with a battle axe, that he beat off his
plume, but went no deeper than the hair. As he was going to repeat his blow on
the head, which now appeared through his fractured helmet. Chrus cut off
Rafaces' hand with one stroke of his scimitar, and thereby saved his
sovereign's life. The danger to which Alexander had been exposed, greatly
animated the courage of his soldiers, who now performed wonders. The Persians
in the center of the horse, upon whom the light arm ^troops, who had been
posted in the interval of the horse, poured a perpecual discharge (...) darts,
being unable any longer to susta^n the attack of the Mace^onians, who struck
them a^^ the face, the two wings were immed^at^ly b^^k^^ and put to flight.
Alexander did ^ot ^^^g pursue them, but immed^a^ly turned about to charge the
^oo^. These at first stood their ground; out when they saw themselves attacked
at the same time by the cavalry, and the Macedonian phalanx which had crossed
the river, and that the hat^alions were now engaged, these of the Persians did
not make either a long or a vigorous defense, and were soon put, to flight; but
the Grecian infantry in Darius' service stood the shock. This body of foot
retiring to a hill, demanded a promise from Alexander to let them march away
unmolested; but following the dictates of his wrath, rather than those of
reas^n, he rushed into the midst of this body of foot, and presently lost his
horse, which was killed by the thrust of a sword. The battle was so hot round
him, that most of the Macedonians, who lost their lives on this occasion, fell
here; for they fought against a body of men, who were well disciplined, had
been inured to war, and fought in despair. They were all cut to pieces, except
two thousand, who were taken prisoners.

In this battle twenty thousand foot, and two thousand five hundred horse, were
killed on the side of the barbarians; and of the Macedonians, twenty-five of
the royal horse were killed on the first attack. Alexander ordered Lysippus to
make their statues in brass, all of which were set up in a city of Macedon,
called Dia, from whence they were many years afterward carried to Rome by
Metelles. About three-store of the other horse were killed, and near thirty
foot, who, the next day, were all laid ^^th their arms and equipage in one
grave; and the king granted an exemption to their fathers and children from
every kind of tribute and service. This victory not only impressed the Persians
with constar^^^ion, but served to excite, the a^door of the invading army.

Such ^e^ the battle of Grannicus, be recovred S^g^^s from the enemy, which was
in a manner the bulwark of the barbarian empire. Four days after, he arrived at
Ephesus, carrying with him those who had been banished from thence for being
his adherents, and restored its popular form of government.

Alexander afterward took Miletus, and demolished Halicanassus to the very
foundation. He next restored Ada, queen of Caria, to her kingdom, of which she
had been dispossessed some time before; and as a testimony of the deep sense
she had of the favors received from Alexander, she sent him every day meats
dressed in the most exquisite manner, and the most excellent cooks of every
kind. Alexander answered the queen upon this occasion, that all this train was
of no service to him; for that he was possessed of much better cooks, whom
Leonidas his governor had given him: one of whom prepared him a good dinner,
and the other an excellent supper: these were Temperance and Exercise.

He soon afterward marched into Phrygia, the ancient dominion of the
celebrated king Midas. Having taken the capital city, he was desirous of seeing
the famous cheriot, to which the gordian knot was tied. This knot, which
fastened the yoke to the beam, was tied with so much intricacy, that it was
impossible to discover where the ends begun, or how they were concealed.
According to an ancient tradition of the country, an oracle had foretold, that
the man who could untie it should possess the empire of Asia. Alexander being
firmly persuaded that the oracle was meant for him, after many fruitless
trials, instead of attempting to untie it in the usual manner, drew his sword,
and cut it into pieces, crying out, such was the only way to untie it. The
priest hailed the omen, and declared that Alexander fulfilled the oracle.

Darius having been employed, for a long time, in collecting a numerous army to
oppose Alexander, advanced toward the river Euphrates. Over his tent was
exhibited, to the view of his whole army, the image of the sun in jewels, while
wealth and magnificence shone in every quarter of the army. First they carried
silver altars, on which lay fire, called by them Sacred and Eternal; and these
were followed by the Magi, singing hymns, after the manner of their country.
They were accompanied by three hundred and sixty-five youths, equalling the
number of days in a year, clothed in purple ro^^s. Afterward came a chariot
consecrated to Jupiter, drawn by white horses, and followed by a courser of
prodigious size, to whom they gave the name of the Sun's Horse; and the
equerries were dressed in white, each having a golden rod in his hand.

Ten chariots, adorned with sculptures of gold and silver, followed afterward.
Then marched a body of horse, composed of twelve nations, whose manners and
customs were various, and all armed in a different manner. Next advanced those,
whom the Persians called The Immortals, amounting to ten thousand, who
surpassed the rest of the barbarians in the sumptuousness of their apparel.
They all wore golden collars, were clothed in robes of gold tissue, with
vestments having sleeves to them, quite covered with precious stones. Thirty
paces from them, followed those called the king's relations, to the number of
fifteen thousand, in habits very much resembling those of women, and more
remarkable for the vain pomp of their dress, than the glitter of their arms.
Those called the Dourphori came afterward: they carried the king's cloak, and
walked before the chariot, in which he seemed to sit as on a high throne. This
chariot was enriched on both sides with images of the gods, in gold and silver;
and from the middle of the yoke, which was covered with jewels, rose two
statues, a cubit in height, the one representing war, the other peace, having a
golden eagle between them, with wings extended, as ready to take flight. But
nothing could equal the magnificence of the king; he was clo^thed in a vest of
purple, striped with silver, and over it hung a long robe, glittering all over
with gold and precious stones, that represented two falcons, rushing from the
clouds, and p^^king at one another. Around his wa^^ he ^o^e a golden girdle,
after the manner of women, whence his scimitar hung, the scabbar^ of which
flamed all over with gems. On his head he wore a tiara, or mitre, round which
was a filler of blue mixed with white. On each side of him walked two hundred
of his nearest relations, whose pikes were adorned with silver, and tipped with
gold; and lastly, thirty thousand infantry, who composed the rear guard. These
were followed by the king's horses, four hundred in number, all which were led.

About one hundred p^ces from thence, came Sysig^mbis, the mother of Darius,
feated on a chariot, and his consort on another, with the several female
attendants of both queens riding on horseback. Afterward came fifteen large
chariots, in which were the king's children, and those who had the care of
their education, with a band of eunuchs. Then marched the concubines, to the
number of three hundred and sixty, in the equipage of queens, followed by six
hundred mules, and three hundred camels, which carried the king's treasure, and
guarded by a great body of archers. After these came the wives of the
crown-officers, and of the greatest lords of the court; then the sutlers and
servants of the army, feated also in chariots. In the rear were a body of light
armed-troops, with their commanders, who closed the whole march.

Such was the splendor of this pageant monarch: he took the field encumbered
with an unnecessary train of concubines, attended with troops of various
nations, speaking different languages; from their numbers impossible to be
marshalled, and so rich and effeminate in gold and in garments, as seemed
rather to invite than deter an enemy.

CHAP. IX.
ALEXANDER, as frequently happens to the greatest captains, felt some emotions,
when he saw that he was going to hazard all at once. The more fortune had
favored him hitherto, the more he now dreaded her frowns: the moment was
approaching, which was to determine his fate. On the other side, his courage
revived from the reflection, that the reward of his toils exceeded the dangers
of them; and, though he was uncertain with regard to the victory, he at least
hoped to die gloriously, and like Alexander. However, he did not divulge these
thoughts to any one, well knowing that, upon the approach of a battle, a
general ought not to discover the least, marks of sadness or perplexity, and
that the troops should read nothing but resolution and intrepidity in the
countenance of their commander.

Having made his soldiers refresh themselves, and ordered them to be ready by
three o'clock in the morning, he went to the top of a mountain, and there, by
torch light, sacrificed, after the mander of his country, to the gods of the
place. As soon as the signal was given, his army, which was ready to march and
fight, arrived by daybreak at the several posts assigned them. But the spies
now bringing word, that Darius was not above thirty furlongs from them the king
caused his army to halt, and then drew it up in battle array. The peasants, in
the greatest terror, came also, and acquainted Darius with the arrival of the
enemy, which he would not at first believe, imagining that Alexander fled
before him, and was endeavoring to escape. This news threw his troops into the
utmost confusion, who, in their surprise, ran to their arms with great
precipitation and disorder.

The spot where the battle was fought, lay near the city of Issus, which the
mountains bounded on one side, and the sea on the other. The plain that was
situated between them both must have been considerably broad, as the two armies
encamped in it. The river Pinarius ran through the middle of this plain, from
the mountain to the sea, and divided it very nearly into two equal parts. The
mountain formed a hollow kind of gulf, the extremity of which, in a curved
line, bounded part of the plain.

Alexander had at first advanced very slowly, to prevent the ranks on the front
of the phalanx from breaking, and haired by intervals, but when he was got
within bow ^^ot; he commanded all his right wing to plunge impet^ously into the
river, purposely that he might surprise the barbarlans, come sooner to a (...)
engagement, and be less exposed to the enemy's arrows; in all which he was very
successful. Both sides fought with the utmost bravery and resolution; and,
being now forced to fight close, they charged both sides sword in hand, when a
dreadful slaughter ensued each engaging man to man. Alexander wished nothing so
ardently as to kill with his own hand Darius, who, being seated on a high
chariot, was conspicuous to the whole army. Oxathres, brother to Darius,
observing that Alexander was going to charge that monarch with the utmost
vigor, rushed before his chariot with the horse under his command, and
distinguished himself above the rest. The horses that drew Darius's chariot
lost all command, and shook the yoke so violently, that they were upon the
point of overturning the king, who, seeing himself going to fall alive into the
hands of his enemies, leaped down and mounted another chariot. The rest,
observing this, fled as fast as possible, and throwing down their arms, made
the best of their way. Darius, the instant he saw his left wing broken, was one
of the first who fled in his chariot; but getting afterward into craggy rugged
places, he mounted on horseback, throwing down his bow, shield, and royal
mantle. Alexander, however did not attempt to pursue him, till he saw his
phalanx had conquered the Greeks who obstinately opposed them, and that the
Persian horse were put to flight; which proved of great advantage to the prince
that fled. In this battle, sixty thousand of the Persian infantry, and ten
thousand horsemen, were slain; while of Alexander's army, there sell but two
hundred and eighty in all.

Sysigambis, Darius's mother, and that monarch's queen, were found remaining in
the camp, with two of the king's daughters, his son, yet a child, and some
Persian ladies; for the rest had been carried to Damascus, with part of
Darius's treasure, and all such things as contributed only to the luxury and
magnificence of his court. No more than three thousand talents were found in
his camp; but the rest of the treasure sell afterward into the hands of
Parmenio, at the taking of the city of Damascus.

The next day, Alexander visited his royal prisoners; and his noble and
generous behavior on this occasion, Plutarch occasion to say, that "the
princesses of Persia lived in an enemy's camp, as if they had been in some
sacred temple, unseen, unapproached, and unmolested." Sysigambis was
distinguished by extraordinary marks of Alexander's favors: Darius himself
could not have treated her with more respect than did that generous prince. He
allowed her to regulate the funerals of all the Persians of the royal family,
who had fallen in battle; and, through her intercession, he pardoned several of
Darius' nobles, who had justly incurred his displeasure. This magnanimous
conduct has done more honor to Alexander's character, than all his splendid
conquests. The gentleness of his manners to his suppliant captives, his
chastity and continence, when he had the power to enforce obedience, were
setting an example to heroes, which it has been the pride of many since to
imitate.

After this conquest, all Phoenicia, the capital city Tire, only excepted, was
yielded to the conqueror. Good fortune followed him to fast, that it rewarded
him beyond his expectations. Antigonus, his general in Asia, overthrew the
Capadocians, Paphlagonians, and others lately revolted. Aristodemus, the
Persian admiral was overcome at sea, and a great part of his fleet taken. The
city of Damascus, also, in which the treasures of Darius were deposited, was
given up to Alexander.

Alexander next went to Sidonia, whose king, Strabo, he dethroned for his
attachment to Darius, and permitted Hephaestion to elect in his stead,
whomsoever of the Sidonians he should judge worthy of so exalted a character.
This favorite was quartered at the house of two brothers, who were young, and
of the most considerable family in the city. To these he offered the crown; but
they refused it, telling him, that, according to the laws of their country, no
person could ascend the throne unless he were of the royal blood. Hephaestion,
admiring this greatness of soul, which could contemn what others strive to
obtain by sire and sword, "Continue, (said he to them) in this way of thinking,
you who seem sensible, that it is much more glorious to refuse than to accept a
diadem. However, name me some person of the royal family, who may remember when
he be king, that it was you who set the crown on his head." The brothers
observing, that several through excessive ambition, aspired to this high
station, and to obtain it paid a servile court to Alexander's favorites,
declared, that they did not know any person more worthy of the diade^^ than one
Abdolonymus, descended, though at a great distance, from the royal family: but
who, at the same time, was so poor, that he was obliged to get his bread by day
labor in a garden without the city. His honesty and integrity had reduced him,
as well as many more, to such extreme poverty. Solely intent upon his labor,
he did not hear the clashing of the arms which had shaken all Asia. The two
brothers went immediately in search of Abdolonymus, with the royal garment, and
found him weeding in his garden. When they salured him king, Abdolonymus looked
upon the whole as a dream; and, unable to guess the meaning of it, asked if
they were not ashamed to ridicule him in that manner. But as he made a greater
resistance than suited their inclinations, they themselves washed him, and
threw over his shoulders a purple robe richly embroidered with gold; then,
after repeated oaths of their being in earnest, they conducted him to the
palace.

Alexander commanded the new-elected princ^ to be sent for, and after surveying
him attentively a long time, ^e spoke thus: "Thy air and main do not contradict
what is related of thy extraction; but I should be glad to know with what frame
of mind thou did bear the poverty." "Would to the gods (replied he) that I
may bear this crown with equal patience. Abdolonymus (...) with Royalty
These hands have procured me all I desired; and whilst I possessed nothing, I
wanted nothing." This answer gave Alexander an high idea of Abdolonymus's
virtue; so that he presented him, not only with the rich furniture that
belonged to Strabo, and part of the Persian plunder, but likewise annexed one
of the neighboring provinces to his dominions.

The Macedonians had already subdued Syria and Phoenicia, the city of Tire
excepted. This city was justly entitled the Queen of the sea, that element
bringing to it the tribute of all nations. She boasted of having first invented
navigation, and taught mankind the art of braving the winds and waves by the
assistance of a frail bark. The happy situation of Tire, the convenience and
extent of its ports, the character of its inhabitants, who were industrious,
laborious, patient, and extremely courteous to strangers, invited thither
merchants from all parts of the globe: so that it might be considered, not so
much a city belonging to any particular nation, as the common city of all
nations, and the center of their commerce.

Alexander thought it necessary, both for his pride and his interest, to take
the city, though it was generally supposed to be impregnable from its
fortifications, and inaccessible from its situation. Alexander, however,
prepared for ^he siege, which is one of the most celebrated recorded in
history. After a long and obstinate defense on the side of the Tyrians, and a
tedious and almost hopeless attack of the besiegers, Alexander took it by
storm; and thus fell Tire, that had been for many ages the most flourishing
city in the world, and had spread the arts of commerce into the remotest
regions.

CHAP. X.
WHILST Alexander was carrying on the siege of Tire, he received a second
letter from Darius, in which that monarch seemed more sensible of his power
than before: he now gave him the title of king, and offered him ten thousand
talents, as a ransom for his captive m^^^er, and wife: he offered him his
daughter Stati^^a in marriage, with all the country he had conquered, as far as
the river Euphrates: he hinted to him the inconstancy of fortune, and described
at large the powers he was still possessed of to oppose.

These terms were so considerable, that, when the king debated upon them in
council, Parmenio, one of his generals, could not help observing, that if he
were Alexander, he would agree to such a proposal. To which Alexander nobly
replied, "And so would I were I Parmenio." He therefore treated the proposal of
Darius with haughty contempt, and refused to accept of treasures which he
already conceived as his own.

From Tire, Alexander marched to Jerusalem where the Jews opened their gates to
receive him. From this city, he went on to Gaza, where he found a more
obstinate resistance than he had expected; but at length, taking the town by
storm, and having cut the garrison consisting of ten thousand men, to pieces,
with brutal ferocity, he ordered B^etis, the governor, to be brought before
him; and having in vain endeavored to intimidate, him commanded, at last, that
holes should be bored through his heels, and thus to be tied by cords to the
back of his chariot, and in this manner to be dragged round the walls of the
city. This he did in limitation of Achilles, whom Homer describe^ as having
dragged Hector round the walls of Troy in the same manner: but it was reading
that poet to very little advantage, to imitate this hero in the most unworthy
part of his character.

He then marched into Egypt, and possessed himself of the whole of it, without
meeting with the least opposition. He afterward visited the temple of Jupiter,
and caused himself to be acknowledged by the priests as the son of that god.
Having settled his affairs in Egypt, he set out to march against Darius, who
was now preparing to oppose him.

On his march, Statira, the wife of Darius, died in childbed, and was honored
with a funeral ceremony due to her exalted character and station. The news of
that melancholy event was carried to Darius by Tricus, one of Statira's
eunuchs, who had affected his escape from the Macedonian camp. The news of
Statira's death overwelmed the mind of Darius with the deepest sorrow: but when
he was told of the generous manner, in which the royal captives had been
treated, he broke out into this exclamation: "Ye gods, the guardians of our
births, and who decree the fate of nations, grant that I may be enabled to
leave the Persian state rich and flourishing as I found it; that I may have it
in my power to make Alexander a proper return for his generosity to the dearest
pledges of my affection! But, if the duration of this empire is near at an end,
and the greatness of Persia about to be forgotten, may none but Alexander be
permitted to sit on the throne of Cyrus? Such sentiments in a despotic prince
must give a very favorable idea of the liberality of his mind.

The armies of Alexander and Darius were now hastily approaching each other,
and at length met on a plain near the city of Arbela. The army of Darius,
consisted, at least, of six hundred thousand foot, and forty thousand horse:
and the other of no more than forty thousand foot, and about eight thousand
horse. The two armies engaged, and the battle was obstinate and bloody; but the
Persians were at length routed, and Darius and his army put to slight.
Alexander then marched for Babylon, and entered that city in triumph, being
received by its inhabitants in the most magnificent manner. He next took
possession of Perepolis, at the head of his victorious soldiers; who, though
the inhabitants made no resistance, began to cut in pieces all those who still
remained in the city. However, the king soon put an end to the massacre, and
forbad his soldiers to commit any further violence.

While Alexander was thus triumphing in all the exultation of success, the
wretched Darius was by this time arrived at Ecbatana, the capital of Media.
There remained still with this fugitive prince thirty thousand foot; among whom
were four thousand Greeks, who were faithful to him to the last. Besides these
he had four thousand slingers, and upwards of three thousand Bactrian horse,
whom Bessus, their governor, commanded. Darius, even with so small a force,
still conceived hopes of opposing his rival, or at least of protracting the
war; but he was surrounded with traitors, his want of success having turned all
mankind against him. Nabarzanes, one of the greatest lords of Persia, and
general of the horse, had conspired with Bessirs, general of the Bactrians, to
commit the blackest of all crimes: to seize upon the person of the king, and
lay him in chains, which they might easily do, as each of them had a great
number of soldiers under his command. Their design was, if Alexander should
pursue them, to secure themselves by giving up Darius alive into his hands;
and, in case they escaped, to murder that prince, and afterward usurp his
crown, and begin a new war. These traitors soon won over the troops, by
representing to them, that they were going to their destruction; that they
would soon be crushed under the ruin of an empire, which was just ready to
fall; at the same time that Bactriana was open to them, and offered them
immense rishes. These promises soon prevailed upon the perfidious army, the
Greek mercenaries excepted, who rejected all their proposals with disdain.
Darius, thus betrayed by his generals, and pursued by his enemies, the Greeks
solicited the honor of protecting his person, assuring him they would so do,
at the expense of the last drop of their blood. But his noble spirit would not
suffer him to accept the offer: "If my own subjects (said he) will not give me
protection, how can I submit to receive it from the hands of strangers?" His
faithful Grecian soldiers, finding it beyond their power to grant him any
relief, threw themselves upon the mercy of Alexander; who, in consideration of
their noble spirit, forgave them, and employed them in his own service.

The traitors seized and bound their monarch in chains of gold, under the
appearance of honor, as he was a king; then enclosing him in a covered
chariot, they set out toward Bactriana. In this manner they carried him with
the utmost dispatch* until being informed, that the Grecian army was still
closely pursuing them, they found it impossible either to conciliate the
friendship of Alexander, or to secure a throne for themselves. They, therefore
once more gave Darius his liberty, and desired him to make the best of his
escape with them from the conqueror; but he replied that the gods were ready to
revenge the evils he had already suffered; and, appealing to Alexander for
justice, refused to follow a band of traitors. At these words they fell into
the utmost fury, wounding him with their darts and their spears, and left him
to linger in this manner, unattended, the remainder of his wre^^^ed life. The
traitors then made their escape d^fferent ways; while the victorious
Macedonians at length coming up, found Darius in solitude, lying in his
chariot, and drawing near his end. However, he had strength enough, before he
died, to call for drink, which a Macedonian, Polystratus by name, brought him.
On this melancholy occasion, the generosity of the unfortunate monarch shone
forth, in the address he made to this stranger: "Now, indeed, (said he) I
suffer the extremity of misery, since it is not in my power to reward thee for
this act of humanity." He had a Persian prisoner, whom he employed as his
interpreter. Darius, after drinking the liquor that had been given him. turned
to the Macedonian, and told him, that in the deplorable state to which he was
reduced, he however should have the comfort to speak to one who could
understand him, and that his last words would not be lost. He therefore charged
hi^ to tell Alexander, that he had died in his debt, that he gave him many
thanks, for the great humanity he had exercised toward his mother, his wife,
and his children, whose lives he had not only spared, but restored to their
former splendor; that he be sought the gods to give victory to his arms, and
make him monarch of the universe; that he thought he need not entreat him to
revenge the execrable murder committed on his person, as that was the common
cause of kings. After this, taking Polystratus by the hand, "Give him (said he)
thy hand, as I give thee mine: and carry him, in my name, the only pledge I am
able to give of my gratitude and affection." Having said these words, he
breathed his last.

Alexander coming up a moment after, and seeing Darius's body, he wept
bitterly; and, by the strongest testimonies of affection that could be given,
proved how intimately he was affected with the unhappiness of a prince who
deserved better. He immediately pulled off his military cloak, and threw it on
Darius's body; then causing it to be embalmed, and his coffin to be adorned
with royal magnificence, he sent it to Sysigambis. to be interred with the
honors usually paid to the deceased Persian monarchs, and entombed with his
ancestors. Thus died Darius, in the fiftieth year of his age, six of which he
reigned with felicity. In him the Persian empire ended, after having existed
from the time of Cyrus the Great, a period of 299 years.

The traitor Bessus did not escape the fate due to his crimes. Alexander
pursued him, to avenge on the murderer the death of his royal master. After
wandering, in anxiety and horror, from province to province, he was delivered,
by the associates of his guilt, into the hands of Alexander, by whom he was put
to a ^ruel death.

CHAP. XI.
THE death of Darius only served to inflame the spirit of ambition in Alexander
to pursue further conquests. He crossed Parthia, and arrived in the province of
Hyrcania, which submitted to his arms. He afterward subdued the Mandii, the
Arii, the Drangae, the Hrachosii, and several other nations, into which his
army marched with greater speed than people generally travel. He frequently
would pursue an enemy for whole days and nights together, almost without
suffering his troops to take any rest. By this prodigious rapidity, he came
unawares upon nations, who thought him at a great distance, and subdued them
before they had time to put themselves in a posture of defense.

Alexander, now enjoying a little repose, ab^ndoned himself to sensuality; and
he, whom the arms of the Persians could not conquer, fell a victim to their
vices. Nothing was now to be seen but games, parties of pleasure, women and
excessive fasting, in which he used to revel whole days and nights. Not
satisfied with the buffoons, and the performers on instrumental music, whom he
had brought with him out of Greece, he obliged the captive women, whom he
carried along with him, to sing songs after the manner of their country. He
happened, among those women, to perceive one who appeared in deeper affliction
than the rest, and who by a modest, and at the same time a noble confusion,
discovered a greater reluctance than the others to appear in public. She was a
perfect beauty, which was very much heightened by her bashfulness, whilst she
threw her eyes to the ground, and did all in her power to conceal her face. The
king soon imagined, by her air and mien, that she was not of vulgar birth; and
enquiring himself into it, the lady answered, that she was granddaughter to
Ochus, who not long before had swayed the Persian scepter, and daughter of his
son; that she had married Hystaspes, who was related to Darius, and general of
a great army. Alexander, being touched with compassion, when he heard the
unhappy fate of a princess of the blood royal, and the sad condition to which
she was reduced, not only gave her liberty, but returned all her possessions;
and caused her husband to be sought for, in order that she might be restored to
him. This single act of generosity should draw a veil over many of his faults.

Hitherto we have seen Alexander triumphing by a course of virtue, we are now
to behold him swollen up by success, spoiled by flattery, and enervated by
vices, exhibiting a very doubtful character, and mixing the tyrant with the
hero. Upon a charge of a real or imaginary plot against him, he first put
Philotas to death, and afterward the father, Parmenio, who was at the time of
his death seventy years of age, and had served his master with fidelity and
zeal, which in the end was thus rewarded. Alexander, thus uniting in his person
at once great cruelty and great enterprise, still marched forward in search of
new nations, whom he might subdue.

Having subdued the Massage^ae, the Dahae, and other nations, he entered the
province of Barsaria, from thence he advanced to Maracander, and appointed
Clitus governor of that province. This was an old officer, who had fought under
Philip, and signalized himself on many occasions. At the battle of the
Grann^ous, as Alexander was fighting bareheaded, and Rasaces had his arm
raised, in order to strike him behind, Clitus covered the king with his shield,
and cut off the barbarian's hard. -- This favor, however, only advanced Clitus
to a post of greater danger. One evening, as an entertainment, the king, after
drinking immoderately, began to celebrate his own exploits, in a manner which
shocked all his old generals. Clitus, who was also intoxicated, contradicted
Alexander in all his assertions, and sung, with an air of insolence, verses
reflecting highly on the price, who seeing the general near him, he struck him
dead with a javelin. The king had no sooner murdered his faithful servant, than
he perceived the atrociousness of the act; he threw himself upon the dead body,
forced out the javelin, and would have destroyed himself, had he not been
prevented by his guards, who seized and carried him forcibly to his own
apartment, where the flattery and persuasions of his friends at length served
to alleviate his remorse. Alexander, in order to divert his melancholy,
assembled his army, and marched in pursuit of new conquests.

He advanced into India, which having never been a warlike nation, he subdued
it with the rapididity rather of a traveller than a conqueror. Numberless petty
states submitted to him, sensible that his stay would be short, and his
conquests evanescent. Sailing down the river Indus, and conquering every thing
in his way, he at last come to the country of the Oxydraci and the Mallis, the
most valiant people in the East. However, Alexander defeated them in several
engagements, dispossessing them of their strong holds, and at last marched
against their capital city, where the greatest part of their forces were
retired. It was upon this occasion, that seizing a scaling ladder, himself
first mounted the wall, followed only by two of his officers. His attendants
believing him to be in danger, mounted swiftly to succor him; but the ladder
breaking, he was left alone. It was now that his rashness became his safety;
for leaping from the wall into the city, which was crowded with enemies, sword
in hand, he repulsed such as were nearest, and even killed the general, who
advanced in the throng. Thus with his back to a tree that happened to be near,
he received all the darts of the enemy in a shield, and kept even the boldest
at a distance. At last, an Indian discharging an arrow of three feet long, it
pierced his coat of mail and his right breast, and so great a quantity of blood
issued from the wound, that he dropped his arms, and lay as dead. The Indian
came to strip him, supposing him really what he appeared: but Alexander that
instant recalled his spirits, and plunged a dagger in his side. By this time, a
part of the king's attendants came to his succor, and forming themselves round
his body, till his soldiers without found means of bursting the gates, saved
him, and put all the inhabitants, without distinction, to the sword.

The wound which at first seemed dangerous, having, in the space of six or
seven days, assumed a more favorable appearance, Alexander mounted his horse,
and showed himself to the army, who seemed to view him with insatiable
pleasure. Then continuing his voyage, and subduing the country on each side, as
he passed along, the pilots perceived from the swell of the river, that the sea
could not be far distant; and they informed the king, that they already felt
the breezes of the ocean. Nothing so much astonished the Macedonian soldiers as
the ebbing and flowing of the tide. Accustomed to the gentle floods of the
Mediterranean, they were amazed when they saw the Indus rise to a great
height, and overflrow the country, which they considered as a mark of divine
resentment. They were no less terrified some hours afterward, when they saw
the river forsake its banks, and leave those lands uncovered, which it had so
lately overflowed. Thus, after a voyage of nine months, he at last stood upon
the shore; and after having offered sacrifices to Neptune, and looked wishfully
on the immense expanse of waters before him, he is said to have wept for having
no more worlds left to conquer. Here he put an end to his excursions; and,
having appointed Nearchus admiral of his fleet with orders to coast along the
Indian shore as far as the Persian gulf, he set out with his army for babylon.

His army sustained incredible hardships on their return: passing through a
country destitute of all sorts of provisions, they were obliged to feast on the
beasts of burden, and were forced to burn those rich spoils, for the sake of
which they had encountered so many dangers. Those diseases also, that generally
accompany famine, completed their calamity, and destroyed them in great
numbers: but the king's fortitude appeared to great advantage on this occasion.
The army being in absolute want of water, some soldiers were sent to endeavor
to find out a spring. They fortunetely fell upon one; but it yielded them but a
very small quantity of water. With what they had gotten, the soldiers returned
rejoicing to the king, who, instead of drinking it, poured it upon the ground,
unwilling that his soldiers should sustain a calamity, in which he refused to
bear a part. This generous act inspired the soldiery with fresh spirits.

After a march of sixty days, they arrived in the province of Gedrosis, the
fertility of which soon banished from the minds of the soldiery all their
former difficulties. Alexander passed through the country, not in the military
pomp of a conqueror, but in the licentious disguise of an enthusiast: still
willing to imitate Bacchus, he was drawn by eight horses, on a scaffold in the
form of a square stage, where he spent the days and nights in feasting. Along
the roads where he passed, were placed casks of wine in great abundance, and
these the soldiers drained in honor of their mock deity. The whole country
echoed with the sound of instruments, and the howling of bacchanals, who, with
their hair dishevelled, and frantic mirth, ran up and down, abandoning
themselves to every kind of lewdness. This vice produced one of a much more
formidable nature in the king's mind; for it always inflamed his passions to
cruelty, and the executioner generally crowned the feast.

After various combats, conquests, cruelties, follies, and excesses, Alexander
arrived at Babylon. On his approach to the city, many sinister omens were
observed; on which account the Chaldeans, who pretended to foresee future
events, attempted to persuade him not to enter that city. The Greek
philosophers, on the other hand, displayed the futility of their predictions.
Babylon was a theater for him to display his glory on; and ambassadors from all
the nations he had conquered were there in readiness to celebrate his triumphs.
After making a most magnificent entry, he gave audience to the ambassadors with
a grandeur and dignity suitable to his power, yet with the affability and
politeness of a private courtier.

Alexander, finding Babylon, in extent and convenience Iupperior to all other
cities of the East, he resolved to make it the seat of his empire; and for that
purpose was desirable of adding to it all the ornaments possible. Though he was
much employed in projects of this kind, and in schemes beyond human power to
execute, he spent the greater part of his time in such pleasures as this
magnificent city afforded; but his pleasures often terminated in licentiousness
and riot. The recollection of the cruel manner, in which he had put a period to
the lives of some of his best friends and favorites festered in his mind, and
cast a thick gloom over his spirits; to dissipate which, required the
application of some very powerful remedy. The remedy, to which he had recourse,
was intemperance. He was, of course frequently invited to banquets, at which he
drank so immoderately, as often to have no command left of himself.

On a particular occasion, having spent the whole night in a debauch, a second
was proposed: he accepted the invitation, and drank to such excess, that he
fell upon the floor, to appearance dead, and in this lifeless manner was
carried, a sad spectacle of debauchery, to his palace. The fever continued,
with some intervals, in which he gave the necessary orders for the sailing of
the fleet, and the marching of his land forces, being persuaded he shoud soon
recover. But at last, finding himself past hopes, and his voice beginning to
fail, be gave his ring to Perdiccas, with orders to convey his corpse to the
temple of Ammon. He struggled, however, with death for some time, and raising
himself upon his elbow, he gave his hand to the soldiers, who pressed to kiss
it. Being then asked to whom he would leave his empire, he answered, "To the
most worthy." Perdiccas enenquiring at what time he should pay him divine
honors, he replied, "When you are happy." With these words he expired, being
thirty-two years and eight months old, of which he had reigned twelve, with
more fortune than virtue.

By the death of this illustrious conqueror were fulfilled many of the
prophecies of the sacred writers. One of them is singularly striking: "The
temple of Belus shall be broken down to the ground, never to raise from its
ruins." That the word of God might stand firm, Alexander is cut off, at the
very instant he is preparing to rebuild that temple, and to raise Babylon to
its wanted splendor. Alexander left one son, named Hercules, who was born of
Barsine, the daughter of Artabazus, and widow of Memnon. Both Roxana and
Statira are said to have been left pregnant.

In whatever light we view this monarch, we shall find little to admire, and
less to imitate. That courage, for which he was celebrated, is but a
subordinate virtue; that fortune, which constantly attended him, was but an
accidental advantage; that discipline, which prevailed in his army, was
produced and cultivated by his father; but his intemperance, his cruelty, his
vanity, his passion for useless conquests, were all his own. His victories,
however, served to crown the pyramid of Grecian glory; they served to show, to
what a degree the arts of peace can promote those of war. In this picture, we
view a combination of petty states, by the arts of refinement, growing more
than a match for the rest of the world united, and leaving mankind an example
of the superiority of intellect over brutal force.

CHAP. XII.
ALEXANDER having. by his last words, bequeathed his empire "to the most
worthy," men who had been accustomed to rule with absolute power, in distant,
extensive, populous, and wealthy provinces, must have been highly pleased to
find, that their sovereign's will threw no bar in their way to dominion or
power. There was one, however, who appeared to have an extraordinary claim to
distinction: Perdiccas, to whom Alexander, in his last moments, had delivered
his royal signet. Possessed of merit, equal at least to that of his
competitors, this adventitious circumstance might seem to have given him a
superior title to the vast object in question; but his rivals were too proud to
suffer an equal to be exalted above them, without throwing some embarrassment
in his way; and too fond of power to bestow a title to an empire, without
advancing their own pretensions. Accordingly they all remonstrated, and opposed
Perdicca's elevation; and, finding that they were not likely to succeed in
their private schemes, by acting interestedly, they resolved to overturn his,
by acting justly, in supporting the claims of the lawful heirs to the crown.
These were Hercules, the son of Alexander; and Aridaeus, Alexander's own
brother. There was little or no contest about Aridaeus's right to a share in
the sovereignty. He had been acknowledged to be insane; and that circumstance,
perhaps more than his consanguinity to the king, procured him an easy admission
to the throne. The right of Hercules was not so readily recognized: his mother
was not of royal extraction; and as Alexander had always shown a preference to
Roxana and Statira, and had, moreover, omitted to mention Hercules in his last
hours, his title was at once set aside; but the exclusive right to the throne
was not to be granted to one person. It was therefore judged proper, by all the
leading men, to divide the sovereignty between Aridaeus and the child to be
born of Roxana, should it prove a son. This appointment was easily acceded to,
as the government that was naturally to be expected from it, would have fall
scope for the exercise of avarice and ambition. This settlement being made, the
various competitors for the Macedonian empire retired to their respective
employments.

Roxana being delivered of a son, whom they named Alexander, Olympias had been
recalled to take charge of her infant grandson, and to sanction the new
administration of Macedon by her presence. On her arrival at Macedon, she first
let lose her savage revenge on Aridaeus, and his queen Eurydice. Aridaeus, the
son of Philip by a concubine had from his infancy been subjected to that
aversion and hatred from Olympias, which the relationship that subsisted
between her and him naturally excited. The infirmity of his understanding was
said to have been the effect of a potion, which she gave him. Cyna^e, the
mother of Aridaeus' queen, had been murdered at the instigation of Olympias.
Amyntas, her father the son of Philip the First's elder brother, had also been
destroyed through her contrivance: so that neither Aridaeus, nor Eurydice his
wife, could be supposed to look upon her with complacence. Indeed, they had
every reason to apprehend bad consequences from her getting into power, and
they set themselves to provide for the worst. Eurydice raised an army, and
marched to meet Olympias; but on the two armies meeting, the troops of Eurydice
went over to the standard of Olympias, and Aridaeus and his queen fell into her
hands.

Olympias persecuted the royal couple with all that unrelenting hatred which
marked her disposition: they were confined to a prison, which was so small,
that they could scarcely turn themselves in it. Their wretched sustenance was
thrown in at a little hole, through which passed light and air, and all the
other limited comforts they were permitted to enjoy. Percerving that this
barbarous treatment had no other effect than to excite the compassion of the
people, and fearing that their commiseration would soon be converted into
indignation toward her, she resolved to put a period to the miserable
existence of her prisoners. She instructed some Thracians to enter the prison,
and dispatch Aridaeus, which they did without remorse. He had reigned six years
and four months.

This inhuman action being perpetrated, Olympias sent messengers to the queen,
furnished with a poinard, a rope, and a cup of poison, desiring her to choose
which she pleased. They found her binding up the wounds of her bleeding spouse,
with linen which she had torn from her own body, and paying all that decent and
solemn respect to the lifeless corse, which became her deplorable situation.
She received the message that was brought to her with the greatest composure;
and, after entreating the gods, that Olympias might be rewarded with the like
present, she took the rope, and strangled herself. Thus were that hapless pair
cut off. Olympias had now seen a period to the life of Aridaeus, whom she had
long since deprived of every rational enjoyment, by robbing him of his
understanding; and she had completed the ruin of Eurydice and her family, by
consigning her to an end similar to that, which her violent and vindictive
passions had formerly procured to her unfortunate parents. Nor was her thirst
of blood yet quenched: for he caused Nicanor, the brother of Cassander, to be
put to death. The body of Io^^s, another brother of Cassander, which had long
rested in the tomb, she had brought forth, and exposed on the highway; and an
hundred Macedonians of noble birth were seized and executed, on suspicion of
having been in the interest of Cassander. At last, however, the fortune of war
threw her into the power of Cassander, who delivered her into the hands of
those whose kindred she had murdered, and who thereupon cut her throat.

The furious contentions that now subsisted among the ambitious surviving
captains of Alexander, deluged Greece in blood, and brought on the most
unnatural murders. Besides those horrid and unnatural scenes we have already
described, Roxana and her sop Alexander were imprisoned, and treated with
contempt; and Hercules, the son of Alexander by Bartine, the only remaining
branch of the royal family, was murdered about two years after. Nor more than
twenty eight years had elapsed since the death of Alexander, and not a single
branch of his house remained to enjoy a portion of that empire, which Philip
and his son had acquired at the price of the greatest policy, dangers, and
bloodshed. Such, to the royal family of Macedon, were the effects Philip
sitting in judgment on his (...)
of that ambition, which had lighted the torch of war over Europe, Asia, and
Africa.

Among the last kings of Macedon, was Philip, son of Demetrius. He had two
sons, Perseus and Demetrius; the former of which accused the latter of a design
to ass^ssinate the king, who retiring into the inner apartment of his palace,
with two of his nobles, sat in solemn judgment on his two sons, being under the
agonizing necessity, whether the charge should be proved or disapproved, of
finding one of them guilty. Perseus took care to procure such evidence against
his brother, as might not fail of convicting him, and Demetrius was accordingly
put to death. Philip, when too late, discovered that he had been imposed upon
by a forgery, and died of a broken heart. He was succeeded by his son Perseus,
who, some time after, was taken prisoner by the Romans, led in triumph through
the streets of Rome, and then thrown into a dungeon, where he starved himself
to death.

The fatal dissension among the Grecian chiefs exposed them to the inroads of
every neighboring power. The Romans, after the defeat of Perseus, established
a new form of government in Macedon. The whole kingdom was divided into four
districts; the inhabitants of each were to have no connection, intermarriage,
or exchange of possessions, with those of the other districts; and, among other
regulations tendings to reduce them to a state of the most ^bject slavery, they
were inhibited from the use of arms, unless in such places as were exposed to
the incursions of the barbarians. Triumphal games at Amphipolis, to which all
the neighboring nations, both Europeans and Asiatics, were invited, announced
the extended dominion of Rome, and the humiliation not only of Macedon, but of
all Greece; for the Romans now found nothing in that part of the world that was
able to oppose them.

Greece, now sunk in that mass of nations which composed the Roman empire, had
lost every vestige of national existence; and, while she was excluded from all
participation in the prosperity of her conquerors, she shared deeply in her
misfortunes. The civil wars of Rome drenched Greece with blood; and, when that
war was concluded, whoever had not appeared on the side of the victor, was
considered as his enemy. Greece, in common with the other Roman provinces, had
suffered many oppressions under the emperors, and from the repeated invasions
of barbarians, when the accession of Constantine the Great to the Imperial
throne, seemed to promise to the Grecian annals a new era of glory, and some
comfort^ for their past misfortunes.

The hopes of Greece, however, were even here disappointed; for Constantine, by
dividing his dominions among his three sons, involved the empire in the flames
of civil war; and his son Julian, who at lost prevailed, overturned every thing
his father had done. He was unable to protect the public prosperity, undermined
by the despotism of a military government, and a general pusillanimity of
manners. These invited attacks on the empire on every side. Julian was forced
to yield a considerable territory to the Persian monarch. In Britain, the Roman
ramparts were opposed in vain to the hardy valor of the ^orth; even the
legionary troops had been found unable to sustain the shocks of the unconquered
Caledonians. The German tribes renewed their inroads into Gaul; Africa
rebelled, and a spirit of discontent and insurrection began to appear among the
barbarian tribes on the Danube. In the reign of the Emperor Valens, the Huns, a
new tribe of barbarians, in manners and aspect more horrid than any that had
yet appeared on the Roman frontiers, plundered and drove from their settlements
the Gothic tribes on the further side of the Danube. Gratian, nephew and heir
to Valens, shared the empire with Theodosius, whom the calamities of the times
raised to the possession of the whole. The abilities and personal valor of
this prince bestowed on the empire an appearance of vigor during his reign;
but his sons Arcadius and Honorius, between whom he divided the empire, brought
up in the bosom of a luxurious palace, and sunk in effeminacy, were unequal to
the task of governing an empire weakened by division. The reign of Honorius
concluded the Roman empire in the East Alaric, the Gothic chief, who,
twenty-five years before, deemed it an honor to bear arms on the side of the
empire, was adorned with the imperial purple. Augustulus, the last Roman who
was graced with imperial dignity at Rome, was compelled to abdicate the Western
empire by Ode^cer, king of the ^e^uli, about the year of Christ 475.

Amidst the calamities which attended and followed after this revolution,
Greece saw ^er magnificient cities laid in ruins, her numerous towns levelled
with the ground, and those monuments o^ her glory, which had hitherto escaped
barbari^n outrage defaced and overthrown; while the wretched descendants of
men^ who blessed the nations with science and art, were either enslaved by the
invaders, or led into captivity, or slaughtered by the swords of barbarians.
Without inhabitants, or coltivation, and buried as it were in ruins, Greece was
too insignificant to be an object of ambition, and left to the possession of
any of the rovers of those days, who chose to make a temporary settlement in
that desolated country. -- Constantinople itself during the greater part of
this gloomy period, retained little more than a shadow of greatness. The chief
inhabitants were those families who, during the incursions of the barbarians,
had made their escape to the mountains. Such was the state of Greece, with
little variation, from the Gothic i^ vision, to the final overthrow of the
Eastern empire by the Ottoman arms, in the year of the Christan ac^^ one
thousand four hundred and fifty three.

However, even in the midst of war, devastation and slavery, Greece continued
long to be the seat of philosophy and the fine arts. Whatever conjectures may
be formed concerning the advancement of science in India and in Egypt, it is
certain, that Greece was the country which enlightened, exalted, and adorned
the rest of Europe, and set an example of whatever is beautiful and great. It
was the genius of Greece that formed those very politicians and heroes, who
first bent her lofty spirit under the yoke of foreign dominion. It was in
Thebes, under the tuition of Epaminondas, that her heroes were trained to a
love of glory, and of all those arts and accomplishments of both peace and war,
by which it is best attained. It was a Grecian philosopher who taught Alexander
how to manage the passions, and govern the minds of men; while the writings of
Homer, by a most powerful contagion, inspired his mind with a contempt of
danger and death in the pursuit of glory. -- As the light of Greece illuminated
her Macedonian, so it spread over her Roman conquerors. Philosophy, literature,
and arts, began to follow glory and empire to Rome in the times of Sylla and
Lucullus, and, in their progress, drew to different schools every man of rank
and fashion in Italy. Wealth, luxury, and corruption, and at last tyranny,
banished it from Rome; but while it lasted, it made up, in some degree, for the
want of liberty; if it were unable to resist oppressive power, it sustained the
mind in the midst of sufferings. -- Even in the worst of times, when the Roman
empire was in the last period of its decl^^e^ amidst the ruins of the ancient
world, distracted by internal divisions, and torn to pieces by the incursions
of barbarous nations from the east, north, and south, a succession of
ingenious, learned, and contemplative minds, transmitted the sacred light of
truth (which, like the sun, though eclipsed or obscured, never deserts the
world) from one age to another.

The modern Greeks, without the least political importance, and sunk in slavery
to a military government, retain but little of their original character. The
gradations, by which that character faded away, are clearly discernible in
their history, and present to the a^tentive eye a speculation of great
curiosity and Importance. The relaxation of manners gradually undermined the
political institutions of the leading states of Greece, and the complete
subversion of these, reacting on manners, accelerated on the declination of
virtue. Simplicity, modesty, temperance, sincerity, and good faith, fled first:
the last of the virtues that took its flight, was military valor.

CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL OCCURRENCES AND EVENTS DURING THE
EXISTENCE OF THE GRECIAN STATES.
N. B. The Figures at the End of the Lines refer to the Date of the Events
before the Birth of Christ.
FOUNDATION of the Kingdom of Athens by Cecrops Before J. C. 1556 Foundation of
the Kingdom of Lacedemonia Before J. C. 1516 Troy taken by the Greeks Before J.
C. 1184 Foundation of the City of Thebes Before J. C. 1055 Homer and Hesiod
lived about Before J. C. 844 Foundation of the kingdom of Macedon Before J. C.
794 Beginning of the common era of the Olympiad Before J. C. 776 Thales of
Miletus, founder of the Ionic sect Before J. C. 640 Draco, legislator of Athens
Before J. C. 624 Solon, and the other sages of Greece, lived about Before J. C.
604 Pythagoras lived about Before J. C. 564 Simonides, the celebrated poet
Before J. C. 560 Pisistratus makes himself master of Athens Before J. C. 559
Heraclitus, chief of the sect that bears his name Before J. C. 544 Death of
Pisistratus Before J. C. 526 Battle of Marathon Before J. C. 490 Death of
Miltiades Before J. C. 490 Xerxes succeeds his father Darius Before J. C. 485
Xerxes sets out to make war against the Greeks Before J. C. 480 Battle of
Thermopyl^e Before J. C. 480 Battle of Salamis, and Xerxes' retreat into Persia
Before J. C. 480 Battle of Pla^^ae Before J. C. 479 Pindar, the celebrated
poet, flourished about Before J. C. 476 Sophocles and Euripides appeared in
Greece about Before J. C. 473 Xerxes killed by Artabanus, the captain of his
guard Before J. C. 472 The Persians defeated by the Greeks, and their fleet
taken, near the mouth of the river Eurymedon Before J. C. 471 Birth of Socrates
Before J. C. 470 Birth of Xenophor Before J. C. 450 End of the war between the
Greeks and Persians, which had continued fifty-one years Before J. C. 449
Alcibrades appears in the war between the Corinthians and the people of Cortyra
Before J. C. 436 Beginning of the Peloponnesian war, which lasted twenty seven
years Before J. C. 431 A terrible plague raged at Athens Before J. C. 430 Death
of Pericles Before J. C. 429 Lysander makes himself master of Athens, and
establishes the Thirty Tyrants Before J. C. 404 Death of Socrates Before J. C.
401 Birth of Aristotle, founder of the Peripatet^es Before J. C. 384 Birth of
Philip, King of Macedon Before J. C. 383 Birth of Demoni^enes Before J. C. 382
Battle of Leuetra Before J. C. 370 Battle of Mantinea, and death of Epimanondas
Before J. C. 363 Philip ascends the throne of Macedon Before J. C. 360 Birth of
Alexander the Great Before J. C. 356 Plato died Before J. C. 348 Philip
declared generalissimo of the Greeks Before J. C. 338 Battle of Cheronta, in
which Philip defeats the Athenians and Thebans Before J. C. 338 Death of
Philip, who is succeeded by his son, Alexander Before J. C. 336 Thebes taken
and destroyed by Alexander Battle of the Grannicus, followed with the conquest
of almost all Asia Mino^ Battle of Issus Tire taken by Alexander Alexander goes
to Jerusalem, makes himself master of Gaza, and soon after of all Egypt. Builds
the city of Alexandria Battle of Arbela Darius seized and put in chains by
Bessus, and soon after assassinated Thalestres, queen of the Amazons, pays a
visit to Alexander Before J. C. 330 Bessus brought to Alexander, and soon after
put to death Before J. C. 329 Lysippus, of Sicyon, a famous sculptor,
flourished about Before J. C. 329 Clitus killed by Alexander at a feast Before
J. C. 328 Alexander's entrance in to India Before J. C. 327 Alexander, on his
return to Babylon, dies there, at the age of thirty-two years and eight months
Before J. C. 323 Olympias, the mother of Alexander, causes Aridaeus, and
Eurydice, his wife, to be put to death, as she herself is soon after, by order
of Cassander Before J. C. 317 Greece reduced into a Roman province, under the
name of the province of Achia Before J. C. 126
FINIS.

