AN ORATION ON THE Improvement of Medicine.

AN ORATION ON THE IMPROVEMENT OF MEDICINE. PRONOUNCED BEFORE A RESPECTABLE
AUDITORY OF CITIZENS, IN THE FEDERAL HALL, IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK; ACCORDING
TO APPOINTMENT OF THE MEDICAL SOCIETY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, At their
Anniversary Meeting, on the 16th January, 1794.

By AMASA DINGLEY, Physician.

'ITPIK' (...)
IPPOKPATOYS NOOS. Errores non sunt Artis, sed artificum. NEWTON. Haud equidem
credo, quia fit divinitus illis
Ingenitum, aut rerum fato prudentia major:
Verum, ubi Tempestas et coeli mobilis humor,
Mutavere vias; et Jupiter uvidus Austris,
Densar, erunt quae rara modo; et, quae densa, relaxat;
Vertuntur species animorum: --
P. V. MARO. NEW YORK: PRINTED BY JOHN BUEL, AT THE ACADEMY, NO. 24,
LITTLE-QUEEN STREET.

TO THE PUBLIC.
THE HEALTH OF THE PEOPLE IS THE SUPREME LAW. Therefore, to the people the
following pages are dedicated. To them it belongs to fix the merit of every
work, and to appretiate the true character of every citizen; for they are the
only legitimate source of sovereignty. If these pages contain any thing useful
or new, the people will approve it, and give credit to the Author for a part of
the debt, which, he owes to society. The remainder shall be paid hereafter. If,
on the contrary, this pamphlet should be found to have no tendency to promote
the interests of medicine and of truth, the people will reject it; for, their
good sense will enable them to judge accurately and determine fairly.

A. D.
February, 1794.
An ORATION, etc.
GENTLEMEN,
A SHORT contemplation of the animal economy will convince us that life cannot
be perpetual, under the present mode of existence: For we quickly perceive, by
the law of our nature, we are subjected to changes, disease and death. From the
first disease that affected man, the healing art must have taken its origin; as
it is natural to believe that mankind must have been thus early impelled by
sickness and pain to seek the remedies that nature afforded for the removal or
mitigation of their misery. -- It is a pleasing and useful speculation, to
trace our art from this embryo state to its present condition of improvement
and maturity. In the dawn of medical knowledge, the evolutions of the human
mind must have been slow and imperfect. Great distress must have been suffered
before many medical facts could have been investigated; and after all, these
must have been the result of individual exertion. But, in the course of
revolving time, and by the progress of civilization, the collective energies of
men, under the benign influences of freedom and the social compact, are
concentred to a point, for accelerating the perfection of the art and sciences.
Among these, if you except agriculture, and the art of teaching children to
think accurately and act well, the first in use, and the first in dignity, is
the Healing Art, or the Science of Life -- Yours is the happiness "to associate
for the express purposes of promoting social and professional intercourse, as a
happy means of disseminating medical knowledge; of investigating the diseases
and remedies peculiar to our country, and thereby to lessen human misery; and
of giving respectability and order to the practice of Physic." Vid.
Constitution and By Laws of the Society.
And, I trust, it may be added, of collecting, methodising and publishing
medical facts and observations for the benefit of this age and of posterity.

LET it then be the design of this discourse, to call your attention to the
Improvement of Medicine: For this will necessarily lead me, concisely, to point
out some of the principal objects of the Institution, by which the advantages
derivable from this establishment will be rendered obvious to the Community;
and, to show some of the means of making the Institution useful to the
citizens, and honorable to its members.

THE novelty of the occasion, as well as the mixed aspect of medical affairs,
seemed to require that something should be offered on this subject. A short
essay on some therapeutic subject, perhaps, would be more acceptable to several
of the members. -- But, to adopt this plan, I trust, will fulfill your design in
appointing an anniversary discourse, and at the same time, be productive of
more general utility.

A DIFFIDENCE of my own abilities, would have forbidden my appearing before you
on this occasion, had I not been confident of enjoying the exercise of that
candor and generosity of sentiment, while an attempt is made to perform the
duty you have assigned me, which has been so often conspicuous in your stated
meetings.

THE medical and philosophical societies in Europe have already done much to
promote and accomplish the excellent designs for which you are associated. They
have brought us to the gate of the temple of nature; they have drawn aside the
veil of ignorance and mysteries; they have invited us to enter and accompany
them, as patient inquirers in the investigation of life, health, and disease.
-- With the other parts of united America, let us join our Brothers of the old
world, in this excellent work of the study of nature. Thus shall we pay a debt
that is due to society and mankind, and "learn Pythagorae aurea carmino.
Pythagoras fled from the tyranny of Polycrates in Samos, to Crotona in Italy,
where he founded a school of physic: He was the first who joined the study of
medicine with that of philosophy. History of Surgery.
to venerate ourselves as men." For, in the great republic of human nature,
these societies are what virtuous families are in a single State.

No^ (...) America is replenished with a rich variety of objects for the
improvement of every branch of medicine -- After we have attended to the
geography of our country, one of the first subjects that should arrest our
attention, is the effect that is produced on the public health, by the progress
of agriculture, and the consequent salutary changes of our climates.

THE changes of temperature, and local situation, that are constantly taking
place on this globe, afford subjects for useful medical researches. -- It may
be permitted to adduce a few facts to illustrate this point. -- All the
northern and western parts of America, exhibit a good picture of the ancient
condition of most of the European climates: --

IN 860, the Mediterranean was covered with ice:

IN 1296, the Baltic was frozen from Gothland to Sweden:

AND in 1423, the ice bore riding from Prussia to Lubeck.

IN the time of Galen, it was observed, that the peach-tree could not flourish
in Italy, by reason of the cold of the winter. Vide Dr. Forster's observations
during Captain Cooke's voyage round the world, 1772 -- 1775; page 81. -- Henry
Home's sketches of the history of man. -- Drs. Arbuthnot and Huxham on air. --
Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, vol. 1, 8vo. Land. 1788;
particularly chap. 1 and 2. See the improvements in agriculture, and
introduction of fruits into the Western Empire; and chap. 9, climate of Germany
and its effects on the natives in the time of Decius. -- Dr. Hunter's Georgical
Essays.


DURING these periods, most of the kingdoms in Europe were overshadowed by
impenetrable forests, and the greater part of the people lived by hunting and
plunder. But, after a long interval of mental and moral darkness, when
agriculture, with the other arts, were restored, we find no satisfactory
account of the progressive melioration of those climates, by clearing the
countries of their forests and perfecting agriculture. The solution of this
problem is left for the Physicians of America. To effect this desirable object,
many ingenious experiments and researches are necessary. Vide Jefferson's notes
on Virginia. -- Captain Carver's Travels.


IT will be useful to make methodical registers of the thermometer, barometer,
From the history of the barometer, we know, that the weight of the atmosphere
is greater at one time than another, in the ratio of one tenth of the
baroscopic column of mercury; so great a difference cannot but greatly affect
us who are subject to it, seeing it amounts to 3200 lb. Dr. Huxham.
hydrometer, and ombrometer. This will require a multiplicity of meteorological
observations; and by experiments with the eudiometer and other chemical
investigations, perhaps, it will be found, that the true cause of intermitting
fevers, and various other disorders, both epidemic and endemic, is the carbonic
acid, as Bergman supposes; Vide Bergman's Physical and Chemical Essays.
or some other peculiar gas, or mephitic exhalation, generated by fermentation
in our swamps and stagnant waters. By knowing the nature of the cause, we shall
gain much toward effecting a cure of these destructive maladies.

THESE inquiries will also assist the Physician in explaining and describing
endemic and epidemic diseases, as well as the diseases of cattle and all sorts
of animals. And, as the pathology of vegetables is a most interesting subject
in the materia medica, and in husbandry and gardening, the farmer will remember
that these studies will extend to the diseases of his fruit trees, his wheat,
his corn, and all the productions of the farm. Will not the farmer then
associate his labors with the physician to record useful facts on these
subjects? May not these studies enable medical men to ascertain the origin of
epidemics with more success and certainty than has hitherto been done? Of how
much utility this may be to the commercial and political interests of our
country, need not be mentioned before this enlightened audience.

BUT to effect these purposes completely, it will be necessary to be constantly
making additions of the best modern publications to the Society's Library,
which is already an object of considerable advantage, especially to the junior
members. A Library has been called medicine for the mind: A Medical Library is
a common bond of union among Physicians, and it renders the acquisition of
knowledge cheap and easy.

DR. SIMS, President of the London Medical Society, and an honorary member of
this institution, in his observations on epidemics, says, that his Medical
Library, which consisted of four thousand volumes, was inadequate to furnish a
sufficient number of authentic facts, from which an accurate history of
epidemic diseases could be made. Vid. Memoirs of the Med. Society of Land. vol.
1, 1787.
This proves the necessity of collecting new facts, at the same time that it
shows the usefulness of a common and well-chosen Library.

THE philosophy of the Atmosphere and Winds, so far as they influence health,
is an important subject. Which winds are most salutary, and which most noxious?
The effects of Evaporation, Rain and Snow, on health, remain to be explained.
Is water held in solution in Calorique -- is it dissolved in air? Where do our
most remarkable winds begin -- and where cease to blow? In what sort of
weather, and in which seasons of the year is oxygene gas, or the vital part of
the atmosphere, and hydrogene, or inflammable gas, Mr. CAVENDISH has shown that
this gas is at least ten times lighter than common air: Mr. Lavoisier contends
that it is one of the component parts of water, and it is by him called
hydrogene. It is supposed to afford their principal nourishment to vegetables,
and thence to animals, and is perpetually arising from their decomposition. --
This source of it in hot climates, and in summer months, is so great as to
exceed estimation. -- Vid. Dr. Darwin's Botanic Garden*
subject to the greatest increase or diminution? In dry seasons, what becomes
of the water taken up by evaporation, and what new combinations take place to
produce a condensation and precipitation of water? In attending to this sublime
Chemistry of Nature, should we not carefully observe and record electric and
magnetic Phenomenon? These are inquiries worthy of the attention of a society
of Physicians. Every inquiry of his kind will contribute to an accumulation of
facts for completing an history When we observe phenomenon, and collect facts,
we form a history. When we discover the nature and relations of phenomenon and
facts, we acquire a science. When we apply the result of science as rules of
conduct, we practice arts. -- Vid. Bruce's First Principles of Philosophy.
of the atmosphere.

THE rapid improvements in agriculture, and the increasing commerce of these
States, constantly bring us acquainted with new articles in diet. The
comparative effects of all these, as well as those that have been habitual to
the people, ought to be carefully noted and explained.

THE diseases that will probably be produced by manufactures in our country,
will become an object of the greatest consequence in a political point of view.
It is to be expected that new diseases will be discovered; but of those that
are now known among the class of citizens, who are employed in the very useful
labors of mechanics, there are many that have not yet found a safe and perfect
remedy. As it is probable that most of the manufactures of these states will be
carried on by means of machinery, for facilitating the operations, rendering
the productions better and cheaper, and superseding manual labor; the diseases
of all sorts of ingenious artisans The surprising advances of Chemistry and the
effects of its application to manufactures; the wonderful combinations of
Chemistry and Mechanics, for the reduction of labor -- These are the happy
means by which bankruptcy has been hitherto averted. The genius of Watt,
Wedge-wood, and Arkwright, has counteracted the expense and folly of the
American War. Jasper Wilson's letter to Rt. Hon. Wm. Pit.
will often put the skill of the physician to the test. In many, the ill
effects of a sedentary life will be united with the danger that arises from
being exposed to poisonous bodies and vapors necessarily employed in the
manipulations and operations of art. The substances, therefore, which occupy
the labors of the artist, also become objects highly worthy of the study and
observation of the Physician.

THE mariner, from the distinguished rank that he holds in modern society, and
especially in all commercial nations, deserves great attention from the
Physician. Several of the diseases of seamen, and particularly the scurvy* have
hitherto baffled medicine. The investigation and cure of their diseases remain,
in a great measure, for the future labors of medical men. In doing this, many
facts may be ascertained for the explanation of that most remarkable property
which exists in animal bodies of accommodating themselves to the various
conditions of life; such as the changes of climate, heat and cold, diet, action
of body and mind, sleep and watching, the healing of wounds and the reunion of
broken bones. To the honor of our country it may be said, that a large
proportion of the mariners are well instructed, and they have an inquisitive
spirit of observation. They can furnish useful hints and remarks that ought to
be examined, because they may lead to useful conclusions.

To investigate the diseases of mankind with success, we must learn to look up
to the heavens, as well as down to the earth. The question respecting the
effects of solar and lunar attraction Dr. Mead, De Imperio Solis et I^^nae.
on health, remains yet to be solved, particularly as these effects may
influence fevers, hepatic diseases, puerperal medicine, animal secretion and
excretion, and the diseases of the mind.

VESALIUS, that great, injured name, Vid. Opera Andreae Vesalii, and Manning's
Physiology.
was the first author of note who adventured to detect the errors of Galen. In
his work De Corporis Humani Fabrica, first published in 1543, he attempts to
prove that the gravity of the fluids contained in the veins and arteries,
exerts no manner of effect within them, so far as relates to the principles of
hydraulics. There are, however, some pathological appearances that favor the
supposition that the effect of the gravity of the fluids in not entirely lost,
in their living and containing vessels or tubes, particularly in hydropic
patients. But, the doctrine of Vesalius has lately been adopted by an ingenious
author, Vid. Joannis Brunonis, M. D. Elementa Medicinae. Sect. cvii. cx. Editio
prima.
who has rejected, entirely, the mechanical philosophy from his system, after
it had long been ingeniously defended by Boerhaave and others. There belongs to
animal and vegetable bodies, an organization differing essentially from all
other modifications of matter. And, to this organization there is superadded a
quality, called, irritability, nervous, inherent or contractile Power, by some;
Excitability, by others, on which the functions of life depend. Therefore all
the supposed analogies, with the innumerable errors thence resulting, between
animate and inanimate bodies, ought to be rejected from rational Medicine. On
this subject much remains to be done.

IT is one of your professed designs to establish an extensive chemical museum,
to contain all the natural productions of this state, that are the objects of
medical chemistry. This must necessarily furnish a large correspondence with
the nonresident members, who are gentlemen of learning and ingenuity, and being
on the places that furnish these productions, much of the honor of perfecting
this establishment will fall to them. -- Our country is rich in articles of
Botany, My highly respected friend, Dr. S. L. MITCHILL, Professor of Chemistry
and Botany, in the College of New York, has favored me with a communication
containing the following note on a Botanic Garden; and a translation of
Girtanner's Theory of Respiration, (vid. page 22.) which are inserted on
account of their beneficial aspects on the true interests of our country; as
well as for a testimony of my sincere respect and esteem for the virtues and
talents of that Gentleman:

"Note on a Botanic Garden."

"The Trustees of Columbia College, have made BOTANY a part of their system of
public Education; but, although they have constituted a Professorship, and
appointed a Professor, still no provision has hitherto been made for a Botanic
Garden. This establishment is so nearly connected with Botany, that the
Lectures must ever be very lame and defective without it. Nothing but a more
full conviction of its importance and utility, is wanting, to set on foot such
an institution, and to carry it into effect. A Botanic Garden is one of the
genteelest and most beautiful of public improvements. It comprizes within a
small compass, the history of the vegetable species of our own country, and by
the introduction of exotics* makes us acquainted with the plants of the most
distant parts of the earth. By facilitating experiments upon plants at this
time, when the theory of nutrition and manures is such an interesting
desideratum, it may be considered as one of the means of affording substantial
help to the labors of the Agricultural Society, and of improving in some
degree the practice of modern husbandry. When these things are duly considered,
it can scarcely be doubted that Botany will receive a further share of public
patronage."


and our materia medica might be copiously furnished in America, from all the
three kingdoms of nature. A history of these substances, some of which are
contained in the unsettled western territories, is a desideratum in physic; I
hope therefore it will not be deemed too enthusiastic to anticipate the happy
day when New York shall boast of its Pharmacopoeia, that shall vie with those
of Europe, in its account of new and more successful remedies, effected by the
associated labors of this society.

THE investigation of the American Materia Medica, As a specimen of what has
been done in this way, see Materia Medica Americana, potissimum regni
vegitabilis. Autore, D. J David Schoepf. 8vo. Erlangae, 1787.
would lead us to a better acquaintance with the state of medicine among the
Indians; and to a more perfect knowledge of the antiquities of our country. We
shall have more reason to undertake this desirable work, when we advert to what
has been said on the subject, by one of the most celebrated writers on the
Materia Medica, that this or any other age has produced.

PROFESSOR Cullen did not hesitate to assert, that, the errors of false
experience are so numerous, that, the writings on the Materia Medica are for
the most part a compilation of mistakes and falsehoods. And he adds, that, these
errors arise from the obstinacy of old professors, and their blind attachment
to theory, as well as the vanity of young physicians being the authors of
observations that are hastily made and dressed in the closet; and, besides,
many of the operations of nature have been falsely imputed to the effects of
medicines pretendedly sounded on experience. See the accurate delineation of
true and false experience, by Dr. Zimmermann, in his treatise on experience in
physic.
So distant are they from a true and faithful delineation of nature. Vid.
Cullen's Treatise on the Mat. Med. vol. 1.


AFTER these facts are mentioned, it will be scarcely necessary to enumerate
the frauds and sophistications of Chemistry and Pharmacy.

To avoid error, under all these circumstances, would require the hands of
Briareus, together with the eyes of Argus -- And, how can these evils be
removed, but by explaining the materia medica of our own country?

On this occasion, it may not be improper to observe, that by abolishing all
nostrums, or secret remedies in your society, and by making it a sufficient
cause of ineligibility to the membership, if any Candidate should hold, use or
vend any nostrum, you have, in this particular, vindicated the profession from
the imputation of quackery. The toleration and encouragement of this practice,
have, with the enchantments of Mesmer's animal magnetism, and other popular
impositions, uniformly been most fertile and disgraceful sources of empiricism.

WITH their government, the French have regenerated their medicine, the annals
of which have not been stained with blood, like those of their politics;
because their war has not been carried on against reason and truth, but against
error and tyranny.

FRANCE, in her present volcanic state, like fiery AEtna, perhaps, may destroy
a Pliny, but, she has however, thrown out many precious substances, that will
enrich the world. Among these the Nouveau (...) de Constitution, pour la
Medecin en France, See a translation of this excellent work in the Med.
Comment. for 1792, Edinburgh.
deserves to be considered as one of the first good fruits of their political
regeneration. From this plan we learn, that the Medical Society at Paris have
exerted the most active vigilance to oppose the dangerous illusions of
ignorance; and the nation have decreed, that for the future, "No Medicines
shall be kept secret."

IT remains among the desiderata of the healing art, to show the advantages
that may result to medicine from Electricity; and to determine in what cases
and in what manner this powerful agent may be further employed for the
advancement of the health and happiness of mankind. A sage of America "invaded
the lowering sky," and was able to arrest, control, and bring down from the
clouds this omnipresent Ignis ubique latet, naturam amplectitur omnem;
Cuncta pa^^t, renovat, dividit, unit, alit.
VOLTAIRE.
agent in the great operations of nature. To give a triumph and consummation to
the art, requires a complete examination and discovery of its action and
effects on animal bodies. In doing this, we have reason to hope, that many of
the perplexities that have hitherto embarrassed the doctrines of inflammation
and animal heat, as well as several other phenomena of the animal economy will
be happily solved.

Is electricity an inflammable fluid, subject to a law of elective attraction?
If heat be the oscillatory motion of the minute particles of bodies, wherein
does animal and vegetable heat differ from that of inanimate or unorganized
L'Organization, le sentiment, le movement spontane, la vie, n'existent qu'a la
surface de la terre, et dans le lieux exposes a la lumiere. Traite de Chymie
par M. Lavoisier.
bodies? What are the extremes of heat consistent with animal and vegetable
life? What degrees of heat are sufficient to destroy animal, vegetable,
mineral, and aerial poisons and contagions? The subject of poisons and
contagions opens an immense field for the researches of Medical Philosophy.

IT still remains to determine the full effects of warm and cool bathing, both
partial and general, on animal bodies. The baths lately made in this city and
its neighborhood, afford excellent opportunities for experiments in this
subject. What are the combined operations of moisture, under different degrees
of temperature, motion and pressure*

IT is now well known, if a person should be immerged two feet under water, and
the area of his skin be fifteen feet, he would sustain a weight of circumfluent
water, pressing on his whole surface, added to that of the air, equal to two
thousand two hundred and eighty pounds. How will the circulations, thoracic and
abdominal viscera, perspiration and the nervous system, be affected by these
circumstances?

THE ingenious, but unfortunate Stark, by experiments on his own body, found
that the perspiration is almost twice as much, during those hours when the body
is naked, as it is in an equal space of time, when covered by our ordinary
garments: -- By the same clear and decisive experiments, it appears, that the
perspiration is not half so great for a given number of hours in the night,
when in sleep, as it is for the same number of hours in the day, when awake.
These discoveries have yet had very little influence on the practice of physic.

IF we except the discovery of the circulation of the blood, and that of the
absorbent system, no modern discovery is more useful than that of the
perspiration. Is not this discovery to be perfected by future statical
experiments?

WE are constantly told, that almost all diseases depend on an increase or
diminution of the perspiration; and that cold constantly checks, and heat
increases it. Perhaps we seldom know when it is checked, or when it is
increased. -- In connection, with this subject, will it not be useful to attend
to the effects of air and earth-bathing on animals.

An inquiry into the causes and cure of Cholera Infantum, would be a work of
the greatest utility. Infants are the hope of society. Vid. Dr. Gregory's
Comparative View, and Dr. Hugh Smith's Letters to Married Women -- and Dr.
Buchan's Domestic Medicine.
This disease destroys multitudes every year. -- What are the effects of tea
and coffee on infants, received by the medium of the milk of the mothers and
nurses? The Chinese avoid above all things, the drinking of tea on a fasting
stomach. Vid. Du Halde's Description of the Empire of China.
In this city, the properties of the tea-water, and the waters in the wells of
the different parts of the city should be examined, and their effects on health
recorded.

How far can the good effects of vegetation Vid. Priestley and Ingenhouz's
experiments to show the great power of vegetables to purify the air, in the
sunshine.
on atmospheric air, be restored to populous cities, by planting ornamental
trees in the streets and public walks, and would this have any influence in
preventing or checking epidemics?

IN this country, the comparative effects of cider, wine, ardent spirits, and
malt liquors, have not yet been fully ascertained.

THE evils that arise from living in Cellars This pernicious practice is one of
the peculiar aggravations of the misfortunes of the poorer class of citizens in
New York.
and other damp places deprived of free ventilation, and the effects of stoves
on the lungs and on the feet, would furnish a useful subject for a medical
memoir.

IRON has been found to be present in almost all organized bodies: And, as it
enters into the composition of animals, answering important purposes in their
economy, and is the most valuable of all the metals; it becomes highly
necessary for the Physician to understand its medicinal uses. -- This can only
be done by the aid of the new Chemistry, which will teach us the nature of the
Gases, and the laws of elective attraction, which are capable of explaining
many of the mysteries of Pathology.

MIGHT not Inoculation be extended to many of the eruptive diseases, with
advantage; and the ferocious nature of the Plague Vid. Gibbon's Roman Empire,
vol. 7, 8vo. chapter xiiii. Howard on Prisons and Lazare^^os.
if this country should ever be visited by that calamity, and some other
malignant epidemics, be rendered much milder, and less destructive by this
practice?

THE extremes of luxury and abstemiousness, the customs, manners and fashions
of the people and their habitations; the effects of celibacy Vid. Gibbon on the
effects of the monastic life, Roman empire, chap. 37 -- and the present
political moral and physical condition of the people of the West Indies,
Southern States of America, and all other countries where the labor is
principally done by Slaves.
on health and political prosperity; the artificial diseases originating in
excess of refinement; and in a particular manner, the all-conquering power of
habit, present themselves to medicine, and demand a large share of her study
and careful attention.

A TRUE account of the effects of burying-grounds in populous cities; an
accurate bill of mortality; a general registry of marriages and births; and an
account of the number of people who migrate into the United States, and
particularly into this city, would be attended with great public advantages. In
some places this work is begun, by which it appears that many parts of
New England are more remarkable for longevity than any countries in Europe.
This work never can be completed but by the united labors of societies of
active and ingenious men. May not a future American PRICE want facts to enable
him to make calculations on the value of lives, annuities and reversionary
payments? And, may not the future Historian of America want facts to enable him
to explain the true indoles and characteristics of the people of a great
Republic, that is to consist of a heterogeneous and mixed mass of all the
nations on earth?

THE publication of Brunonis Elementa Medicinae, will probably form a new Era
in the annals of the healing art. You will therefore permit me to observe, if
in the 18th century, a genius has appeared, the light of the medical world, to
dissipate the darkness of hypothesis and system, by the most successful
application of philosophy and general principles to THE SCIENCE OF LIVING
MATTER; and if this author has been more successful in demonstrating that man
is nothing of himself, but depends altogether on extraneous causes, and that
all his dormant energies must be wakened into motion by these causes, before he
can exhibit the phenomenon of sense, perception, thought, reasoning and action;
then it follows, that Philosophy, which is the immovable basis of this
doctrine, must be more intimately studied by Physicians than formerly. Hence,
all the frivolous objections of some, against this doctrine, that it leads to
idleness and superficial study; and all the vain pretensions of others, that a
few months of inattentive reading and a little practice, according to this
theory, are sufficient to make a good Physician, fall with their authors to the
ground.

THE author of the new theory of Medicine, had a fiery imagination, which, like

" The Poet's eye, in a fine frenzy rolling,
"Did glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven," Shakespeare.

and grasped the most distant analogies of nature. His subtle genius did
discover the nice connections and differences of animal facts and animal
functions: And, his profound and luminous judgment, by long and laborious
inductions, led him to conclusions, that, in their ultimate practical effect,
must be the source of innumerable evils, or of uncounted blessings to mankind.
Are these conclusions true? Let them be acknowledged. Are they false? Let them
be confuted. Are they a mixture of truth and error? Let the gold be separated
from the dross.

IT yet remains, to determine the advantages that may accrue to Medicine, from
a faithful relation of unsuccessful cases. We learn from the writings of CICERO
and JULIUS CAESAR, not only the virtues, but also the defects and errors of
these personages. Physicians ought not to be unwilling to publish their want of
success in the administration of Medicines; for this has hitherto been a
department in physic which has been much neglected: Though Hippocrates and some
others who have been greater BENEFACTORS Among the Physicians of this class in
America* Dr. Z. Boylstone and Dr. Douglass have merited a distinguished rank.
To Dr. Boylstone and the Rev. Dr. Cotton Mather, America is indebted for the
introduction of the practice of inoculating for the Smallpox, Vid. Mather,
Boylstone and Coleman's Historical account of the Smallpox inoculated in
New England. Boston. 1721 -- 1730.

To Dr. Douglass of Boston, and Dr. C Colden of New York, America is indebted
for the first judicious method of treating the malignant Quinsey, which
prevailed in Boston and several other parts of America, in 1735 and 1736; and
which has since that period, several times prevailed, being attended with great
mortality, in this country. Vid. Douglass de Angina Ulcusculosa.


to mankind than kings and heroes, have given a few laudable examples in this
way.

LONG has Medicine been traduced as a mere conjectural and experimental art.
Ars nostra conjecturalis est -- experiment^^^^ (...)
In a partial sense, this is true -- It is also true of agriculture and
politics: and even some of the sublimer parts of the mathematics, are involved
in perplexities that the mind of NEWTON himself could not perfectly remove.

IN this age, however, it is acknowledged by all candid and well informed men,
that many of the operations of the animal economy are as well explained and
understood, as any phenomenon in natural Philosophy -- Many facts might be
adduced in support of this declaration. It is sufficient to instance the
subjects of Digestion and Respiration. The former has been almost exhausted by
the lucid experiments and by the ingenious and successful labors of Stevens,
Spallanzani, Hunter, Senebier, and Carminati; and the latter has been happily
elucidated by Priestley. Crawford, Lavoisier and Girtanner "Mr. Girtanner's
Theory of respiration is briefly this:" "During respiration the oxygene-gas of
the atmosphere is decompounded. One part of the oxygene unites with the venous
blood and changes its dark color into a scarlet. Another part of the oxygene
combines with the carbone which is disengaged from the venous blood, and forms
carbonic acid gas. A third portion of the oxygene connects itself with the
carbone of the dark colored mucus, which is separated in the branches of the
Trachea in considerable quantity; and in like manner turns to carbonic acid
gas. A fourth portion of the oxygene, combines with the Hydrogene separated
from the venous blood, and constitutes the watery exhalation manifest in the
breath.

"The caloric of the decompounded oxygene gas continues in part with the
combined oxygene, and together with it, forms a combination with the venous
blood; and hence proceeds the greater quantity of caloric in the arterial than
in the venous blood* as Crawford has remarked. Another part of the caloric goes
into union with the carbonic and gas. A third part of it enters into the
formation of the Halitus." -- The products of respiration he enumerates are
these; 1st, a fluid animal oxyde, arterial blood. 2d, Carbonic acid gas. 3d,
water. And 4th, a small quantity of uncombined caloric. (Girtanner,
anfangegrunde (...) phlogistischen chemie, hap. xxxiv. 260)


.

THE stomach and the succus gastrious, afford an excellent lesson of
instruction. Who would not wish to profit by it in all his enquiries? If we
imitate the wonderful operations of the organ so happily explained by the
beforementioned authors, we shall find, that many a bulky volume of hypotheses
will pass down the primae viae of our minds, without leaving more than a few
sentences of useful truth, to invigorate the mind of the Physician in the
acquisition of medical knowledge.

THESE facts will soon induce us to believe, that error is the sole cause of
the misery of man. That the detection of error is the discovery of truth, is an
excellent aphorism. A faithful detail of medical errors, properly managed,
would have the happiest effect on practice -- It would prevent the
misapplication of talents and time, and so facilitate the way to truth. This
can no where be done so well as in a Medical Society -- For, the truths that
are dispersed among various persons, may be here collected and united into one
general mass of knowledge, which will enlarge the mind, and regulate the
judgment of the practitioners, who having regularly received instructions from
particular teachers, are now to consider the ARS MEDENDI as their best teacher
-- The variety of facts, that each may show to the other, will prevent partial
views, and inspire comprehensive conceptions; thus the judicious Physician, to
whom are committed the dearest interests of society, will be enabled to steer
his course more safely between the dangerous extremes of dogmatism and
empiricism. It is very apparent that this practice must lead indirectly and
ultimately to a great improvement in medicine -- The collision of mind with
mind, ought to strike out some light, and we ought to collect the scattered
rays to a focal point, by which some of the darker and more interior recesses
of the temple of medical science might, in a future period, be happily
illuminated.

IN the present state of society, it is difficult to obtain subjects for
facisitating the study of Phisiology and Pathology. The morbid appearances of
dead bodies are examined under great embarrassments -- If we unite to
demonstrate to the public the advantages of these enquiries, we may hope to
obtain the interest of the wise and prudent part of the citizens in favor of
these pursuits. Prejudice and feeling are opposed, but reason may do much to
remove these obstacles. The best apology that ever could be offered for what
has been done in this business is, that "me are sometimes induced to violate
the laws of society to (...) those of nature." -- But we should reflect, that
the laws of society are a part of the general system of nature, and therefore,
they cannot be violated in these instances with impunity. One of the first
characters Condorcet.
in the French Republic, has observed with great truth, that, "Respect for the
remains of men who have been dear to us, is no prejudice it is an affection
inspired by nature herself; who has places in the recesses of our hearts, a
veneration for every thing that can recall to our remembrance, beings whom
friendship, or gratitude has rendered sacred to our feelings. The liberty of
offering a sorrowful homage to their ashes is then a precious right, to
delicate minds; and the power of choosing that which their sensations dictate,
cannot, without injustice, be taken away."

ON this day it is proper to commemorate some of the benefits of the
City-Dispensary. This Institution has been encouraged and supported by the
liberal contributions and well-directed charity of the citizens. Since the
establishment of this medical asylum for the poor and sick, more than one
thousand poor patients have been received into its hospitable bosom. By a
careful examination of the Registry, I am able to lay before you the following
statement of facts, viz. 70 are returned on the books, dead.
When you consider the circumstances of this class of citizens, you will all
readily acknowledge, that this is a small proportion -- 42 have been sent to
the Almshouse and Hospital. 13 being disorderly, have been dismissed. 75 have
been relieved, some of their very complicated diseases being incurable. 8 have
removed into the country: And 730 are returned on the journal, cured:


CONTRIBUTORS to the dispensary! your bounty and charity have poured wine and
oil into the wounds of sensibility, and caused the abodes of sickness, pain and
misery, to echo with grateful joy. On this day, the blessing of more than 700
persons, many of whom have been ready to perish, comes upon you. Physicians of
the Dispensary! have we attended the bed of hopeless, beggared, sharp-pinching
poverty, with the same fidelity, as we do the sickly couch of wealth and
luxury? If we have done this, to day we participate the divine pleasure, which
springs from the consciousness of doing good.

IT is hoped you will not tax me with arrogance, while I endeavor to call your
attention, one moment, to the most useful subject of resuscitation.

THE apparatus annexed to the Dispensary for the relief of unfortunate persons,
who may suffer suspended respiration, by drowning, lightning, suffocation,
convulsions, suicide, intense cold, mephitic air and noxious vapors; and other
causes that produce apparently sudden death, particularly in the case of
still-born infants, has not yet answered the important uses for which it was
intended. Could not this society by uniting their exertions with the managers
of the Dispensary, and other benevolent citizens, effect all the excellent
designs, that the Humane Societies of our sister States and those of Europe,
have most happily achieved?

LET us cast our eyes over the map of New York: We instantly perceive that no
country affords so fine a theater for the establishment of HUMANE SOCIETIES as
this State. On the one side we are presented with a delightful view of the
East-River; on the other, the Hudson, covered with the floating wealth of the
Farmer and Merchant, appears before us. Northward and Westward, we behold the
Iroquois, Champlain, Erie and Ontario. In the extensive and fertile territories
between these extremes, we observe the Mohawk, Senaka and Genesee; next, the
intersecting branches of the Delaware and Susquehannah, and then the beautiful
ponds, canals and smaller lakes, appear before us. And may we not anticipate
the northern and western inland lock-navigation? All these masses of water are
situated in a climate that is exposed to the most sudden changes, storms and
tempests; and in the winter, to intense cold. Now let us behold the traveller,
whelmed beneath the ice, the fragile bridge of his delusive way! Here let
HUMANITY come in aid of life and restore the SUFFERER to the bosom of love and
gratitude -- then will HE wipe the tear of sorrow from the eye of conjugal and
filial affection! For, while all this yielding element furnishes an ample scene
of dangerous business and pleasure, it forms at the same time, "the floating
grave," to employ, as the Poet observes,

"the resuscitating breath
"Of medical benevolence!"
ON this theater, contentions and disputes ought to be exhibited, that would be
worthy of Physicians and useful to men: Here, the genius of Medicine might
contend with that of the Drama Referring to a theatrical exhibition, of the Old
American Company, for the relief of a number of orphans and widows of the
Fishermen who were drowned in the North-River, in March and April, 1793.
for the honors of philanthropy. Here disputes on the nature of animal life,
and on the best methods of rekindling its quenched flame, might be managed in
such a manner as to compel all men to acknowledge that Medicine is a most
useful art. When we shall have accomplished these excellent works, we shall
rejoice as many of our professional brethren have already done:

"Our's is the task, the greatest task, to save
"Friend, Lover, Parent, from the watery grave;
"To snatch from death the victim of despair,
"And give the means of penitence and prayer." --
IN America we have always enjoyed, what France has lately restored to her
Citizens, the union of Medicine with Surgery, which constitutes the Healing
Art what it was in the Hippocratic Age. To separate the practice of Physic from
that of Surgery, would be like a disunion of Light and Fire -- Medical
Surgery is, therefore, highly interesting to the Physician and to the public --
Perhaps, it is reserved for the Physicians of America to discover the best
methods of preventing or superceding many of the severer operations in surgery
-- Too much praise cannot be given to the humane, judicious, prompt and
dexterous operator. But when will the presumptuous exercise of the bloody
scalpel and catlin of Radcliffe and Sigault be suspended? When will their
vanity, rashness and pertinacity no longer boast of what is in reality the
greatest disgrace of the healing art? How long shall human nature be struck
with horror, at the detail of their barbarous and ill-judged operations? Vid.
Principles of Puerperal Medicine, by John Aitkin. M. D. Wm. Dease's
Observations on Midwifery -- and Dr. Hunter's Remarks on the (...) operation.


ANATOMY is justly said to be the eye of all rational Medicine. In like manner,
the theory of the human mind, may justly be considered, as a kind of Anatomy of
the Passions, Intellect and faculties of Man; which discovers all the mental
diseases. Contemptible are the resources of that Physician, who is solely
dependent on Nosology, for the name of a disease, and on a Pharmacopoeia, for a
specific remedy.

To the praise of this age, the pathology of the mind considered as a subject
of as much utility to medicine as that of the body. There is but little doubt,
but Tetanus, Epilepsia, Hydrophobia, Mania, or Madness; Visaniae, Vid. Dr. T.
Arnold's Treatise on Insanity, Lunacy and Madness.
or the several kinds of Insanity; and even Hysteria and Hypochondriasis, with
some of the diseases of the Moral Faculty, would in several parts of Europe and
America, in 1692, have been ranked under the head of Witchcraft, See
Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts. -- Mr. Calef's work on Witchcraft --
Mead's Medica Sacra. -- Mather's Magnalia* -- Case of the Demoniacs mentioned
in the New Testament, by N. Lardner. Land. (...). 1758, and Gibbon's Roman
Empire, chap. xxi.
and consequently, all these diseases, with many more, would have been
considered as capital crimes, in the penal code of that day.

LET the sober, wise and judicious part of the public now determine, how much
praise is due to Physicians for investigating and radically curing many of
these diseases.

A FEW years ago, it was considered as a kind of daring impiety, for a
Physician to attempt the cure of several diseases of the mind; particularly
those of the moral faculty. But as long as we believe that men have the power
of resisting inclination, and to weigh the motives of action, we need not fear
the consequences of trying the full effects of medicines that may operate by
physical necessity on man. And, let it be remembered, when Hipparchus undertook
to number the stars and trace their motions, his attempt was also derided as
impious; because, it was considered as a work that baffled all human labor and
observation, and could be done only by the Deity. Mark what followed: The
labors of Hipparchus enabled Paul, a Florentine Physician, In 1474, he
corresponded with Columbus, on the probability of finding India, in the west.
Life of Columbus* by Ferdinand Columbus.
to make maps and charts, by which he demonstrated to Columbus the globurality
of this Planet. All the events in nature are wonderfully connected together by
infinite wisdom, and conspire to make one complete and harmonious plan of
Providence! Had it not been for what has falsely been called the rash impiety
and enthusiasm of Hipparchus, the old world would never have come to the
knowledge of America; and instead of associating together, under a free
government, to promote the interests of humanity, most of us who are present
would, at this moment, have been the vassals of some European despot, as was
once the lot of our persecuted ancestors.

MAY it be the distinguished fortune of some American Physicians, to become in
the medical world, what Hipparchus and Columbus were in Astronomy and
Navigation!

To the praise of America, there is a native of this country, who, by uniting
the three characters of Philosopher, Patriot and Physician* (need I name Dr.
Rush?) has done much toward investigating, explaining and curing many of the
mental diseases. But much still remains to be done.

THIS is an age of skepticism: and this is the time to observe and explain the
effects of skepticism on health. Neither should the curious and surprising
operations of speculative opinions in religion, Vid. Hannah Adams's View of
Religions. Mosheim's Ecclesiastical History, and Robertson's Charles V.
morals and politics, be overlooked; for they evidently produce remarkable
effects on health and disease. The ebulitions of enthusiasm, with dreams,
visions, trances, and all the illusions of the senses, particularly sight and
hearing, should likewise engage the serious and careful attention and study of
medical men. And, while we contemplate the injustice and impolicy of the
slavery of the poor Africans, in our boasted republican and free governments,
shall we forget to observe the effects of slavery on the health, temper, genius
and character of the people, who advocate and practice this trafic and bondage
of man?

THE doctrine of the association of ideas is more useful to the Physician, than
to the Professor of any other art. Whoever knows how to avail himself of this
subject in the practice of physic, may be said to be in possession of a key to
unlock many of the apartments of the cabinet of nature. How often, by this
talismanic charm, may the morbid condition be changed to the healthful! This
was the BRAZEN SERPENT and the TALITHA-CUMI of Dr. Willis, when he cured the
King of England.

WHILE medicines are administered to change the diseased action, or to remove
the irregular action, to equalize the excitement and to vary its degree, and
thus to restore health and happiness; we find ample scope for scrutinizing the
operations of the mind, when we shall often obtain the greatest advantages in
changing the train of ideas.

"From grave to gay, from lively to severe."
In doing this, may we not hope, that, it is reserved for the professors of the
healing art to unravel all the curious tissue of feeling, emotion, passion and
thought more successfully, than has ever yet been done by the unaided light of
solitary philosophy.

THE effects of reading Novels and Romances, on the Imagination, appetites and
passions, particularly in young people, have not yet been investigated by
Physicians. To keep the passions Vid. The Rev. Dr. Watts' Doctrine of the
Passions, and Locke's Essay on Human Understanding.
regular and in temperate balance with each other, is the way to preserve
health, and at the same time to promote virtue and happiness. Temperance is the
only panacea that Medicine knows. This saved Socrates, Thucidydes and Justinian
from the ravages of the plague which depopulated the earth in their days.
Hence, the necessity of the professors of health enforcing their instructions
of temperance by the eloquence of example. But the time allotted for this
discourse does not permit me to go into a regular detail on these subjects.

THUS, Gentlemen, I have endeavored to call your attention to the improvement
of Medicine, by giving a slight, though very imperfect, sketch of the principal
objects of your Institution. The advantages are too obvious to need any
comment. Many of them are of such a nature, that they never can be effected by
individuals, but must depend solely on the united labors of societies of active
and ingenious men. Active men, it must be remembered, for all who are not
active in these societies, are like negative quantities, which being added to
positive, too often make the whole negative.

IN conformity with the design of this Anniversary Meeting, many more
particulars might be mentioned, if the time and your patience would permit:
Suffice it, to remark, wherever there is organization, spontaneous motion and
life, there are the concomitants of Humanity, Disease and Death; and there are
the objects to engage the attention and employ the study of the Physician.

ARE we convinced of the advantages of uniting our exertions to accomplish the
useful purposes which have been mentioned? Opposition of pretended interest and
partial views will effect nothing. Union, every thing. Wise men are seldom
satisfied with their own opinions, till they are confirmed by the suffrages of
the rest of mankind. This is the age in which the mysterious quackery of
Abracadabra ought to be no more; for Dogmatism can no longer trample on Genius
and Merit. Let us, therefore, be amalgamated together. United, we have the
hardness and strength of iron, with the ductility and beauty of gold. In
discord, we are nothing but a mere rope of sand.

UNDER the Demon of Discord, what advantageth it Holy Bible.
this Society, that AEsculapius and Avicenna should have lived? that, Vesalius
and Harvey should have traced the blood through all its labyrinths. -- That
Boerhaave and Van Sweiten should have accumulated all the knowledge of
Antiquity and augmented the same, for our use -- that Winslow and Morgagni
should have demonstrated the geometry of God, in the mechanism of Man -- That
Haller and Whytt, that Hoffman and Cullen should have written; that Black,
Pringle and M'B^^de should have experimented; that Priestley should have taught
us the uses of air, and Lavoisier those of fire; that Hunter, John Hunter.
Brown and Galvani, should have penetrated the recesses of Life! -- Under the
Dominion of Discord, we can achieve excellent works. We can say, each to the
other, let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die. Holy Bible.


AN eloquent foreigner observes, that "union is an irresistible panacea against
the evils of pertinacity. It is union that composes the understanding and
tranquilizes the affections; she stills the tumult of the passions, she
supersedes personal antipathies, she disenchants the deluded senses, she
dissipates the clouds by which truth is obscured, she sheds the rays of
distinction on the apostle of truth; he presents her with modesty, he is
received without unfavorable prepossessions." Let us, then, unite our labors
for the common good of Society: Thus shall we render this Institution useful to
the People, and honorable to its Members.

THE patriotic Citizens will give their approbation to an Establishment which
has the public health for its object. May we not hope, that, the enlightened
Legislators of a free People will give their sanction to its Incorporation? All
the objects of the Institution can be promoted much better this way than any
other. This Society may, hereafter, have a HUNTER, Wm. Hunter.
a FOTHERGILL, a COPELEY, a LETTSOME and a HAWES, who will institute Incentives
and Rewards for Genius and Character. She may, in some future day, have an
Establishment for the relief of the Widows and Orphans of her poor or
unsuccessful members.

I AM sensible, many objections are urged against all sorts of Incorporations
in a free government. But, these all arise from the effects of the ancient
Incorporations being misapplied to the present state of Society.
Incorporations, were invented by the Emperors of Germany, in favor of the
Peasantry, when the Barons* or Chieftains, under the feudal system, conspired
together, in a formidable Aristocracy, against the Kings. Then it became the
policy of Kings to check the encroachments of the Patricians, or Nobles, on the
usurped and regal power; and artfully to strengthen and increase this power,
which was ever operating the degradation and misery of mankind, by giving, as
it was then falsely called, privileges to the Plebeians, or Peasantry, and so
defending them against the equally unjust claims of the Barons, in uniting them
in the support of Monarchy, which was constantly at war with Aristocracy. In
America, there is no Peasantry; but in room of it, a collective and united body
of Husbandmen, called THE FREE YEOMANRY. There are more modern Corporations,
with peculiar powers, which have ended in monopolies. These, first, fattened on
the blood and tears of the natives of the East and West Indies, and having
become enebriated with the sweat, extorted from the slave-wearied limbs of the
Sons of Africa, they, afterward, corrupt Society, with their unjustly
accumulated wealth, and destroy themselves. In all those periods, the people
were oppressed by an arbitrary Government, which did nothing relative to
Medicine; if, you except the despotic decrees of the Parliament of Paris,
respecting antimony; and the disgraceful edict of Charles V. to regulate
Venefection.

INCORPORATIONS may be reformed, as well as any other political institutions.
May it be a part of modern policy to establish certain incorporations, under
such conditions, as will check the violence of democracy; and tend, by
promoting useful knowledge, to the support, perhaps, to the perpetuity, of
elective, free and well-balanced governments.

THE wisest physician Hippocrates de aere, locis et aquis.
of antiquity observed, that the Asiatics were less warlike and more effeminate
than the Europeans. This he attributed, in part, to their climate, but
principally, to the form and administration of their governments, which were
all despotic and subject to the arbitrary will of their kings. We have the
happiness to live under a free government. At this time we scarce need recur to
Longinus to be informed, that, 'Liberty is formed to nurse the sentiments of
great geniuses, to inspire them with hope; to push forward the propensity of
contest one with another, and the generous emulation of being the first in
rank.' Our government, then, must produce great effects, not only on the
genius, but also on the health of the people. The former will enable Physicians
to observe with accuracy, and future ages will expect that their duty should
have impelled them to record with fidelity, THE EFFECTS OF FREE GOVERNMENTS ON
THE HEALTH OF THE CITIZENS.

FREEDOM! all-hallowed name! Thou friend of man! at thought of thee, our hearts
are warmed with thy celestial fire! Already do we behold a host of thy
heaven-descended offspring:

When Bacon, "from the gloom
Of cloistered monks, and jargon-teaching schools
Led forth the true Philosophy, there long
Held in the chain of words and forms
And definitions void," --
thy victorious benignant hand guided his illumined mind: When he marked out
the limits of human knowledge, thou did inspire him. When Newton, greatest
sage! calculated, thou wast with him. When Bail became the advocate-general of
Philosophers, then did thou give a subtlety and inspire a confidence unknown
to man before. When Lock made all the mental world his own, thy friendly
genius guided him through all the deep research, and pointed the way to truth.
In Milton, immortal name! thou did teach mankind that disobedience to the
will of Heaven is the true cause of all the tyranny and misery in nature. When
Clarke and Butler, by moral demonstration, proved to be wildered men the truth
of that religion, first taught in Judea, by Jesus of Nazareth, which carries in
its divine bosom, peace on earth and good will to men; thou did dispel the
darkness of superstition. When Raleigh, Ridley, Sidney, Russell and Hamden
expired, in sealing the truth with their precious blood, thou, O FREEDOM! did
consecrate their names, in the sacred temples of Virtue, Honor and Fame.

IN thy venerable Rousseau, thou have pourtrayed all thy charms; by his
eloquence have thou delineated the beauty and power of truth; and by his
strength and courage, did thou substantiate thy choicest blessings. In thy
own Voltaire, thy benediction to all mankind was God and Liberty. In him did
thou avenge the cause of humanity and deliver Europe from the yoke of the
ancient despotism of Asia: In him did thou give to truth the sacred
impressions of genius; and by his strong arm did thou shake the disgraceful
remains of feudal and gothic vassalage. When Montesquieu and Beccaria restored
to humanity, her long lost charms, thy friendly spirit did direct them.

PRIESTLEY, illustrious sage! The fruitless effort to save a sinking realm is
his crime: The greatness of his virtues and his sufferings prove the despotism
and misfortunes of that nation, whose history his future fame will adorn. He, O
FREEDOM! has fought, successfully fought, under thy holy banners, and broken
the fetters of reason. By him, have thou confounded the blind partisans of
antiquity, and demolished the antique pillars of the temple of superstition.
But, in Britain shall it be said* that, Erskine his friend, and the friend of
Pain, can no longer defend the palladium of Liberty; and that he having become
the christian victim of the riotous triumph of mad hierarchical bigotry, such
as would have disgraced the reign of Dioclesian or Nero, must flee his native
land. Welcome, thrice welcome, to this western world: thou bring with thee
all the treasures of knowledge of all ancient and modern time. Come and animate
the Americans with the amiable example of thy virtues. This was written after
Dr. Priestley had informed several of his friends in America of his intention
of leaving England, on account of civil and religious persecution, and fleeing
to America, the asylum of those who flee from the Tyrants of the old world.


WHEN Mirabeau, Condorcet, and that bright phalanx of patriots and heroes,
arrayed, in the divine panoply of reason, waged successful war against the
many-headed monster, Tyranny, thou, O FREEDOM! did nerve their mighty arm
with more than herculean strength.

THESE are the men whose fame will live forever: These are the benefactors of
mankind: their glory will embrace all the future generations of men. Who can
stop the progress of their works! What can check the progress of truth! As soon
might man stretch forth his feeble arm and say to you bright orb of day, retire
and cease to shine.

BUT, what shall we say of the Legislators and Heroes of America? These all
uttered their voices, strong as reason and sublime as heaven, saying, Let
America be free, and America was free. Under the auspices of that freedom, in
this Hall, are we now assembled.

PHYSICIANS! you are convened on one of the most important occasions that can
excite the attention of the wise and virtuous part of mankind. Your profession
is to be the disciples of nature. Your object is to be the mitigation and cure
of diseases. And, your ruling principle is to be active benevolence, by which
you are to become the counselors, the friends and the benefactors of mankind.
Let us therefore make this day a solemn Jubilee, sacred to the memory of all
those who have improved the healing-art, and promoted the interests of humanity
in the world.


