Dr. DEANE's ELECTION SERMON. MAY 28, 1794.

COMMONWEALTH of MASSACHUSETTS. In the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES, MAY 28, 1794.
ORDERED, That Doctor CONY, Mr. WILLIAMS, of Pittsfield, and Mr. SPROUT, be a
(...) to (...) on the Reverend Dr. SAMUEL DEANE, and thank him, in the Name of
the HOUSE, for the SERMON delivered by him this Day, before His Honor the
LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR, the Honorable COUNCIL, and the two Branches of the
GENERAL COURT; and to request a Copy thereof for the Press.

Extract from the Journal.

Attest. HENRY WARREN, C. H. N.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE His HONOR SAMUEL ADAMS, ESQUIRE. LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR;
THE HONORABLE THE COUNCIL, SENATE, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS, MAY 28th, 1794.

BEING THE DAY OF GENERAL ELECTION.

BY SAMUEL DEANE, D. D. A PASTOR of the FIRST CHURCH in PORTLAND.

PRINTED in BOSTON, At the STATE PRESS, by ADAMS and LARKIN, PRINTERS to the
COMMONWEALTH of MASSACHUSETTS. -- 1794.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
As we are convened with our civil fathers to pay our religious acknowledgments
to the Deity, and to inquire in his temple, the theme for our contemplation,
which I have selected from the sacred pages, is this --

PROVERBS III.6. IN ALL THY WAYS ACKNOWLEDGE HIM, AND HE SHALL DIRECT THY
PATHS. THIS respected audience will easily forgive the omission, if they should
hear nothing said at this time concerning the necessity, the origin, or the
nature of civil government; nor of the particular kind which is most eligible,
and most conducive to the happiness of a state or nation: Things which have
been often attempted on such occasions, and by those who were thought equal to
the undertaking. Neither will it be so requisite to point out those
qualifications which the delegated electors ought to regard in those whom they,
set up as rulers, as in those times when one whole branch of the legislative
body were chosen by the assembled representatives, on this anniversary.
Accordingly a subject is chosen which does not lead to these things; but to
show the necessity of paying a due regard to the most high God; and which
contains an important encouragement to our so doing.

THE words ways, and paths, in the text, are easily understood as applied to a
man's conduct in the course of his life; to that of one as much as another,
whatever may be his station; so that the administration of the affairs of
government is included.

IF any such persons can be found, as deny, or disbelieve, the existence of the
Divine Being, they are farthest of all men from complying with the duty
required in the text. But it may justly be doubted whether any rational human
creature has lived and died under such a delusion. The opinion can only be
founded in folly. The fool has said in his heart there is no God; and of such
only it is to be expected, who are either naturally wanting in understanding,
or who have greatly abused and obscured the light of reason and conscience by
sin. For by the things that are made, and must have been created by him, are
clearly seen, and understood, his eternal power and Godhead. The existence of
things, not eternal nor selfcreated, must lead us to believe in one who is
self-existent, without beginning, and possessed of all perfections.

BUT the acknowledgment of this truth, That God is, cannot be all, nor the
principal thing which is required. For by this the generality of mankind are
but little, if at all, distinguished one from another.

THE belief of God's governing providence over all his works is undoubtedly
included; and the oral profession of this belief is not excluded. For it would
be irrational to suppose that the Almighty Creator of the universe has no
governing influence over the work of his own hands.

WE do not deny that Omnipotence, directed by infinite wisdom, is equal to the
task of making a most huge and complicated (...) which should need no
direction, or support, after the original impulse, in order to answer
innumerable wise ends in its creation. But that he has done this in the
structure of the material universe, it is impossible to prove. Much has been
discovered by philosophers, concerning the laws of matter and motion. But the
most sagacious theorist could never assign any physical cause of gravitation,
which probably pervades all matter, and directs its motions: But have confessed
that this universal property, or affection, may be no other than a constant
energy of the Supreme Being, If this is the case, or allowed to be so, the
reality of a divine providence is not to be denied, or doubted. He that stands
at helm, we may say, directs the ship and governs its motions.

IN language of inspiration, God is said to uphold all things by the word of
his power; and without him, it is asserted, that not even a sparrow dies. How
much more then must the noblest of his visible creatures, and their affairs, be
under his direction? Those creatures of God which are fitted to act morally,
from motive and choice, are evidently under his governing influence. This
appears from his imposing systems of laws to regulate their conduct; from his
promises and threatenings, of rewards to the obedient, and punishments to the
rebellious; from the promised assistances of his Holy Spirit, and the
ministration of the celestial angels to the heirs of salvation. By the divine
agency, either directly or through his instruments, the meek are guided in
judgment; and even the hearts of kings, however stubborn, are turned by the
Monarch of the universe, as the rivers of water.

AND if individual persons are under the divine guidance, the same is surely
the case of states and communities, which are composed of individuals. These
are equally fit subjects of the divine government, and would be equally unhappy
in the want of it. Accordingly we are assured in holy writ, that the kingdom is
the Lord's, and that he is the Governor among the nation. With good reason then
do his servants believe in his governing providence, as exercised in this
inferior world.

PRAYER is also a fit acknowledgment of the Deity. Men should so depend upon
the divine influence, and be so affected with a persuasion of it, as to apply
to him for guidance, in all their important affairs and transactions, In all
thy ways acknowledge him. This will be following the divine direction in other
parts of the sacred volume; and the laudable examples of the devoted servants
of God, both in ancient and modern times.

AND this seeking to God for direction is not only the duty and privilege of
the common people, but more especially of those who are called to guide the
state, and administer the great affairs of the public. For these men act not
only for themselves, but for the whole community. So that errors in their
conduct may be most extensively hurtful and pernicious. And questions come
before them in the course of their business, not only of great weight and
importance, but often very complicated and perplexed. And as the conscience of
a good ruler will not allow him to act and determine by guess, or at random;
how great need has he, not only of exerting his own best abilities, but of
supplicating the friendly aid of one, in whom are boundless treasures of wisdom
and knowledge, and who cannot err in judgment? Every pious ruler is convinced
of his need of assistance from on high; and will gladly make use of his
privilege to repair to the throne of grace for this favor, in the arduous
affairs of government. Moses affords such an example to human governors. He was
wont to apply to God for direction, in guiding his refractory people. And
Solomon, when a choice of divine favors was offered him, supplicated for
wisdom and understanding, to enable him to manage the affairs of his government.

I TRUST I am not speaking to those who will say in their hearts, What profit
shall we have, if we pray unto him? The duty of prayer is not only enjoined
repeatedly in the oracles of God; but clearly dictated by the light of nature,
as appears from the conduct of the heathen mariners with Jonah. There cannot be
a more reasonable service. But for our assurance of gracious answers to our
prayers, we are mostly, if not wholly, beholden to divine revelation. By this
we learn that God is nigh unto all that call upon him, or invoke him with
sincerity; and that, if we implore his aid in cases of difficulty, he will
direct our paths.

THOUGH the intention and use of prayer cannot be to inform the omniscient
Being of our wants, nor to alter the purposes of our unchangeable benefactor,
there is still a connection between asking and receiving his favors. And this
devout exercise will happily serve to keep up in our minds a sense of his
agency, and of our wants and dependence; and prepare us for the right reception
and improvement of what he bestows.

THERE are many ways in which he can give us assistance and direction, besides
doing it by the immediate agency of his Spirit. And his power of doing the
latter none will dare to dispute. The almighty agent, who created the human
soul, has a more near and immediate access to it than any creature can have; so
that he can excite in men such ideas, and lead them into such trains of
thought, as shall influence their actions in perfect consistency with their
moral agency, and accountableness for their conduct.

BUT a practical acknowledgment of the Deity includes, also, a profound
submission to his authority over us, and a voluntary obedience to his
commandments. What will it avail for men to profess that he has in his hands,
by right, and in fact, the government of the world, if they oppose their wills
and actions to his infinite authority? Or, of what account will be their belief
of his existence, so long as they allow themselves to live in practical
atheism? It is a very bad character, given of some who profess to know God,
that in their works they deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and to
every good work reprobate.

THIS practical acknowledgment of God is the highest interest, and the
unquestionable duty of all men. And all the wise and good rejoice in the divine
commandments; accounting the service of God as better than freedom; and take
delight in conforming themselves to their knowledge of his will, as it is
conducive to his honor, and to the restoration and felicity of their lapsed
nature. But the impenitent and disobedient disrelish the divine government,
placing the most of their happiness in secular and licentious, immoral, and
ungodly conduct: And, regardless of the divine forewarnings and threatenings,
r;ush headlong in the way to perdition.

FROM the doctrines contained in the subject, civil rulers may be led to
observe something of the nature of their duty toward God. As men, they are on
the same footing as others; equally bound to the acknowledgment of the Deity,
in all the ways that are dictated by reason and revelation. They should also
remember that, as they are ministers of God, and his representatives, it is of
high importance that they be followers of him in all his moral perfections and
actions, as far as their ability extends; especially in their conduct toward
men. Otherwise they will be unfit to be considered as earthly Gods. They are
set in conspicuous places; and have it in their power to be extensively
beneficial to mankind, by their pious and virtuous examples. They should not
only submit themselves, in all their conduct, to the divine commandments, but
exhibit in their lives bright patterns of submission to the good laws of men.
If private Christians are sacredly bound to show forth the virtues of him who
has called them, and to shine as lights in the world; much more is it requisite
in men who are vested with civil authority. For their good examples will be far
more influential on mankind, than the examples of those in the lower walks of
life. Mankind are ambitious of imitating the conduct of their superiors. And as
the talent is given to magistrates, in, this way to be public benefactors,
they should consider that they must be answerable to the supreme governor, if
they are found guilty of the non-improvement of it. For they must be viewed as
disregarding the divine authority, unless they comply with this duty; and may
justly expect the fate of the unprofitable servant.

THEY must enact no laws but such as have the public welfare for their object:
For God invests them with no authority, but to do good.

BUT if, instead of practically acknowledging the divine authority over them,
they take advantage from their promotion to affront and provoke him, by
oppressing the people, or neglecting to serve them; and by wicked examples
encourage immorality and ungodliness; what account will they be able to give of
themselves to their master in heaven?

POSSESSION of the public power is attended with some peculiar temptations. It
enables men, in some cases, to commit wickedness with impunity. Those who hold
the reins of government can defraud the innocent of their just dues, and
establish iniquity by laws. They can secure to themselves the emoluments of
their office, without performing its duties according to the intention, and
just expectation of their electors. They have opportunity to influence in the
appointment of unfit persons to serve in the judicial and executive departments
of government; and to keep out those of better characters, for the sake of
bribes, the prospect of advantages to themselves or families, or through
prejudice and party spirit. That those who are drawn aside from the path of
duty by such sinister motives are unsit for the high employment of legislation,
and guiding the affairs of a State, cannot be disputed. Instead of approving
themselves as the ministers of God for the good of the people, they may be
considered as emissaries of satan, and scourges of the public. Such men do not
acknowledge the divine Being. They are destitute of religious reverence toward
him; and the language of their conduct is, that they will not have him to reign
over them.

ALSO, the duty of rulers to mankind, and in particular to those who vest them
with authority, is deducible from the subject. If they have a due regard to the
Deity, they will make use of their power and authority as he requires, no
otherwise than to promote the happiness of society. The latter cannot but flow
from the former; and where the latter is not, a religious regard to the Deity
has no place. For an Apostle of Christ has well said, If a man love not his
brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen?

PHILANTHROPY is a Christian virtue of essential importance; and in men of
public character it is indispensably requisite to their answering the designs
of their appointment. Patriotism is the branch of it which should be a striking
trait in their character. The worthy magistrate will therefore bear it in mind
that he is put into office to promote the welfare of the community, and of that
particular part of which he is strictly a member. This is not only the great
design of God, but of man, in his appointment. No free people are supposed to
elect a ruler for any different purpose. He will therefore endeavor, in all
his official conduct, to promote the public welfare. As a legislator he will
give his vote for the enacting of no laws, and the annexing of no sanctions,
but such as he is convinced will be conducive to the good of the public, let
who will be in favor of them. For though he ought to weigh with candor all
that may be said against his opinion, after all he must act according to the
dictates of his own reason and conscience. He is principally answerable to God,
and to the vicegerent of God in his own bosom.

AND as a friend to society, such a ruler will think it of importance to
prevent, as far as may be, the intricacy and obscurity in the language of laws,
which may render them perplexing and ensnaring to the common people.

IN the repealing of laws, he must be actuated by the same conscientious and
benevolent principles. And there may be as real occasions for unmaking old, as
for making new laws and regulations. By means of changes in the circumstances
of a community, those which were once good and necessary may become unfit and
inexpedient. And if antiquated and useless laws, or even any which cannot be
put into execution, are suffered to stand unrepealed, it may be questioned
whether they do not operate to the weakening of the hands of government; or
lead subjects to disobey the best laws with hopes of impunity.

THE worthy magistrate will be so tender of the public welfare, that he will
be careful to inform himself of the true characters of candidates for
subordinate offices, knowing that vicious and ungodly men ought never, unless
in cases of necessity, to be entrusted with power; lest they should so abuse it
as to bring scandal upon government, and mischief upon the people. And being
acquainted with their characters, he will not countenance their being put into
places of honor or trust; nor will he connive at the continuance of such
persons in office. The subordinate officers which Moses was advised to
constitute, were not only to be able men, capable of performing the duties of
their station, but such as feared God, and were men of truth, hating
covetousness.

GOOD rulers will be actuated by such a care for the happiness of the
community, that they will use their wisdom to explore ways and means to
alleviate the public burdens, and the hardships which chance to fall upon
individuals, or on particular orders of men; impose no burdens without real
necessity, for the support of government, for the defense of the State, or the
increase of public happiness on the whole. And they will study to call for
such contributions only, as can be made in the most easy, peaceable and
imperceptible manner.

IT may be expected of them that they be encouragers and supporters of the
means of education, by good laws, and by such establishments and endowments as
appear fit and needful. Especially this will be done by intelligent republican
rulers; as on it depend the peace, prosperity, and perpetuity of the State: How
easily might an ignorant people be excited by an eloquent demagogue to rebel
against such a government, and introduce anarchy, confusion and ruin? How
unqualified are such a people to elect able rulers, and such as are fit to be
entrusted with authority? They will set up men who are like themselves, through
partiality, or ignorance, or from the necessity of the case. And when the blind
have blind leaders, all will be confounded together.

IT may be said, to the honor of our constitution of government, that civil
rulers are happily restrained by it from the abuse of power; and in particular,
from interfering with the rights of conscience. So long as they make this their
directory, subjects need be under no dismal apprehensions of oppression. But
shall magistrates make no use at all of authority with respect to religion and
morality? It is agreed that it would be going beyond their line to do anything
of this sort, more than is perfectly consistent, with the sacred rights of
conscience. For, as Christians, we are under the government of Christ; and
civil rulers, as such, have no authority in his kingdom. And yet they may, and
they ought to be, nursing fathers to the church of Christ. They may secure to
Christians the enjoyment of the rights of conscience; prevent their being
interrupted in the exercise of their religion; and enable Christian societies
to raise contributions among themselves, to serve religious purposes. And if,
with political views, they may enforce the support of schools for the
instruction of youth, why not that of meetings for the instruction of grown up
children in religion and morality, so far as they shall judge it needful to
promote the welfare of society? Why not oblige a dishonest person to attend
these meetings, of the denomination he prefers, if it were only to prevent his
invading the property of his Christian neighbors, while they are at the place
of public worship? And why not constrain the profane person to do the same, in
hope that he may learn to be afraid of perjury, the practice of which vice
would be pernicious to a community, as it would render good government
impracticable. All that is indisputably beneficial to society, and consistent
with the rights of individuals, is within their line. And good instructions in
piety and morality are so evidently of this sort, that they have been adopted
by the most applauded of ancient governments.

WE rejoice with our honored rulers this day, in the peace, independence, and
prosperity of our State and Nation. And we look back with pleasure, and devout
gratitude to the Supreme Ruler of events, on the snares which we have escaped.
The Lord was on our side, when men rose up against us. As by Moses he delivered
his chosen people from Egyptian bondage; so he raised up a leader to our
forces, of like wisdom and patriotick zeal, whose name will be equally known to
future generations.

OUGHT we not to be the more sensibly affected with our deliverance, and the
obtainment and security of our rights, when we consider with what amazing
difficulties a great and powerful nation, in alliance with us, have been
struggling, to obtain and secure the same rights, and a free government, of
which we are in the peaceable possession? May all their wise designs, and
laudable endeavors, be crowned with happy success; and those individuals among
them, and nations around them, who have unrighteously opposed their design of
reforming their national government, be convinced of the evil of their conduct.
Are the governors of that afflicted nation charged with cruelty, on account of
the multitude of capital punishments? The blame of this should partly fall on
their wicked invaders, whose bloody onsets and insidious intrigues, have
encouraged many to engage in insurrections, treasons and rebellions, by which
they forfeit their lives. What degrees of lenity might have been exercised
toward offenders, consistently with the safety of the State, perhaps it is
very difficult for us at this distance to determine. Whilst, as true
republicans we cannot but approve their glorious design, we may say they have
probably fallen into great errors, in their zealous pursuit of it. Nor is it to
be expected that their powers will be in the best manner directed, till they
more devoutly acknowledge the government of him who is over all. It was right
to reject an absurd species of Christianity; and it is hoped that a better one
will be soon adopted.

THE union of our States seems to be settled on an immovable basis; and our
rapid increase promises to give us national consequence and respectability. We
foresee nothing to prevent it, under the wise conduct of a supreme executive in
whom all hearts are united; nor so long as the spirit of mutual condescension
is cultivated among the States. The national constitution, so generally
approved, may be viewed as a band of that lasting union, which cannot be too
zealously cultivated. That saying should not be forgotten, By uniting we stand,
by dividing we fall.

THIS respectable State, in particular, has reason to rejoice in the enjoyment
of its rights, and of a happy republican government. Our constitution does
honor to its framers; approaches so near to perfection; and has hitherto so
well answered the wise purposes of its formation, that it can hardly be thought
advisable to put ourselves to the expense and trouble of a revisal. It would be
very uncertain whether any real amendment would, on the whole, be obtained.

WITH pleasure we behold a respectable delegation from the various parts of
this extensive Commonwealth, for the purpose of transacting the important
public business of the present year. May these chosen patriots be actuated by
a noble zeal to promote the public welfare, and may heaven vouchsafe to direct
all their steps. May they act in the fear of God, as they are accountable to
him for their conduct. For though, on account of their station, they are
considered as children of the most high, they shall die like other men; and
after death is the judgment.

AND here we cannot refrain from condolence with our political fathers on a
melancholy event, which has taken place since our last anniversary election;
the removal of that distinguished person, and illustrious republican, who has
so long sat, and with so much dignity, in the chief seat of government. May his
uniform and inextinguishable love of his country, and attachment to the rights
of mankind; and not less his regard for the institutions of religion, and
friendship to the teachers of it, be remembered, and emulated by those who
shall hereafter be called to fill his important station. Long will his
philanthropy, generosity and munificence, be had in remembrance. Especially
will the numerous partakers of his bounty rise up and call his memory blessed.

WE rejoice to see his venerable copatriot now in the place of first
magistrate; a gentleman of well known, and long approved ability and virtue;
who early took an active part toward the accomplishment of our happy
revolution. May the supreme Governor take him into his holy keeping: And, as he
will not fail to acknowledge God, so may he be favored with all needful divine
direction, in the duties of his arduous office. Having always deserved well of
the public, he will experience the most agreeable reward, by having his power
of doing good increased. May his life and usefulness be protracted, that he may
long rejoice in the gladness of our nation. And in the closing scene may his
peaceful conscience anticipate that joyful plaudit, which all the faithful
shall receive from the great Judge of the world.

THE respected, and much honored gentlemen, who are elected to form the two
branches of the legislature, have received a recent testimony of the confidence
of the people in their integrity and abilities, which we trust will not be
abused nor disappointed. As you are vested with the power of the state, and
constituted guardians of its precious rights, your God, your consciences, and
your sacred oaths, oblige you to use your best endeavors to promote the
political good of this people. Your betrustment is great, and part of your work
may be very difficult, at this eventful era, when our affairs are so much
embarrassed by means of the war that rages in Europe, and the depredations in
the West Indies, by which we greatly suffer. If you find that you need wisdom,
you are to ask it of him who is the fountain of it, and answers the prayers of
all who acknowledge him aright. In the elections of this day may you be under a
divine guidance, and in all the business of your sessions through the year.

PERSUADED of the purity of your intentions, the preacher will not presume to
be your dictator, in a line that is out of his profession: But would humbly
recommend to your paternal attention a few things, which to him appear to be of
some political importance.

IF practicable, it seems desirable that something may be done toward putting
into full execution the law respecting schools; that the rising generation may
become possessed of those advantages, which were anxiously desired by the
framers of it, and which cannot but be thought important by an enlightened
republic. And whether some harmless alteration might not render the law more
easy to be enforced, is submitted to your wise consideration.

OUR civil fathers will also consider whether the means of defense ought not to
be more attended to, than they have hit her to been; as we know not what alarms
may come, nor what enemy may next be disposed to invade us -- whether military
skill should not be more assiduously cultivated -- and the militia kept on the
most respectable footing, that we may not be wholly unready to repel an
invasion -- And whether, in our present aspect of affairs, escouragement should
not be afforded to the general government, not only for protecting our
navigation and commerce from piratical depredations; but for the speedy
erection of forts and batteries, on our exposed maritime borders. A little
delay, with respect to the last of these objects, may lead to tragical and
distressing scenes. What other nation is contented with so defenseless a coast?

FRUGALITY, industry and economy are to be considered as excellent virtues in
the inhabitants of any State. For without these no country arrives at opulence;
nor without their continuance, will depopulation and wretchedness be prevented,
much more are they needful in a young country, with low finances, and which has
yet done so little toward providing for the public safety and defense, these
virtues are evangelical, as well as political, and essential parts of that
righteousness which exalts a nation. The want of them would effectually prevent
our growing into that respectability, which we have been fondly anticipating in
expectation. But why, in the name of reason, will we keep ourselves low, by
eagerly importing and purchasing the trifling manufactures of distant nations?
Possibly our political guardians, without the enaction of sumptuary laws, may
devise some means to check the rage for foreign superfluities, which is
complained of by many as too prevalent, and of a pernicious tendency.

IN subserviency to such a design, might not several new manufactories be
erected, and fostered by the hand of government, to supply the people, not only
with necessary things, but with some that are elegant and ornamental? the
natural consequence would be, preventing much of our wealth from taking wing,
and flying to the transatlantick regions.

THE government in time past has done honor to itself, by their kindness and
assistance to the university in this vicinity. You will consider what further
help it may need, to continue and increase its importance, and usefulness to
the public. BY means of the taking down of one of the buildings, that seat of
learning has not been sufficient, for several years past, to lodge all the
students. Expense in education is thus increased; and a number of them at
present are put to many inconveniences of a remote lodging; where they lose the
benefit of the immediate inspection of the governors.
And not content, that the central part only of this extensive government
should be so well furnished with the means of a liberal education; you cannot
be so partial, but that you will be disposed to establish and endow similar
seats of learning in the remote parts; that so the inhabitants may not be in
danger of losing their republican virtues through lack of knowledge. If the
western has been thus favored, why should not the oriental be attended to?
Though, while the settlers are mostly emigrants from the older parts of the
Commonwealth, a few men of erudition may happen to be found among them; what
prospects can we have concerning the next and future generations? The need of
erudition seems greater in a region bordering on provinces of Britain, where
principles of kingly government prevail; that the corruption and defection of
the people may be effectually, and forever prevented.

IT is presumed that you need not be reminded to consult the honor and credit
of government, by a punctual fulfillment of all the obligations the State is
under; and render to all what they have a just right to expect. The speaker
dares not affront you so much as to suggest a suspicion that you will take
advantage of your high authority to practice iniquity. Christian rulers are not
disposed to injure the enemies of the State; how much less its friends and
supporters, its servants and defenders? For they will consider that contracts
are as much binding in the sight of God, upon States and corporate bodies, as
upon individuals; and that no fraudulent machiavellian policy may be expected
to prosper.

THE address now turns to my fellow citizens of every rank, who are here
assembled. As we wish and pray for the continuance and increase of public
prosperity, it is incumbent on us that, regarding the divine authority, we do
all in our power to strengthen the hands of the government we are
providentially under. It is not enough that we elect wise and faithful men, to
conduct the affairs of the public. It becomes us to pay a sacred regard to the
laws; so as neither to violate them ourselves, nor encourage others in doing
it. Those who offend against the public authority should be rebuked and
punished, that others may not dare to follow their example. And no improper
fear of being persecuted as informers should deter any from causing offenders
against our good government to be detected. If no zeal nor courage were
wanting, in giving assistance to the civil power, government would discover its
full energy, and happy effects; and comparatively few would be molested in the
enjoyment of their rights. It is not the want of good laws, so much as the want
of virtue in the subjects to give them force, that occasions our hearing of so
many grievances, contentions, and injuries.

THAT the good laws of the land may be duly regarded, magistrates should be
revered and honored. As they are vested with the power, they should be
considered as possessors of the dignity and majesty of the State. But, by
refusing them due honor, the people dishonor themselves, and contribute to
bring the community into contempt.

COMPLAINERS and fault-finders, who vent their gallagainst public characters
and measures, should always be discountenanced by every friend to the
Republic. For persons should not be hasty in concluding that their rulers,
have erred in any instance. They should rather consider that the collected
wisdom of the State or Nation, and the superior advantages for information,
possessed by political assemblies, render it probable that their decisions are
more wise and sit than the opinions even of an enlightened individual. But, as
all men are liable to err, if our rulers are found to do so, none but peaceable
and respectful methods should be used to convince them. As an ecclesiastical
elder should be entreated as a parent; so should our political fathers.

DISAFFECTION to government often arises from a sordidly avaricious temper;
which makes men backward to pay tribute, according to their ability and the
exigencies of the State. How unreasonable and shameful are such a temper and
conduct! Is it fit that we should expect to receive for nothing the unspeakable
benefits of good government, the security of our liberties, persons and
fortunes? Can we wish our rulers to spend their time and attention in the
public service, without an adequ^te reward? Or can we be ready to indulge
suspicions that they are too forward to lay burdens upon us, when we know that
they themselves bear their proportion of them, according to their several
abilities? For so happy is our situation since the revolution, that our rulers,
in most cases, cannot oppress us without hurting themselves.

LET us see that we always make the wisest possible use of the power of
appointing our own rulers, which the good providence of God has given us;
imploring his direction in these matters; and endeavor in all possible ways to
advance the public welfare. For by so doing we should remember that we promote
our own happiness. All the members partake of the health of the body,
political, as well as natural. And that we may not fail of being good subjects,
it should be considered that we ought to obey our rulers from a principle of
duty to our Almighty Sovereign. For good rulers are ordained by him; and by
resisting them we shall oppose the ordinance of God, and expose ourselves to
his wrath. It is therefore our duty, our interest, and wisdom, to resolve that
we will submit to their laws, that so we may lead quiet and peaceable lives,
while we persevere in all godliness and honesty: For this is good, and
acceptable in the sight of God our Savior.

NOTHING indeed can do more toward the support of government, than the
practice of religion and virtue. Were mankind perfect in these things, human
government and laws would be rendered useless. So that the more they are
practiced, the more easily government will be administered; and the more happy
will be the condition of society. Let us then resolve, that, by the help of
God, we will thus become benefactors to the public. If this were done by the
generality, a blessed reformation would be effected. The blessing of heaven
would be upon us, and better times would be experienced than have ever yet been
known. Expensive vices would give place to fruitful industry. Rulers and ruled,
teachers and private Christians, and all corporations instituted to serve the
community, would exert themselves to increase the public happiness. The arts
and sciences would flourish, as genius and learning would be encouraged.
Agriculture and commerce would be more productive of support and wealth.
Manufactures would increase, and arrive to the greatest perfection. The fame of
our increasing wealth and happiness would draw multitudes of emigrants from
other quarters of the globe, to assist in our improvements, and to participate
in our prosperity. Our peace and happiness would exhibit no faint picture of
the predicted millennial state, or be the dawn and introduction of it.

FINALLY. May persons of all denominations be induced, from evangelical
motives, to the religious acknowledgment of the Deity, and the practice of
universal holiness. Thus, being guided by divine counsel, shall we secure to
ourselves his approbation and acceptance, through the Redeemer; which are of
infinitely greater consequence to us, than all our terrestrial enjoyments. The
fashion of this world is swiftly passing away. All human governments will soon
be terminated, and gone forever. The rapid wheels of time are driving us on to
our most important state of existence; in which all the godly and virtuous
shall live in greater felicity than it is possible at present for us to
conceive; a happiness answerable to the desires and capacities of our souls,
without alloy, and without end.

THE END.
APPENDIX.
THE following List is added by the desire of the Historical Society. Gentlemen
of information are requested to fill up the blanks. Those who possess any
Election Sermons, particularly for the first century of Massachusetts, will
benefit the public and posterity, by depositing them in the library of the
Historical Society, where they will be gratefully received, and carefully
preserved. 1631 By Text. 32 -- 33 -- 34 -- John Cotton, of Boston. 35 -- 36 --
37 -- 38 -- 39 -- 40 -- 1641 -- 42 -- 43 -- Ezekiel Rogers, of Rowley. 44 -- 45
-- 46 -- 47 -- 48 -- 49 -- 50 -- 1651 -- 52 -- 1653 54 -- 55 -- 56 -- Charles
Chauncy, President of the College. 57 -- 58 -- 59 -- 60 -- 1661 -- John Norton,
of Boston -- Jeremiah, chapter xxx. ver. 17. 62 -- 63 -- John Higginson,of Salem.
-- I Kings, viii. 57, 58, 59. 64 -- 65 -- 66 -- 67 -- Jonathan Mitchel, of
Cambridge. -- Nehemiah ii, 16. 68 -- William Stoughton, Afterward
Lieutenant Governor
of Dorchester. 69 -- John Davenport, of New Haven. -- II Samuel, xxiii.3. 70
-- 1671 -- 72 -- Thomas Shepard, of Charlestown. -- Jeremiah ii.31. 73 -- (...)
Oaks, President of the College.
of Cambridge. -- Deuteronomy xxxii.^^. 74 -- Samue; Torrey, of Weymouth. --
Revelation ii.5. 75 -- 76 -- William Hubbard, of Ipswich -- I Chronicles,
xii.32. 77 -- Increase Mather. of Boston. -- I Chronicles, xxviii.9. 78 -- 79
-- James Allen, of Boston. -- I Kings, viii.57. 80 -- 1681 -- 82 -- 83 --
Samuel Torrey, of Weymouth. -- Deuteronomy xxxii.47. 84 -- 85 -- William Adams.
-- Isaiah lxvi.2. 86 -- 87 -- 88 -- 89 -- 90 -- Cotton Mather, of Boston. --
Nehemiah v.19. 1691 92 -- 93 -- Increase Mather, of Boston. -- Isaiah i.26. 94
-- Samuel Willard, of Boston. -- II Samuel, xxiii.3. 95 -- Samuel Torrey, of
Weymouth. -- Hosea i.7. 96 -- 97 -- 98 -- Nicholas Noyes, of Salem. -- Jeremiah
xxxi.23 99 -- 1700 -- 1 -- Joseph Belcher, of Dedham. -- Job xxix.25. 2 --
Increase Mather, of Boston. -- Esther x.iii. 3 -- Solomon Stoddard, of
Northampton. 4 -- Jonathan Russell, of Barnstable. -- Nehemiah ix.33. 5 --
Joseph Estabrooks, A. M. of Concord. -- Genesis xii.2. 6 -- John Rogers, A. M.
of Ipswich. -- I Kings, viii.57, 58. 7 -- Samuel Belcher, of Newbury. --.
Matthew vi.10 8 -- John Norton. 9 -- Grindal Rawson, A. M. of Mendon. --
Jeremiah xiii.16. 10 -- Ebenezer Pemberton, of Boston. -- Psalm lxxxii.6, 7.
1711 -- Peter Thacher, A. M. of Milton. -- Isaiah lviii.18. 12 -- 13 -- 14 --
Samuel Danforth, of Taunton. -- Psalm lxxx.14. 15 -- Jeremiah Shepard, A. M. of
Lynn. -- Isaiah lxiii.12. I6 -- Benjamin Wadsworth, of Boston, Psalm
lxxviii.72. 17 -- 18 -- Benjamin Colman, A. M. of Boston. -- Nehemiah v.I9. 19
-- William Williams, A. M. of Hatfield. -- Judges ii.2. 20 -- Nathaniel Stone,
of Harwich. -- Romans xiii.3. 1721 Small pox in Boston: It is supposed no
sermon was preached. 22 By John Hancock, A. M. of Lexington. -- Luke xxii.25.
23 -- Benjamin Colman, of Boston. -- I Chronicles, xxviii.8. 24 -- Joseph
Sewall, of Ditto. -- II Samuel, xxiii.3, 4. 25 -- Ebenezer Thayer, A. M. of
Roxbury. -- Jeremiah vi.8. 26 -- Peter Thacher, A. M. of Boston. -- Psalm
lxxvii.20. 27 -- Joseph Baxter, A. M. of Medfield. -- I Timothy, ii.1, 2. 28 --
Robert Breck., A. M. of Marlborough. -- Deuteronomy v.29. 29 -- Jeremiah Wise,
M. A. of Berwick. -- Romans xiii.4. 1730 By Thomas Prince, M. A. of Boston. --
I Samuel, ii.6, 7. 1731 -- Samuel Fiske, M. A. of Salem. -- Psalm ci.6. 32 --
John Swift, M. A. of Framingham. -- Luke xiii.9. 33 -- Samuel Wigglesworth, M.
A. of Ipswich. -- Revelation iii.1, 2. 34 -- John Barnard, A. M. of Marblehead.
-- Proverbs xvi.12. 35 -- John Prentice, A. M. of Lancaster. -- II Chronicles,
xvii.3, 4, 5, 6. 36 -- Edward Holyoke, M. A. of Marblehead. -- Nehemiah vii.2.
37 -- Israel Loring, A. M. of Sudbury. -- Revelation ii.5. 38 -- John Webb, M.
A. of Boston. -- Isaiah ix.6. 39 -- Peter Clarke, A. M. of Salem. -- Hosea
xi.12. 40 -- William Cooper, A. M. of Boston. -- Psalm ii.I0, 11, I2. 1741 --
William Williams, M. A. of Weston. -- Zechariah xii.5. 42 -- Nathaniel
Appleton, A. M. of Cambridge. -- Psalm lxxii.1, 2, 3. 43 -- Nathaniel Bells, V.
D. M. of Situate. -- Deuteronomy xxxii.4^. 44 -- James Allen, V. D. M. of
Brookline. -- Isaiah vi.1. 45 -- Ebenezer Gay, A. M. of Hingham. -- II Samuel,
xxi.17. 46 -- John Barnard, M. A.of Andover. -- Psalm lxxxii.1. 47 -- Charles
Chauncy, D. D. of Boston. -- II Samuel, xxiii.3. 48 -- Daniel Lewis, A. M. of
Pembroke. -- Isaiah xxii.21. 49 -- William Balch, A. M. of Bradford. -- Psalm
cxxii.6, 7, 8, 9. 50 -- Samuel Phillips, A. M. of Andover. -- Proverbs viii.15,
16. 1751 -- William Welsteed, A. M. of Boston. -- Psalm xlvii.9. 52 Small pox
in Boston, no sermon preached. 53 By John Cotton, A. M. of Newton. -- Isaiah
xxxiii.6. 54 -- Jonathan Mayhew, D. D. of Boston. -- Matthew xxv.21. 55 --
Samuel Checkley, A. M, of Ditto. -- Zephaniah i.15. 56 -- Samuel Cooper, A. M.
of Boston. -- Hebrews xi.24, 25, 26. 57 -- Ebenezer Pemberton, A.H, Ditto. --
Deuteronomy v. 29. 58 -- Thomas Frink, M. A, of Rutland. -- Isaiah xxxii.1, 2.
59 -- Joseph Parsons, A. M. of Bradford. -- Esther x.3. 60 -- Samuel Dunbar, A.
M. of Stoughton. -- II Chronicles, xv.1, 2. 1761 -- Benjamin Stevens, A. M. of
Kittery. -- II Corinthians, iii.11. 62 -- Abraham Williams, A. M. of Sandwich.
-- I Corinthians, 12, 25. 63 -- Thomas Barnard, A. M. of Salem. -- Judges ix.7
to 15. 64 Small pox in Boston, no sermon preached. 65 -- Andrew Eliot, A. M. of
Boston. -- I Chronicle, xii.32. 66 -- Edward Barnard, A. M. of Haverhill. --
Nehemiah v.15. 67 -- Ebenezer Bridge, A. M. of Chelmsford. -- Deuteronomy
xxxiii.29. 68 -- Daniel Shute, A. M. of Hingham. -- Ezra x.4. 1769 By Jason
Haven, A. M. of Dedham. -- Psalm lxxv.6, 7. 70 -- Samuel Cook, A. M. of
Cambridge. -- II Samuel, xxii.3, 4. -- At the request of a great number of
gentlemen, friends to the liberties of North America, who were desirous,
notwithstanding the removal of the Massachusetts General Court,
(unconstitutionally as they judged) to Cambridge, that God might be
acknowledged in the house of worship at Boston, in which our tribes, (...) the
days of our fathers, have annually sought to him for (...), previous to the
choice of his Majesty's Council. (Title Page.)
Charles Chauncy, D. D. of Boston. -- Psalm xxii.4. I77I -- John Tucker, A. M.
of Newbury. -- I Peter, ii.13, 14, 15, 16. 72 -- Moses Parsons, A. M. of
Newbury Falls. -- Proverbs xxi.1. 73 -- Charles Turner, A. M. of Duxbury. --
Romans xiii.4. 74 -- Gad Hitchcock, A. M. of Pembroke. -- Proverbs xxix.^. 75
-- President LANGDON, before the Provincial Congress at Watertown, May 31st.
Samuel Langdon, D. D. of Cambridge. -- Isaiah i.26. -- Mr. GORDON, before the
General Court at Watertown, on the 19th July, on their assembling, agreeable to
the Charter, and in compliance with the choice of Congress.
William Gordon, of Roxbury. -- Jeremiah xxx.20, 21. 76 -- Samuel West, A, M of
Dartmouth. -- Titus iii.1. 77 -- Samuel Webster, A. M. of Salisbury. -- Ezekiel
xlv.8, 9. -- Before the General Court, on the 4th July, being the first
anniversary of Independence.
William Gordon, of Roxbury. -- I Kings, xii.25. 78 -- Phillipe Payson, A. M. of
Chelsea. -- Galatians iv.26, 31. 79 -- Samuel Stillman, A. M. of Boston. --
Matthew xxii.21. 80 -- Simeon Howard, A. M. of Ditto. -- Exodus xviii.21. -- On
the commencement of the new Constitution of Massachusetts, 25th October, 1780.
Samuel Cooper, D. D. of Boston. -- Jeremiah xxx.20, 21. 1781 -- Jonas Clark,
A. M. of Lexington. -- Psalm xlvii.8, 9. 82 -- Z^bdi^^ Adams, A. M. of
Lunenburgh. -- Ecclesiastes viii.4. 83 -- Henry Cumings, A. M. of Billerica. --
I Peter, v.5. 84 -- Moses Hemmenway, A. M. of Wells. -- Galatians v.13. 85 --
William Symmes, A. M. of Andover. -- I Chronicles, xxviii.8. 86 -- Samuel West,
A. M. of Needham. -- Matthew xx.27. 87 -- Joseph Lyman, of Hatfield. -- Romans
xiii.4. 1788 By David Parsons, A. M. of Amherst -- Proverbs xxiv.2. 89 -- Jonah
Bridge, A. M. of East-Sudbury -- Psalm lxxxii.1. 90 -- Daniel Foster, A. M. of
New-Braintree. -- Proverbs viii.16. 1791 -- Chandler Robbins, A. M. of
Plymouth. -- II Chronicles, xii.32. 92 -- David Tappan, A. M. of Newbury. --
Psalm lxxvii.20. 93 -- Samuel Parker, D. D. of Boston. -- Proverbs xiv.34. 94
-- Samuel Deane, D. D. of Portland. -- Proverbs iii.6.

Several gentlemen have been chosen to preach the Election Sermon, but have
declined. The following names only have been obtained.

Thomas Smith, A. M. of Portland. 1769 Joseph Jackson, A. M. of Brookline. 1793
Joseph Lathrop, D. D. of West-Springfield.

