AN ENQUIRY INTO, AND OBSERVATIONS UPON THE CAUSES AND EFFECTS OF THE EPIDEMIC
DISEASE, WHICH RAGED IN PHILADELPHIA FROM THE MONTH OF AUGUST TILL TOWARD THE
MIDDLE OF DECEMBER, 1793.

BY JEAN DEVEZE, MASTER IN SURGERY, FROM CAPE FRANCAIS, PHYSICIAN OF THE
HOSPITAL AT BUSH-HILL, SURGEON-MAJOR AND PRINCIPAL PHYSICIAN OF THE MILITARY
HOSPITAL ESTABLISHED BY THE FRENCH REPUBLIC AT PHILADELPHIA.

Nature is the first Physician. HYPPOCRATES, Pop. Mal. b. 6, s. 5. PRINTED BY
PARENT, PHILADELPHIA. 1794.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE epidemic disease, of which so many of the citizens of Philadelphia fell
victims, and which spread such a scene of terror around it by its ravages in
the month of August, interested the feelings of the compassionate so forcibly,
that at their own expense the hospital at Bush-hill was opened.

At this juncture I arrived on this continent, and was appointed to the medical
direction of this hospital. As the patients multiplied in abundance, Dr.
Benjamin Duffield, a member of the College of Physicians of this city, was
associated with me by the committee. My first care was to communicate to him my
mode of treatment, and my reasons for adopting the various methods I had chosen
to encounter the destructive plague which depopulated the city, and overwhelmed
it with melancholy and consternation. Dr. Duffield, after having examined my
practice, and visited the patients with me in concert, assured me that his mode
of treatment was entirely conformable to mine, and that he should coincide in
the plan I had established without alteration.

The approbation of a professional man, whose reputation alone speaks his
eulogy, and who to his intelligence in medicine joins the successful practice
of surgery, was, I confess, to me a motive of encouragement. Besides, I had
persuaded myself, that I had fallen upon the true indications of cure; and
therefore continued my treatment according to my principles, excepting only in
those cases in which particular circumstances required its modification.

The harmony which perpetually subsisted between, Dr. Duffield and myself, did
not a little contribute without doubt, to the success we experienced in the
management of a disease, one of the most destructive that the human race can be
afflicted with. This success was another motive for me to be particular and
exact in the observations I have now the honor to present to the public. They
were originally destined to remain buried in my port-folio, for my own use, and
to have recourse to in cafe of necessity, if ever the same disease should again
appear with the same symptoms and variations.

But I could not resist the solicitation of some particular friends; and I
moreover imagined that they might be useful to professional gentlemen who have
not had an opportunity of following the disease through all its modifications,
and to whom the danger of experiments and endeavors, always painful and
afflicting to humanity, has been dispensed with. I had another motive, which
was to incite those to whom the disease was already known, to execute better
than myself the desire I had of being useful. Added to this, some directors of
the hospital, and the committee to whom its administration was entrusted, have
informed me, that they should with pleasure see my observations published. I
therefore thought it a duty to yield to their request, and to gratify my own
feelings in this testimony of my esteem for them. If my endeavors have been
useful, it is in part owing to the encouragement they inspired me with, and to
the example they placed before my eyes, in performing with the most religious
pity, the most meritorious acts of benevolence and charity. I dare then to
flatter myself, that these motives which have inspired me, rather than the
desire of book-making, will be a sufficient excuse for the faults which will
necessarily be found in this performance, and will obtain the indulgence of the
reader, who will neither find that elegance and correctness of style so
necessary in works of entertainment, and so superfluous when simple facts are
to be narrated.

If these researches and observations on the causes, qualities, and treatment
of the disease which was their object, should meet with any contradictions, or
persons of a different opinion, I now, once for all, declare that I renounce
all controversy.

AVERTISSEMENT.
LES ravages qu'occasionnalt en Aout dernier, dans la ville de Philadelphie, la
malady epidemique, don't tant de citoyens ont ete les victimes, et qui a
repandu tant de terreur, ont interesse l'humanite de quelques ames
compatissantes qui ont fond a leurs frais l'hopital qui subsiste encore sous
le nom de Bush-hill.

J'arriva^s a cette epoque dans ce continent; je sus choisi pour avoir la
direction de cet hopital, en qualite de medecin. Comme les malades y
abondaient, le comite m'associa le docteur Benjamin Duffield, membre du college
de medecin de cette ville. Mon premier ^oin fut de lui communiquer la maniere
don't je faisais usage, et les motifs qui determinai^nt mon choix pour chacun
des moyens que j'adoptais afin de combattre le fleau destructeur qui depeuplait
la ville, et repandait partout la tristesse et la consternation. M. Duffield,
apres avoir examine ma pratique et visit les malades avec moi, approuva ma
maniere, me dit que la sienne etait entierement conform, et qu'il adoptait le
plan de traitement que j'avais etabli, sans proposer aucun changement.

L'approbation d'un homme de l'art, don't la reputation seule fait l'eloge, et
qui joint aux connaissances de la medecin celles de la chirurgie qu'il exerce
avec les memes succes, ^ut pour moi, je l'avoue, un motif d'encouragement; je
me persuadai d'autant plus d'avoir saisi les vraies indications curatives. Je
continual donc les traitemen^ d'apre^ mes principes, sauf les modifications
don't les circonstances determinaient la necessi^^. La bonne intelligence qui
n'a cesse de regner enter le docteur Duffield et moi, n'a pas peu contribue,
sans doubt, aux succes que nous avons obtenus dans le traitement d'une malady
des plus meurtrieres, don't l'espece human puisse etre affligee. Ces succes
ont ete pour moi un motif de plus pour mettre quelque clarte dans les
observations que je present aujourd'hui au public. Else n'etaient d'abord
destinees qu'a demeurer ensevelies dans mon porte-feuille, pour moi seul et
pour les consulter au besoin, quant a l'usage des moyens que j'avais employes,
si toute ^ois la meme malady venait a se reproduire avec les memes variations
et les memes symptoms: mais je n'ai pu me refuser a la solicitation de
quelques amiss. J'ai pense en outre que, d'une part, else pourraient etre
utiles aux persons de l'art qui n'auraient pas eu occasion d'etudier cette
malady et de la suivre dans toutes ses modifications, et qui seront dispensees
du danger des experiences et des essais toujours facheux et toujours affligeans
pour l'humanite, et que d'une autre part else pourront engager ceux a qui elle
serait deja connue a remplir mieux que moi le desir que j'ai eu de bien fair.

De plus, quelques directeurs de cet hopital, et le comite, a qui
l'administration en a ete confiee, m'ayant laisse entrevoir qu'ils verraient
avec plaisir mes observations mises au jour, j'ai cru devoir ceder a ce desir,
et a la satisfaction que j'eprouve a leur en fair l'hommage. Si mon zele a pu
etre utile, je le dois en party a l'encouragement qu'ils m'ont inspire et a
l'exemple qu'ils m'ont done, les ayant vu remplir avec la piete la plus
religieuse, les acts de la bienfaisance et de la charity la plus meritoire.
J'ose me flatter que ces motifs auxquels j'ai cede plutot qu'a celui de fair
un livre, feront pardonner les negligences qui doivent se rencontrer dans cet
ecrit, et m'obtiendront l'indulgence du Lecteur, qui n'y trouvera ni cette
elegance, ni cette correction de style, si necessaire dans des ouvrages de pur
agreement, et si superflues dans une simple narration de faits.

Si mes recherches et mes observations sur les causes, les qualites et le
traitement de la malady qui en fait l'objet, rencontraient quelques
contradiction ou quelques persons d'une opinion differente, je previens que
je renonce d'avance a toute discussion pole mique.

ERRATA.
Page 4, line 20, of barley, read barley.

-- 28, -- 8, complains, r. complained.

-- 30, -- 10, her, r. his.

-- 32, -- 26, and which, r. which.

-- 40, -- 27, and limbs, (...) and limbs.

-- 58, -- 13, done, r. do no.

-- 58, -- 26, mendicament, r. medicament.

-- 60, -- 25, was renewed, r. renewed.

-- 108, -- 15, at, r. an.

-- 136, -- 10, includes, r. include.

ERRATA.
Page premiere, Epigraphe, Hipocrate, lisez Hippocrate.

Page 3, ligne 6, quelques qualites, lisez des qualites.

Page 11, ligne 4, linstinct, lisez l'instinct.

Ditto, ligne 12, egosime, lisez egoisme.

Page 13, ligne 23, pille, lisez pills.

Page 21, ligne 2, produise, lisez soit.

Page 23, ligne 19, verite, lisez variete.

P. 25, l.23, vertueux qui n'a, lisez et une virtue quin'ont.

Page 59, ligne 13, paraissens, lisez paraissent.

Page 67, ligne 26, a bouche, lisez la bouche.

Ditto, ligne 32, vitriol, lisez nitre.

Page 73, ligne 12, par, lisez pour.

Ditto, ligne 13, essentielles de, lisez essentielles a.

Page 77, ligne 6, des selles, lisez les selles.

Page 83, ligne 22, on, lisez son.

Page 91, lignes 30 et 31, retranchez auparavant.

Page 93, ligne 20, vitriol, lisez nitre.

Page 133, ligne 5, ^^aient, lisez etaient, et retranchez et.

Ditto, ligne 13, traite, lisez traites.

Ditto, ligne 31 suffisent-elle, lisez suffisent-ils.

RECHERCHES ET OBSERVATIONS, Sur les Causes et les Effets de la Malady
Epidemique qui a regne a Philadelphie, depuis le mois d' Aout jusques verse le
milieu du mois de Decembre de l'annee 1793;

Par JEAN DEVEZE, Maitre en Chirurgie, du Cap-Francais, Medecin de l'Hopital
Bush-hill, Chirurgien-major et Medecin en chef de l'Hopital militaire etabli a
Philadelphie au compte de la Republique Francaise.

La Nature est le premier Medecin. HYPOCRATE, Malad. popul., Live. 6, Sect. 5.

A PHILADELPHIE, De l'Imprimerie de PARENT.

AN ENQUIRY INTO, AND OBSERVATIONS UPON THE CAUSES AND EFFECTS OF THE EPIDEMIC
DISEASE, Which raged in Philadelphia from the month of August till toward the
middle of December, 1793.
A Few days after my arrival at Philadelphia, the seventh of August, 1793, it
was reported many persons had lost their lives in consequence of a sore throat.

The rapid progress of the disease gave reason to suppose, it had some
contagious property annexed to it; the death of many persons in the same
quarter, and nearly at the same time, so far gave sanction to this opinion,
that it was proved to a certainty to be very dangerous to approach those who
were attacked with it.

The month of August had nearly elapsed before I had an opportunity of
inspecting into the nature of this complaint, when I attended a girl about six
or eight and twenty years of age, servant to Mr. Bohlen, merchant, in North
Water-street. She was very robust and of a sanguine habit; the family
physician, a respectable and well-informed practitioner, judging the case
unfavourable, and supposing she would probably share the fate that had attended
many of his patients, called in and engaged me, in case she sunk under it, to
open the body, and endeavor to find out the cause of so fatal a malady.

I went with him to Mr. Bohlen's. We found the patient in extreme agitation,
face red, eyes sparkling, skin dry and hot, tongue and lips also dry and red,
the amygdale glands swelled, the uvula, palate, and inside of the throat
inflamed; she swallowed with great difficulty and spoke with pain; respiration
was strong, head and throat painful, pulse hard and frequent.

From these indications I proposed bleeding -- the physician consented, and I
immediately performed the operation, and prescribed lemonade and a gargle made
with water and oxymel, or one of honey and spirit of vitriol. It was also
agreed the patient should make use of the bath. On our return the next day she
was infinitely better; the pulse had unfolded, and she spoke with more ease. As
the fever continued, the heat was considerable, and the blood taken the
preceding day indicated great inflammation. I proposed a second bleeding, which
was performed by the consent of the physician. She was desired to continue the
gargle and lemonade, to take creamed of barley or rice, a light mucilaginous
diet, such as sago, tapioca, and the like. The next day we found she had
quitted her bed, was in good spirits, without fever, and had no farther
occasion for medical assistance. We advised her to take a common cathartic. I
saw her no more, but heard her health was perfectly re-established, and she has
not since felt the slightest indisposition.

I could cite many other cases of a similar nature, having seen and visited an
infinite number of persons attacked with the same disease, and had the
happiness not to lose any, except a child that was placed under my care at the
last extremity.

Let it not be supposed, these observations are made as an apology for
bleeding. I acknowledge having cured many without that help; although it was
generally requisite, have often observed symptoms which forbid its use. I then
substituted glysters, gargles, baths, lemonade, chicken water, skimmed milk,
emulsions, simples, and sedatives, and even sometives have used them in
conjunction with the lancet.

If in the beginning of this unfortunate malady recourse had been had to a
similar treatment, I am convinced it would seldom have proved mortal.

But an ill-directed public often acted contrary to what was efficacious. The
diseased were carefully shut up in close rooms, and covered with three or four
blankets; their beverage was infusions of camomile, Madeira wine, and other
inflammatory liquors, which increasing the disease brought the patient to
extremity, having produced mortifications and overcharged the brain. After
death, the victim of this fatal practice had a livid appearance, and the
vessels of the head and brain were in the same state as those who die with a
fit of the apoplexy.

Some days after the sore throat appeared, the fever, which spread devastation
through the city, carried mourning into families that were enjoying the purity
of their manners in the bosom of peace, and under the protection of laws
dictated by independence, wisdom, and virtue.

Affectionate wives! unfortunate mothers and orphans! your fate overwhelms me
with heartfelt distress -- Would to heaven I could assuage your sorrows, by
accumulating them in my own breast, and thus restore you to the happiness
inexorable death has deprived you of, in the objects of your dearest affection,
and make you forget your misfortunes. But alas! my wishes are useless, and
there remains to me only the hope, that by fulfilling the duties my profession
and humanity require, I may soften your ills by diminishing their number.

The misfortunes you have experienced are great, but on looking back how
dreadful must be the prospect to those who have to reflect, that in suffering
their minds to be affected by vain fears, which I will not say extinguished,
though it stifled the sacred sentiments Nature has graven in every heart; when
they call to mind this terror was the cause of their forgetting the first of
duties, and abandoning to all the bitterness of disease their nearest relations
and dearest friends; yet error justifies, nay more, I will say, prescribed the
conduct; the ideas suggested was the cause of your abandoning the unfortunate
victims of this fatal malady, neglected and left alone to expire in all the
horror of despair.

Children! mothers! husbands! think of the duty which God has prescribed to
you. Instinct will dictate, give way to its impulse, and you will follow the
road to virtue; but if deaf to the voice of nature, those for whom alone you
ought to live are deprived of the cares they expect from you -- think what will
be your remorse when they are no more. But say you, the fear of sharing the
same fate, without the possibility of saving another, was the only cause of
your flight. This mode of reasoning proceeded from those only who gave way to
prejudice, which prevented their seeing, that by such an example they justified
a similar conduct in their children and servants.

But why should I endeavor to inspire you with sentiments that are already in
your hearts. An hospitable and generous people cannot be inhuman. If this
virtue, which does honor to your morality -- if the exercise of humanity
ceased for a moment amongst you, your hearts had no part in it -- fear and
error are an excuse; they, for a time, suspended your courage, yet you soon
after was convinced your fears were ill-founded.

In short, the public papers inspired you with terror by pretending to declare
the disease contagious. They went farther -- they advised marking those houses
where the epidemic had already sacrificed some victims. This was, no doubt, one
of the principal causes, of the rapid destruction, which spread devastation
through this unfortunate city.

Honored with your confidence, and that of your representatives united in the
committee, which appointed me to the care of the hospital at Bush-hill, the
refuge of the destitute, unfortunate persons attacked with this epidemic; to
you I owe the result of my observation^ -- may I acquit myself of the duty by
the production of useful ideas.

It will, perhaps, appear strange to many, that, contrary to the public
opinion, I dare assert the malady was not contagious. But the truth being
unalterable, could I refuse to believe circumstances proved to me by continual
observations? It is to the well-informed, and those uninfluenced by party, I
leave to pronounce upon the proofs I will give, and which seem to me to
establish my opinion in an incontestible manner.

The first public report inconsiderately spread abroad, was that the disease
had been imported in the brig Mary, Captain Bush, from Cape Francois, with many
passengers on board, and that during the voyage several persons had died of the
disease which afterward raged in Philadelphia. I was myself a passenger on
board the brig, and can affirm these pretended facts, so forcibly
authenticated, are without foundation. It is true, after having been pillaged
by the pirates, How can I otherwise name men, who in contempt of every law and
principle of humanity, could speculate on our misfortunes, and take from us the
little we had saved from the devouring flames, and rage of the assasin;
cannibals, whose deplorable victims we are. These men do not blush to call
themselves privateers, possessing still more venom, or at at least accomplices
by the deed with the wretches, who by flames forced to flight the few that had
escaped the sword of the banditti; these men, I say, have failed in the first
of all duties, humanity; they have violated every law, by first plundering us
at sea, and then carrying us into an English port to make their piracy lawful.
They pillaged us as Frenchmen; but were we the belligerent French? Were we
Frenchmen speculating on the sale of our merchandises? Were we, in short,
Frenchmen exposed to the chance of war? No: we were, and ought to have been to
them, men -- and men driven from their homes, without asylum or refuge, under
the protection of colors which necessity had forced us to adopt. These pirates
then have violated the rights of people and of nations, by neither regarding
our misfortunes, or the neutral flag that had become ours. I shall not make any
reflections on the tacit approbation of the court of London to this act of
piracy; yet think, when it is told to future ages, it must be remarked as an
infamy to the English name.


we were reduced to a most pitiable state, when we were seen to disembark
ill-cloathed, pale, and with the most powerful expression of grief depicted on
our countenances, (occasioned as well by our past misfortunes, as those that
seemed to await us,) I am not surprised the inhabitants of Philadelphia,
tormented from nearly that period with a malady, the origin of which was
unknown, or that men in general little acquainted with the principles of
natural philosophy should figure to their imaginations we were diseased, though
in reality only unfortunate, having lost but one man during the passage, who,
it is probable, might have escaped that fate could he have received the care
and assistance we were all totally deprived of. On our arrival we had only
three sick, a woman that had miscarried during the voyage, and who afterward
died of a dropsy at Bush-hill, and two ladies now in good health, and who had
never the least symptom of the disorder that spread destruction through this
city.

The same uncertainty with respect to the cause of this epidemic, gave rise,
with no greater foundation, to the report of its being brought in by the
privateer Sans Culotte. Unless we disbelieve the captain and surgeon of this
vessel, we must be convinced that neither the privateer, or the two prizes she
brought into port, had any sick on board. I should never end if I was to relate
all that had been advanced to prove the disease was imported; shall, therefore,
pass on to those only which appear to me sufficient to demonstrate, that the
complaint took its rise in this country.

The first cause of this scourge is the same which produces almost all other
diseases, the alterations of the atmospheric air. This fluid, with which we are
surrounded, is well known to be one of the elements that constitute the animal
system; it is of all the most susceptible of modification; and which influences
in the most powerful manner the animal economy, either by its weight or
lightness, heat or cold, dryness or humidity, or the different qualities it is
susceptible of, when charged with miasmata, which arise from every part.

As a particular enquiry into all the modifications of which air is susceptible
would carry me too far, I shall content myself with hastily examining the
effects it produces on the animal system, when too light or hot, and also when
charged with heterogenous or putrid particles.

When the atmospheric air is too light, it does not counterbalance the effort
of the elementary air. People then experience a degree of debility and
lassitude, which ignorant persons attribute to a cause opposite to the true
one: the air or the weather, they say, is too heavy; whereas the uneasiness
they feel is the result of a too great lightness of the fluids, which being
rarefied, augments the volume of blood, distends the vessels, forces them to
give way by repletion, and prevents a free circulation; the lungs on their part
deprived of the action afforded them by the outward air, are incapable of
exercising their functions.

A patient in this situation would feel a weight upon the breast, with a quick
and painful respiration, that would soon be followed by a spitting of blood,
and death from suffocation. Such has been the effect some travelers have
experienced, whose zeal to make discoveries in natural history has sometimes
carried too far, and who from the desire and glory of being useful, have
climbed elevated mountains, without considering their strength, and uncautious
of the danger to which they exposed themselves.

When the heat of the air is excessive, this elementary principle of life
becomes equally pernicious; the blood is inflamed by being deprived to excess
of its serous particles, which evaporate through the skin; the stomach is
relaxed, and incapable of performing its functions; the gastrick juice no
longer retains the requisite qualities to promote digestion, or produce a chyle
proper to repair the extraordinary secretions of the body; hence crudities
arise, which weaken every organ, and the machine becomes totally debilitated.
Such is the origin of the acrimony from which a great number of diseases take
their rise.

The air may become still more fatal when filled with infected miasmata, which
arise from every part. This corrupted air, if I may so name it, carries with
it, when introduced into the body, the cause of many maladies, with which
individuals are more or less affected, as their habit or constitution gives way
or resists its morbific quality, or even from their manner of living and
immediate physical or moral situations, which more or less facilitate or oppose
the action of the venom; nor do I think individuals are equally affected,
because it may happen the putrid miasmata being unequally disseminated in the
fluids, may accumulate more in one part than in another; their being rejected,
or retained, may also proceed from situations, such as the borders of rivers,
the country, or forests.

It is t^^^ that the air, more or less adulterated or modified, produces
different effects, relative to the situation of places and present state of
individuals, insomuch that those whose moral and physical temperament easiest
give way to the morbific cause, will fall sick the first, while those in a
situation totally opposite will escape the danger; because nature by a perfect
arrangement of the different parts of animal organization, neutralises and
annihilates the principal causes of the disease, which act more strongly in the
former, whose animal system is disordered. Often also we remark in those
patients who are not totally deranged, a certain desire for some particular
food in preference to another, a desire which is often the effect of a natural
instinct that rarely deceives, and which a prudent physician, accustomed to the
study of nature, will never fail to profit by, with the wisdom that inspires
him with the knowledge of his art.

All this proves that the body, as I said before, gives way or resists, more or
less, the morbific cause. From whence it results, that some though they resist
long, are attacked in their turn; others are affected lightly, whilst it acts
seriously upon a great number; which is a natural effect of an epidemic, that,
from the causes I have indicated, shows itself successively in individuals, and
with different gradations.

It is for want of having paid sufficient attention to the variety of effects
proceeding from the same cause, that epidemic diseases have been looked upon as
contagious; nevertheless, I do not pretend to say there are no diseases of that
kind, but am of opinion they are not so common as in general thought.

A contagious disorder is that which is communicated from one person to
another, by an efflux of miasmata spread through the air, without touching the
infected body. This kind of contagion is called contagion at distance: the
plague, and other similar maladies, are of this number.

Diseases are also called contagious when they are communicated by an infected
person touching one that is not so, which goes under the name of contagion by
immediate contact: such, among others, as the itch, etc. etc.

It results from this definition, that maladies, contagious at distance, are
communicated to other bodies, surrounding the infected persons, by breathing
the same air, which alternately passes into the lungs of those who live in the
same place, particularly in close apartments; and then the malady may very well
be characterised under the title of contagious disease. But if in an epidemic
disorder those who continually touch the sick, those who without any
preservative listen only to their courage and love of humanity, give themselves
up to the care of the diseased, live in the midst of them, and breathe the same
air; if these persons are not infected, it is clear the disease is merely
epidemic, and not contagious. This was precisely the case in that we are now
speaking of. I am the more pleased in relating my opinion, as it gives me an
opportunity of doing homage to a citizen, who must be ever dear to his country
for a zeal, courage, and virtue that has hardly an equal; a fact from which I
fear no contradiction, and that seems to me a certain proof that the malady,
whose consequences were so fatal, was not contagious.

Mr. Stephen Girard, merchant of this city, and member of the committee, a man
blessed with an a^^luent fortune, regardless of the injury he must sustain by
abandoning his house of commerce, gave way only to the generous dictates of
humanity; not satisfied with contributing by his wealth alone to the relief of
his fellow-citizens, he attended them in person also; went every morning to the
hospital at Bush-hill, where his first care was not only to direct, but to
inspect into the provisions and arrangement of the house; after which he
visited the apartments of the sick: the unfortunate persons in the greatest
danger were those who first attracted his attention. He approached them with
that philanthropy that proceeds from the heart alone, and which must give the
greater luster to his generous conduct: he encouraged, took them by the hand,
and himself administered the medicines I prescribed. I even saw one of the
diseased, who having nauseated his medicine, discharged the contents of his
stomach upon his benefactor. What did Girard then do? -- entirely devoted to
the public welfare, firm and immovable, and forgetting himself to think only
of the sufferings of his fellow creatures, whom he wished to succor; he wiped
the patient's clothes, comforted, and by the force of persuasion and patience,
induced him to swallow the remedy. He did not stop here -- before he quitted
him to show the same attention to another, he felt his feet and head, in order
to judge of the degree of heat, that he might take from or add to his covering,
according to the necessity of the case; he arranged the bed, inspired him with
courage, by renewing in him the hope that he should recover. -- From him he
went to another, that vomited offensive matter which would have disheartened
any other than this wonderful man; then seeing one at a distance at the point
of death, with the eyes and skin yellow, covered with black blood, that run
from both mouth and nostrils, and feeling about with a bloody and tremulous
hand for a vessel which he could not obtain; Girard ran to his assistance, gave
him the vase, replaced him in his bed, which he set to rights, and only quitted
him to show the same attention to another. The hour of repast arrives -- he is
hungry, yet complains of the necessity he was under of recruiting his strength;
ran, eat a morsel in haste, and re-appeared immediately, still more earnest,
and full of zeal to pay over again the same attention; and never quitted but
when forced by the calls of nature to take some few hours of rest.

Oh! you, who pretend to philanthropy, reflect upon the indefatigable Girard!
take him for your model, and profit by his lessons; and you, citizens of
Philadelphia, may the name of Girard be ever dear to you! -- If you, like me,
had witnessed his virtuous actions, his brows would have been long ago adorned
with a civic crown. What man could be more exposed to the danger of catching
this disease than Mr. Girard: from which we may very reasonably conclude it was
not contagious, unless we are to think, that by the peculiar grace of divine
providence he was preserved to serve as a model for others, or to soften the
ills of the unfortunate victims of this epidemic.

But Mr. Stephen Girard was not the only one exposed to the same danger, for
Mr. Helm, a virtuous citizen, and also one of the committee, found means to
conquer the repugnance inspired by fear. Toward the end of the epidemic, he
also visited the apartments and took care of the sick. He, as well as his
intrepid colleague, remained free from infection. I must also mention the
surgeons that assisted me, who lodged and eat at the hospital, and day and
night visited the chambers of the sick, to dress their blisters and superintend
the nurses: not any of them felt the least inconvenience. I seize with pleasure
this opportunity to return to those fellow-citizens who seconded my cares and
labors, the justice due to their zeal, and the activity with which they
executed their duty. If the disease had been contagious, certainly some of them
would have been attacked, but not one experienced the slightest indisposition.

Mrs. Saville, principal nurse of the hospital at Bush-hill, a valuable woman,
and who deserves the gratitude of the public for the manner in which she
acquitted herself in the charge assigned her, was the only one of all the
principal attendants that was seriously attacked with the epidemic. She had
been from her infancy in Philadelphia, and it is very possible there acquired
the seeds of the disorder. It might equally happen, and I am induced to
believe, though slightly infected from the first, her indisposition would have
been trifling had there not been added to the first cause, that of the putrid
miasmata spread throughout the hospital, where she continually remained. This
person was the last patient seriously disordered I attended at Bush-hill, and
was so fortunate as to cure her: shall give the history of this case as the
subject of one of the observations at the end of this work.

Among the nurses for the sick, two only died: one contributed to her death by
her intemperance, being often disguised by liquor. They were both of this
country, and probably had the seeds of the disease previous to their going to
the hospital; and those seeds would equally have unfolded themselves had they
staid in town; which appears to me the more likely, that many of the other
nurses were not at all indisposed, although they eat and slept in the chambers
of the sick.

The importance of the subject shows me the necessity of advancing every proof
in my power; and considering the motive to be for the public interest, imagine
it will not be taken amiss if I cite myself an example*

At the time that I was accepted as physician to the hospital at Bush-hill, I
had just experienced the most serious misfortunes, having fallen from affluence
into the greatest misery; (and I should not forget to observe, that almost all
the French who sought an asylum here, were in a similar situation.) I had,
during the whole voyage, breathed the foul air in the hold of the vessel in
which I came, and where after being upon deck for some time in the day was
forced to return and pass the nights, and all the bad weather, in a kind of
infected dungeon; had stinking water to drink, and was even deprived of the
provisions I had carried on board, and which was taken from me by pirates of
all kinds, in the hands of whom I was so unfortunate as to fall.

Man is easily capable of philosophising when his moral is supported by his
physical strength; but when the latter is deranged, the other is weakened in
proportion. It is what I experienced; the feelings of the mind had so acted
upon the body, that I have not recovered from the state of debility it had
thrown me into. This state must have favored in a singular manner the action
of the miasmata, which I drew in with my breath at the hospital, where I often
went with a m^st violent headache, and sometimes even with a slight fever. I
paid my morning visit fasting, that in the afternoon immediately after dinner.
I opened a great number of bodies, and consequently was under the necessity of
dipping my hands in the black and corrupted blood that proceeded from their
mortified entrails, and breathed the infected vapors that exhaled from them. I
was it must be acknowledged, one of the most exposed to the disease; had it
been contagious without doubt it must have easily shown itself in me, for,
independent of the danger to which my duty exposed me, I was in a state of
indisposition that made me likely to receive the action of the deleterious
miasmata and to facilitate the operation: nevertheless I was exempted.

To all these undeniable proofs against the opinion of those who have advanced
that the disease was contagious, I will add another fact, which of itself must
be a perfect conviction of the truth of my assertions. Many persons attacked
with diseases totally different to the epidemic, were taken care of at Bush
hill, at the same time and in the same apartments with those infected with the
reigning malady. They recovered, though they saw on all sides persons die of
the epidemic, whose beds were immediately re-occupied by others having the same
disease as those whose places they supplied; and it is principally to be
observed, that the former were continually surrounded by those who were
dangerously attacked, as well as with the atmosphere of miasmata, which the
breath and perspiration spread through the room, receiving into their lungs the
same air that had repeatedly passed and repassed through those of the other
sick, which had not only become more phlogisticated, but where (...) had also
been impregnated with emanations fit to have communicated the disease, if it
had possessed the power. What is very remarkable is, that I have not seen one
example of these patients having the epidemic, unless previously attacked; and
never, notwithstanding these circumstances so favorable to contagion, did
their disease change its character, since they were all restored. I made this
remark upon so many, I can no longer doubt the disease that raged in
Philadelphia was not at all contagious, but only epidemical.

This disease, then, was neither brought in by men or vessels; it took its rise
in the country; the cause which produced it, had long been acting on the animal
economy. What proves the truth of this assertion is, that very few persons
newly arrived were infected with the sickness. It is true, these causes have
had more or less action upon the individuals that were attacked; but I have
already given the reason from whence it resulted, that some were first
attacked, others not till long after, that some had it very lightly, that the
symptoms in many were more serious, whilst others had the disease in its full
strength and malignity.

The constitution, age, sex, the manner of living situation of the place in
which they lived, the actual state of the humors, and passions of the soul,
were the causes of the variations I observed during the epidemic.

I shall be asked, without doubt, from what cause the air and aliments were so
far vitiated as to make them susceptible of engendering this disease? Although
there often exists in nature effects, the causes of which are beyond the reach
of hu^a^ sagacity, I will nevertheless endeavor to present some, though
without pretending to advance them as the only causes of the scourge which
ravaged this city.

I will examine these causes under two heads -- general and particular.

The general causes are known to all: the little cold during the preceding
winter, and extreme heat of the succeeding summer, which was unaccompanied by
the usual storms, to which may be added the fruit of the year being unusually
bad.

Among the particular causes we may reckon burying grounds in the midst of the
city. These places of interment are injurious from the vapors which exhale
from them and corrupt the atmosphere, and also by the miasmata which the
rainwater carries with it, as it filters through the earth and passes into the
wells. This water, used by the whole city, must be pernicious, and should be
particularly attended to, if in the end those dangers are to be avoided which
result from it. There is another cause of corruption in the city^^^^ the
tan-yards, and starch manufactories, and also the quays, where at low water the
mud is uncovered, from which a quantity of pernicious vapors arise; in short,
the ditches with which the city is surrounded, from the earth being taken out
to make bricks, where the water from stagnating during the summer, sends forth
infectious exhalations, and also serves, and it passes through the earth, to
carry with it corruption into the wells.

All these causes united must necessarily corrupt the blood, and give to the
bile such a degree of acrimony as to become the principal cause of the epidemic.

All physicians and physiologists agree, that the bile when degenerated
produces an irritation of the solids, and dissolution of the fluids, which I
observed in this disease, the symptoms of which were almost always inflammatory
in the beginning; this state was followed by a dissolution of the humors, and
with such rapidity, that the physician had not time to deliberate upon the
choice he ought to make of the necessary remedies to combat the dangerous
symptoms attendant in each of these states. Sometimes the patient felt a great
lassitude for some days previous to the manifestation of the fever; in others
it showed itself without warning; in general it began with a violent headache,
pains in the back and ^limbs; the patients often complained of pains in their
bones; some had irregular shiverings; in general the skin was hot, dry, and
acrid; sometimes that heat was concentred (...) the inside, the patient
complained of an internal fire which consumed him; the thirst was
proportionable to the degree of heat; many had this heat, particularly about
the body and breast; the extremities were only warm, and sometimes even quite
cold.

The respiration was sometimes obstructed, painful, strong, interrupted, and
laborious. When I presented the back of my hand to their breath, I found the
heat considerable; the dryness it produced in the throat, tongue, lips, and
nostrils occasioned an itching, and made swallowing difficult; the tongue at
first red, as well as the lips when become dry, were soon covered with a black
crust, which also attached itself to the teeth in a manner difficult to remove;
a weight and considerable pain about the epigastric region announced and
accompanied violent vomitings, which fatigued the patients; the matter they
threw up was of different qualities, sometimes white and acid phlegm, which set
the patients' teeth on edge; sometimes green or yellow bile, at others a matter
black, and like the dregs of an ink-bottle imperceptibly mixed with glairous
matter, from which was commonly exhaled an odor like rotten eggs; it was so
acrid it excoriated the throat and lips; the stomach, irritated by its action,
rejected all kind of liquids, and the diseased, though tormented by thirst
refused to drink, in order to avoid the pain of vomiting.

The patients were also often affected by diarrhoeas of different kinds,
usually accompanied by pains in the sometimes the evacuations were frequent,
liquid, watery, and began with the disease; at others it appeared some days
after the fever; they were then bilious, greasy, and frothy; they were often
white and glairous; in some green, yellow, inclining to red, bloody; and
sometimes only black blood. The discharges from the patients were often
unaccompanied by pain; at others the gripings were excruciating; sometimes the
evacuations were without sm^ll; (...) others cadaverous and foetid.

The patients experienced an inability to sleep; if they slumbered by chance,
their sleep was laborious, they felt themselves as fatigued when they awoke as
if they had not slept at all; the urine assumed different appearances during
the course of the malady; in general at the beginning it was crude, then in
small quantity, excoriating, acrid, red, bloody, and black; sometimes without
sediment and thick, at others it was covered with a thick film, or had dregs
floating in it^ occasionally it had sediments of different natures; sometimes
it was suppressed, at others it came away involuntary.

An uneasy weariness was soon followed by a yellow appearance, which usually
first showed itself in the eyes, and soon after the whole body was of a deep
lemon color; in that state the veins opened again where they were bled, the
wound was surrounded with a livid circle, and it was with very great difficulty
the blood was stopped. I observed this accident happened only to those patients
who were bled too late.

The tongue was covered with blood at first red, then black, which issued from
the pores of the tongue, inside of the mouth and gums; to this hemorrage was
joined that from the nose, which sometimes preceded and sometimes flowed at the
same time.

If the remedy was inefficacious, and did not produce any change in the state
of the humors, gangrene or livid spots appeared in different parts, and
gradually extended in such a manner, that the whole body sometimes appeared
mortified; the diseased, when in that situation, before they died had a putrid
smell; if the back of the h^^d was then put to the mouth, a cold sensation was
felt, from the contact of the air which proceeded from the lungs. Those who
died in that state had experienced weaknesses in the beginning of their
sickness; the morbific cause, from having long acted, had perverted all the
humors, and disposed them to putrefaction.

It was very seldom medicine had sufficient power in those cases to save the
patient: when the disease was at its height, the elements which compose the
formation of the fluids and solids being no longer retained by the glutinous
particles which united them, made continual efforts to disengage themselves and
join their original mass, in the same manner as the breath of life, which
animated the matter, evaporates into space, and again joins the being from
which it first came.

From all these symptoms which accompanied this epidemic, I consider it as a
true colliquative fever, which is in the same class with the ardent fever,
complicated, and joined to another very fatal disease which I had observed at
St. Domingo, and known by the name of the Siam Disease, or Siam Fever. It
seemed as if these two scourges had united their symptoms, and acted in
concert, which may be judged of by the description I have given, and which is
only the recital of my own observations.

The prognostics upon this malady were in general unfavourable, but more or
less consoling according to the number and malignity of the symptoms, and
adapted to the knowledge of the constitution, the sex, and age of the patient,
the manner of living, state of the humors, and complication of other diseases,
etc. each being a circumstance to serve as a touchstone to the physician, to
fix the judgment he should pronounce.

Th^^ at least is what directed my conduct. Every symptom attracted my
particular attention. I set myself about the study of it in order to prevent my
acting against nature, when she was successively destroying the morbific cause;
she often alone acts sufficiently to explode and destroy the cause which
oppresses her; it is true she acts sometimes in certain cases with too much
violence, and in others too slowly: it is then art should assist in increasing
or diminishing strength, or in bringing it to a salutary crisis; in short, it
is for (...) to produce this crisis, when nature, overcome by the force of the
disease, remains without action. It is when nature is inactive, art should show
itself; but how difficult to seize the critical moment when the physician
should only remain a spectator, or that when ^e ought to act. He is an
excellent physician who has acquired that degree of knowledge -- happy the
mortal that possesses him. Being in the habit of seeing the diseased, and to
observe nature, can alone guide the practitioner, and render medicine a really
useful science, but any one who, seduced by the brilliancy of a system, will
force nature by the rules of the method he has adopted, he, I say, is a scourge
more fatal to the human kind than the plague itself would be.

The public will find from the account I have given, it is impossible to lay
down a mode of treatment applicable in every case; nevertheless, though
circumstances obliged me to vary the means I made use of, I will set down the
most general cases, and the motive which determined my choice.

I should first observe, the patients were not carried to the hospital till
reduced to the last extremity; many expired six, eight, or twelve hours after
their arrival, some even did not live two hours; many had made use of very
fatal medicines, such as drastic purges, composed of jalap or gumboage, and
calomel; they had taken these remedies in the beginning of the disease, in the
moment of irritation, when the humors being yet crude, the morbific cause
could not be carried off by cathartics.

The public being misinformed, added to these dangerous medicines the use of
sodorific and spirituous liquo^s; many among the number that fell victims to
this incendiary practice perished by this fatal method. If ^^ere were any of
those unfortunate persons that recovered, they owed their convalescence to the
goodness of their constitution, and the little effect the malady had upon them;
for mercurial preparations having the property to dissolve the humors, acted
in these cases with the morbific cause, which itself produced this d^^nion.
Sodorifics also improperly taken hastened the loss of the patient, and often
rendered mortal a disease that would have given way to proper treatment. It is
true nature will sometimes itself expel the morbific cause by perspiration, but
then these critical evacuations terminate the malady. It is not in the
beginning of a disease that nature thus acts, and when it does happen, these
sweats become symptomatic. It is the same with other evacuations, which only
serve to enervate the patient, without carrying off the cause of the disease.

A skilful physician is not deceived by these evacuations. He lessens or
favors them according to the time when they appear: but he can never take into
his method of cure, that of either exciting or increasing them, when they are
the symptom^ of a serious disease; if he acted otherwise he would favor the
malady to the destruction of the individual: then the strength of the patient's
constitution could alone support him against the force of the disease, and
inexperience of the practitioner.

In order to give a clear idea of the general methods I made use of to combat
the malady, I shall divide its duration into three parts -- that of the
irritation o^ crudity, that of the concoction, and that of its termination or
crisis.

It is to be observed, these three periods followed each other so quick, as to
require the most scrupulous attention to find out when they succeeded each
other; as they were often confounded. I was then obliged to pay more attention
to the prevailing symptoms than to the time they made their appearance, in
order to apply the proper remedies. Without this precaution I should have
committed great errors, for I met with some who had arrived to the end of the
first period on the fifth day, while others were at the expiration of the
disease on the third.

In the first period, when the pulse announced a sanguinary plethora, when I
perceived a considerable irritation, as well by the state of the pulse as the
heat of the skin, the redness of the face, and violent vomiting; when in
particular an extreme thirst was joined to these symptoms, and pains in the
head and other parts, I had the patients bled; if the blood was inflammatory,
and the symptoms did not diminish, if in short nothing forbid the remedy, I
repeated it more or less according to the circumstances. In general I had but a
small quantity of blood taken away, and that repeatedly, in preference to once
bleeding more copiously, that I might preserve the patient's strength.

This precaution was the more indispensible when the sick were not brought into
the hospital at the beginning of the disease. It was seldom bleeding could be
used with success after the third day; sometimes even I saw indications which
prevented my doing it even the first. It must not be forgot I speak in general,
there are exceptions to this rule, but to bleed a^ the moment the dissolution
of blood takes place, becomes mortal, which I had opportunity of observing in
those unfortunate persons brought to the hospital, after having been bled in
that state.

Vomiting was symptomatic, and made frequent bleedings more necessary. I
prescribed he bath and clysters with the same views. I gave antiphlogistic and
diluting drinks, such as lemonade, chicken water, oxymel, barley water, gruel,
and cold water, acidulated with dulcified spirits of nitre, which cooled the
urine, made it more abundant, and acted as a sedative and antiputrescent.

I reaped considerable advantage from water acidulated with fixed air, which I
prescribed as a common drink. Having fortunately saved from the wreck of my
cabinet, which had become the pirates prey, an apparatus which served me at the
hospital at Bush-hill. I every morning made a sufficient quantity of fixed air
to serve all the patients, for whom it was necessary. This water, agreeable
enough to the taste, remained on those stomachs that rejected other liquids. I
made use of this remedy with great success at St. Domingo, not only in ardent,
inflammatory, and putrid fevers, but also in many other maladies. This drink is
also highly antisceptic and cooling.

When the vomiting resisted all these means, I prescribed simple emulsions;
also made use of cooling and sedative draughts, in which I put vitriolic either,
Hoffman's mineral liquor, and sedative salts; I also gave to some, salt of
tartar and lemon juice. If these means did not answer my purpose, I was not
obstinate in continuing their use; I changed alternately from one to the other,
till I found which best moderated and agreed with the immediate state of the
solids. Such was my plan of conduct in every circumstance. It was an error to
believe, what succeeded well in one case, would have the same success in all
others, though they appeared alike; because often an infinite number of hidden
circumstances produced a change in the animal economy. I have seen a remedy
that has cured one, done good to a second, and hurt a third. The diversity of
effects proceeding from the same cause will always prevent remedies being
generally specific; and proves the scientific part of physic will not be so
certain as the experimental.

When some of the liquids which I have mentioned were successful, I had it
continued, and accompanied with camphire, in the form of bolusses, a manner
least digusting to the sick, and in which I could increase the dose as I
pleased, or according to the exigency of the case. Every bolus was usually
composed of two grains of camphire and three of nitre. I gave two or three
every hour. If the patient was too ill to take the bolus, I gave it in a liquid
form. (This mendicament I consider as an excellent sedative and antiputrescent,
which inconsiderately used would be attended but with little inconvenience.) I
allowed the sick to suck slices of sweet oranges, and during the first period
they rarely took any other food than creamed rice or barley.

When the violence of the symptoms were abated, and the patient arrived at the
second period, which happened sooner or later, I endeavored to find out the
way nature seemed most to incline in endeavoring to expel the morbific cause;
and sought for what I judged most proper to second her.

I often made use of veal or chicken broth, creamed rice, panada, Bourdeaux
wine sweetened, and in short more powerful cordials where the case required
them; and if nature seemed disposed to act of itself, I was careful not to
disturb in endeavoring to strengthen. I only tried to second her when weak and
trembling. Sometimes the disease got the upper hand, and triumphed over the
efforts nature made to disengage herself, then the pulse became low, and
sometimes convulsive, I had recourse to blisters, at which time I was
particular in the use of nitrous draughts, in order to diminish the action of
the cantharides upon the blister. Sometimes I found myself obliged to give the
most powerful cordials to re-animate the action of the solids. When the
blisters answered the end I proposed, or that alone, or with the help of
cordials, the strength was was renewed; when in short the humors flew toward
the part where they were placed, the malady usually terminated without any
other crisis than the suppuration, which I took great care to encourage as far
as appeared necessary; for if the humors flew to the inside, I observed the
blister was covered with a dry and mortified slough, the pulse became
concentred and low, the patient's extremities were sometimes cold, and
respiration difficult.

Authors have prescribed in similar circumstances to put fresh cantharides upon
the blister, but experience has proved to me this practice often produces very
pernicious consequences; therefore I did not follow it; in short, in such a
case the action of the flies draws the outside of the vessels upon which they
are applied; these being deprived of the liquor they gave on the first
application, their size was further co^tracted by the caustic nature of the
flies, the fluids they contained flew back into the habit, and produced new
disorders; the slough which already existed thickened still more from the
contraction being greater. I have always preferred, and with success, dressing
the blister with an unguent of storax, I made the patient take at the same time
a strong decoction of bark, which was made a cordial in some cases by the
addition of cinnamon water, o^ something similar.

If the danger was imminent I then applied fresh blisters, but not on the same
places. In the first case, when the patient's stomach did not reject the
decoction of the bark, I was almost certain the first dressing would show a
beginning separation of the mortified slough; by degrees it was detached, and
at length fell entirely off: it is necessary to observe, that in this case the
suppuration was great, it was also necessary to assist it, as it often put a
period to the disease. If the immediate indications required cathartics, I gave
them in reiterated, but small doses; a strong purgative would have retarded
suppuration, by drawing the humors to the inside, and destroying the patient.
If the matter from the suppuration was not good, I continued the use of the
bark; sometimes the pus corroded the parts, and formed ulcers that assumed
different appearances, which the more determined me to continue the discharge,
endeavor to correct the internal h^mours, and assist nature in disengaging
herself. In short, I made use of cathartics, more or less, when the blister
healed of itself.

After what I have said, it must be understood the blister produced an
artificial crisis. I have met with many cases where nature produced much
better, although very rarely in the epidemic we are speaking of. I have
sometimes observed the morbific matter fall upon some particular part, and
produce disorders more or less considerable, as abscesses, mortifications, etc.
Sometimes even this mass of humors went off by urine, an hemorrage, or
diarrhoea. I never saw the crisis act by perspiration in this epidemic, and
those I have already mentioned were almost always imperfect.

When the morbific matter settled on a part little essential to life, I
favored the efforts nature made, by augmenting or supporting her strength, and
diminishing the external resistance; for this purpose I made use of emollients,
either in fomentations or cataplasms. This sort of crisis was also very rare; I
saw only one instance, which was in a suppuration of the parotides; the patient
recovered, but required great care and precaution.

Sometimes the venom, by attacking a particular part, destroyed the vital
principle, and produced mortification; then the patient could only be cured
when the affected part was large enough to contain the mass of humors, and
enable me by its extent and situation to cut away the mortified parts.

The urine, as I have already said, was one way nature took to relieve herself,
but I seldom found this method sufficiently efficacious, notwithstanding I
endeavored to forward it by diuretics.

I have seen some critical hemorrages. Women, whose periodical evacuations
happened at the time of the crisis, usually recovered. A discharge of blood
from the nose has also had good effects; but it seldom alone produced a perfect
crisis. If this hemorrage was symptomatic, and joined to that of the mouth, the
patient was in the greatest danger; they always appeared to me to indicate a
dissolution of the humors.

I then made use of antiputrescents, as camphire and nitre; but found a much
greater advantage from a strong decoction of bark, acidulated with spirits of
vitriol. I gave this remedy in large doses; also made use of broths, in which I
had each time half a dram of gum dragant, powdered; I ordered creamed rice,
and juice of sweet oranges; if the case required it, I supported the patient
with red wine, sweetened; sometimes by cordial draughts: but I never used these
means without the greatest circumspection. First, I had to prevent the patient
sinking into a state of debility, from which I could not have recovered him;
then to take care not to raise him so high as to augment the hemorrage, already
too fatal of itself, and to which I could only oppose internal remedies, fit to
give consistency to the humors that were dissolved by the nature of the
disease.

I have already said the diseased were wearied with diarrhoes of different
kinds; in general these evacuations were symptomatic; when they were crude,
without smell, and in large quantities, I made use of cordials with
astringents, but was cautious in the use of such remedies, in order to avoid
the danger that must arise from a sudden suppression of the evacuation. My end
in diminishing them was to save the patient's strength, that I might gain time
for an endeavor to destroy or neutralise the morbific humor, or throw it upon
a part that would not endanger the patient's life.

If the flux stopped of itself, it was a very serious circumstance, which
should if possible have been foreseen; for then the humors flew to the head,
the patient became comatose, which was soon followed by death.

Diarrhoeas of every kind were preceded and accompanied by a weight and pain in
the loins; when that suddenly ceased, and pain of the head followed, or
increased after the suppression of that of the back, this change showed the
morbific matter was quitting the intestines, and attacking the brain; a truth I
was often convinced of by experience. In short, I have seen this case always
followed by delirium, the diarrhoea stopped, and coma followed, the pulse
became concentred, small, convulsive, and death did not fail to put an end to
this tragic scene. When a patient came to the hospital with these symptoms my
efforts were always useless; but when brought in time, that is before the
humor had fixed in the head, I had blisters applied to the legs and thighs;
the irritation drew the humors to that part; if the discharge was in quantity,
it served as a crisis, and the patient recovered.

But as I have said already, the patients were seldom brought in time; they
were sent to the hospital at the last extremity, long after the humor had
fixed its habitation in the head, and when it was no longer possible to draw it
elsewhere; yet as it was better to try uncertain means, than to let a patient
die for want of an endeavor, however desperate the case might be. I tried the
same method, I even applied larger blisters, administered cordials, and applied
hot bricks to the extremities; and was fortunate enough to save several by that
means, who must otherwise have inevitably perished for want of such a trial;
and must confess this success, though rare, made me some amends for the
uneasiness I felt in not having it in my power to be useful to be many others
who, I may venture (...) say, perished for want of succor and assistance.

After what has been said, think I have reason to conclude, that the appearance
or augmentation of pain in the head, and diminution and cessation of it in
another part where the disease had fixed it, showed the patient was in imminent
danger. This is also applicable to pain in any of the vital parts.

Before I finish this part of my enquiry, I cannot omit mentioning the use of
one of the most powerful remedies in the materia medica; and not to deviate
from my subject, will give as an example the effect it produces on the head.
The headache, as I have already observed, increasing at the time in which the
pain in the loins disappeared, announced the transition of the morbific matter
to the brain; if in that case, to calm the pain in the head, and watching, I
had made use of opium, I should have effectually calmed the pain, and put the
patient to sleep; but what would have been the consequence? I should at the
same time have diminished the strength of the organs, particularly that of the
brain, and have favored the overcharging of the part where the morbific matter
had a tendency to settle; then there was no resource: the humor once fixed,
the patient dies. In order to render this reasoning more clear, I shall beg
leave to make use of a comparison; and will suppose two men fighting; an
officious friend arrives, finds no other expedient to separate them than tying
the hands of one, whilst he suffers the other to continue striking him. What
must occur? the interference of the officious friend is injurious to the one he
prevents continuing the combat. The physician who administers opium in the
above case, is precisely the officious friend, that instead of preventing an
evil, by making it less pernicious, fixes it in a part from whence it is
scarcely possible to expel it.

Although I am acquainted with all the virtues of opium, I think it absolutely
hurtful in ardent, malignant, and putrid fevers, and principally at the crisis.

Having presented the general means I employed according to the circumstances,
I pass on to some particular observations, which will prove at the same time
that this disease was of a most serious nature, though not contagious; and
leave the connoisseur to judge, if my method is founded upon the principle of
medical practice.

FIRST OBSERVATION.
A man between thirty-six and thirty-eight years of age, middle sized, bilious
temperament, hair and beard black, was admitted into Bush-hill hospital the
29th of September, 1793. He could not say how many days he had been ill, but
was informed the first or second day of the fever he had taken a drastic
medicine, composed of jalap and calomel. The tongue and lips were very black
and dry, respiration painful, and extremities cold; he threw up with violence
all he took, his belly was hard and painful, the abdominal muscles were in such
a state of contraction as to flatten the belly in a manner that it almost
touched the backbone; the faeces were black, of an ill smell, and mixed with
blood; the urine in small quantity, also black and faetid; in short, the pulse
was concentred, and the tendons convulsed. I had blisters applied, and hot
bricks to the extremities. I endeavored to get some remedy down his throat,
but in vain; nature was so weakened, art could not re-animate him. He died in
the night of the 1st of October. The second I opened his body and found:

The membranes of the brain in their natural state, the sinews of the duramater
contained a very little black blood, the brain firm, the cortical substance
less red than it should have been, the medulla substance too white, the callous
artery and plexus choroides discolored and almost white, the ventricle
scarcely containing any serosity.

The lungs in their natural state, the pericardium containing very little
serosity, the heart withered and wrinkled, absolutely not containing any thing,
pale, appearing as if it had been washed, and of a flabby consistency.

The stomach a little contracted, its thickness double what it ought to be, the
internal membrane partly destroyed, what remained was red and inflamed, the duo
denum and almost all the whole intestinal canal in the same situation, what
remained of the internal mem appeared blacker in proportion as I approached the
larger intestines, the passages were lined with a black, glairous, bloody
matter of a faetid smell; the liver, gall, bladder, pancreas, and kidneys in a
natural state. In opening the liver I found a small quantity of black blood,
the spleen black, withered, and of a consistence less firm than in its natural
state; the mesentery black toward the spine, its membranes having opened
formed a bag, that was filled with blood extremely black; that, contained in
the largest abdominal veins was of the same color; in short, the bladder was
contracted, and contained but a small quantity of black faetid urine, and the
internal membrane was spotted with a brown color.

SECOND OBSERVATION.
The first of October, a man about thirty-three years of age was admitted into
the hospital. He was insensible, cold, and almost without pulse; his mouth half
open, and full of black blood; his respiration low, quick, and interrupted; his
body deep yellow. Those who accompanied him told me, in answer to my questions,
that he had been ill some days, but did not say how many, and that he had taken
many medical powders similar to the preceding patient.

Every method I made use of to re-animate the vital powers, were useless: the
patient died during the night. The second I opened him; the head showed nothing
different from the preceding body.

The lungs even appeared in their natural state, except some adhesions, but
they were old and were found between the pleura and the right lobes.

The pericardium contained a little serous matter of a deep yellow; the heart
withered, empty, and the right auricle full of very black blood.

The stomach, which I found more than double its natural thickness, contained
also, as well as the intestinal canal, black blood, and bile also black,
sometimes mixed together, and sometimes separate, the internal membrane of
these parts almost entirely destroyed, the little that remained was mortified,
detached, and floating in matter; the mesentery, toward the intestines, was
inflamed; the glands very much swelled and black; it contained yellow pus
between its two membranes near the spine; the gall bladder was empty, the
liver, spleen, and veins in their natural state; the pancreas, hard and
inflamed, was about twice as large as it ought to be; the urine was black and
faetid; the internal membrane of the bladder mortified.

THIRD OBSERVATION.
A man, thirty-four years of age, of a sanguine and robust habit, accustomed to
drinking, fell sick the 11th of October, after a debauch in which he had drank
brandy to excess. I saw him at the hospital the first day of the disease; he
had a burning heat, his skin was hot and dry, his face the color of crimson,
his eyes sparkling, he was extremely thirsty, his tongue very dry and covered
with a fir that was pale yellow, his respiration high and difficult, he vomited
with violent (...) green and yellow bile, his pulse was hard and tight, he
complained of pains in the epiga^^ trick region, and in the head.

I had him bled in the arm, and ordered clysters made with a decoction of flax
seed, a bath, and lemonade with nitre. In the afternoon, finding the symptoms
not diminished, I had him bled again.

The day after, being the second, I had him twice bled, and prescribed the same
remedy, but he threw up every liquid.

The third day he experienced lassitude, his pulse became intermittent, his
eyes and skin yellow, his stools were glairous, mixed with blood, the abdomen
was neither extended nor painful, the little urine that came from him was
bloody; in short, he vomited green and glairous matter, mixed with blood.

In this melancholy situation I gave him water acidulated with dulcified
spirits of nitre, and gave order at the same time to change his drink according
to his fancy; they gave him that he wished, but he vomited every thing
immediately, and nothing could remain on his stomach.

The fourth he experienced weakness, and the whole body was of a deep yellow,
the extremities became cold, the pulse little and intermittent, his respiration
more difficult, the faeces continued to be mixed with a glairous bloody matter,
and strength wore away by degrees; in short, he died on the 15th of October,
the beginning of the fifth day. He preserved his senses to the last.

By the opening of his body I found, that the serosity contained in the
ventricle of the brain was very yellow; the rest of the head offered nothing
remarkable.

The lungs on the outward parts were covered with black spots; in dividing them
I found they were gorged with a black frothy blood; the humor of the
pericardium was yellow, the heart absolutely empty, its right auricle contained
black blood.

The stomach was extended by the air it contained, it was almost double the
thickness it ought to be, and contained clots of black blood; the internal
membrane was inflamed but unequally, the red was in some places brighter than
others, that of the duodenum and other intestines were in the same situation;
clots of black blood and glairous matter of the same color lined the
intestinal canal, the vessels of the mesentery were choked and also contained
black blood.

The bladder contained a little bloody urine, and the internal membrane was
very much inflamed.

FOURTH OBSERVATION.
The 15th of October I saw a young man at the hospital about twenty-six years
of age. He was brought the evening before, and had been sick five days, during
which he had taken three doses of drastic powders, composed of jalap and
calomel. He was of a bilious temperament, small made, and had chestnut colored
hair.

He had a great deal of fever, his skin was burning hot, breathing difficult,
tongue dry and very red, he was very thirsty, and made many efforts to vomit:
he had violent pains in the abdomen, instead of faeces pure blood came from
him, his pulse was strong and frequent, he made some few drops of urine, with
great pain, and of a deep color.

I ordered him lemonade with nitre, a simple emulsion, emollient clysters,
cataplasms on the lower belly, and had him bled three times in the course of
the day.

The 16th I saw no other change than the weakness he felt on going to stool;
every thing he swallowed instantly came up again with most violent and painful
efforts; his beverage returned from his stomach mixed with blood. I tried many
methods to stop the vomiting, but in vain, he was in continual agitation till
death, wished to lie on the ground, and said he had a fire burning within him;
these agitations terminated in weakness, which carried him off the 18th, at the
end of the seventh day.

On opening his body I made the following observations: the corroidal plexus
was not as high colored as in its natural state, the brain was firm, and the
ventricles without serosity, the sinuses of the duramater contained very little
blood, but of a brown red color; the right lobes of the lungs were much
inflamed, the left in a natural state, no serosity in the pericardium, the
heart was empty, its right auricle contained a clot of blood that did not stick
to it; when I took it out I saw another that followed, and came from the vena
cava inferior; it was three inches long, and of two colors; the part that
answered to the exterior of the auricle was white, and resembled the blood of
those who have the pleurisy; the rest, as well as what came out of the vena
cava, was of a red brown; the stomach contained blood as well as the
intestines, the internal membrane was much inflamed, the pylorns mortified, and
the intestines had inflammatory and gangrenous spots; the liver white on the
outside, was gorged with very black blood, the spleen appeared in its natural
state, the pancreas hard and inflamed, the bladder, which I found in its
natural state, contained a very little red blood.

FIFTH OBSERVATION.
A woman, about thirty-four years of age, robust, of a sanguine habit, and that
had been sick about six days, entered the hospital the 5th of October. She told
me, the first day she was ill she had taken two doses of drastic powders, which
took no effect; she was very red, and violently oppressed; her pulse
intermittent, hard, and tight; her tongue red and dry, she was peculiarly
thirsty, her skin hot, she felt a pain and tightness in the left hypochondria,
she was uneasy and could not remain long in the same place. I had her bled in
the arm, and gave her lemonade acidulated with dulcified spirits of nitre; also
prescribed emollient clysters and a bath.

In the afternoon, the fame symptoms remained; the blood that had been taken
from her was absolutely without serosity. I ordered a second bleeding, which
could not take place on account of an extreme faintness, that seized her at the
moment the surgeon was about to open the vein, he had even much difficulty in
bringing her to again: it seized her every time she rose to drink. The 16th I
found her insensible, and she died shortly after. The 17th I opened her body
and found:

The sinuses of the duramater full of blood and in a natural state, all the
vessels of the brain in the same state, the corroidal plexus gorged and very
red, not any serosity in the ventricle of the brain, the substances of the
viscera appeared in their natural state.

In raising the integuments of the breast, I found blood spread under the large
right pectoral muscle, it came from the internal mamillary artery, which had
been tore by the violence of the blood that had extra-vasated behind the
sternum, had opened the intercostal muscles, between the third and fourth of
the long ribs, and spread as I have already said, without entering into the
breast, that is on the outside of the pleura; the inside of the breast was
filled with clotted blood, the lungs were also swelled with it like spunges,
there were crevices through which blood had passed, which filled the breast.

I found the liver a third larger than it ought to be, an elevation in the
middle part of the great lobe, indicating to me an imposthume. I introduced my
scalpel, there came out a pint of bloody matter: the other viscera were in
their natural state.

SIXTH OBSERVATION.
A man about fifty years of age, of a bilious temperament, ^^ir and beard gray,
came into the hospital the 21st of October. He told me he had felt great
weakness for some time, and had been very ill about six weeks previous. He was
very weak, his pulse slow, and almost in its natural state; said he had
occasion for food, and asked for something to eat. I gave him soup, and for
drink Bourdeaux wine with water. He remained in the same state three days, and
except the weakness seemed well, and said he felt no pain.

The 31st he was oppressed, his eyes became yellow, and pulse weak. I
prescribed him as a remedy, a linctus of water, honey, and styllitic oymel; and
for his common drink, water and honey. The 1st of November the whole body
became yellow, his nose bled, his tongue was covered with blood, he spit a
great deal in the afternoon, respiration became painful, and the extremities
cold; his urine was black, as also the bile he vomited, his pulse became
intermittent, he had a palpitation which very much incommoded him. I prescribed
a decoction of bark, acidulated with spirits of vitriol, a camphorated cordial
draught, and wine with sugar was given in table spoonfuls. The second he was
worse; to the symptoms of the preceding day were joined black and bloody
faeces; he vomited often his strength insensibly decreased, and he died on the
morning of the third. In the afternoon I opened his body, which was of a deep
yellow, with mortified spots, his month was full of black blood, and had a very
ill smell.

I did not find any blood in the sinuses of the duramater, the vessels of the
brain were discolored, the serosity of the ventricle yellow, and the brain
firm.

The lungs entirely withered, and mortified next the spine, dissolved between
my fingers and spread an ^^fectio^s smell; the pericardium contained a little
yellow serosity, the heart of an extraordinary size, almost double that of the
most robust man, the inside had the appearance of having been washed, and had
not (...) least drop of blood; the right auricle was swelled, after having
divided it there came out a clot that was not adhesive, but resembled the fat
of the cellular membrane by its consistency and yellow color, as well as the
fat under the ligaments of the lower abdomen; these substances weighed three
ounces and some grains.

I found the liver in its natural state, the gall bladder contained very little
bile, the spleen was black, soft, and gave way between my fingers like jelly;
the stomach, as well as the intestines, contained black and bloody matter, the
internal membrane was inflamed, that of the duodenum still more, and that of
the intestines mortified; the mesentery next the spine was livid; the bladder
contained black urine.

SEVENTH OBSERVATION.
The 27th of October a man about thirty-eight was brought to the hospital. He
was insensible, almost without pulse, cold, mouth half open, eyes yellow, open,
and fixed.

I had large blisters applied to the legs, and hot bricks to the extremities; I
ordered a cordial draught in case he should be able to swallow it; all these
means united operated insensibly: the 30th he recovered his senses and speech,
told me he had been ill eight days when brought to the hospital. I found him so
well as to give me the hope of curing him, consequently had him carried from
the chambers of the dying into another room. The second, he refused the
decoction of the bark which I had ordered, he took creamed rice and diet
drinks, he continued tolerably well till the 5th, on which day his pulse became
little and concentred, the blisters dried up, the extremities became cold and
livid.

I again ordered the decoction of the bark, and a draught, antiputrescent and
cordial. I had the blisters dressed with the unguent of storax, his extremities
were fomented, but all was useless -- the progress of the mortification
increased every day, the slough fell from the blisters; the 8th, suppuration
was re-established, the patient took all they gave him, every function was
perfect, and he said he felt no pain; he preserved his senses till the 11th, on
which day he again became insensible, his pulse intermittent and scarcely
perceptible, he had an infectious smell, the breath from his lungs was cold and
stinking, he was at length in such a state as to be unable to swallow, he had
convulsive motions in the tendons. He died the 12th in the morning; in the
afternoon I opened him and found:

Black blood in the sinuses of the duramater, the rest in its natural state,
the lungs mortified, heart withered of a flabby consistency, and containing
black blood; the stomach and viscera of the abdomen in its natural state, the
mortification of the lower extremities extended to the middle of the leg, that
of the hands had not passed the second joint of the fingers, but in both it had
penetrated to the bone.

EIGHTH OBSERVATION.
The 17th of November I saw a young man about twenty-five years of age. He had
been brought to the hospital the evening before, and told me he had been ill
five days; he had a high fever, his skin was burning about the body, though his
extremeties had only their usual heat; he complained of a seeming fire in the
inside; was thirsty, his tongue and lips black and dry, his respiration
laborious and frequent, the breath from the lungs considerably hot, his eyes
very yellow, his person livid and very thin, instead of faeces glairous yellow
frothy matter cause from him, his urine was red, he threw up all he drank,
became worse and died the 19th, the seventh day of his disease. The 20th, I
opened his body: the lungs were spotted with red and black, the pericardium
contained a little yellow serosity, in the heart was found blood of a pale red
color.

The liver was of an olive green color, in the interior as well as exterior
parts; the gall bladder of an extraordinary size, it floated in the abdomen,
extended to the inferior part of the illiac region, and was marbled with black;
I took it out with care, and weighed it with the bile it contained; I found it
twelve ounces three drachms; the bile when put in a vase was of a green black
color, and of the consistence of white of egg.

The spleen was hard on the outside, the inside resembled conserve of red roses
by its consistency and red color; the stomach was contracted, and did not
contain any thing, the internal membrane was slightly inflamed, that of the
duodenum in the same state; the intestines contained glairous yellow frothy
matter, the internal membrane had spots slightly inflamed; the pancreas hard,
red, and rather larger than in its natural state; the internal membrane of the
bladder inflamed, the urine extremely red, the mesentery and pyplon contained
no fat.

NINTH OBSERVATION.
A woman, about twenty-eight years of age, robust, and of a sanguine habit,
entered the hospital the 30th of September. She was attacked with the fever two
days before; her respiration was short, quick, and hot; pulse hard and tight,
face red, eyes watery and bright, skin hot and dry; she had pains in the head
and epigastrick region, her urine was in small quantity and very red, she
vomited white glairous matter of so strong an acid as to set her teeth on edge,
her tongue dry and red, accompanied by excessive thirst.

I prescribed bathing, and bleeding in the arm, which I had repeated in the
afternoon, and gave her as a beverage, water mixed with volatile concreted
alkali, in each bottle I put ten grains and two ounces of simple syrup.

The next day, being the third, she was affected with the same symptoms, and
felt such extreme uneasiness, as to be continually wishing to change her place;
the remedies were continued as before, with the addition of ten grains of salt
of tartar, and lemon juice, to be taken at the moment of effervescence, and
repeated twice a day, also every half hour a grain of camphire, with three
grains of nitre in form of a bolus.

In the afternoon she was less agitated; her pulse a little dilated, the
vomiting and pain in the epigastrick region ceased about noon: her tongue was
moist, and a little white; she complained of pain in the reins. The bolus and
alkalised water were continued as before.

The fourth day in the morning, her tongue was ash-colored, and mouth clammy;
she had two evacuations of green, bilious, frothy, yellow matter. I prescribed
half an ounce of cream of tartar, and two grains of emetic tartar, to be
dissolved in a pint of water, and taken in three doses, at the distance of an
hour each, observing not to repeat them, if either produced vomiting two or
three times. In the afternoon she was without fever, with a moisture on the
skin, had taken the whole of the remedy, and vomited five times white glair,
mixed with green bile; she had also eight motions.

I ordered strong broth, creamed rice, and for the evening (as she had been
deprived of sleep from the time she fell sick) a jalap, composed of fifteen
drops of liquid laudanum, four ounces of common water, and an ounce of simple
syrup.

The fifth day passed without fever; she took creamed rice, and the usual
drink. The following day I gave her a cathartic. The seventh passed without
fever. The eighth she again took an opening medicine, and was then sent among
the convalescent, where she recovered, and left the hospital in perfect health.

TENTH OBSERVATION.
The 30th of September I saw a young man, about twenty years of age, of a
sanguine habit, who had been ill two days, and was bled at home. His
respiration was high, pulse quick and short, face inflamed, eyes sparkling,
skin dry and hot; he had pains about the heart and in the head, his tongue was
red and dry, he was thirsty, and vomited yellow matter with violence; for some
days he had been costive, his urine was red and in small quantity.

I prescribed bathing, emollient clysters water acidulated with fixed air for
common drink and bolusses of camphire and nitre. The following day, the third
of the disease, the symptoms were the same, as was he remedy. The fourth, the
symptoms had diminished; his tongue was incrusted but moist, he had a
disagreeable taste, and had not vomited since the night; his abdomen was
swelled, but not painful. I prescribed an ounce of cream of tartar in water and
syrup, which remedy produced five or six evacuations of white glairous matter;
in the afternoon he took broth several times. The fifth day he was much
agitated, changing his place continually; the symptoms of the third returned
with equal violence, and the same remedies were continued.

The sixth day he was much fatigued, had neither slept nor vomited; he had a
pain in the loins, that of the head and epigastrick region had left him; the
abdomen was swelled but not painful.

The seventh day he was very uneasy, vomited green and yellow bile, and almost
all he drank; with the abdomen painful, the headache returned, his breath was
short and quick, pulse weaker, showing an approaching state of debility.

In the afternoon he had an evacuation of white and glairous matter, the
headache and vomiting ceased, repiration became easier, which determined me not
to apply blisters; but I ordered creamed rice, and wine with sugar to support
his strength.

On the eighth he was oppressed; I gave him wine and water, creamed rice, and
wine with sugar. The ninth he was much agitated, with the abdomen swelled and
painful, he threw up all he drank, his respiration was much confined; about two
in the afternoon a bloody flux appeared; it was glairous and of a foetid smell,
then the vomiting ceased, respiration became free, and though he had several
evacuations, was not so weak as in the morning. The tenth the flux continued.

The eleventh it was more considerable, swelling of the abdomen continued, the
pulse was waving, and the skin moist.

The twelvth and thirteenth passed tolerably well, the flux being less; his
tongue was covered with a fir of a dirty white color.

The fourteenth day passed without fever. I administered three drachms of
rhubarb, and two ounces of manna. This medicine had a good effect; the blood
totally disappeared after the two first evacuations, the fever also gave way,
and did not return.

On the sixteenth he took a similar dose; and on the seventeenth was sent among
the convalescent, from whence he went out in perfect health.

ELEVENTH OBSERVATION.
The seventeenth of October a man was brought to the hospital, about forty-five
years of age. He was insensible, with his mouth open, tongue and teeth black,
the body cold, and almost without pulse, respiration was short and slow: he was
placed on his arrival in the chamber with the dying. I prescribed at
antiputrescent, and cordial draught, ordered hot bricks to his extremities, and
wine with sugar to be given him. He remained in the same state till the 19th,
when I found the pulse raised, his senses returned, and tongue was moist. He
complained of a pain in the genitals, which were much enlarged; the testicles,
spermatic cords, and scrotum were much swelled, the latter was covered with
blisters and gangrenous spots; the penis was four times as large as it ought to
be, and covered with spots like the scrotum; the prepuce formed a phimoses.

I ordered a strong decoction of bark, acidulated with spirits of nitre; a
quarter of a glass was taken every hour, and a table spoonful of a camphorated
draught every half hour; his usual drink was water acidulated with fixed air;
his food creamed rice. An emollient cataplasm was put on the genitals.

The 20th I found him much better, but the mortification had fixed on the
penis. I made an incision as deep as the part would admit, and had the
poultices composed with spirits of turpentine, and camphorated spirits of wine;
the internal remedies were the same.

The 21st I took away the skin that was loose from the incision of the
preceding evening; the part was dressed with the unguent of storax, and
cataplasms applied as before upon the testicles. The 22d the suppuration began;
as it gradually augmented the other parts decreased, and assumed their natural
size. This patient left the hospital perfectly re-established, after having
taken the decoction of bark, and water acidulated with fixed air for a length
of time; when he ceased their use the suppuration became bad, and fever
returned. His cure was completed by cathartics, administered in proportion as
the suppuration. dried up, and the cicatrice formed.

TWELVTH OBSERVATION.
The third of November a young girl between twelve and thirteen was brought to
the hospital. She told me she had been ill several days; her eyes and skin were
very yellow, the latter dry and of a burning heat; she was thirsty, with a
quick pulse, and interrupted perspiration; she had an hemorrage from both mouth
and nostrils, the blood from the latter was very red, the drops that fell on
the sides of the basin appeared composed of little globules which were not
adhesive.

I prescribed a camphorated draught, and for common drink, water acidulated
with fixed air. The following day the heat of the skin diminished, but the
other symptoms remained; to the remedies already given, I added a decoction of
bark, acidulated with spirits of vitriol; and as the patient was very weak, she
had during the day four cups of veal broth, in each of which was infused half a
dram of gum dragant in powder; she also took some spoonfuls of sweetened red
wine.

The 9th, she complained of a sore throat. I made her a gargle with a mixture
of water, styllitic oxymel, and honey, acidulated with spirits of vitriol. The
hemorrage continued with the same force till the 13th, on which day it was more
considerable; the 14th it entirely disappeared, as did the other symptoms; the
remedies were then laid aside, and she continued to recover. I gave her a
cathartic some days after, and sent her to the convalescent, from whom she went
out perfectly recovered.

THIRTEENTH OBSERVATION.
The 27th of September a young woman, about twenty-six years of age, was
brought to the hospital. She was of a phlegmatic constitution, and had a fit of
sickness a short time before. She was attacked with the fever in the morning;
her skin was dry, tongue and lips in the same state; she felt a lassitude and
pain in the epigastrick region, she had a difficulty in breathing, and was
thirsty; her urine was excoriating and in small quantity.

I prescribed a cooling antiputrescent draught, and water acidulated with
dulcified spirit of nitre, sweetened with simple syrup.

The second she became yellow, and vomited bile of different colors. The third
the yellow was deeper, all the symptoms of the second day had increased with
violence, the vomiting fatigued her very much; to avoid the pain she refused to
drink: at night her tongue was covered with blood. The fourth a quantity came
from both mouth and nostrils; she was excessively weak.

The fifth her pulse was low and intermittent, she lost much blood, and was
greatly oppressed; her tendons were much convulsed. I ordered blisters to her
legs, and prescribed decoction of bark acidulated with spirits of vitriol, wine
with sugar, and broth with gum dragant, as in the preceding case. In the
evening she was senseless, and almost without pulse; she mechanically applied
her fingers to her nose, which she pinched, and covered her face with the black
blood that came from both mouth and nostrils; her face was entirely yellow,
mouth and eyes half open, which gave her a most hideous appearance. I had hot
bricks applied to her extremities, which were cold, as also upon the blisters;
and ordered a cordial draught to be given in spoonfuls, when she should be able
to swallow.

The sixth I found her better, but her senses were imperfect and ideas
confused; she swallowed mechanically all that was put in her mouth; the
blisters rose well, and discharged thick pus. I supported her with cord^alised
tincture of bark, wine, and broth.

The seventh she relapsed, and was as on the fifth; the blisters were covered
with a dry gangrenous slough, and the hemorrage continued. I found her in a
desperate situation, and had her warmed with hot bricks as before.

The eighth, ninth, and tenth she was the same, and did not recover her senses
till the eleventh; then the mortified slough fell from the blisters, and
suppuration was great. She continued the acidulated bark till the twentieth,
when the hemorrage ceased; she also used a detergent gargle, to brace and
cleanse the inside of the mouth, which was excoriated and covered with little
ulcers, her lips were in the same state and swelled. I made use of means to
support her strength, gave her cathartics when the blisters dried up, and sent
her among the convalescent, where she entirely recovered.

FOURTEENTH OBSERVATION.
The third of December, a woman about thirty-eight years of age, robust, and of
a sanguine habit, had been taken ill the evening before. She had pains in the
head and back, her face was red, respiration short and quick, skin dry and of a
burning heat, tongue also dry and red; she was thirsty, with a hard and tight
pulse, her abdomen painful, but not swelled; she was bled twice that day, had
emollient clysters, and chicken water with nitre.

The third day she felt great uneasiness and general pain, she changed her
position continually; the fever was very strong, her urine red and in small
quantity; she continued the chicken water, to which I added water acidulated
with dulcified spirits of nitre.

I found her better on the fourth; her tongue was covered with a white fir, her
mouth clammy and bitter; the irritable symptoms appeared calmed. I prescribed
half an ounce of cream of tartar, and two grains of emetic tartar, to be
dissolved in two glasses of water, and taken in three doses at the distance of
an hour each. She took only two-thirds of this remedy, as she vomited a
quantity of green and yellow bile with glairous matter, and had three motions;
she took some light broth, and in the afternoon continued the chicken and
acidulated water; and in the evening had a clyster.

There was a sensible change on the fifth. On the the sixth she was much
oppressed; could not lie, but sat on the side of the bed; and was much weakened
by frequent evacuations of liquid matter. In the afternoon the pulse became low
and convulsive. I had blisters applied to her legs, and prescribed a draught
composed of four ounces of common water, an equal quantity of rose water,
thirty grains of prepared cachoe, an ounce and a half of spirituous cinnamon
water, and two ounces of simple syrup. A table spoonful to be taken every half
hour.

The seventh she was fatigued and agitated, changing her situation every
moment, had pains in her ^ones, and an oppression so great as to be obliged to
^it ^p in bed; she had a burning skin, and great thirst, took whatever was
offered her; her urine was red and in small quantity; she had convulsive
motions in the tendons, and the solids were in a state of irritation.

I prescribed a draught of eight ounces of common water, twenty grains of
Homberg's sedative salts, thirty-six drops of Hoffman's mineral liquor, and two
ounces of simple syrup, to be taken by the table spoonful every half hour; the
blisters were taken off about four in the afternoon, there was a great deal of
pus; the pain in the loins and evacuation ceased, her face was red, she had a
violent headache and oppression, her nose began to bleed about six in the
evening, and her pulse became concentred. I gave her wine with sugar. At nine
o'clock she became cold; hot napkins were applied to her extremities, and she
swallowed some spoonfuls of a cordial draught, which was occasionally repeated
till morning.

The next day, being the eighth, the patient was so bad as to be almost without
pulse, was forced to press very close to feel it, it was intermittent; she had
convulsive motions in the tendons, and had not recovered any warmth; her
respiration was difficult, and the hemorrage violent; her tongue was moist, and
she was extremely weak.

I prescribed a decoction of four ounces of red bark in a pint of water, and
added to it twenty drops of spirits of nitre. She took two table spoonfuls of
this remedy every hour, and in the intervals red wine with sugar, broth, and
creamed rice, or barley.

Toward eleven o'clock her pulse raised, respiration was easier; the hemorrage
continued as before. At four in the afternoon she became weak as in the
morning, lost a great deal of blood, and breathed with difficulty; her urine
was thick and of the color of strong beer, it was put in glasses but did not
settle; her pulse was scarcely to be felt; her senses continued perfect, though
her weakness was so great. When the blisters were dressed, they were dry, and
covered with gangrenous slough. I had unguent of storax applied. She continued
the decoction of bark, wine broth and creamed barley.

The morning of the ninth I found her better, the oppression had ceased, but
she fainted at four o'clock; the hemorrage was considerable all night, but
entirely disappeared in the morning; she had two foetid evacuations in
substance; her urine was abundant, and had a cloud in it that did not settle;
her skin was humid and of an equal natural heat; she felt easy.

The regimen and remedy of the preceding day were continued. The tenth she was
rather stronger, and more easy in bed, had slept during the night; her pulse
was expanded, and fever ceased, a natural heat only remaining; the urine was in
quantity and thick, as was a white sediment it deposited; the slough began to
detach itself from the blisters; the remedies were continued the same. The
eleventh her tongue was firred, and had a disagreeable taste. She had no
evacuation from the ninth. I gave her three drachms of glauber's salts, and two
ounces of manna, dissolved in two glasses of water, which she took in three
doses; the evacuation was great, and consisted of bilious* glairous matter of
an infectious smell. At night she was without fever, and stronger
notwithstanding the great evacuation.

The twelvth passed without accident. She took her food the thirteenth. On the
fourteenth the slough was entirely detached; suppuration was abundant, and
completed the cure. The patient took an opening medicine after the blisters had
dried up. She had no relapse, and was perfectly re-established.

FIFTEENTH OBSERVATION.
A man about fifty years of age, entered the hospital the 29th of September,
with a tetanus; his jaw was so very fast locked, it was very difficult to put a
small spoon between his teeth to give him drink. The disease became worse, he
was stiff in every part, and bent backward. He refused every remedy. I had him
carried into the chambers of the dying. As he saw numbers expire on all sides,
victims to the epidemic, and their beds immediately re-occupied by others, the
terrifying spectacle no doubt suggested to him some very serious reflections;
and he immediately asked for some drink. As my visits were as frequent in that
room as in the others, I perceived the change, and having some hope from it,
prescribed remedies suitable to the case. He found himself very soon relieved,
the action of swallowing became free, and by degrees the disease gave way. At
the end of twenty-five days he was well enough to sit upright, when he went
into another apartment. His cure was not retarded though he was continually
with those that had the epidemic; he was perfectly re-established, and went out
of the hospital the 19th of November, in a better state of health than he had
previous to the disease.

SIXTEENTH OBSERVATION.
A young man, twenty five years of age, had for the space of nine months
callous ulcer, about three inches in diameter, upon the inner ancle bone. It
was kept open by a mass of humors from excess of every kind, in his manner of
living; and to that he added the application of an improper unguent; the
suppuration, which had been abundant, stopped suddenly, and the reflux of this
humor produced a disorder, the symptom of which was a high fever. In this
state he was brought to the hospital the 22d of October, and placed in the
midst of persons attacked with this epidedemic. I prescribed remedies suitable
to his situation; the suppuration was quickly re-established, when I applied
remedies to eradicate the cause of the ulcer, the only complaint that remained
on the 10th of January, when the hospital at Bush-hill was replaced by the
French hospital. This man was seventy-two days surrounded by those attacked
with the epidemic, many of whom died by his side, whose places were immediately
re-occupied by others infected with the same disease; and yet he never
experienced any symptoms that did not belong to his own complaint.

SEVENTEETH OBSERVATION.
A girl, about nineteen, was brought to the hospital the 23d of September. She
had a high fever, and complained of pain in the head; her face was red, eyes
watery, and breath short; she was thirsty, and felt a general uneasiness, with
pain in the reins, and vomited liquids in the state she took them; her pulse
was waving, tongue red and moist; she had had the fever about two days. I
prescribed lemonade with nitre, part of which she threw up till the 24th, when
the vomiting ceased, her pulse became calm, the fever left her, and respiration
was natural, but she complained of a sore throat; her face and breast were
covered with red spots, and assumed the appearance of the smallpox, of a fine
sort. The disease was favorable: and although the patient remained in the same
room with those attacked by the epidemic, she went out of the hospital
perfectly re-established the sixth of November.

Another girl about her age, and many children were in the same situation, and
all recovered. I could relate many other instances of the same kind, of
diseases cured with great success in the hospital during the height of the
epidemic, but think those already given sufficient to prove it not contagious.

I must do homage to truth, and undeceive the public relative to a false report
which increased the public fear, and that some people seemed to delight in
gaining credit to; and here declare, not any person from St. Domingo died of
the epidemic at Bush-hill. One woman from the Cape died, but her complaint was
a dropsy; a negro also died, but not of the reigning disease. He came to the
hospital the 29th of October* with a mortification occasioned by cold. This
unfortunate man had lost both feet; the vital principle being destroyed. As it
had fixed below the calves, I amputated both legs, and expected the happiest
success from the operation; when he eat to excess of some victuals brought by
one of his friends, who thought to serve him, but in reality put a period to
his existence.

I did not know one inhabitant refugee from St. Domingo that died of this
epidemic. An European who resided some time at Port au Prince may be reckoned
as one victim to this scourge, but he had been near a year in Philadelphia.

EIGHTEENTH AND LAST OBSERVATION.
Though I have already proved the malady not contagious, another observation
must establish my opinion without contradiction.

After the cessation of the epidemic, when the patients were convalescent and
judged fit to return home, the committee gave up the place to the Minister from
the French republic; some French soldiers only remained, who had been there
from the 20th of November. I purchased for the republic the beds, blankets,
pillows, and other appendages made use of by those diseased with the epidemic.
They were immediately, and are still occupied by new patients, though they have
neither been washed or fumigated.

The French patients under my care at the time and since the epidemic, were
attacked, some with symptomatic fevers, diarrhoes, dysenteries, inflammations
of the lungs, or other internal diseases; many had dangerous wounds, and other
chirurgical complaints, which obliged me to perform the most serious
operations, and they were attended by the greatest success. There were also a
great number of patients with diseases both external and internal, who occupied
the same be^s, blankets, pillows, and in short every thing made use (...) by
the epidemic patients; yet never knew any of them experience the slightest
symptom of the disease that made such ravages in the city of Philadelphia, in
America.

Facts so convincing must surely dissipate every remaining terror, occasioned
by the idea of the epidemic being contagious, and that even at a future period
the clothes made use of by the diseased might communicate the malady. Some
incredulous persons may perhaps say, these are no proofs of its not being
contagious, since these patients, as well as those persons who escaped the
epidemic, might not at that time be disposed to receive it. This objection
might be easily answered, but I will content myself with observing, that among
so many sick of other complaints at the hospital, and the great number of
French who arrived here from the hospital at the Cape, where they were in want
of every thing, and afterward exposed to the greatest misery, it is more than
morally impossible not even one should have been disposed to receive the
epidemic disease.

After these observations, extracted from a number of others which I made at
Bush-hill and in the city during the disease, a judgment may be easily formed
1st, of the nature of the malady; 2dly, how far my remedies were efficacious;
3dly, the contrary effect of those made use of in the beginning; and 4thly,
that it was not contagious.

This fact being proved, it can no longer be doubted the epidemic took its rise
in this country; and it appears indispensibly necessary to seek the cause, and
proper means to prevent its return, or render the effects less fatal.

I should not think my intentions sufficiently answered if I did not offer a
few ideas upon this important subject, and the means likely to preserve the
city from the dreadful consequences of such a scourge. Puerile and critical
minds will perhaps exclaim against my observations, but flatter myself I shall
be made amends by the opinion of the philosophic and sensible, to whom there is
not any think extraordinary or superfluous when the object is the good of
mankind. I only propose general means as preventatives, for if an epidemic
again appears, it will most probably assume a different form, and consequently
require another mode of treatment.

The methods requisite to be observed relate not only to society in general,
but includes each individual in particular.

That which belongs to society in general and public order, seems particularly
to require, first, that the interior part of the city be cleared of tan-yards
and starch manufactories; secondly, that the police particularly attend to the
cleanliness of the quays and streets, to prevent the water stagnating in the
ditches that are in the environs of the city, in cavities where buildings are
erecting, and streets not yet paved; the same attention should be paid to the
markets, to prevent green and bad fruit being sold: last summer I observed
peaches, melons, and other fruits so far from their maturity, they could not
fail proving very injurious. There is another cause, which in my opinion acts
infinitely more on the animal economy, the prodigious number of burial places
This truth has been sensibly felt for some time in Europe. The voice of an
enlightened body of men has induced the French nation to banish burial grounds
from their cities. Many persons here pretend, they could not at all affect the
salubrity of the city, and advanced as a proof, the disease not being so
frequent near those receptacles of the dead as in other places. If this
assertion was true, it could not confute my opinion; however, I do not pretend
to say, the cause of the epidemic proceeded from the burial grounds alone, but
I declare and maintain, the putrid miasmata which continually exhale (however
deep the graves might be) being mixed with miasmata proceeding from other
causes, must render the city less healthy, and corrupt the air through which it
passes; this air thus charged with vapors, might be spread abroad and affect
persons at a distance, whilst those near the cimeteries escaped, from not
having come into immediate contact with that air. To give full explanation of
this assertion is foreign to my purpose; those already acquainted with the
nature and properties of air, will not fail to add to, and feel the force of my
reasoning.
* in the heart of the city. The vapors continually attracted from these places
of corruption by the sun, infect the air, whilst the rain penetrating, washes
in the graves the putrid remains of the bodies, and carries with it into the
wells detached, infected particles, from which it could not be disengaged by
filtration, in the short space it has to go.

After this remark, which I can only think of with pain, may not an individual
say before he drinks a glass of water, "I am about to feed upon a being like
myself, to swallow particles from dead bodies, and perhaps those once dear to
me, and whom I still regret." Independent of other inconveniences from burial
places in the city, this reflection alone is surely sufficient to determine upon
following the example of almost all the cities of Europe; where, I repeat,
experience has induced them to banish such places, as they are capable of
injuring the healthiest constitution, and affecting them with the most fatal
diseases. I have not dissembled, and am sensible how few will think with me. I
expect the sarcastic laugh of the half-learned critic, and persons much
attached to their own opinion; but as I have already said, philosophers will
know how to value my reasons, and desire of being useful to society.

I think among other means proper to prevent this inconvenience, a fire-pump
might be placed on the river Delaware, to raise water into the city, which
should be conveyed into fountains properly situated, for the convenience of the
necessaries of life. A quantity of healthy water might easily in future be
procured from the Schuylkill, by means of the canal upon which they are now at
work; whilst that from the pumps would be only used for domestic purposes and
in cases of fire.

Before such establishments can be formed, or any good arise from them, I would
advise those to whom it is convenient, to have the water they drink fetched
from the river when the tide is down, and put in earthen vessels to settle, or,
which would be better, let it pass through a filtering stone. Such are the
general means that appear to me most necessary for the healthiness of the city.

The particular means which regard individuals only, consist in some
precautions. The most necessary is to fortify the mind, and resist as much as
possible the fears naturally inspired by epidemics. This emotion of the soul
disorders the mind, effaces reason, and occasions in the whole machine such a
commotion as to influence the animal economy, and injure the health. It is
therefore highly necessary to resist this childish fear, which cannot cure, but
may render the body more liable to disease. Excess of every kind must also be
avoided; the air of houses and apartments continually changed, and every thing
kept in the greatest state of cleanliness. This neatness consists in the
frequent change of linen, bathing often in summer, washing the mouth every
morning and after each meal with water and vinegar.

I cannot finish these reflections, and pass unnoticed those little bags of
camphire, and spunges filled with vinegar, that were so generally made use of
last autumn; and do not pretend the means were not salutary, but the manner
they were used in was pernicious: the mouth and nose were so closely pressed,
as totally to interrupt respiration for a time, which must naturally produce
the most fatal symptoms. The air, that humid and fluid substance, that serves
for respiration, loses its elasticity, and is easily corrupted by the acrid
humors drawn from the lungs; this humor mixed with it produces a stimulating
quality, which excites in the bronchiae, and other aerial vessels, a
contraction that prevents a free dilation of the lungs, and circulation of the
blood, from whence the worst disorders may proceed. Those who place confidence
in this means, should use it with moderation, to avoid finding a source of
disease in the real principle of life.

Such are the reflections I think a duty to lay before the public. From what I
have seen, observed, and studied, I have acted agreeable to my knowledge and
capacity. If my efforts and zeal have been crowned with some success -- if the
result of the observations I now present to the public is useful, my end is
attained, and shall be happy in any opportunity I may have of being usfeul to
my fellow creatures.

FINIS.
REGISTERED ACCORDING TO ACT OF CONGRESS.

RECHERCHES ET OBSERVATIONS, Sur les Causes et les Effets de la Malady
Epidemique qui a regne a Philadelphie, depuis le mois d'Aout jusques verse le
milieu du mois de Decembre de l'annee 1793.
PEU de jours apres mon arrivee a Philadelphie, le 7 aout 1793, j'appris par la
vo^e public, que plusieurs persons y etaient mortes des suites d'un mal de
gorge.

Les progres rapides de cette malady firent croire qu'elle portait avec elle
quelques qualites contagieuses. La mort de plusieurs persons dans le meme
quartier, et dans un tems tres-rapproche, accredita cette opinion au point
qu'il passait pour certain qu'il etait tres-dangereux de s'approcher de ceux
qui etaient attaques de cette malady.

Ce ne fut que verse la fin du mois d'aout que j'eus occasion de connaitre cette
malady, dans une fille agee d'environ 26 ou 28 ans, servante de M. Bollens,
negociant, dans Water-street nord. Elle etait tresrobuste et d'un temperament
sanguin. Le medecin ordinaire de la maison, homme respectable et tres-instruit,
n'en jugeant pas favorablement, et pensant qu'elle subirait le sort de
plusieurs malades qu'il avait foigne, m'avait appelle et engage, au cas qu'elle
succombat, a fair l'ouverture de son cadavre, afin de connaitre les causes
d'une malady si funeste.

Je me rendis chez M. Bollens avec lui. Nous trouvames la malade dans une
extreme agitation, le visage rouge, les yeux etincellans, la peau seche et
brulante, la langue et les levres aussi seches et rouges, les glandes amigdales
gonflees, la luette, le voile du palais et tout l'interieur de la gorge
enflammes. Elle avalait avec la plus grande difficulte et parlait avec peine;
sa respiration etait forte; elle souffrait de la gorge et de la tete; enfin son
pouls etait dur et frequent.

D'apres toutes ces indications je proposal au medecin de la saigner; il y
consentit, et je fis de suite, moi-meme, cette operation. Je lui prescrivis la
limonade, un gargarisme fait avec l'eau et l'ox^^el scyllitique, et a son
defaut du miel et de l'esprit de vitriol. Il fut convenu que la malade
prendrait un bain. Nous y retournames le lendemain; elle etait infi^iment
mieux; son pouls s'etait developpe; elle parlait plus facilement. Comme elle
avait de la fievre, que la chaleur etait considerable, et que le fang tire de
la veille annoncait une grande inflammation, je proposal une second saignee,
ce qui fut execute du consentement du medecin. Nous lui ordonnames de continuer
son gargarisme, de boire de la limonade, et de prendre de la creme d'orge ou de
riz.

Le lendemain nous la trouvames levee, gaie, sans fievre, et dans un etat a
pouvoir se passer des secours de la medecin. Nous lui conseillames de prendre
une medecin ordinaire. Je ne l'ai plus vue, mais j'ai su qu'elle s'etait
parfaitement retablie, et qu'elle n'avait pas eu depuis la plus legere
indisposition.

Je pourrais citer beaucoup d'autres faits de ce genre. J'ai vu et visit une
infinite de persons attaquees de la meme malady; j'ai eu le bonheur de n'en
perdre aucune, a l'exception d'un enfant qui n'a ete enter mes mains que sur la
fin de sa malady.

Que l'on ne pense pas que ce ^oit pour fair l'apologie de la saignee que je
cite ces observations. Je dois meme convenir que j'ai gueri plusieurs persons
sans ce secours. Quoique ce moyen fut generalement tresb^en indique, j'ai
observe souvent de contre-indications qui m'ont empeche de le mettre en usage.
Alors les lavemens, les ga^garismes, les bains, la limonade, l'eau de poulet,
le petit lait, les emultions simples et sedatives, so^t les moyens que j'y ai
substitues, quelquefois meme je les ai employes et mis en usage conjointement
avec la saignee.

Je suis persuade que cette malady aurait ete moins funeste, si dans le
commencement on avait e^ recours a un pareil traitement, auquel je pense
qu'elle aurait rarement resist.

Mais le public mal dirige, faisait souvent le contraire de ce qui aurait ete
efficace. Les malades etaient renfermes dans des chambres closes avec le plus
grand soin; ils etaient charges de trois ou quatre couvertures. Leur traitement
etait pour boisson de l'infusion de camomille, du vin de Madere, et autres
liqueurs semblables et brulantes, qui, agissant en sens egal avec la malady,
faisait perir les malades, apres avoir produit la gangrene dans toutes les
parties affectees, et des engorgemens dans le cerveau. Les victimes de cet^e
pratique meurtriere devaient, apres leur mort, avoir la figure livide, et les
vaisseaux de la tete et de la poitrine dans le meme etat que ceux qui meurent
d'une attaque d'apoplexie.

Quelques jours apres les maux de gorge, parurent les fievres qui ont devaste
cette ville, port le devil dans les familles, qui jouissaient au sein de la
paix, du bonheur de vivre dans la purete des moeurs, et sous la protection des
lois dictees par l'independance, la sagesse et la virtue.

Chastes epoux! meres infortunees! orphelins malheureux! ah! combien votre sort
m'attriste? que ne puis-je vous secourir en accumulant dans mon coeur tous les
chagrins qui vous devorent. Que ne puis je vous render le bonheur don't la mort
inexorable vous a ravi les objets? Que ne puis-je vous fair oublier que vous
etes malheureux? mais helas! mes voeux font impuissans, et je n'ai que
l'espoir, en remplissant les devoirs que mon etat et l'humanite m'imposent, de
soulager et d'adou^ir vos maux en en diminuant le nombre.

Les malheurs que vous venez d'eprouver sont bien grands; mais combien ne vous
paraitront ils pas affreux, lorsque faisant un pas en arriere, vous vous
rappellerez que votre esprit affecte par une vain crainte, ^^^^tre laquelle il
luttait sans cesse, cette terreur a, je ne dirai pas etouffe, mais fait taire
en vous ces sentimens sacres que la nature a gravee dans tous les coeurs;
lorsque vous vous rappellerez que cette crainte irre^^echie vous a fait oubl^^r
le plus saint des devoirs, quand vous vous rappellerez que vous avez abandonne
a toute l'amertume de leurs maux, vos proches et vos amiss les plus chers.
L'erreur a justify, je dirai plus, elle a pour ainsi dire prescrit votre
conduite, et les malheureuses victimes d'une malady funeste le sont devenue^
encore de ce sentiment qu'on vous a suggere: elle^ ont peri fault de soins, et
expirees dans l'horreur du desespoir.

Epoux, meres, enfans, freres songez au, devoir que D^eu vous a prescrit.
Listinct vous le dicte, cedez a cette impu^sion et vous suivrez le chemin de la
virtue; mais si, ^ourds a la voix de la nature, ceux pour qui seuls vous devez
vivre sont prives des soins qu'ils attendent de vous. Jugez de vos remords
lorsqu'ils ne seront plus. Mais, dites-vous, la crainte d'eprouver le meme sort
sans pouvoir sauver mo^ pere, me l'a seule fait abandonner. Ce raisonnement
n'est que celui du plus aveugle egosime, et ne voyez-vous pas que votre
conduite justify d'avance celle de vos enfans et de vos serviteurs.

Mais a quoi bon chercher a vous inspirer des sentimens qui sont dans votre
coeur. Un peuple hospitalier et genereux ne peut etre inhumain. Si cette virtue
qui fait le complement de votre moralite; si l'humanite a cesse un instant
d'etre exercee par vous, votre c^^^ n'y a aucune part. La crainte et l'erreur
sont vos excuses: else ont aneanti votre courage; mais ainsi que vous le
verrez dans un instant, else etaient mal fondees.

En effet, les papiers public vous ont inspire la terreur en affectant
d'annoncer que la malady etait contagieuse. On a ete plus loin, on a pretendu
qu'il fallait marquer la port des maisons ou l'epidemie avait deja immole
quelques victimes. Tell est, n'en doutez pas, une des principales causes du
ravage rapide qui a devaste cette ville infortu^ee.

Honor de votre confiance et de celle de vo^ representans, reunis en comite,
qui m'a choisi pour diriger l'hopital de Bush-hill, refuge destine a recueillir
les malheureux attaques de l'epidemie, je vous dois le fruit de mes
observations; je m'empresse de vous en fair l'hommage: puisse-je, en m'ac
quittant de ce devoir, vous developper des idees utiles.

Il paraitra peut-etre etonnant a quelques persons que, frondant l'opinion
public, j'ose avancer que la malady n'etait pas contagieuse; mais la verite
etant une, je ne puis me refuser a l'evidence que m'ont demontre mes
observations. Je laisse aux hommes instruits et degages de tout esprit de
systeme a prononcer sur les preuves que je vais donner, et qui me semblent
e^ayer mon opinion d'une maniere incontestable.

Le premier bruit public, que l'on s'est plu a repandre inconsiderement, a
pretendu que la malady avait ete apportee par le briq le Mary, captain Rush,
venant du Cap-Francais avec beaucoup de passagers, et que pendant sa traversee
plusieurs persons etaient mortes de la meme malady, qui depuis a regnee a
Philadelphie. J'etais moi-meme passager a board de ce briq, et je puis assurer
le contraire de ce pretendu fait, qui s'est si fortement accredite. Il est
vrai, qu'apres avoir ete pille par les pirates, Comment pourai-je qualifier
autrement des hommes qui, au mepris de toutes lo^s et de tous principes, ont
specule sur nos malheurs pour nous enlever le peu que nous avions soustrait aux
flammes et a la rage assassine des cannibales don't nous sommes les deplorables
victimes? Ces hommes, ne rougissant point d^ s'appeller c^rsaires, plus
crimin^ls, encore, ou au moins accomplices, par le fait, des so^lerats qui, par
la flamme, ont sorces a la suite ceux de nous qui avaient echappes au ^er
assassin^; ^es hommes, dis-je, ont manque an premier de tous les devoirs, a
l'humanite. Ils ont viole toutes les lois; en pillant en mer, et en nous
conduisant ensuite dans un port anglais poor y fair legitimer leur piraterie.
Ils nous ont pills comme francais: oui nous etions, nous sommes, et nous
serons toujours* francais; mais etions-nous des francais belligerans?
Etions-nous des francais speculant sur le trafic de nos marchandises et de nos
denrees? Etions-nous enfin des francais exposes aux evenemens de la guerre?
Non, nous n'etions et nous ne devions etre pour eux^ que des hommes, et des
hommes chasses de leurs foyers, parconsequent sans asyle, et refugies sons la
protection d'un pavillon que la necessite nous avait force d'adop^er. Ces
pirates ont done viole le droit des gens et des nations, en ne respectant ni
nos malheurs, ni le pavillon neutre qui etait devenu le notre. Je ne me
perme^trai aucune reflection sur l'approbation taci^e de la cour de Londres, a
cet act de piraterie et d'execration, mais il me semble que dans les races
futures, il ne pourra etre ^it^ qu'^ la honte du nom anglais


nous avons ete reduits a l'etat le plus pitoyable; et je ne suis pas surpris
qu'en nous voyant ainsi debarquer mal vetus, pales, les expressions de la
douleur peintes sur nos figures, tant a cause de nos malheurs passes, qu'a
cause de ceux que nous presentaient un avenir miserable, il n'est pas etonnant,
dis-je, que les habitans de Philadelphie, tourmentes depuis cette epoque d'une
malady don't on ignorait l'origine, les hommes peu eclaires dans les causes et
les principes des evenemens physiques, ne se soient figure que nous etions
malades lorsque nous n'etions que malheureux. La verite est que nous n'avons
perdu, dans la traversee, qu'un seul homme qui, sans doubt, aurait echappe a
cette destinee s'il avait pu recevoir les soins et les secours don't nous etions
tous entierement depourvus. Lors de notre arrivee il n'y avait de malades que
trois persons; une femme qui, pendant le voyage, avait fait une fausse
couche, et qui est morte long-temps apres, a Bush-hill, d'une hydropisie, enfin
deux demoiselles qui sont aujourd'hui tres-bien portantes, et don't la malady
n'a jamais eu rien de semblable, ni aucun symptom de celle qui a fait tant de
ravage dans cette ville.

Les memes effets de cette incertitude sur les causes de cette epidemie ont
fait egalement et avec aussi peu de fondement, avancer qu'elle avait ete
apporte par le corsaire le Sans-Culote; mais, si nous nous en rapportons au
captain et au chirurgien de ce batiment, nous nous convaincrons que, ni dans
ce corsaire, ni dans les deux prises qu'ils ont conduites dans ce port, il n'y
avait aucun malade. Je ne finira^s pas si je voulais rapporter tout ce qu'on a
debite pour accrediter cette opinion, que la malady a ete importee. Je vais
passer aux preuves qui me paraissent suffisantes pour la fair rejeter et pour
etablir que l'epidemie a pris naissance dans le pays meme.

La premiere cause de ce fleau et celle d'ou derivent presque toutes les
autres, est l'alteration de l'air atmospherique. Ce fluide, don't nous sommes
environnes est, comme on le sait, un principe constituant des individus. C'est
celui de tous les elemens le plus susceptible de modifications, et qui influe
le plus puissamment sur l'economie animale, soit par sa pesanteur ou par sa
legerete, par son degree de froid ou de chaud, de secheresse ou d'humidite soit
par les differentes qualites qu'il est susceptible d'acquerir en se chargeant
des miasmes qui s'elevent de toutes parts.

L'examen de toutes les modifications don't l'air est susceptible devant
necessairement m'entrainer trop loin, je me contenterai de parcourir rapidement
les effets qu'il produit sur l'economie animale, lorsqu'il est trop ledger,
lorsqu'il peche par exces de chaleur, et enfin lorsqu'il est charge de parties
heterogenes et putrides.

Lorsque l'air atmospherique est trop ledger, il ne contre-balance pas l'eff^rt
que fait l'air principe, les forces sont abattues, l'on eprouve des lassitudes;
les persons peu instruites des causes physiques, attribuent ces effets a une
cause entierement contraire. L'air, disent-elles, est lourd, le temps est
pesant, et cependant le mal-aise qu'elles eprouvent n'est que le resultat de la
trop grande legerete de ce fluide, qui etant rarefie, augmente le volume du
sang, distend les vaisseaux qui, forces de ceder, se trouvent engorges, et
incapables de reagir; de la, les engorgemens sanguins, le poulmon, de son cote,
prive de l'action que lui prete l'air exterieur est incapable d'exercer ses
fonctions; alors le sang, violemment agite, heurte en bouillonnant contre les
parois des vaisseaux, souvent il les dechire et se fait un passage contre
nature.

Un malade, dans cette circonstance, ressent un poids sur la poitrine, sa
respiration est prompte et penible, il crache le sang et meurt suffoque. Tell
est l'effet qu'eprouvent quelques voyageurs que le zele de fair des
decouvertes dans l'histoire naturelle, emporte quelquefois trop loin et qui,
cedant au desir et a la gloire d'etre utiles, plutot qu'ils ne calculent leurs
forces, gravissent des montagnes eleves sans songer aux dangers auxquels ils
s'exposent.

Lorsque la chaleur de l'air est excessive, cet element principe de la vie
devient egalement pernicieux; alors le sang se trouvant degage a l'exces de sa
party cereuse qui sort par les pores de la peau, s'enflamme; l'estomac se
trouve relache, il ne fait plus ses fonctions; le suc gastrique n'a plus les
qualites requises pour que le resultat de la digestion produise un chile propre
a reparer les pertes extraordinaires que fait le corpse; il s'etablit un etat de
crudite qui affaiblit tous les organes, et la machine se trouve dans un etat de
debilite totale. Tell est l'origine de cette acrimonie qui devient la cause d'un
grand nombre de maladies.

L'air peut encore devenir plus meurtrier en se chargeant de miasmes infectes
qui s'elevent de toutes parts. Cet air corrompu, si j'ose m'expliquer ainsi^,
port en s'introduisant dans les corpse la cause de plusieurs maladies don't les
individus sont plus ou moins affectes, suivant leur disposition et suivant que
leur constitution prete ou resist a la cause morbifique ou meme suivant leur
maniere de vivre, et la situation present de leur physique et de leur moral
qui facilite o^ s'oppose plus ou moins a l'action du venin: je pense aussi que
les individus ne sont pas egalement frappes parce qu'il peut se fair que les
miasmes putrides, etant inegalement disseminees dans ce fluide, s'accumulant
plus dans un lieu que dans un autre, la situation des lieux favorise leur
sejour on les dissipe, tell que le passage sur les eaux, les campagnes et les
forets.

C'est ainsi que l'air plus ou moins altere ou modifie, produit des effets
differens relatifs a la situation des lieux et a l'etat present des individus;
de maniere que tell don't le moral et le physique preteront davantage a la cause
morbifique tombera malade le premier, tandis que tell autre dans un etat
contraire echappera au danger; parce qu'alors la nature, par le jeu parfait des
differentes parties de l'organisation animale, neutralise ^t annihile les
causes principes du mal qui agissent plus fortement dans le premier, don't les
ressorts de l'economie animale ^ont deranges. Souvent meme nous remarquons dans
des malades don't le derangement n'est pas total, certain desir pour tell, o^ tell
aliment pluto^t que pour d'autres, desir qui souvent n'est que l'effet d'un
instinct naturel rarement trompeur, et don't un medecin prudent et accoutume a
etudier la nature, ne manque jamais de profiter avec la sagesse que lui inspire
les connaissances de son art.

Tout cela nous prouve que les corpse, ainsi que je viens de le dire, pretent ou
resistent plus ou moins a l'action deletaire de la cause morbifique, d'ou il
resulte que tell qui a resist long-temps, est attaque a son tour, et que tell
autre n'est que legerement affecte, tandis qu'une infinite d'autres le ^ont
gravement: effets naturels des epidemies qui, d'apres les causes que je viens
d'indiquer* se developpent successivement dans les individus, et avec des
gradations infinies.

C'est fault d'avoir fait assez d'attention a la verite des effets des memes
causes, que l'on a souvent regard comme contagieuses les maladies epidemiques,
je ne pretends cependant pas qu'il n'y a point de maladies de ce genre, mais je
suis d'avis qu'elles ^ont plus rares qu'on ne le croit communement.

On appelle maladies contagieuses celles qui se communiquent d'un individu a un
autre, par une emanation des miasmes repandus dans l'air et ^ans l'attouchement
des corpse affectes. Cette espece de contagion se nomme contagion par distance;
la peste et d'autres maladies semblables sont de ce nombre.

On appelle aussi maladies contagieuses celles qui se communiquent par
l'attouchement immediate de la peris son affectee avec celle qui ne l'est pas.
C'est ce que l'on design sous le nom de contagion par contact immediate, tell
entr'autre la gale, etc. etc. etc.

Il resulte de cette definition, que la malady contagieuse par distance, se
communique aux autres corpse qui entourent les persons infectees, et qui
respirent le meme air, lequel pass alternativement dans les poulmons de ceux
qui sejournent dans le meme lieu et principalement dans les endroits fermes, et
alors la malady est bien caracterisee malady contagieuse. Mais si, dans une
malady epidemique, ceux qui touchent continuellement les malades, ceux qui
sans aucun preservatif, n'ecoutant que leur courage et leur amor pour
l'humanite, se livrent aux soins des malades, vivent au milieu d'eux et
respirent continuellement le meme air; si, dis je, ces memes persons ne se
trouvent point affectees, il est clair que la malady est purement epidemique
et nullement contagieuse: or c'est ce qui est arrive dans celle don't il est ici
question. Je me plais d'autant plus a rapporter ce fait, qu'en etayant mon
opinion je rends a un citoyen qui doit pour jamais etre cher a ce pays, par son
zele courageux et vertueux qui n'a peut-etre pas d'exemple, l'hommage du a son
merit; fait sur lequel je ne crains pas d'etre dementi, et qui me parait
victorieux pour prouver que la malady, don't les suites ont ete si funestes,
n'etait nullement contagieuse.

M. Stephens Girard, negociant de cette ville, et membre du comite, oubliant
qu'il etait rich et qu'il portait un tort considerable a sa fortune en
abandonnant sa maison de commerce, n'ecoute que son mouvement d'humanite. Non
content de contribuer par son aisance au soulagement de ses concitoyens, il
voulut encore les servir lui-meme. Chaque jour, des l^ matin, il etait rendu a
l'hopital Bush-hill; son premier soin etait d'ordonner et de suivre par
lui-meme les travaux et l'approvisionnement de la maison; de-la il se rendait
dans les salles aupres des malades. Les infortunes qui etaient les plus
affectes etaient ceux qui attira^ent ses premieres attentions: il ^'approchait
d'eux avec cet air de bonte qui part du coeur, et qui relevait encore son
action genereuse, leur serrait la main, les encourageait et leur presentait
lui-meme les remedes que j'avais prescrit; souvent meme j'ai vu les malades,
rebutes par le mauvais gout des medicamens, les rejeter et en couvrir leur
bienfaiteur. Que ^aifait alors le vertueux Girard? entierement devoue au salut
public, ferme, inebranlable et s'oubliant pour ne songer qu'a l'etre souffrant,
son semblable, qu'il voulait secourir, il essuyait le moribond l'exhortait au
courage, il revenait a la charge, et a force de persuasion et de patience il
parvenait a fair avaler le remede. Il ne se contentait pas de cela, avaunt de
le quitter pour passer a un autre, et lui prodiguer les memes soins, il lui
touchait les pieds, le front, afin de connaitre le degree de chaleur et fair,
suivant les circonstances, augmenter ou diminuer le nombre des couvertures, il
arrangeait le lit et lui inspirait de nouveau du courage en lui faisant naitre
l'espoir de recouvrer la sante: de la il passait a un autre qui vomissait des
matieres infectes et qui auraient rebute tout autre que cet homme inconcevable.
Tantot voyant de loin un moribond, les yeux et la figure jaunes, couvert d'un
sang noir qui decoulait de sa bouche, de son nez, et cherchant en tatonnant
avec ses mains tremblantes et ensanglantees un pot de chamber qu'il ne pouvait
atteindre, Girard court a son secours, le met lui-meme sur le vase, le remet
dans son lit, l'arrange, le soigne et ne le quitte que pour passer a un autre
lui prodiguer les memes soins. L'heure du repas arrive, son estomac a des
besoins, il se plaint de cette necessite de reparer ses forces, il court manger
un morceau a la hate, et l'instant d'apres il reparait encore plus ardent et
plus zele, prodigue les memes soins et ne quitte que pour ceder de nouveau a la
nature et prendre quelques heures de repos.

O vous humains qui vous pretendez philantropes, considerez l'infatiguable
Girard, il est votre modele, et c'est de lui que vous avez a prendre des
lecons! Et vous, citoyens de Philadelphie, que le nom de Girard vous ^oit a
jamais cher! Si comme moi vous eusslez ete le temoin de ses actions vertueuses,
deja son front, depuis long-temps, serait ceint d'une couronne civique.

Quel homme a, plus que M. Girard, ete expose a gagner cette malady? et ne
peut-on pas en conclure qu'elle n'etait pas contagieuse, a moins qu'on ne
veuille penser que, par un effet de la bonte divine, il ait ete conserve pour
servir de modele ou pour adoucir les maux des infortunees victimes de
l'epidemie?

Mais M. Stephen Girard n'est pas le seul qui ait couru les memes dangers. M.
Helm, citoyen vertueux, aussi membre du comite, a scu vaincre la repugnance et
la crainte. Verse la fin de l'epidemie il a aussi parcouru les salles et done
ses soins aux malades: il a, comme son intrepide colleague, ete exempt de son
atteinte.

Je citerai encore les chirurgiens qui me servaient d'aides, qui logeaient et
mangeaient a l'hopital, et qui, la nuit comme le jour, entraient dans les
salles pour fair les pansemens, visiter les malades et surveiller les
infirmiers; aucun d'eux n'a eprouve la plus legere incommodite. Je saisis avec
plaisir cette occasion, pour render a ceux de mes concitoyens qui ont second
mes soins et mes travaux; la justice due a leur zele et a l'activite qu'ils ont
mis a remplir leur devoir. Si la malady eut ete contagieuse, il y en aurait eu
certainement plusieurs qui eussent ete frappes de ce fleau; pas un seul au
contraire n'a ete atteint du plus pe^t mal.

Madame Saville, menagere de l'hopital, femme tres-estimable, a qui est due la
reconnaissance public pour la maniere d'ont elle s'est acquittee du
departement qui lui avait ete confie, est la seule de tous les employes a
Bush-hill qui ait fait une malady grave. Cette dame est depuis son enfance a
Philadelphie, il est tres-possible qu'elle eut prise en ville le germe de cette
malady, il peut egalement se fair, et je suis port a le croire, qu'ayant ete
legerement atteinte dans le principe, elle n'aurait eprouvee qu'une petite
malady si elle n'avait ajoute a cette cause premiere celle des miasmes
putrides, repandus dans l'hopital ou elle restait constamment. Cette dame a ete
la derniere malade, gravement attaquee, que j'aie traite a Bush-hill; j'ai eu
le bonheur de la guerir. Je donnerai l'histoire de sa malady, qui sera le
sujet d'une des observations qui se trouvent a la suite de cet ouvrage.

Parmi les gardes malades, deux sont morts: l'un etait souvent ivre et a
beaucoup contribue par cette intemperance a sa mort, tous deux etaient du pays
ils avaient probablement le germe de la malady avaunt de venir a l'hopital, et
ce germe se serait peut-etre egalement developpe chez eux en ville; ce qui me
parait d'autant plus vraisemblable que plusieurs d'entre les autres gardes
n'ont nullement ete incommodes quoiqu'ils mangeassent et couchassent dans les
salles don't les malades leur etaient cou^ies.

L'importance du sujet exigeant la reunion du plus grand nombre de preuves
possibles, et attendu qu'elles ont pour motif l'interet general; j'ai lieu de
croire qu'on ne me saura pas mauvais gre de me citer aussi pour exemple.

Lorsque je fus nomme medecin de l'hopital Bush-hill, je venais d'eprouver tout
ce qu'a d'affreux le passage subit et inattendu de la plus grande aisance a la
plus affreuse misere. J'avais pendant tout le passage, (je ne dois pas oublier
de dire que tous ces faits sont communs avec la plupart des francais qui ont
pris ici un asile) j'avais, dis-je, pendant toute la traversee respire le
mauvais air qui regnait dans la cale du batiment sur lequel j'ai pass, et
apres avoir pendant quelques instants change d'air sur le pont, nous rentrions
la nuit et dans le mauvais temps dans cette meme cale, espece de cachot
infecte. L'eau que nous buvions etait pourrie. Nous etions meme prives des
douceurs que nous avions embarques et qui nous avaient ete enlevees par les
pirates de tout genre, aux mains desquels nous avions eu le malheur de tomber.

L'homme est aisement philosophe lorsque le moral est soutenu par le physique,
mais lorsque ce dernier eprouve quelque derangement, l'autre est affaibli en
proportion: c'est ce que j'ai eprouve. Les pe^^es morales avaient tellement agi
fur mon physique, que je me trouvais dans un etat de debilite don't je ne suis
pas encore revenu. Cet etat favorisait singul erement l'action des miasmes que
je respirais a l'hopital ou j'allais souvent ayant un mal de tete des plus
violence. Quelque ^ois meme je me suis senti des mouvemens de fievre. Je faisais
ma visit a jeun tous les matins, celle du soir ^itot apres mon diner. J'ai
fait l'ouverture d'un grand nombre de cadavres; j'ai parconsequent ete oblige
de tremper mes mains dans le sang noir et corrompu qui ^ortait de leurs
entrailles gangrenees, et je respirais les vapeurs infectes qui s'en
exhalaient. J'ai ete fans contredit un des plus exposes: si la malady eut ete
contagieuse, elle se serait sans doubt plus aisement declaree chez moi, car,
outre les dangers auxquels je m'exposais par devoir, j'etais dans un etat
d'indisposition qui me rendait apt a recevoir l'action des miasmes deletaires,
et je me trouvais dans une situation a en faciliter la propagation; cependant
j'en ai ete exempt.

A toutes ces preuves bien sensibles reunies contre l'opinion de ceux qui ont
avance que la malady etait contagieuse, j'ajouterai un fait qui, lui seul,
pourrait co^duire a une conviction parfaite de ce que j'avance.

Plusieurs persons attaquees de maladies entierement differentes de
l'epidemie ont ete traitees a Bush-hill, et dans le meme moment et dans la meme
chamber, avec des malades de la malady regnante. Ceux la guerissaient et
voyaient mourir a droite et a gauche des individus attaques de la malady
epidemique, et don't le lit etait sur le champ occupe par d'autres ayant la meme
malady que ceux qu'ils remplacaient; et ce qui est principalement a remarquer
c'est que les premiers; constamment environnes de malades gravement attaques;
plonges dans un atmosphere de mia^mes que la respiration et la sueur
repandaient dans l'appartement; recevant dans leurs poulmons le meme air qui
avait mill fois pass et repasse dans ceux des autres malades, ou, non
seulement il s'etait phlogistique, mais ou il s'etait charge des emanations
propres a developper une malady semblable, si else en eussent eu la faculte;
ce qui, dis-je, est a remarquer, c'est que je n'ai pas vu un seul exemple de
ces malades avoir l'epidemie, qu'ils n'avaient pas auparavant, et jamais,
malgre toutes ces circonstances favorables a la contagion jamais leur malady
n'a changee de caractere, puisque tous ont gueri. J'ai fait cette observation
sur un si grand nombre, qu'il ne m'est plus permis de douter que la malady qui
a regnee a Philadelphie, n'etait nullement contagieuse, et qu'elle etait
simplement epidemique.

Cette malady n'a donc ete apportee ni par des hommes ni par des navires: elle
a pris naissance dans le pays. Les causes qui l'ont produite agissaient depuis
long-temps sur l'economie animale; ce qui prouve la verite de cette assertion,
c'est que tres-peu de persons, nouvellement arrivees, ont ete atteintes de ce
mal.

Il est vrai que ces causes ont eu plus ou moins d'action sur les individus
attaques; mais j'en ai deja done les raisons; d'ou il est resulte que tell a
ete le premier malade, tell autre ne l'a ete que long-temps apres: celui-la a
ete atteint de la malady dans toute sa force et dans toute sa malig^ite,
tandis que les symptoms dans celui ci n'ont pas ete bien graves, et qu'un
autre n'en a eu que de tres legers.

Le temperament, l'age, le sex, la maniere de vivre, la situation du lieu
qu'on habit, l'etat actuel des humeurs celui des passions de l'ame: tells
sont les causes des variations observees dans le course de cette epidemie.

L'on me demandra sans doubt par qu'elles causes l'air et les alimens ont pu
etre vicies au point de les render susceptibles d'engendrer cette malady.
Quoiqu'il existe souvent dans la nature des effets don't les causes echappent a
la sagacite de l'esprit humain, je vais cependant essayer d'en presenter
quelques unes, sans pretendre neanmoins les donner comme causes uniques du
fleau qui a ravage cette ville.

Je diviserai ces causes en causes generales, et en causes particul^eres.

Les causes generales et connues de tout le monde peuvent se rapporter au peu
de froid qu'il a fait l'hiver precedent, aux chaleurs excessives de l'ete qui
lui a succeed, a l'absence des plu^es et des orages, enfin aux mauvais fruits
de l'annee.

Parmi les causes particulieres on peut fair entrer la situation des
cimetieres dans l'enceinte de la ville. Ces lieux nuisent d'abord par les
vapeurs qui s'elevent des tombs, et qui corrompent l'air; puis par les miasmes
que l'eau de la pluie entraine avec elle, apres avoir filtree dans la terre ou
les corpse sont enterres, d'ou elle penetre dans les puits. Cette eau, don't
toute la ville fait usage, ne peut etre que pernicieuse, et merit d'attirer la
plus grand^ attention, si l'on veut eviter pour la suite, les dangers imminens
qui en resultent.

(...) est une autre source de corruption qui se trouve ^^ns la ville, ce sont,
d'une part, les tanneries et les ^^^riques d'amidon, d'autre part, ce sont les
quais qui, a mer basse, la^ssent a decouvert une etendue de fang^ d'ou s'exhale
une quantite prodigieuse de vapeurs pernicieuses; enfin les fosses qui ont
servies a la fo^ille des terres pour fair la brique, et don't la ville est
entouree, ou l'eau, en^ejournant, se, corrompt dans l'ete repand dans l'air des
exhalaisons infectes et ^^^it, en filtrant dans la terre, par porter de nouveau
la corruption dans l'eau des puits.

Toutes ces causes reunies ne pouvaient que porter la corruption dans le sang,
et donner a la bile un tell degree d'acrimonie, qu'elle est devenue la cause
materielle du developpement de l'epidemie.

Tous les medecins et les phisiologistes conviennent que la bile degeneree
produit l'irritation des solides et (...) dissolution des fluides. C'est ce que
j'ai remarque dans cette malady, don't les caracteres etaient presque toujours
inflammatoires a son invasion; cet etat etait suivi de la dissolution des
humeurs, et avec une tell rapidite, que souvent le medecin n'avait pas a
deliberer sur le choix des moyens propres a combattre les symptoms violence
don't ces deux etats etaient accompagnes. Quelque fois les malades eprouvaient
des lassitudes plusieurs jours avaunt que la fievre se manifestat: d'autre fois
elle se montrait sans avoir eu d'avant-coureur: ^n general elle commencait par
un grand mal de tete, par des douleurs aux lombes et aux extremites: les
malades se plaignaient des douleurs dans les os; quelques-uns avaient des
frissons irreg^liers, en general tous avaient une chaleur seche et aride a la
peau: d'autre fois cette chaleur etait concentree dans l'interieur, les malades
le plaignaient d'un fe^ interne qui les devorait; alors la so^^ etait
proportion^ee an degree de chaleur; dans plusieurs cette chaleur etait extreme
au tronc et verse la poitrine; les extremites n'en ressentaient qu'une mediocre,
souvent meme else etaient froides.

La respiration etait quelque fois genee, penible, forte, entrecoupee et
laborieuse. Lorsque je presentais le dos de la main a l'air qui en ^ortait, je
le trou ais d'une chaleur extreme. Il dessechait la gorge, la langue, les
levres, et les narines auxquelles il occasionait une demangeaison, et rendait
la deglutition difficile. La langue, dabord rouge, ne tardait pas, apres s'etre
sechee, a devenir, ainsi que les levres, couvertes d'un limon noir qui
s'attachait aux dents et y devenait adherent: une pesanteur et une douleur
considerables a la region epigastrique, annoncaient et accompagnaient des
vomissemens don't les efforts violence fatiguaient les malades. Les matieres
qu'ils vomissaient etaient de differentes natures; quelque fois c'etait des
phlegmes blancs, tres-acides, qui agacaient les dents des malades: d'autre fois
c'etait de la bile verte ou jaune; d'autre fois une matiere noire, semblable ^u
marc d'une bouteille a l'en^re, mal delayee dans des matieres gla reuses,
desquelles s'exhalaient communement une odeur d'oeuf pourri: else etaient
si^acres, qu'elles exc^ri^ient la gorge et les levres. L'estomac irrite par
leur action, rejetait toute espeece de liquides, et les malades, quoique
tourmentes par la soif, refusaient de boire pour eviter les douleurs du
vomissement.

Souvent les malades etaient ^f^aiblis par des diarrhees de differentes natures
qui etaient precedees et accombelly; saignees en general par des douleurs aux
lombes* quelque fois ces dejections etaient frequentes, liquides aqueu^es, et
commanca^ent avec la ^^aladie: d'autre fois else se declaraient apres
plusieurs jours de fievre: else etaient tantot bilieuses, grasses et
mousseuses, tantot blanches et glaireuses; il ^'en trouvaient de vertes, de
jaunes, de rougeatres, de sa^gu^lo entes et meme de ^ang pur, et noires, tantot
les malades allaient a la selle sans douleur; tantot enfin, ils avaient de
violentes tranchees: quelque fois ces dejections etaient sans odeur, d'autres
fois infectes et cadavereuses.

Les malades eprouvaient des insomnies; si par hazard ils dormaient, le sommeil
etait laborieux, ils ^e trouvaient aussi fatigues a leur reveil, que s'ils
n'avaient pas dormi. Les urines etaient differentes dans le co^rs de la
malady. Dans le commencement en general else etaient crues, puis else
devenaient rares, mordicantes, acres, rouges, sanguinolentes et quelque fois
noires: quelque fois aussi else etaient sans sediment, et troubles; d'autres
fois il se formait a la superficie une pell^^ule ou une nubecule: il s'en
trouvait avec un sediment de differente nature; qu'elque fois else se
suprimaient, et d'autre fois enfin, les malades les rendaient sans s'en
appercevoir.

Des lassitudes inquietantes etaient bientot suivies de la ja^ ^isse qui
commencait ordinairement par les yeux; et bientot apres, tout le corpse etait
couleur de citron fonce. Dans cet etat les saignees se rouvra^ent, les piquures
s'entouraient d'un cercle livide; ce n'etait qu'avec la plus grande peine qu'on
parvenait a arre^er le sang. J'ai remarque que ces accidens n'arrivaient qu'
aux malades qui avaient ete saignes trop tard.

La langue se couvrait d'un sang d'^bord rouge, puis noir: il suintait de toute
part de la langue, de l'interieur de la bouche et des genci^es. A cette
hemorragie se joignait celle des narines qui, quelque fois, precedait, et
quelque fois coulait en meme temps.

Si les remedes etaient inefficaces et n'apportaient aucun changement dans
l'etat des humeurs, la mortification se developpait dans quelques parties ou
des taches livides se montraient a diverse endroits, et s'etendaient par
gradation, de many e que quelque fois tout le corpse paraissait gangrene. Le
malade dans cet etat, repandait, avaunt de mourir une odeur infecte; si l'on
approchait de sa bouche le dos de la main, on eprouvait un sentiment de froid
par le contact de l'air qui sortait de ses (...) oulmons. Les malades qui sont
morts dans cet etat, avaient eu des faiblesses dans les commencemens de leur
malady. Les causes morbifiques ayant agi long-temps, avaient perverti toutes
les humeurs et les avaient disposees a la pourriture.

Il est rare que dans des cas semblables, les secours de la medecin soient
assez puissans pour sauver le malade. Alors le mal est a son comble; les
elemens qui concourent a la formation des solides et des fluides n'etant plus
retenus par le glutten qui les unissait, font sans cesse des efforts pour se
desunir et rejoindre la mass don't ils sont sortis, de meme que le souffle de
vie qui a anime la matiere, s'elance da^s l'espace et se reunit a l'etre d'ou
il avait ete emane.

D'apres tous ces symptoms qui ont accompagnes la malady epidemique, je la
considere comme une vrai^ ^^^vre colliquative, don't l'espece se rapporte a la
fievre ardente compliquee, et jointe a une autre malade tres-meurtriere, que
j'ai observee a St-Domingue, et connue sous le nom de mal de siam on fievre de
siam. Il semble que ces deux fleaux avaient reunis leurs symptoms et
agissaient de concert, ainsi qu'on peut en juger par la description que je
viens d'en fair, et qui n'est que le recit de tout ce que j'ai ^u.

Le pronostic que l'on pouvait porter sur une pareille malady etait en general
facheux: mais il devenait plus ou moins consolant, d'apres le nombre et la
gravite des symptoms, adoptes a la connaissance du temperament, du sex, de
l'age du malade, de (...) maniere de vivre, de l'etat de ^^s humeurs et des
complications d'autres infirmites ou maladies, etc.: toutes circonstances qui
devaient servir de pierre de touch a^ medecin pour asseoir et prononcer son
jugement.

Tell a ete: dumoins ce qui a dirige ma conduite chaque symptom a fix mon
attention particuliere; je me suis attache a l'etudier, afin de ne pas
m'exposer a contrarier la nature, lorsqu'elle travaillait avec fruit a ^e
debarrasser de la matiere morbifique: elle seule fait souvent le travail
necessaire pour expulser et detruire la cause qui l'opprime. Il est vrai que
quelque fois elle agit dans certains cas avec trop de violence, et dans
d^^utres avec trop de lenteur; c'est alors que l'art doit agir, pour augmenter
ou diminuer ses forces, ou pour l'aider a amener une crise salutaire, enfin
c'est a l'art seul de produire cette crise, lorsque la nature, affaissee par la
force du mal, rest sans action.

C'est done lorsque la nature est sans activite que ^art doit se montrer; ma^s
combien est difficile a saisir (...) moment precis, ou le medecin doit rester
simple spectateur, et celui ou il doit agir: celui-la est le vrai medecin qui
est parvenu a ce degree de connaissance. Heureux le mortel qui le possede:
L'habitude de voir les malades, et d'observer la nature, peut seule guider le
praticien, et render la medecin une science vraiment utile; mais celui qui,
seduit par le brillant d'un systeme, ve^t assujettir la nature aux regles de la
method qu'il a adoptee; celui-la, dis-je, est un fleau plus pernicieux a
l'humanite que ne pourrait l'etre la peste elle-meme.

Le public senti^a que d'apres les details que je viens de donner, il-m'est
impossible d'indiquer un traitement generalement applicable dans tous les cas;
cependant quoique les circonstances m'aient oblige de varier les moyens que
j'ai mis en usage pour combattre la malady, je vais exposer les cas les plus
generaux, ainsi que les motifs qui ont determine mon choix.

Je dois prevenir que les malades n'etaient en general ports a l'hopital q^'a
la derniere extremite. Beaucoup y ont p^ri, six, huit ou douze heures apres
leur arrivee: quelques-u^s meme n'y ont pas vecu deux heures. Beaucoup avaient
mis en usage des remedes meurtriers, tells que des purgatifs drastiques,
composes de jalap, ou de gomme-gutte et de calomel: ils avaient pris ces
remedes des l'invasion de la malady, dans le moment de l'irritation, ou les
humeurs encore ^rues, ^e pouvaient entrainer la cause morbifique par l'action
des purgatifs.

Le public, mal instruit, ajoutait a ces purgatifs dangereux, l'usage des
boissons sudorifiques et spiritueuses. Combien aussi dans le nombre de ceux qui
o^^ peris de cette malady, combien n'ont pas ete victimes de cette pratique
incendiaire? S'il en est qui ont eu le bonheur d'y resister, ils ne doivent
l'existence qu'a leur bonne constitution, et au peu d'effets qu'avaient produit
sur eux les causes de la malady; ear les prepa^ations mercurielles ayant la
propriete de dissoudre les humeurs, agissent, dans cette circonstance, de
concert avec les causes morbifiques qui, elles-memes, operent cette
decomposition: les sudorifiques, aussi m^l indiques, hataient la perte des
malades, et ont rendu mortelle une malady qui aurait cede a un traitement
convenable. Il est vrai que quelque fois la nature se debarrasse de la cause
morbifique par les sueurs; mais alors ^^^te evacuation critique termine la
malady. Ce n'est pas dans les commence ^^ns d'une malady que la nature agit
ainsi, et lorsque cela arrive, les sueurs deviennent symp^omatiques* il en est
de meme des autres evacuations qui ^e servent qu'a enerver les malades sans
entrainer les causes du mal.

Un medecin instruit et praticien ne se trompe pa^ sur ces sorts
d'evacuations. Il les reprime o^ les favorise suivant le temps ou else
paraissent; mais il ne peut jamais entrer dans ^es vues curatives de les
exciter ou de les favoriser, lorsqu'elles ne sont que des symptoms d'une
malady grave. S'il agissait autrement, il travaillerait en sens egal avec le
mal, a la destruction de l'individu; alors l'heureuse constitution du malade
peut seule le soustraire, et a la force de la malady et a l'inexperience d^
medecin.

Afi^ de donner une idee net des moyens en general, que j'ai mis en usage a
l'effet de combattre la malady* l'^n diviserai sa duree en trois periodes:
celui de l'irritation, ^tation, ou si l'on veut de crudite; celui de la
coction; enfin celui de la terminaison o^ de la crise.

Il est bon d'observer que ces trois periodes parcouraient leur duree avec tant
de rapidite, qu'il fallait la plus scrupuleuse attention pour saisir le moment
ou l'un finissait et faisait place a l'autre; souvent meme ils etaient
confondus. J'etais done oblige d'avoir egard aux symptoms existans, plutot
qu'a l'epoque ou ils paraissaient, afin d'employer les remedes a propos. Sans
ces precautions, j'aurais commis de grandes fautes, car j'ai vu des malades qui
n'avaient pas encore atteint la fin du premier periode le cinquieme jour,
tandis que d'autres etaient au dernier ter^e de la malady, le troisieme.

Dans le premier periode, lorsque le pouls annoncait une pletore sanguine;
lorsque j'appercevais une irritation considerable, tant par l'etat du pouls que
par la chaleur de la peau, la rougeur du visage et les vomissemens avec effort,
quand ^ur-tout, a ces symptoms, se joignaient une soif ardente, des maux de
tete ou dans quelqu'autre party, je faisais saigner les malades; si le sang
etait inflammatoire, si les symptoms ne diminuaient pas; si enfin rien ne
contre-indiquait ce remede, je le reiterais plus ou moins souvent suivant les
circonstances. ^n general je faisais fair les saignees petites, je pre ferais
ce moyen reitere a des saignees copieuses afin de menager les forces du malade.

Cette precaution etait encore plus indispensable, lorsque le malade n'etait
pas amene dans les premiers jours de la malady. Il etait rare de pouvoir
saigner avec succes apre le troisieme: quelque sois meme j'ai appercu des
contre-indications qui ^^'ont empee de le fair le premier jour; on ne doit
point oublier que je parle en general: il est des exceptions a cette regle.
Mais une saignee faite au moment ou (...) dissolution du sang est etablie,
devient mortelle, ainsi que j'ai e^^ occasion de l'observer, sur des malheureux
apportes a l'hopital, apres avoir ete saignes chez eux dans cet etat.

Les vomissemens etaient symptomatiques et exigeaient de multiplier les
saignees. J'employais les bains et les lavemens dans les memes vues. Je donnais
des boissons antiphlogistiques et delayant^s, tells que la limonade, l'eau de
poulet, l'oxicrat, l'eau d'orge, de gruau, l'eau froide. Toutes les boissons
etaient en general acidulees avec l'esprit de nitre dulcifie, ce qui calmait
l'ardeur des urines, les rendait plus abondantes et agissait comme anti-putride
et sedatif.

J'ai tire un grand avantage de l'eau acidulee avec l'air fix, prise pour
boisson ordinaire. J'avais heureusement sauve des debris de mon cabinet, qui
est presqu'en entier devenu la pro^e des pirates, un appareil qui m'a servi a
l'hopital Bush-hill. Je faisais tous les jours une suffisante quantite d'air
fix pour l'usage des tous les malades a qui je le croyais necessaire. Cette
eau, assez agreeable au gout, passait souvent chez des malades qui rejetaient
toutes les autres boissons. Je me suis avantageusement servi a St* Domingue de
ce remede, non seulement dans les fievres ardentes, inflammatoires et putrides,
mais encore dans beaucoup d'autres maladies. Cette boisson est un excellent
anti-septique temperent.

Lorsque les vomissemens resistaient a tous ces moyens, je pres^r^vais de
emulsions simples; je faisais egalement usage des potions temperantes,
sedatives, dans lesquelles je faisais entrer l'ether vitriolique la liqueur
minerale d'Hoffmann et le sell sedatif; je donnais quelque fois le ^el de tartre
avec le jus de citron. Si ces moyens ne repondaient pas a mon attente, je ne
m'obstinais pas a en continuer l'usage, je passais alternativement de l'un a
l'autre jusqu'a ce que je rencontrasse ce qui couvenait au mode, a l'etat
present ou se trouvait le ton des solides. Tell a ete mon plan de conduite dans
toutes les circonstances. C'est etre bien dans l'erreur que de croire que le
moyen le mieux entendu, et qui reussit dans un cas, puisse avoir le meme succes
dans tous les autres, quoiqu'ils paraissens semblables, parce qu'une infinite
de circonstances, souvent cachees, produisent du changement dans l'economie
animale; aussi voyons-nous souvent tell remede guerir une person, devenir null
chez une autre, et quelque sois nuisible a une troisieme* La diversite des
effets dependant de la meme cause s'opposera toujours a ce qu'on trouve des
remedes generalement specifiques: ce qui fait que jamais la medecin ne de
viendra une science aussi certain que la physique experimentale.

Lorsque quelques unes des boissons, don't je viens de parler me reussissaenit,
j'en faisais continuer l'usage en y ajoutant celui du camphre que je donnais en
bols, maniere moins rebutante pour le malade, et a l'aide de la quelle
j'augmentais la dose a mon gre et suivant que le cas l'exigeait. Chaque bol
etait ordinairement de deux grains de camphre et trois grains de nitre: je les
donnais toutes les heures, au nombre de deux, ou si les malades se trouvaient
trop mal pour avaler les bols, je leur donnais en boisson. Ce medicament, que
je regard comme un excellent sedatif et antiputride, est celui don't l'usage,
meme inconsidere, entraine le moins d'inconveniens. Je permettais aux malades
de sucer des tranches d'oranges douces, et pendant le premier periode il etait
rare qu'ils pr^slent d'autre nourriture que des cremes de riz ou d'orge.

Lorsque la violence des symtomes etait calmee et que le malade etait parvenu a
son second periode, qui arrivait plus ou moins promptement, je m'attachais a
etudier quel moyens la nature semblait prendre pour se debarrasser de l'humeur
morbifique qui l'opprimait, et je cherchais ce qui me paraissait le plus propre
a la seconder.

Souvent j'employais les bouillons de veau ou de volaille, des cremes de riz,
des panades, du vin de Bordeaux, sucre* enfin des cordiaux plus forts si le cas
l'exigeait; et si la nature me paraissait disposee a agir elle-meme, alors je
me gardais bien de la troubler en voulant la fortifier; je ne cherchais qu'a la
seconder lorsque je la voyais chancelante et faible. Quelque fois le mal
prenait le dessus et triomphait des efforts que la nature faisait pour se
debarrasser; alors le pouls devenait petit et quelque fois convulsif, c'est
dans ce cas que j'avais recours aux vesicatoires. J'insistais sur l'usage des
potions nitrees, afin de diminuer l'actions des cantarides sur la vessie.
Souvent je me voyais contraint de donner les cordiaux les plus puissans, pour
ranimer l'action des solides. Lorsque les vesicatoires remplissaient le but que
je m'etais propose, et que seules ou aidees des cordiaux, ils remontaient le
ton, qu'enfin l'humeur se portait verse les parties ou ils etaient appliques, la
malady se terminait assez ordinairement sans d'autres crises que l^
^uppuration que j'avais grand soin d'entretenir autant qu'elle me paraissait
necessaire; car si l'humeur venait a refluer dans l'interieur, ainsi que j'ai
eu occasion de l'observer; dans ce cas les vesicatoires se couvraient d'un
escare gangreneux et sec; le pouls devenait petit et concentre; le malade avait
quelque fois les extremites froides et la respiration laborieuse. Les auteurs
ont prescrit dans de pareilles circonstances de remettre de nouvelles
cantharides sur les vesicatoires, mais l'experience m'a appris combien cette
pratique etait sujette a produire des effets pernicieux, aussi ne l'ai-je point
suivie. E^ effet, dans un cas pareil l'action des mouches crispe l'embouchure
des vaisseaux sur lesquels else sont appliquees: ceux-ci etant deja prives de
la liqueur qu'ils avaient ^ournie lors de la premiere application, leur calibre
se trouve ressere dans une plus grande etendue, par l'action caustique des
mouches, le fluide qui s'y trouve contenu reflue dans la mass, y produit des
desordres, et l'escare qui existait deja, s'epaissit d'autant plus que la
crispation a ete plus grande. J'ai toujours prefere, et avec succes, de fair
panser les vesicatoires avec l'onguent de styrax. Je faisais prendre en
meme-temps au malade, une forte decoction de quina, que je rendais cordiale
dans quelques circonstances, par l'addition de l'eau de canelle, ou autre chose
semblable: si le cas devenait pressant, alors je faisais appliquer de nouveaux
vesicatoires, mais non pas dans le meme endroit. Dans le premier cas, lorsque
le malade ne rejetait pas la decoction de quina, j'etais presque assure que le
premier pansement laissait appercevoir un commencement de separation des
escares gangreneux, peu a peu else se detachaient et finissaient par tomber
entierement. Il est bon d'observer que, dans ce cas, la supuration vient
tres-abondante, et qu'il est tres-necessaire de la faciliter, car elle termine
souvent la malady. Si des indications pressantes exigeaient des purgatifs, je
les donnais a petite dose en les reiterant. Une forte purgation aurait fait
surement tarir la supuration en l'attirant dans l'interieur et aurait fait
perir le malade. Si la matiere de la supuration n'etait pas belle, j'insistais
sur l'usage du quina. Quelque fois la supuration rongeait les parties et
formait des ulceres qui prenaient diverse caracteres, ce qui me determinait
d'autant plus a entretenir l'ecouleme^^^^ je m'attachais a corriger le vice
interne et j'aidais la nature a se debarrasser; enfin j'avais recours aux
purgatifs plus ou moins nombreux lorsque les vesicatoires se tarissaient
d'eux-memes.

D'apres ce que je viens de dire, on voit que les vesicatoires produisaient une
crise artificielle; j'ai rencontre plusieurs cas ou la nature en produisait de
meill^ures, quoique tres-rarement dans l'epidemie don't il est ici question.
J'ai quelque fois remarque que l'humeur morbifique se portait sur tells ou
tells parties et y produisait des ravagesplus ou moins considerables, comme la
gangrene, des depots, etc. Quelque fois aussi cette meme humeur se dissipait
par les urines, par une hemoragie et par des diarrhees. Je n'ai jamais vu de
crises s'operer par les sueurs, dans cette epidemie, et les crises don't je
viens de parler, ont presque toujours ete imparsaites.

Lorsque l'humeur morbifique se portait verse quelques parties peu essentielles
a la vie, je favorisais les vues de la nature, en augmentant ou en soutenant
ses forces, et en diminuant les resistances exterieures; pour cette effet, je
faisais usage des relach^ns, soit en fomentation, soit en form de cataplasme.
Ces ^ortes de crises ont ete ^ort rares; je n'ai vu qu'une seule fois une
parotide en supuration: le malade en a gueri; mais il a fallu y apporter
beaucoup de soins et les plus grandes precautions.

Quelque fois le venin, en se portant verse une party, y detruisait le principe
vital, et y produisait la gangrene, et le malade ne guerissait qu'autant que la
party affectee pouvait contenir la totalite de l'humeur, et me permettait par
son etendue et sa structure, d'emporter avec l'instrument tranchant la portion
gangrenee.

Les urines, comme je l'ai deja dit, etaient une voie don't la nature se servait
pour se debarrasser; mais j'ai vu rarement que ce moyen (...) ete entierement
efficace malgre les soins que je pre^^is a employer les diuretiques.

J'ai vu quelques hemoragies critiques. Les femmes don't l'evacuation periodique
arrivait dans le temps de la crise, ont generalement gueries, L'hemoragie
nazale a opere de bons effets, mais il est rare que seule elle ait produit une
bonne crise* si cette hemoragie etait symptomatique et qu'elle se joignait avec
celle de a bouche, le malade etait dans le plus grand danger. Ces hemoragies
m'ont toujours parues etre l'indic^^de la dissolution dans les humeurs.

Je faisais alors usage des antiputrides, comme le camphre et le nitre, mais je
tirais un plus grand* avantage d'une forte decoction de quina acidulee: avec
Pesprit de vitriol. Je faisais prendre ce remede a forte dose. J'employais
aussi le bouillon dans lequel je faisais dissoudre chaque fois un demi gros de
gomme adragante, en poudre. J'ordonnais des cremes de riz, le jus d'oranges
douces; si le cas l'exigeait, je soutenais les forces du malade, par le vin
rouge, sucre, quelque fois par des potions cordiales; mais je n'usais jamais de
ce moyen qu'avec la plus grande circonspection. En effet, je devais empecher le
malade de tomber dans un etat de faiblesse, d'ou il ne se serait pas releve;
mais d'un autre cote je devais prendre guard a ne pas donner trop de ton, qui
necessairement aurait augmente l'hemoragie, alors funeste par elle-meme* et a
laquelle je ne pouvais opposer que des remedes internes et propres a donner de
la consistance aux humeurs, don't les causes de la malady avaient opere la
dissolution.

J'ai deja dit que les malades etaient fatigues par des ^ours de ventre de
differentes natures* En general ces dejections etait symptomatiques: lors
qu'elles etaient crues, sans odeur et abondantes, j'employais les cordiaux
meles avec les astringents; mais je ne faisais usage de ces remedes qu'avec la
plus grande circonspection, afin d'eviter le danger auquel aurait expose une
suppression subite de cette evacuation. J'avais pour but, en la diminuant, de
menager les forces du malade, afin de gagner du temps pour travailler a
detruire ou a neutraliser l'humeur morbifique, ou a l'attirer sur quelques
parties peu essentielles a la conservation de l'individu.

Si le course de ventre venait a se supprimer de luimeme, c'etait un accident
bien grave et qu'il fallait tacher de prevenir; car alors l'humeur se portait a
la tete, et produisait le coma qui etait suivi de la mort.

Les dejections de toute espece etaient precedees et accompagnees d'une douleur
et d'une pesanteur aux lombes. Lorsque cette douleur diminuait tout-a-coup, et
que la tete devenait douloureuse a son tour, ou que le mal, dans cette derniere
party, devenait plus fort apres la disparution de celle aux lombes, ce
changement annoncait que la matiere morbifique abandonnait les intestins et ^e
portait au cerveau. Verite don't l'experience m'a convaincue. En effet, j'ai
toujours vu, dans ce cas, que le malade, peu de temps apres, avait le delire;
le course de ventre ^e supprimait, le coma s'en suivait, le pouls devenait
concentre, petit et convulsif, et la mort ne tardait pas a terminer cette scene
tragique. Lorsque les malades venaient a l'hopital avec ces symptoms, mes
efforts ont toujours ete inutiles; mais s'ils etaient apportes assez a temps,
c'est a-dire avaunt que l'humeur se ^ut fixee a la tete, alors je faisais
appliquer les vesicatoires aux jambes et aux cuisses; l'irritation attirait
l'humeur sur ces parties; si la supuration devenait abondante, elle tenait lieu
de crise, et le malade guerissait.

Mais comme je l'ai deja dit, je n'ai pas souvent eu le bonheur de voir ces
malades assez a temps; on n^ les envoyait a l'hopital qu'a la derniere
excremite, long-temps apres que l'humeur avait fix son siege a la tete, et
lorsqu'il n'etait plus possible de l'attirer ailleurs. Cependant, comme il vaut
mieux tenter des moyens incertains, que de laisser un malade sans secours,
quelque desespere qu'il fut; j'essayais ces memes moyens, je faisais meme
appliquer des vesicatoires plus amples; j'y joignais les cordiaux, je les
faisais rechausser avec des briques chaudes, mises aux extre J'ai ete assez
heureux, par ces moyens, d'en sauver quelques uns qui auraient infailliblement
peris ^ans ces tentatives, et je dois avouer que ces succes, quoique rares,
m'ont dedommage du chagrin que je ressentais de ne pouvoir etre utile a
beaucoup d'autres, qui, j'ose le dire, n'ont peris que fault de soins et de
precautions.

Ce que je viens de dire me done lieu de conclure que l'apparition ou
l'augmentation des douleurs a la tete, lorsque celles d'une party quelconque
ou la malady s'etait fixee, disparaissent, mettent le malade dans le plus
grand danger. Ce qui peut s'appliquer par les memes douleurs, dans toutes les
parties essentielles de la vie.

Avaunt que de finir cette party de mes recherches, je ne puis me dispenser de
parler de l'usage d'un des plus puissans remedes que la medecin possede, et
pour ne pas m'ecarter de mon sujet, je vais prendre pour exemple les effets
qu'il produit dans la tete. Le mal de tete, ainsi que je l'ai observe et que je
viens de rapporter, augmentant au meme instant ou la douleur des lombes avait
disparue, annoncait le transport de l'humeur morbifique au cerveau. Si dans ce
cas, pour calmer les douleurs de tete et l'insomnie, j'eusse fait usage de
l'opium, 'j'aurais effectivement calm ces douleurs en procurant le sommeil;
mais qu'en serait-il resulte? J'aurais en meme-temps diminue les forces
organiques, et sur-tout celles du cerveau, et j'aurais favorise l'engo^gement
de cette party, verse laquelle la matiere morbifique avait une tendance a se
porter; alors plus de ressource; l'humeur une fois fixee, le malade doit perir.
Afin de render ce raisonnement plus sensible, qu'il me soit permis de fair une
comparaison* Je suppose deux hommes en querelle et aux prises; un ami officieux
arrive, ne trouve d'autre expedient pour les separer, que de lier les bras de
l'un pendant que l'autre continue a lui porter des coups: qu'arrivera til? Que
le service de l'ami est pernicieux a l'un des deux, mis horse du combat. Et
bien, le medecin qui administre l'opium, dans le cas cite, est precisement
l'ami officieux qui, aulieu de detourner un mal, pour le render moins
pernicieux, le fix dans une party don't il n'est presque plus possible de le
fair sortir.

Quoique je reconnaisse toute l'efficacite de l'opium, je pense qu'il est
absolument contraire et nuisible dans les fievres ardentes, malignes, putrides
et principalement dans le moment des crises.

Apres avoir present les moyens generaux que j'ai employe suivant que me
l'indiquaient les circonstances, je pass a quelques observations particulieres
qui prouveront a la fois, que cette malady etait des plus graves, mais qu'elle
n'etait pas contagieuse. Else metront aussi les connaisseurs a portee de juger
si ma pratique est fondee sur les principes de la medecin clinique.

PREMIERE OBSERVATION.
Un homme age de 30 a 38 ans, de taille moyenne, d'un temperament billieux,
barbe et cheveux noirs, est enter a l'hopital Bush-hill, le 29 Septembre 1793;
il ne put me dire depuis combien de jours il etait malade; mais j'appris que
les premier et second jours de sa fievre, il avait pris une dose de poudres
drastiques, composees de calomel et de jalap.

La langue et les levres etaient noires et fort arides la respiration penible,
et les extremites froides. It vomissait avec effort tout ce qu'il prenait: son
ventre etait douloureux et dur: les muscles de l'abdomen se trouvaient dans un
etat de contraction qui rendait le ventre applati et rapproche de la colonne
vertebrale; les matieres qu'il rendait par des selles, etaient noires, infectes
et melees de sang; les urines en petite quantite, aussi noires et fetides;
enfin son pouls etait concentre et les tendons avaient des mouvemens convulsifs.

Je lui fis apposer les vesicatoires; je fis mettre des briques chaudes a
toutes les extremites; j'effayai de de lui fair avaler quelques remedes; mais
le tout en vain. La nature etait tellement affaiblie, que l'art ^e pouvait plus
la ranimer. Le malade mourut dans la nuit du premier Octobre. Le 2 je fis
l'ouverture de son cadavre, et je trouvai:

Les membranes du cerveau dans l'etat naturel; les sinus de la dure-mere,
contenant tres-peu de sang, noir; le cerveau ferme; la substance corticale,
moins rouge qu'elle aurait du etre; la medullaire plus blanch; l'artere
calleu^e, et le plexus choroide decolore et presque blanc; les ventricules ne
contenant presque point de serosite.

Les poulmons dans l'etat naturel; tres-peu de serosite dans le pericarde; le
coeur fletri et ride, ne contenant absolument rie^, pale, ayant l'air d'avoir
ete lave, et d'une consistance molasse.

L'estomac un peu ressere sur lui-meme; ^on epaisseur double de ce qu'elle
aurait du etre; la membrane interne en party detruite; les lambeaux qui en
restaient, rouges et enflammes; le duodenum et presque tout le canal intestinal
dans le meme etat: ce qui restait de membrane interne, se colorant en noir a
mesure que j'approchais des gros intestins; le canal tapisse d'une matiere
noire, glaireuse sanguinolente et d'une odeur setide; le foie, la vesicule du
fiel, le pancreas, les reins dans un etat naturel; le mesentere livide du cote
de la colonne vertebrale, ses deux feuillets ecartes dans cette party formant
une poche pleine de sang noir: le sang des veins cave et port de la meme
couleur; enfin la vessie contractee contenant un peu d'urine noire et fetide,
et la membrane interne parsemee de taches brunes.

SECOND OBSERVATION.
Le premier Octobre on apporta a l'hopital, un homme age d'environ 33 ans; il
etait ^ans connaissance, froid et presque sans pouls: sa bouche etait a demi
ouverte et pleine d'un sang, noir; sa respiration etait petite, prompte et
entrecoupee; son corpse, d'une couleur jaune foncee. Les persons qui
l'accompagnaient me firent dire, en reponse a mes questions, qu'il etait malade
depuis quelques jours, sans en fixer le nombre: mais ils me dirent qu'il avait
pris plusieurs medecines en poudre, de la meme nature que celles du precedent.

Tous les moyens que je mis en usage, pour ranimer les forces vitales, furent
inutiles: le malade mourut pendant la nuit.

Le 2, je fis l'ouverture de son cadavre: la tete ^e m'offrit rien de plus que
dans l'observation precedente.

Les poulmons me parurent dans l'etat naturel, a quelques adherences pres, mais
qui etaient anciennes, et qui se trouvaient enter la plevre et le poulmon droit.

Le pericarde contenant un peu de serosite, d'un Jaune fonce; le coeur etait
fletri et vide; l'oreillette droite pleine d'un sang tres-noir.

L'estomac que je trouvai d'une epaisseur plus que du double de son etat
ordinaire, contenait, ainsi que le canal intestinal, du sang noir, et de la
bile, aussi noire, tantot meles ensemble, tantot separes: la membrane interne
de toutes ces parties etait presqu'entierement detruite; le peu qui en restait
s'est trouve absolument gangrene, detache et flottant dans ces matieres. Le
mesentere etait enflamme du cote des intestins; les glandes en etaient
tres-engorgees et noires: il contenait du pus jaune enter ses deux feuillets,
du cote de la colonne vertebrale. La vesicule du fi^l etait vide; le foie, la
rate et les reins dans l'etat naturel; le pancreas dur et enflamme avait a peu
pres le double de son volume naturel. L'urine etait noir et fetide, et la
membrane interne de la vessie etait gangrenee.

TROISIEME OBSERVATION.
Un homme age d'environ 34 ans, d'un temperament sanguin et robuste, qui avait
l'habitude de s'enivrer, tomba malade le 11 Octobre, a la suite d'une debauche
dans laquelle il avait bu de l'eau-de-vie a l'exces. Je le vis a l'hopital le
premier jour de sa malady: il avait une chaleur brulante; sa peau etait seche
et aride; sa figure d'un rouge cramoisi; ses yeux etincellans. Il etait
extremement altere; sa langue, tres-seche, etait couverte d'un limon d'un jaune
clair; sa respiration elevee et genee: il vomissait, avec des efforts
considerables, de la bile verte et jaune* son pouls etait dur et serre; il se
plaignait de douleurs a la region epigastrique et a la tete.

Je le fis saigner au bras j'ordonnai des lavemens faits avec une decoction de
grains de lin; un bain et de la limonade nitree: l'apres mid^, les symptoms
n'ayant pas diminues, je le fis saigner de nouveau.

Le lendemain, qui etait son second jour, je le fis saigner deux fois et lui
prescrivis les memes remedes, mais il vomit toute espece de boissons.

Le troisieme jour il ressentit des lassitudes: son poul's devint intermittent,
ses yeux se colorerent de jaune, ainsi que sa peau: ses selles etaient des
glaires melees de sang: le ventre n'etait ni tendu ni douloureux; le peu
d'urines qu'il rendait etaient sanguinolentes, enfin il vomissait des matieres
glaireuses, vertes et jaunes, melees de sang.

Dans cet etat facheux, je lui fis donner de l'eau acidulee avec l'esprit de
nitre dulcifie, et je donnai order en meme-temps de changer de boisson a sa vo,
^onte. On lui donna toutes celles qu'il desira; mais il vomissait tout
aussitot, et rien ne pouvait rester dans. son estomac.

Le quatrieme il eprouva des faiblesses: tout le corpse etait d'un jaune fonce;
les extremites devinrent froides; le pouls fut petit et intermittent; la
respirationse gena de plus en plus; les selles. etaient toujours melees de
glaires sanguinolentes, et les forces allerent en decroissant. Enfin il mourut
le 15 Octobre au matin, entrant dans son cinquieme jour. Il conserva sa
connaissance jusqu'au dernier moment.

Par l'ouverture de son cadavre, je trouvai que la serosite contenue dans les
ventricules du cerveau etait tres-jaune. Le rest de la tete ne m'offrit rien
de remarquable.

Les poulmons etaient couverts de taches noires a l'exterieur: lorsque je les
divisai, je les trouvai gorges d'un sang noir et ecumeux: l'humeur pericardine
etait jaune: le coeur absolument vide: l'oreillette droite contenait du sang
noir.

L'estomac distendu par l'air qu'il contenait, avait plus que le double de son
epaisseur naturelle et renfermait des caillots de sang noir: la membrane
interne etait enflammee, mais inegalement: le rouge etait plus ou moins vif par
interval; celle du duodenum et de tous les autres intestins etait dans le meme
etat: des caillots de sang noir et des glaires de la meme couleur tapissaient
le canal intestinal: les vaisseaux du mesentere etaient tres-engorges et
contenaient aussi du sang noir.

La vessie renfermait un peu d'urine sanguinolente: la membrane interne etait
tres-enflammee.

QUATRIEME OBSERVATION.
Le 15 Octobre, je vis a l'hopital un jeune homme age d'environ 26 ans. Il
etait enter la veille au soir. Il etait malade depuis cinq jours, pendant
lesquels il avait pris trois prises de poudres drastiques, composees de jalap
et de calomel. Son temperament etait billieux: il etait d'une petite taille et
avait les cheveux chatains.

Il avait beaucoup de fievre; sa peau etait brulante; sa respiration genee; sa
langue seche et tres-rouge: il etait tres-altere et faisait des efforts pour
vomir: son ventre etait tres-douloureux: il allait a la garde-robe et ne
rendait que du sang pur; son pouls etait dur et press; il rendait avec douleur
quelques gouttes d'urine d'un rouge fonce.

Je lui ordonnai de la limonade nitree, une emulsion simple, des lavemens
emoliens, des cataplasmes sur le ventre, et je le fis saigner trois fois dans
la journee.

Le 16, je n'appercus d'autre changement que des faiblesses qu'il ressentait en
allant a la garde-robe: tout ce qu'il prenait etait a l'instant vomi avec des
efforts douloureux: les boissons ressortaient de son estomac, melees de sang.
J'essayai envain differens moyens pour appaiser ces vomissemens. Tant qu'il
vecut il se trouva dans une agitation continuelle, et voulait se coucher par
terre; il avait, disait-il, un feu qui le brulait interieurement. Cet etat
d'agitation se termina par des faiblesses qui l'emporterent le 18, a la fin de
son septieme jour.

A l'ouverture de son cadavre je fis les observations suivantes: le plexus
choroide n'etait pas si color que dans l'etat naturel; le cerveau etait ferme
et les ventricules sans serosite. Le sinus de la dure-mere contenait tres-peu
de sang d'un rouge brun.

Le poulmon droit s'est trouve tres-enflamme: le gauche etait dans son etat
naturel: point de serosite dans le pericarde. Le coeur etait vide; l'oreillette
droite contenait un caillot de sang qui n'etait point adherent; en le retirant
j'en vis un autre qui lui etait contigu et qui venait de la vein cave
inferieure, (...) avait trois pouces de long, etait de deux couleurs; la party
qui repondait a la paroi anterieure de l'oreillette etait blanch et
ressemblait a la couenne du sang des plevretiques. Le rest, ainsi que ce qui
sortait de la vein cave etait d'un rouge brun.

L'estomac contenait du sang, ainsi que les intestins. La membrane interne
etait tres-enflammee; je trouvai le pilore gangrene, et les intestins parsemes
de points inflammatoires et gangreneux; le mesentere etait enflamme; le foie
bleuatre, et l'exterieur etait gorge d'un sang tres-brun; la rate m'a paru dans
son etat naturel; le pancreas etait dur et enflamme; la vessie, que je trouvai
dans son etat naturel, contenait un peu d'urine tres-rouge.

CINQUIEME OBSERVATION.
Une femme agee d'environ 34 ans, robuste, d'un temperament sanguin et malade
depuis six jours, entra a l'hopital le 15 Octobre. Elle me dit que, dans les
premiers jours de sa malady, elle avait pris deux doses de poudres drastiques
qui ne l'avaient pas purgee. S^ figure etait tres-rouge; elle etait violemment
oppressee; son pouls intermittent, dur et serre; sa langue rouge et seche. Elle
etait singulierement alteree; sa peau etaient brulante: elle ressentait a
l'hypocondre droit une douleur avec tension; elle avait des inquietudes et ne
pouvait rester a la meme place. Je la fis saigner du bras et lui ordonnai de la
limonade acidulee avec l'esprit de nitre dulcifie: je prescrivis aussi des
lavemens emoliens et un bain.

L'aprees-midi, les memes symptoms existaient: le sang que je lui avais fait
tirer etait absolument sans serosite. J'ordonnai une second saignee, qui ne
put avoir lieu, a cause d'une extreme faiblesse qui lui prit au moment ou le
chirurgien allait lui ouvrir la vein: on eut meme beaucoup de peine a la fair
rev^nir de cet etat, qui reparaissait chaque fois qu'elle se soulevait pour
prendre quelques boissons. Le 16 je la trouvai sans connaissance, et elle
mourut bientot apres. Le 17 je fis l'ouverture de son cadavre et j'y trouvai:

Le sinus de la dure-mere plein de sang, de couleur naturelle; tous les
vaisseaux du cerveau dans le meme etat: le plexus choroide engorge et
tres-rouge; point de serosite dans les ventricules du cerveau: les substances
de ce vicere me parurent dans leur etat naturel.

En levant les tegumens de la poitrine, je trouvai beaucoup de sang epanche
sous le muscle grand pectoral droit, il provenait de l'artere mammaire interne,
qui avait ete dechiree par la violence du sang qui s'etait extravase derriere
le sternum, avait ecarte les muscles intercostaux enter la troisieme et la
quatrieme des vraies cotes, et s'etait repandu comme je l'ai dit, sans penetrer
dans la poitrine, c'est-a-dire an dehors de la plevre; l'interieur de la
poitrine etait rempl^ de sang ^^ille; les poulmons en etait gorges comme des
eponges, et avaient des crevasses par oil s'etait epanche le sang qui
remplissait la poitrine.

Je trouvai le foie plus volumineux d'un tiers qu'il ne devait etre; une
elevation dans la party moyenne et superieure du grand lobe, m'indiquant
l'endroit d'un depot, j'y enfoncai le scalpel, il en sortit une pint de pus
sanguinolent: tous les autres visceres etaient dans leur etat naturel.

SIXIEME OBSERVATION.
Un homme d'environ 50 ans, d'un temperament billieux, barbe et cheveux gris,
entra a l'hopital le 29 octobre; il me dit que depuis plusieurs semaines
auparavant il etait tres-faible, son pouls etait lent et pres que dans l'etat
naturel. Il dit qu'il avait besoin de nourriture et desira d'avoir a manger je
lui fis donner du bouillon, de la soupe, et pour tisanne, du vin de Bordeaux,
coupe avec de l'eau. Il est rest trois jours dans le meme etat, et, a la
faiblesse pres, il avait l'air de jouir de la meilleur sante; rien, disait-il,
ne lui faisait mal.

Le 31 il fut oppress; ses yeux devinrent jaunes; il toussa beaucoup; son
pouls etait faible: je lui prescrivis un lok compose d'eau, de miel, d'oximel
scyllitique, et pour boisson ordinaire, de l'eau miellee.

Le premier Novembre tout son corpse devint jaune; son nez ^aig^a; sa langue se
couvrit de sang: il en cracha beaucoup dans l'apres-midi; sa respiration devint
penibe et ses extremites froides. Ses urines etaient noires ainsi que la bile
qu'il vomit; son pouls devint intermittent: il eut des palpitations qui
l'incommodaient beaucoup.

Je lui prescrivis une decoction de quina acidule avec de l'esprit de vitriol,
une potion camphree et cordiale, et du vin sucre, pour lui etre done par
cuilerees.

Le 2 il fut plus mal: aux symptoms de la veille se joignirent des selles
noires et sanguinolentes; il vomit tres-frequemment: ses forces diminuerent
insensiblement et il mourut le 3 a^ matin. L'apres-midi j'ouvris son cadavre
qui etait d'un jaune fonce, parseme de taches gangreneuses; sa bouche etait
pleine d'un sang noir, et il repandait une tres-mauvaise odeur.

Je ne trouvai point de sang dans le sinus de la dure^mere; les vaisseaux du
cerveau etaient decolores; la serosite des ventricules etait jaune et le
cerveau ferme.

Les poulmons entierement fletris et gangrenes du ete de la colonne vertebrale
s'ecrasaient enter me^ doigts et repandaient une odeur infecte. Le pericarce
contenait un peu de serosi e jaune; le coeur etait d'un volume extraordinaire
et presque do double de celui de l'homme le plus fort: il avait l'air d'avoir
ete lave, et ne contenait pas une goutte de sang: l'oreillette droite etait
distendue: apres l'avoir divisee, il en sort^^ un corpse qui n'etait point
adherent, semblable au t^ssit cellullaire, graisseux par sa consistance par sa
couleur^ jaune, ainsi que l'etait la graisse sous les tegumens du has ventre.
Cecorps pesait trois onces et quelques grains.

Je trouvai le foie dans l'etat naturel: la vesicule du fiel contenait tres-peu
de bile: la rate noire, molle et s'ecrasant enter mes doigts commee une gelee:
l'estomac contenait, ainsi que les intestins, des matieres noires, melees de
sang; la membrane interne etait enflammee: celle du deodenum davantage, et
celle des intestins gangrenee; le mesentere, du cote de la colonne vertebrale,
etait livide: la vessie contenait de l'urine noire.

SEPTIEME OBSERVATION.
Le 27 Octobre, on apporta a l'hopital un homme age d'enviror 38 ans: il etait
fans connaissance, presque sane poul^, froid, sa bouche a demi ouverte, ses
yeux jaunes, ouverte et fixes.

Je lui fis appliquer de larges vesicatoires aux jambes, et des briques chaudes
aux extremites: j'ordonnai une potion cordiale au cas qu'il fut en etat de
l'avaler. Tous ces moyens reunis opererent insensiblement. Le 30 il recouvra la
parole et la connaissance; il me dit qu'il etait malade depuis huit jours
lorsqu'on le porta a l'hopital; je le trouvai assez bien pour esperer de le
guerir; en consequence je le fis transp^^ter de la salle des agonisans ou il
avait ete mis, dans une autre salle.

Le 2, il refusa de prendre la decoction de quina que je lui avais prescrit; il
prit la creme de riz et les boissons: il continua d'aller assez bien jusqu'au
5, jour ou son pouls devint petit et concentre; les vesicatoires se secherent;
les extremites devinrent froides et livides.

Je le remis a l'usage de la decoction de quina et d'une potion anti-putride et
cordiale: je fis panser les vesicatoires avec l'onguent stirax; on fomenta les
extremites; mais tout fut inutile: la gangrene faisait chaque jour de nouveaux
progres. Les escares des vesicatoires tomberent. Le 8, la supuration se
retablit: le malade prenait tout ce qu'on lui donnait: il faisait bien toutes
ses fonctions, et n'eprouvait, a ce qu'il disait, aucune douleur. II conserva
sa connaissance j'usqu'au II, jour ou il retomba dans l'affaissement: son pouls
devint intermittent et a peine sensible; il rendait une odeur infecte: l'air
qui sortait de ses poulmons etait froid et puant, il devint au point de ne
pouvoir plus rien avaler. Il avait des soubre-sauts dans les tendons, des
mouvemens convulsifs dans les muscles fronteaux, et il mourut le 12 au matin.
L'apres midi je l'ouvris et je trouvai:

Du sang noir dans le sinus de la dure mere: le rest etait dans l'etat naturel.

Les populmons gangrenes: le coeur fletri, d'une consistance molle et contenant
du sang noir.

L'estomac et tous les visceres du bas ventre me parurent dans leur etat
naturel.

La gangrene des extremites inferieures s'etendait jusqu'a mi-jambe: celle des
mains n'avait pas depasse les secondes phalanges des doigts; l'une et l'autre
p^^etraient jusqu'aux os.

HUITIEME OBSERVATION.
Le 17 Novembre, je vis un jeune homme d'environ vingt-cinq ans: il etait a
l'hopital de la veille au soir Il me dit qu'il etait malade depuis cinq jours.
Il avait une forte fievre; sa peau etait brulante au tronc, et ses extremites
n'avaient qu'une chaleur ordinaire. Il se plaignait d'un feu interne qui le
brulait; il etait altere: sa langue et ses levres etaient noires et seches: sa
respiration laborieuse et frequente: l'air qui sortait de ses poulmons etait
d'une chaleur considerable: il avait les yeux tres jaunes, la figure livide et
decharnee; il rendait frequemment par les selles des matieres jaunes,
glaireuses et ecumeuses; ses urines etaient rouges: il vomissait toute espece
de boissons: son etat empira et il mourut le 19, le septieme jour de sa
malady. Le 20 je fis l'ouverture de son cadavre: les poulmons etaient taches
de noir et de rouge: le pericarde contenait un peu de serosite jaune, et j'ai
trouve dans le coeur du sang d'un rouge pale.

Le foie avait la couleur d'un verd d'olive, tant exterieurement
qu'interieurement: la vesicule du fie etait d'un volume extraordinaire: elle
flottait dans le bas-ventre, et s'etendant jusqu'a la party inferieure de la
region iliaque: elle avait la couleur du marbre noir: je l'ai enlevee avec
precaution, et je l'ai pesee avec la bile qu'elle contenait; j'ai trouve douze
onces trois gros, ou quatre-vingt dix-neuf gros. Le bile mise dans un vase
avait la couleur d'un gros verd noir, et la consistance du blanc d'oeuf.

La rate etait dure a l'exterieur: l'interieur ressemblait a de la conserve de
rose, rouge, par la consistance. et par la couleur: l'estomac etait reserre et
ne contenait rien: la membrane interne etait legerement enflammee: celle du
duodenum etait dans le meme etat: les intestins contenaient des matieres
glaireuses, jaunes et mousseuses: la membrane interne avait de legeres taches
d'inflammation: le pancreas etait dur, rouge et un peu plus gros que dans
l'etat naturel: La membrane interne de la vessie etait enflammee: les urines
extremement rouges: le mesentaire et l'epiploon ne contenant point de graisse.

NEUVIEME OBSERVATION.
Une femme d'environ 28 ans, robuste, d'un temperament sanguin, entra a
l'hopital le 30 Septembre; il y avait deux jours qu'elle avait la fievre: sa
respiration etait petite, frequente et chaude: son pouls dur et sec: son visage
rouge; ses yeux larmoyans et brillans; sa peau seche et brulante. Elle avait
des douleurs a la tete, et a la region epigastrique; ses urines etaient rares
et tres-rouges: elle vomissait des glaires blanches et d'une acidite si forte
qu'elle avait les dents agacees; sa langue etait rouge et seche: elle etait
tres-alteree. Je lui prescrivis une saignee du bras que je fis reiterer;
l'apres-midi elle prit un bain. Je lui donnai pour boisson, de l'eau melee avec
de l'alkali volatile concret, don't je faisais mettre dix grains dans chaque
bouteille, et deux onces de sirop simple.

Le lendemain, qui etait son troisieme jour, elle fut tourmentee par les memes
symptoms que la veille et par un mal-aise general qui l'obligeait de changer
de place a chaque instant. Je lui fis continuer les memes remedes, auxquels
j'ajoutai dix grains de sell de tartre avec du jus de citron, pour etre pris au
moment de l'effervescence. Ce remede devait etre reitere deux fois dans la
journee, et elle devait prendre toutes les demi-heures un bol compose d'un
grain de camphre et de trois grains de nitre.

L'apres-midi elle se trouva moins agitee: son pouls etait un peu developpe: le
vomissement et la douleur de la region epigastrique avaient disparus a midi; sa
langue etait humide et un peu blanch: elle se plaignait d'une forte douleur
aux lombes: je lui continuai les bols et l'eau alkalisee.

Le quatrieme jour au matin, elle avait la langue d'un blanc sale, la bouche
pateuse. Elle avait rendu deux fois, par les selles, des matieres bilieuses,
jaunes et vertes. Je prescrivis une demi once de creme de tartre et deux grains
d'emetique, dans une livre d'eau, pour etre pris en trois doses, a une heure de
distance, en observant de ne pas donner la second ou la troisieme, au cas que
la premiere ou la second eut opere deux ou trois vomissemens.

L'apres-midi je la trouvai sans fievre, la peau humide. Elle avait pris la
totalite du remede, et avait vomi cinq fois des glaires blanchatres, melees de
bile verte: elle avait ete huit fois a la ^elle. Je lui fis donner un bouillon
fort, une creme de riz pour le soir. Comme elle avait ete privee du sommeil
depuis qu'elle etait tombee malade, j ordonnai un julep avec quinze gouttes de
laudanum liquide, quatre onces d'eau commune et one once de sirop simple.

Le cinquieme jour se passa sans fievre: elle prit de la creme de riz, but de
la tisanne ordinaire, et le lendemain je la purgeai. Le septieme se passa
egalement sans fievre. Le huitieme elle fut repurgee, et l'apresmidi je
l'envoyai aux convalescens, ou elle s'est bien remise. Elle est sortie de
l'hopital jouissant d'une parfaite sante.

DIXIEME OBSERVATION.
Le 30 Septembre je vis a l'hopital un jeune homme d'environ 20 ans; d'un
temperament sanguin: il etait malade depuis deux jours et avait ete saigne chez
lui. Sa respiration etait haute, son pouls vif et press, son visage enflamme,
ses yeux brillans, sa peau seche et brulante; il avait des douleurs aux
precoeurs, a la tete sa langue etait rouge, seche; il etait altere et vomissait
avec efforts des matieres jaunes. Depuis plusieurs jours il etait constipe: ses
urines etaient rouges et peu abondantes.

Je lui prescrivis un bain, des lavemens emoliens, de l'eau acidulee avec l'air
fix, pour boisson ordinaire et des bols avec le camphre et le nitre.

Le lendemain, son troisieme jour, les symptoms se trouvant les memes, il
continua les memes remedes.

Le quatrieme tous les symptoms avaient diminues sa langue etait chargee et
humide: il avait la bouche mauvaise; il ne vomissait plus depuis la nuit, son
ventre etait tendu, sans etre douloureux. Je lui fis prendre une once de creme
de tartre dans de l'eau et du sirop. Ce remede produisit cinq a six evacuations
de matieres glaireuses et blanches. L'apres-midi il prit plusieurs bouillons.

Le cinquieme jour il fut agite; il changeait de position a chaque instant:
tous les symptoms du trois, (...) parurent avec la meme violence: il continua
les memes remedes.

Le sixieme jour il etait tres fatigue; il n'avait point dormi: il ne vomissait
plus: il avait une douleur aux lombes; celle de la tete et des precoeurs avait
disparue; ^on ventre etait tendu sans etre douloureux.

Le septieme jour fut tres-orageux; il vomit de la bile verte et jaune, et
presque toutes les boissons: il se trouva fort agite; son ventre etait
douloureux: le mal de tete revint: sa respiration etait petite et frequente;
son pouls, moins vif, annoncait un etat prochain de faiblesse.

L'apres-midi il fut a la garde-robe et rendit des glaires blanchatres et
jaunes: le mal de tete et les vomissemens disparurent: la respiration devint
plus facile, ce qui me determina a ne pas employer les vesicatoires. J'ordonnai
du vin sucre et des cremes de riz pour soutenir ses forces.

Le huitieme jour il se trouva fort accable; je lui fis donner pour boisson
ordinaire du vin et de l'eau: il prit aussi du vin sucre et des cremes de riz.

Le neuvieme jour il fut tres-agite son ventre etait gonfle et douloureux: il
vomissait toutes les boissons: sa respiration etait tres-genee: verse les deux
heures apres-midi il se declara un course de ventre sanguinolent, glaireux et
infecte: alors le vomissement disparut, la respiration devint libre, et
quoiqu'il allat souvent a la selle, il etait moins faible que le matin.

Le dixieme jour le course de ventre continua.

Le onzieme il devint plus considerable; mais l'enfluredu ventre diminua: le
pouls devint ondulant, et la peau humide.

Les douze et treizieme se passerent assez bien; le course de ventre fut moins
considerable; la langue etait. upaisse et d'un blanc sale.

Le quatorzieme jour il etait sans fievre; je le purgeai avec trois gros de
rhubarbe et deux onces de manne. Cette medecin eut un assez bon effet, et
apres les deux premieres selles, le sang disparut tout-a-fait. La fievre ceda
egalement et ne revint plus. Le 16 il reprit une pareille medecin et je
l'envoyai le 17 parmi les convalescens, d'ou il est sorti bien portant.

ONZIEME OBSERVATION.
Le 17 Octobre on apporta a l'hopital un homme age d'environ 45 ans: il etait
sans connaissance; la bouche ouverte, la langue, les levres et les dents
noires; le corpse froid et presque sans pouls: la respiration etait petite et
rare. Je le fis mettre, en arrivant, dans la salle des agonisans. Je prescrivis
une potion cordiale et anti-putride, et j'ordonnai qu'on lui appliquat des
briques chaudes aux extremites: je lui fis aussi donner du vin sucre. Il resta
dans le meme etat jusqu'au 19, que je trouvai son pouls eleve. La connaissance
lui etait revenue; sa langue etait humide; il se plaignait d'une douleur aux
parties genitales, qui se trouvaient d'un volume considerable. Les testicules
et les cordons des vaisseaux spermatiques se trouvaient engorges, ce qui
rendait le scrotum tendu et luisant: il etait, de plus, couvert de taches
gangreneuses et de phlyctenes: la verge avait un volume quatre fois plus
considerable que dans l'etat naturel; la peau qui la recouvre etait comme celle
du scrotum; le prepuce formait un phimosis.

Je lui fis donner une forte decoction de quina acidulee avec l'esprit de
nitre, pour prendre un quart de verre toutes les heures, avec une cuilleree, a
bouche, de potion camphree toutes les demi-heures: sa boisson ordinaire etait
de l'eau acidulee avec l'air fix, et sa nourriture, de la creme de riz. Un
cataplasme emolient et resolutif fut applique fur les parties genitales.

Le 20 je le trouvai assez bien, mais la gangrene etait decidee sur toute la
verge. Je fis des scarifications aussi profondes que le permettaient les
parties sur lesquelles agissait mon instrument: je fis animer les cataplasmes
avec de l'esprit de terebentine et l'esprit de vin camphre. Quant aux remedes
interieurs ils furent les memes.

Le 21 j'emportai tous les lambeaux forms par les incisions de la veille, et
cette party fut pansee avec l'onguent stirax: on mit le meme cataplasme que la
veille, sur les testicules. Le 22 la supuration commenca a s'etablir; a mesure
qu'elle augmentait, les autres parties se degorgerent et reprirent leur volume
naturel. Ce malade est sorti de l'hopital tres-bien portant: apres avoir fait
usage de l'eau acidulee avec l'air fix et de la decoction de quina pendant
long-temps. Des qu'il en discontinuait l'usage, la supuration devenait d'une
mauvaise qualite et la fievre reprenait. Sa guerison s'est terminee par
quelques purgatifs, pris a mesure que la supuration tarissait et que le
cicatrice se formait.

DOUZIEME OBSERVATION.
Le 3 Octobre, apres-midi, on apporta a l'hopital une jeune fille d'environ 12
ans. Elle me dit qu'elle etait malade depuis sept jours. Elle avait les yeux et
la peau tres jaunes; une hemoragie par le nez et par la bouche; la peau seche
et d'une chaleur acre; elle etait alteree; sa respiration etait entrecoupee et
son pouls press: les gouttes de sang qui tombaient sur les bords du vase,
paraissaient composees de petits globules distans les uns des autres.

Je lui fis prendre une potion camphree, de l'eau acidulee avec l'air fix pour
boisson ordinaire.

La chaleur de la peau diminua, mais les autres symptoms se laissaient encore
voir. J'ajoutai aux remedes de la veille, une decoction de quina acidulee avec
l'esprit de vitriol; et comme la malade etait tres-faible, j'ordonnai qu'on lui
donnat, dans la journee, quatre bou llons de veau, dans chacun desquels je fis
delayer demi-gros de gomme adragante en poudre; elle prit aussi quelques
cuillerees de vin rouge sucre.

Le 9 elle se plaignit d'un mal de gorge: je la fis gargariser avec un melange
d'eau d'oximel scylitique et de miel acidule avec l'esprit de vitriol.
L'hemoragie continua avec la meme force jusqu'au 13: ce jour elle fut plus
considerable. Le 14 elle disparut tout-a-fait, ainsi que les autres symptoms:
elle cessa les remedes et se porta de mieux en mieux: je la purgeai quelques
jours apres, et l'envoyai parmi les convalescens, d'ou elle est sortie
parfaitement retablie.

TREIZIEME OBSERVATION.
Le 27 Septembre on apporta a l'hopital une fille agee d'environ 26 ans, d'un
temperament pituiteux. Elle avait fait une malady depuis peu: la fievre
l'avait prise le matin; sa peau etait aride, sa langue et ses levres seches:
elle ressentait des lassitudes, des douleurs a la region epigastrique: sa
respiration etait difficile: elle etait alteree: ses urines ares, rouges et
cuisantes.

Je lui fis prendre une potion anti-putride et temperante, de l'eau acidulee
avec l'esprit de nitre dulcifie et edulcoree avec du sirop simple.

Le 2 elle devint jaune et vomit de la bile de diverses couleurs. Le 3 la
couleur jaune etait plus foncee: tous les symptoms des premier et second jours
s'etaient developpes avec violence: le vomissement la fatiguait beaucoup, et
afin d'en eviter les douleurs, elle refusait toutes sorts de boissons. Le soir
sa langue se couvrit de sang. Le 4 elle en rendit beaucoup par le nez et par a
bouche: elle etait d'une faiblesse considerable.

Le 5 son pouls etait petit, intermittent: elle perdait beaucoup de sang et se
trouvait tres-oppressee: les tendons avaient des mouvemens convulsifs. Je lui
fis mettre des vesicatoires aux jambes: je prescrivis une decoction de quina
acidulee avec l'esprit de vitriol, du vin sucre et du bouillon avec de la gomme
adragante, comme dans l'observation precedente. Le soir je la trouvai sans
connaissance et presque sans pouls: elle portait machinalement les mains a son
nez, qu'elle pincait: se barbouillait la figure avec le sang noir qui sortait
de sa bouche et de son nez; son visage etait entierement jaune; la bouche etait
a demi-ouverte, ainsique ses yeux; ce qui lui donnait l'air d'un spectre
hideux: ses extremites etaient froides: j'y fis appliquer des briques chaudes,
ainsi que sur les vesicatoires. J'ordonnai une potion cordiale, pour etre prise
par cuilleree, lorsqu'elle pourrait avaler.

Le 6 je la trouvai moins mal; elle avait une connaissance tres-imparfaite; ses
idees etaient diffuses; elle avalait machinalement ce qu'on lui mettait dans la
bouche: les vesicatoires qui avaient tres-bien pris, dor^ nerent beaucoup de
serosite: je la fis soutenir avec une decoction de quina cordialisee, du vin
sucre et du bouillon.

Le 7 elle tomba dans l'etat du 5; les vesicatoires etaient couverts d'escares
gangreneuses et seches: l'hemoragie continuait: je la trouvai dans un etat
desesperant: je la fis chauffer avec des briques comme le 5.

Les 8, 9 et 10 elle ne fut pas mieux; ce ne fut que le onzieme jour qu'elle
recouvra sa connaissance: les escares gangreneuses des vesicatoires tomberent,
et la supuration devint tres-abondante: je lui fis continuer l'usage de la
decoction de quina acidulee, jusqu'au 20, epoque ou l'hemoragie du nez et de la
bouche disparut. Elle fit aussi usage d'un gargarisme detersif, afin de
raffermir et netoyer l'interieur de sa bouche, qui etait excoriee et remplie de
petites ulceres: ses levres etaient gonflees et dans le meme etat. J'ai soutenu
ses forces et l'ai purgee, lorsque les vesicatoires ont taris. Je l'envoyai aux
convalescens et elle se retablit parfaitement.

QUATORZIEME OBSERVATION.
Le 3 Decembre je vis a l'hopital une femme agee d'environ 38 ans, robuste,
d'un temperament sanguin. Elle etait tombee malade la veille: elle avait des
douleurs a la tete et aux reins: sa figure etait rouge: sa respiration petite
et frequente: sa peau seche, d'une chaleur acre: sa langue aussi seche et
rouge: elle etait alteree: son pouls etait dur et sec: son ventre douloureux
sans tension. Je la fis saigner deux fois dans la journee; elle prit des
lavemens emoliens et but de l'eau de poulet nitree.

Le troisieme jour elle fut fatiguee par des inquietudes et des douleurs
generales; elle changeait de position a chaque instant: la fievre etait
tres-forte; ses urines rouges et rares. On continua l'eau de poulet: je
prescrivis, de plus, l'eau acidulee avec l'esprit de nitre dulcifie.

Le quatrieme je la trouvai mieux: sa langue etait humide et couverte d'un
limon blanchutre; sa bouche pateuse et amere: tous les symptoms d'irritation
paraissaient calmes. Je lui prescrivis demi-once de creme de tartre avec deux
grains d'emetique dans deux verres d'eau, pour etre pris en trois doses, a une
heure de distance: elle ne prit que les deux tiers de ce remede; vomit beaucoup
de bile verte et jaune avec des matieres glaireuses, et fut trois fois a la
selle: elle but un bouillon ledger et continua l'apres-midi l'eau de poulet et
l'eau acidulee avec l'esprit de nitre dulcifie; le ^oir elle prit un lavement.

Le cinquieme n'offrit pas de changement sensible. Le sixieme elle fut
oppressee au point qu'elle ne pouvait se tenir couchee: elle restait assise sur
son lit. Elle etait affaiblie par de frequentes selles de matieres liquides:
l'apres-midi son pouls devint petit et convulsif. Je lui fis appliquer des
vesicatoires aux jambes, et prescrivis une potion composee de quatre onces
d'eau commune, autant d'eau de rose, trente grains de cachou prepare, une once
et demi d'eau de canelle spiritueuse, et deux onces de sirop simple, pour etre
pris par cuillerees toutes les demi-heures.

Le septieme je la trouvai fatiguee et agitee: elle changeait de position a
chaque instant: tout ^on corpse etait douloureux (...) elle ressentait des
douleurs dans les os. L'oppression etait si extreme qu'elle etait forcee de se
tenir assise sur son lit: sa peau etait brulante: elle etait alteree et prenait
tout ce qu'on lui presentait. Ses urines etaient rouges et en petite qua^^tite:
elle avait des soubre-sauts dans les tendons, et tous les solides paraissaient
dans un etat d'irritation.

Je prescrivis une potion composee avec huit onces d'eau commune, vingt grains
de sell sedatif de Homberg, trente-cinq gouttes de liqueur minerale d'Offman, et
deux onces de sirop simple, pour etre prise par cuillerees a bouche toutes les
demi-heures. L'apres-midi, verse les quatre heures, je fis lever les
vesicatoires, qui rendirent beaucoup de serosite: la douleur des lombes avait
disparue: elle n'allait plus a la selle: sa figure etait rouge: elle avait un
violent mal de tete et etait oppressee: son nez commenca a saigner. Verse les
six heures du soir son pouls devint concentre: je lui fis donner du vin sucre:
a neuf heures du soir elle devint froide: je lui fis mettre des serviettes
chaudes aux extremites, et verse minuit je lui fis avaler quelques cuillerees
d'une potion cordiale qu'elle continua jusqu'au jour.

Le lendemain, son huitieme jour, fut tres-mauvais. La malade etait presque
sans pouls: j'etais oblige d'appuyer fortement pour en sentir les battemens:
ils etaient intermittens: des mouvemens convulsifs se faisaient appercevoir
dans les tendons: elle n'avait pas recouvre la chaleur: sa respiration etait
tres-laborieuse: l'hemoragie continuait avec force: la langue etait humide, et
la faiblesse extreme.

Je prescrivis une decoction de quatre onces de quin^^^^a rouge, en poudre,
dans une peinte d'eau: j'y fis ajouter vingt gouttes d'esprit de nitre. La
malade prit toutes les heures deux cuillerees a bouche de ce remede, et dans
l'interval je fis donner du vin rouge avec du sucre, du bouillon et quelques
cuillerees de creme d'orge.

Verse les onze heures so pouls se remonta: elle paraissait respirer avec moins
de peine: l'hemoragie du nez continuait avec force. A quatre heures apres-midi
elle tomba dans un etat de faiblesse pareille a celle qu'elle avait eprouvee le
matin: elle perdait beaucoup de sang, respirait avec difficulte; ses urines
etaient troubles et ressemblaient par la couleur, a de la forte biere: je les
fis garder dans des verres: else ne deposerent point: le pouls etait a peine
sensible; mais quoiqu'elle fut tres-faible, elle avait une parfaite
connaissance. Je fis panser les vesicatoires qui se trouverent secs et couverts
d'une escare gangreneuse: j'y fis mettre l'onguent stirax; j'insistai sur la
decoction de quina, le vin, le bouillon et les cremes d'orge.

Le neuvieme, au matin, je la trouvai mieux: elle n'etait point oppressee: elle
avait eu une faiblesse a quatre heures du matin; l'hemoragie avait ete
considerable toute la nuit, mais elle etait entierement disparue: son pouls se
remonta insensiblement; il devint ondulent: elle fut deux fois a la garde-robe
et rendit des matieres liees et puantes: ses urines furent abondantes; else
contenaient un nubecule suspendu, qui ne tomba pas au fond du verre: sa peau
etait humide, d'une chaleur naturelle et egale; elle ne souffrait point.

Je fis continuer les remedes et le regime de la veille. Le dix elle avait un
peu plus de force et se remuait aisement dans son lit: elle avait dormi pendant
la nuit: son pouls s'etait developpe; la fievre avait disparue; la chaleur
etait naturelle; les urines furent abondantes et tres-troubles: else
deposerent un sediment blanc, epais et abondant: les escares des vesicatoires
commencaient a se detacher. Je continuai les memes remedes. Le onzieme elle se
trouva bien, ayant dormi toute la nuit: sa langue etait chargee; elle avait la
bouche mauvaise: n'avait point ete a la guard* robe depuis le neuvieme jour. Je
lui fis donner trois gros de sell de glober et deux onces de manne, fondus dans
deux verres d'eau: elle prit ce remede en trois doses: il l'evacua beaucoup et
lui fis render des matieres bilieuses, glaireuses et d'une odeur infecte. Le
soir elle fut sans fievre et se trouva plus forte, malgre les abondantes
evacuations que la medecin avait provoquee.

Le douzieme se passa sans aucun accident; elle ne prit que de la nourriture;
le treizieme et le quatorzieme, les escares des vesicatoires se detacherent
entierement: la supuration devint abondante et a terminee la guerison. La
malade a ete purgee une fois seulement, apres que les vesicatoires ont ete
seches; elle n'a pas eu de rechuttes et s'est parfaitement retablie.

QUINZIEME OBSERVATION.
Un homme d'environ cinquante ans etait enter a l'hopital le 29 Septembre; il
avait le tetanos: ses machoires etaient si serrees, qu'il etait difficile
d'introduire enter ses dents le bout d'une cuillier afin de le fair boire. Son
etat empira; il devint entierement roide et courbe en arriere. Il refusait
constamment toute espece de remedes. Je le fis porter dans la chamdes
agonisans. Comme il voyait perir a ses cotes beauserious ^oup de malades,
victimes de l'epidemie, et aussitot remplaces par d'autres, il fit sans doubt
quelques reflections que lui suggera ce spectacle effrayant; il ^e determina des
ce moment a prendre quelques boissons. Comme mes visites etaient aussi
frequentes dans cette salle que dans les autres, je m'appercus de ce
changement, et prenant un peu d'espoir, je lui prescrivis les remedes analogues
a son etat; il se preta a les prendre, et s'en trouva si bien, qu'il ne tarda
pas a se sentir soulage: la deglutition devint libre, et peu a peu la malady
ceda: au bout de quarante-cinq jours il fut en etat de se tenir assi. Je le fis
changer de salle, et quoiqu'il ^ut toujours a cote des epidemiques, les progres
de sa guerison n'en furent pas pour cela plus rallentis. Il s'est parfaitement
retabli, et le 19 Novembre il sortit de l'hopital plus fort et plus frais
qu'avant sa malady.

SEIZIEME OBSERVATION.
Un jeune homme age de vingt cinq ans avait, depuis environ neuf mois, un
ulcere calleux de pres de trois pouces de diametre, sur la molleole interne,
entretenu par un vice des humeurs: aux exces de tous genres, du cote du regime,
il avait ajoute l'application imprudente d'un dessicatif: la supuration qui
etait tres-abondante, tarit tout-a-coup, et le reflux de cette humeur produisit
dans son corpse un desordre don't une forte fievre etait le symptom. C'est dans
cette etat qu'on l'apporta a l'hopital, le 22 Octobre. Il fut place dans une
salle an milieu des persons attaquees de l'epidemie. Je lui prescrivis les
remedes propres a sa situation. La supuration ne tarda pas a se retablir, et
des ce moment, cet homme n'a eu d'autre mal que l'ulcere: je m'attachai a en
detruire la cause. Le 10 Janvier l'hopital Bush-hill ayant ete remplace par
l'hopital francais, cet homme y resta. Pendant soixante dix-neuf jours qu'il
est rest entoure de malades epidemiques, don't plusieurs sont morts a ses cotes
et ont ete remplaces par d'autres attaques de la meme malady, il n'a ressenti
ni eprouve aucun symptom si ce n'est ceux de la malady qui lui etait
particuliere.

DIX-SEPTIEME OBSERVATION.
Une fille d'environ 19 ans fut apportee a l'hopital le 23 Septembre: elle
avait une forte fievre et se plaignait d'un mal de tete* sa figure etait rouge,
ses yeux larmoyans, sa respiration haute: elle etait alteree, avait des
anxietes generales, une douleur aux lombes: elle vomissait les boissons tells
qu'elle les prenait; son pouls etait ondulant, sa langue rouge, assez humide:
elle avait la fievre depuis deux jours. Je lui prescrivis de la limonade
nitree, don't elle vomit une party jusqu'au 24, que les vomissemens cesserent*
alors son pouls devint calm, la fievre cessa, la respiration devint naturelle,
mais elle se plaignait de la gorge. Sa figure et sa poitrine se couvrirent de
petites taches rouges, qui prirent le caractere de la petite verole discrete.
Cette malady a ete des plus benignes, et cependant la malade est toujours
restee dans la meme salle, environnee de persons attaquees de la fievre
epidemique. Elle est sortie de l'hopital le 6 Novembre tres-bien retablie.

Une autre fille de son age et plusieurs enfans ont ete dans le meme cas: ils
sont tous sortis bien portans. Je pourrais citer un grand nombre d'observations
du meme genre, et de maladies differentes traitees a l'hopital ave^ le plus
grand succes pendant le sort de l'epidemie mais je pense que celles que je
viens de decrire, suff ^ont pour prouver que l'epidemie n'etait pas contagieuse.

Je dois aussi, pour detromper le public sur un faux bruit qui tend a perpetuer
les craintes que quelques persons semblent prendre plaisir a accrediter; je
dois, dis-je, render hommage a la verite, et avancer ici qu'il est faux qu'il
soit mort a l'hopital Bush-hill des persons venues de St Domingue. Il y est
mort une femme venant du Cap, mais qui n'avait d'autre malady que d'etre
hydropique: il y est mort aussi un negre qui n'avait nullement l'epidemie: il
vint a l'hopital le 29 Octobre, avec la gangrene aux extremites inferieures, et
qui avait ete occasionnee par l'impression du froid. Ce malheureux avait perdu
les deux pieds Par la gangrene qui avait detruit le principe vital. Comme elle
s'etait fixee au-dessous des molets, je lui fis l'amputation des deux jambes:
j'attendais les plus heureux succes de ces operations, lorsque ce negre mangea
avec exces des alimens que lui avait apportes un de ses amiss qui crut ^ui
render service, et qui lui donna la mort.

Je ne connais pas un seul habitant de St. Domingue, refugie dans cette ville,
qui soit peri de l'epidemie. Un europeen qui etait rest quelque temps au
Port-au-Prince, peut etre compte parmi les victimes de ce fleau, mais il etait
a Philadelphie depuis pres d'un an.

DIX-HUITIEME ET DERNIERE OBSERVATION.
Enfin quoique j'en a^e dit assez pour prouver que cette malady n'etait point
contagieuse; une derniere observation achevera de le determiner d'une maniere
positive et sans replique.

Lorsqu'apres la cessation de l'epidemie, les malades qui se trouvaient
convalescent a l'hopital, furent juges en etat de retourner chez eux, le comite
ceda le local a l'administration de la Republique Francaise. Il ne resta que
des soldats francais qui y etaient deja; et depuis le 20 Novembre, j'achetai,
pour le compte de la Republique, les lits, les couvertures de lain, les
oreillers et autres chooses qui s'y trouvaient, tous objets qui avaient servi
aux epidemiques. Ils furent sur le champ employes et le sont meme encore pour
les nouveaux malades, sans avoir ete laves ni parfumes.

Parmi tous les malades francais, au nombre d'environ deux cens, que j'y ai
traite pendant, et depuis la malady; les uns etaient attaques de fievres
symtomatiques, d'autres de diarrhees et de dissenteries; quelques-uns ont eu
des fluxions de poitrine et autres maladies internes; beaucoup avaient des
plays graves et autres maladies chirurgicales, qui m'ont force a pratiquer les
operations les plus importantes et qui ont ete suivies du plus grand succes;
enfin j'ai traite un tres-grand nombre de maladies differentes, tant internes
qu'externes. Les malades ont ete dans le meme lieu, dans les memes lits; ils se
sont servis des memes couvertures de lain, des memes oreillers, et enfin de
tout ce qui avait ete a l'usage des epidemiques, et je n'ai jamais reconnu chez
aucun d'eux le plus ledger symptom du fleau qui a fait tant de ravages parmi
les americains de la ville de Philadelphie.

D'apres tous ces faits, qui pourrait ne pas se tranquilliser sur les craintes
ou l'on est encore de la contagion de cette malady, et ne suffisent-elle pas
pour rassurer et dissiper les veins frayeurs qui portent a croire que ce qui a
servi a un epidemique peut, dans un temps meme recule, donner la malady a ceux
qui en feraient usage? Quelques incredules m'objecteront, peut-etre, que ces
malades, ainsi que ceux qui on^ echappe a l'epidemie n'etaient pas disposes a
la gagner, et que ce n'est pas une preuve qu'elle ne fut pas contagieuse.
Quoiqu'il me serait facile de repondre a cette objection, je me contenterai
d'observer qu'il est plus que moralement impossible que, dans le grand nombre
des francais arrives ici, sortant de l'hopital du Cap, ou ils avaient manque de
tout, et apres avoir ete exposes a toutes les miseres qu'ils ont eprouvees, et
parmi tant de malades que j'ai traites a l'hopital, il ne s'en soit pas trouve
un seul qui fut dispose a etre attaque de la malady epidemique.

D'apres ces observations, extraites d'un tres-grand nombre que j'ai ete a meme
de fair a l'hopital Bush-hill et dans la ville, pendant le course de
l'epidemie, les hommes de l'art pourront juger, 1. du caractere de cette
malady. 2. de l'efficacite des moyens et des remedes que j'ai employes. 3degrees;.
des effets des remedes contraires qui ont ete employes dans les commencemens.
4degrees;. enfin ils pourront se convaincre qu'elle n'etait point contagieuse.

Si ce fait est prouve, il n'est plus douteux que l'epidemie a pris naissance
dans ce pays, et il me parait indispensable d'en rechercher les causes et les
moyens propres a en eviter le retour, ou a en render les effets moins funestes.

Je croirais n'avoir pas entierement rempli mon objet, si je ne presentais
quelques idees sur cette matiere bien importante, et sur les moyens qui me
paraissent susceptibles de preserver cette ville des suites facheuses d'un
pareil fleau. Des esprits, ou critiques ou puerils, s'eleveront, peut-etre, sur
quelques-unes de mes observations; mais je me flat d'etre dedommage par
l'opinion des hommes vraiment philosophes, pour qui rien n'est ni superflu ni
extraordinaire, lorsqu'il est question du plus grand bonheur de l'humanite. Je
ne propose que des moyens generaux, parce qu'il me parait tres-possible que, si
une nouvelle epidemie venait a paraitre, elle se montrerait sous un aspect
different, et qui exigerait d'autres procedes.

Parmi ces moyens il en est de deux sorts: ceux qui interessent et qui
tiennent a la societe en general, et ceux qui ne sont relatifs qu'a chaque
individu en particulier.

Les premiers, qui tiennent a l'ordre public, semblent exiger imperieusement,
1. que l'on purge l'interieur de la ville, des tanneries et des fabriques
d'amidon qui s'y trouvent. 2. que la police veille a la plus grande proprete
des quais et des rues; a empecher que l'eau ne croupisse dans les fosses qui
entourent la ville, dans les emplacemens bas et non batis, ainsi que dans les
rues qui ne sont pas encore pavees. La meme attention devrait s'etendre sur les
marches; empecher qu'on n'y vende des fruits verts et de mauvaise qualite. J'y
ai vu l'ete dernier, des peches, des melons et autres fruits qui etaient bien
loin du term de maturite, si necessaire pour les render aussi salutaires,
qu'ils sont pernicieux avaunt que de l'avoir acquise. Mais une cause qui, a mon
avis, influe plus puissamment encore sur l'economie animale, est le nombre
prodigieux des cimetieres Depuis long-temps cette verite a ete sentie en Europe
C'est d'apres l'avi^ des corpse et des hommes les plus eclaires que la France
s'est determinee a ecarter de toutes les villes les cimetieres. Plusieurs
persons pretendent ici, qu'ils ne peuvent apporter aucun obstacle a la
salubrite de la ville, et ils en donnent pour preuve, que la malady a ete
moins frequente dans les environs des cimetieres, que par-tout allieurs. Quant
ce fait serait vrai, il ne contrary point mon opinion. En effet, je ne pretend
pas dire que la cause de l'epidemie provienne uniquement des cimetieres, mais
je dis et je soutiens, que les miasmes putrides qui s'exalent continuellement
(quelque soit la profondeur des fosses) de ces lieux fun^bres, venant a se
meler avec d'autres miasmes produits par d'autres causes, contribuent a render
la ville moins salubre, et corrompent d'antaut l'air qui la traverse, que cet
air, ainsi charge de vapeurs putrides, et port au loin, agit sur des individus
eloignes des cimetieres, pendant que ceux qui les avoisinent et qui n'ont pas
respire cet air n'en sont point atteints. Cette idee, pour etre bien s^ntie,
demanderait un developpement tres-etendu et etranger a mon objet; mais les
persons deja instruites y supplero^t et sen^^ront la force de ce raisonnement
que je ne fais que presenter ici-
que cette ville renferme dans son enceinte. Les vapeurs que la pomp aspirante
du soleil eleve sans cesse de ces lieux de corruption, en infectent l'air,
tandis que les eaux pluviales y penetrant, vont laver dans les tombeaux les
restes pourris des cadavres qui y reposent, entrainent dans les puits des
particules infectes qu'elles en detachent, et don't else n'ont pas eu le tems
de se degager par la filtration dans le court espace qu'elles mettent a s'y
render.

D'apres cette verite sur laquelle je ne m'appesantis qu'avec douleur, mais qui
n'est que trop reelle, chaque individu ne pourrait-il pas se dire, avec r^ison,
avaunt de boire un verre d'eau? je vais me nourri^ de mon semblable; je vais
mettre dans mon estomac des particules detachees des cadavres, et peut-etre de
ceux qui m'ont appartenus et que je regrette journellement. Outre ces
inconveniens, de la position des cimetieres dans les villes, cette reflection
seule ne suffit-elle pas pour determiner a suivre a ce sujet l'exemple de
presque toutes les villes de l'Europe, ou, je le repete, l'experience a
determine a ecarter ces lieux de leur enceinte, comme etant capables de porter
dans les corpse les plus sains et les mieux constitues, le germe des maladies
les plus graves. Je ne me suis point dissimule combien elle aurait peu de
partisans; je m'attends me;me au rire caustique de quelques demi savans, ou de
gens attaches a leur opinion; mais, comme je l'ai deja dit, les vrais
philosophes sauront apprecier (...) mes raisons et mes motifs d'etre utile a
l'humanite.

Enter autres moyens propres a ecarter ces inconveniens, je pense qu'on
pourrait placer une pomp a feusur la riviere de la Delaware. Cette machine
monterait l'eau dans la ville ou des fontaines placees a propos, la
distribuerait pour les besoins de la vie animale: le canal du Schuylkill,
auquel on travaille, pourra facilement, par la suite, y repandre l'abondance
d'une eau salutaire, et celle des puits ou des pompes, ne servirait plus alors
que pour les besoins domestiques et dans les cas d'incendie.

Mais en attendant que ces etablissemens, que l'humanite reclame, puissent
operer le bien qu'on doit s'en promettre, je conseille aux persons a portee
de la riviere, de ne boire que de son eau, prise a mer basse, epuree par le
repos dans des vases de terre, ou ce qui serait preferable, apres l'avoir faite
passer par des pierres a filtrer. Tells sont les moyens generaux qui me
paraissent indispensables pour la plus grande salubrite de la ville.

Quant aux moyens particuliers et qui ne regardent que chaque individu, ils
consistent uniquement dans l'usage de quelques precautions a observer: le plus
essentiel serait, s'il etait possible de resister a ce mouvement involontaire,
de se roidir contre la crainte et la frayeur qu'inspirent au premier moment les
maladies epidemiques: cette emotion de l'ame trouble l'esprit et offusque la
raison de ceux qu'elle saisit, et elle occasionne, dans toute la machine, une
sort de commotion qui influe sur l'economie animale et altere la sante.

Il faut donc, autant que fair se peut, resister a ces terreurs paniques et
pueriles, qui ne peuvent guerir le mal et qui, au contraire, mettent le corpse
dans une situation plus apt a etre atteint de la malady. Il faut aussi eviter
les exces en tous genres; renouveller l'air des maisons et des appartemens; se
tenir dans l'etat de la plus stricte proprete, qu'il ne faut pas confondre avec
le luxe de la parure exterieure: cette proprete contribue au maintien de la
sante; elle consiste a renouveller le plus souvent possible le linge de corpse;
a se baigner de temps-en-temps en ete, et a se laver la bouche tous les matins
et a l'issue de chaque repas, avec de l'eau et du vinaigre.

Je ne puis me determiner a finir ces reflections sans dire un mot de ces
sachets camphres et de ces eponges humectees de vinaigre, et don't on faisait,
l'ete et l'automne dernier, un usage si peu reflechi; je ne pretends pas dire
que ces deux moyens ne pussent etre salutaire, mais la maniere don't on s'en
servait ne pouvait etre que pernicieuse. On s'en bouchait si fortement le nez,
que la respiration demeurait long-temps comme entierement interrompue, ce qui
ne pouvait produi^e (...)


