A MEDICAL SKETCH OF THE SYNOCHUS MALIGNA, OR Malignant Contagious Fever; AS IT
LATELY APPEARED IN THE CITY OF PHILADELPHIA: TO WHICH IS ADDED, SOME ACCOUNT OF
THE MORBID APPEARANCES OBSERVED AFTER DEATH, ON DISSECTION.

BY ISAAC CATHRALL.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY T. DOBSON, AT THE STONE-HOUSE, NO. 41, SOUTH
SECOND-STREET.

-- 1794. --

THE Note * on page 8 should have been referred to from the word Charleston,
line 14. and what appears as a continuation of the Note should have been in the
Text, following the word contagion, line 12.

PREFACE.
THE subsequent pages are the result of observations made, during the period of
three months, on a disease hitherto but little known in this part of the
continent; and, although they have not a number of years' experience to
sanction their accuracy, yet there are but few tropical practitioners, who have
resided the greatest part of their lives in countries where the disease
generally occurs, that have seen such a number of cases as some of the medical
gentlemen of this city who have enjoyed but an indifferent share of health
during the melancholy space of three months.

To acquire information, to alleviate the distresses of my fellow-citizens, and
to procure the matter of this essay, I have spared no pains; nor have I shrunk
from scenes truly dreadful, to make myself acquainted with the leading features
of this disease, and the different morbid phenomena after death, so as to be
enabled to narrate every circumstance of importance and to discriminate the
different stages of the disease with as much precision as the nature of it
would admit; likewise, to point out the various appearances that tend to mark
the favorable or unfavourable event, which are certainly of great importance
to be ascertained both to the physician and patient.

It is, however, much to be regretted, that those circumstances are so little
noticed by the different authors who have had repeated opportunities of
observing such a disease, so replete with danger in every stage; for, all I
have had occasion to consult, since the disappearance of it here, seem to
differ much both with respect to the history and method of cure. In the former,
most of them are very deficient. In the latter, few, I believe, can boast, with
propriety, of their great success, however different their methods of treating
the disease may have been. For, some of those practitioners, who wrote at an
early period, recommend profuse bleeding; others are more moderate in the use
of that evacution; and some writers advise the disuse of it altogether; whilst
Dr Mosely, a more modern author, recommends it, in an extreme degree, in
particular cases -- his words are "Usque ad deliquium animi." Such are the
opinions of the various authors on the subject of venesection in this disease;
but want of leisure and free access to the various medical publications, on
this subject, during the prevalence of the malignant fever in this city,
deprived me of an opportunity of consulting many books on the occasion. This
circumstance prevented the influence of partiality or prejudice on my mind
respecting the necessary treatment. I was, therefore, obliged to seek, through
my own observations on the symptoms, and the appearance after death, what
appeared to me the most rational method of cure.

I have added to this essay an account of some dissectious made at the hospital
at Bushhill, during the prevalence of the disease, on such patients as were
affected with it to an extreme degree.

Being more desirous of submitting a plain narration of facts than ambitious to
make a large book, I have omitted the insertion of some propositions which it
was my intention to have offered to the public on the utility and manner of
conducting quarantines, where the commerce of countries renders a purification
of persons and commercial objects necessary. I, therefore, hope this
interesting medical subject may be handled by some one of the profession who
may have had longer experience than I have had in countries where such diseases
generally occur, and whose abilities are more adequate to the task than my own.

I shall now proceed to give the clearest and most intelligible idea of the
disease that my limited experience enables me to form. I shall merely state
facts, as they occurred, without any attempt at embellishment of style; for,
the simplicity of truth requires no coloring -- she is, like Milton's Eve, --
"when unadorned, adorned the most."

Philadelphia, March 13 th, 1794.
INTRODUCTION.
THE malignant and contagious fever, which has so lately committed such
devastation upon the inhabitants of this city, appears, from all the
information that could be obtained from the different publications on diseases
incident to mankind between the tropics, to be one nearly resembling, in its
most leading features, the yellow-fever of the West India Islands, and of the
coast of Africa Doctor Williams observed the disease on the coast of Africa.
See his essay on the subject, page 11.
; of which places I believe it to be a native. For we have no authentic and
accurate description of it that I am acquainted with in the writings of authors
on the diseases of the East Indies, or province of Canton in China, where the
seasons of the latter are similar to those of the tropics. Various have been
the appellations given to the late contagious fever, according to the different
nations among whom it has occurred, and to the most uniform and constant
symptoms they had observed in its progress. As a yellow suffusion sometimes
takes place in the eyes and skin, it has by some authors been termed a yellow
or putrid bilious fever: the latter from it is sometimes having a septic
tendency. As neither of these symptoms are constantly observed in the course of
the disease, there may be some impropriety in the terms, however universally
they may have been adopted. By the French it is called "la malady de Siam,"
from their supposing the same disease to have appeared in the kingdom of Siam
in the East Indies. It is, likewise, called by the French "la fievre matelotte"
because seafaring people were supposed to be most subject to it. The Spaniards
call it "vomito preto" or the black vomiting, from one of it is dangerous
symptoms. Such has been the diversity of name for this disease. And with
respect to it is origin in this city, it has been a little similar. Some have
supposed it to be indigenous and the offspring of vegetable putrefaction.
Others, that it was imported from the West Indies. Of the latter opinion I am
clearly, for that is the most probable, and is supported by the greatest number
of facts. When it appeared before in this country, which has been at six
different periods, exclusive of that of the last year, it could, with facility,
be traced to have been imported from the West Indies. It visited Charleston in
South Carolina four times according to Doctor Lining, viz. in 1732, 1739, 1745,
and 1748. It likewise appears from Dr Lind Lind on Infection, page 293.
that it was introduced here in 1740, by a trunk of wearing apparel; and, from
the notes of Dr Redman, president of the college of physicians, on whose
integrity I can depend, we are informed that it was brought here from the
Havannah in 1762, by a mariner who arrived sick. From that time it has never
been observed in this city until last year, when it first appeared on the third
of August, in Waterstreet, between Mulberry and Sassafras Streets, at a
boarding-house much frequented by seamen, many of whom belonged to the Xebec
privateer, Sans Culottes, of Nantz, that had just come off from a cruise with
the ship Flora her prize; the crew of which vessel, from every circumstance
that could be collected, appears to have brought the disease indirectly from
the West Indies into this city by exchanging part of her crew for that of a
prize she had taken from the West India Islands, where the disease was well
known to rage with great mortality.

The people most generally affected with this disease were the inhabitants of
Philadelphia, and natives of America from different parts of the Continent. No
condition, or situation in life was exempted from it is violence. The timid of
both sexes, the most healthy, and those who seemed to have all the vigor of
youth on their side, fell victims to it. No age scarcely escaped; from the
child in the cradle up to confirmed manhood, and even from that to extreme old
age. Women, during gestation, appeared to me to be more susceptible of it than
those who were not in that state; and, in almost all, it produced abortion or
miscarriage -- few, I believe, recovered from it; owing, probably, to their
systems being more disposed to violent inflammation than those of others. It
was, however, more fatal to the male than the female sex. But the most
cheerful, fearless, and gay, of both sexes, frequently escaped it, as likewise
did idiots, and those people who, for a considerable length of time, had been a
little deranged.

Strangers were very seldom attacked, particularly those from the West India
Islands where it generally affects foreigners. But here they were seldom
susceptible of it. Blacks of every description, were less liable to it than the
white inhabitants; and the negroes originally from the coast of Africa were
scarcely ever affected Jackson of Jamaica observes, that be never saw a Negro
or a Creole with the disease who had lived constantly in their native country.
See his book on fevers, page 250.
, although some of those of our own country fell a sacrifice to it is violence.

During the first two weeks of it is appearance in this city, it was almost
entirely confined to that part of Water-street where it commenced; and the
inhabitants of that neighborhood were seized in succession. For the first ten
days there were seldom two attacked with the disease in the same house, which
induced some to think that it was not contagious; but they were soon
sorrowfully mistaken, for, it became general among the families of that
neighborhood, and not long after spread it is mortal influence to different
parts of the city, carrying off a great part and even the whole of some
families, and produced such destruction, that, in the space of three months,
upwards of four thousand and forty eight persons were consigned to eternity.
See Carey's account of the rise and progress of the disease.


It was a singular fact, that when carried into the country, it never was, but
in one instance, that I am acquainted with, propagated beyond the person who
carried it; although some of the family officiated as nurses, and even slept in
the same bed with the patient until the day of his death. This was the case, in
some measure, during the several times it prevailed in Charleston, South
Carolina; and, like many other contagious diseases, it does not appear ever to
affect the same person twice. Although careful enquiry has been made by several
of my medical friends and myself, it only appears that some of the patients had
a slight relapse of fever, but without any of the distinguishing symptoms of
the disease, and very soon recovered. This I have frequently observed in my own
practice, and, likewise, in that of my friends -- but I have never remarked a
second attack of the disease, however constantly the patient may have been
afterward exposed to the contagion See Physical and Literary Essays of
Edinburgh, vol ii.

Upon strict inquiry among mariners and others who had the disease in the West
Indies and those inhabitants who had it before when it visited this city, I
cannot find one that was affected with the disease during it is late prevalence
although much exposed to the contagion.


. These circumstances are corroborated by the accurate Dr Lining of Charleston;
and, in some measure, by some of the tropical writers, particularly Jackson of
Jamaica, who goes so far as to say that it has been seldom known to affect the
same people twice, unless after they had returned from a colder region;
although the remitting fever says he, of Jamaica does not cease to attack such
as have resided the greatest part of their lives in the climate. See Jackson on
Fevers, page 250.


Having thus far briefly traced the rise and progress of this disease, which
was beyond a doubt, highly contagious; I come now to consider, under what
circumstances the contagion was communicated; -- How long it was, after
apparently receiving the infection, before it produced its effects; -- And in
what manner it acted on the system.

These questions apply to contagion in general, and are involved in much
obscurity and doubt; and it is probable that they never will be satisfactorily
solved.

With regard to the first proposition, it may be observed, that like other
contagious diseases, this seemed to be communicated in three distinct ways --
First -- by immediate contact with the patient's body. Secondly -- through the
medium of the air which surrounded him within a limited distance. And, Thirdly
-- by bodies of different kinds being exposed to, and as it were, drinking up
the matter of contagion, having a power of retaining it in an active state, and
communicating it to animated bodies.


I believe the disease was communicated in these several ways. As to the first,
viz. that of coming in contact with the patient's body, this was the most
certain way of receiving it. I am not clear what particular stage was the most
dangerous; but from such information as could be collected, during the
prevalence of the disease, it appeared to be the advanced stages; although I
knew a nurse, who I am almost certain received the infection from a patient,
during the operation of an emetic; for the matter thrown up by vomiting emitted
a peculiarly foetid smell, which affected her soon after she had carried it out
of the room. Early the next day she was attacked with all the symptoms of the
disease. From this instance, and several more I could adduce if it were
necessary, of those who received the infection at a later period, during the
inflammatory stage; is it not probable that all patients, under similar
circumstances are capable of communicating the disease, during the first and
second days? But it is infinitely more contagious in the latter stages than in
the early period.

The second mode of receiving the infection, was from the matter of contagion
arising from the morbid body impregnating the atmosphere of the chamber, and
being applied to susceptible constitutions. This, I believe, can only take
place within a certain small distance of the person affected, for in proportion
as it became diffused in the atmosphere, it must lose it is activity, and be so
far exhausted as not to be able to produce the disease. Therefore people in
walking the streets, are secure from being contaminated by the atmosphere which
surrounds them; for, although a number of articles, charged as it were, with
the matter of contagion, be exposed in the open air; yet the effluvia issuing
from them, would be so much diffused, corrected and modified, through that
immense space, as scarcely to be able to have any effect, except within the
contagious atmosphere, extending but a small distance from the articles
themselves. The danger of going abroad in the city, during the prevalence of a
contagious disease, is from coming in contact with the clothes of those who had
recently left the chambers of the sick.

The third mode of receiving the infection, was from substances which had
imbibed the matter of contagion, having the power of retaining and
communicating it in an active state, such as woollens, furs, etc. under
particular circumstances, as when excited by heat and applied to the healthy
system, have a power of inducing the disease. In this manner it is probably
conveyed into different countries, in a quiescent state; after which, being
excited by heat or any other agent, it exerts its baneful infl^u^ce on people
within the sphere of it is action; from which it is soon communicated and spread
far and wide. In this way the contagion of the smallpox may be communicated --
it may in like manner be retained from season to season, for inoculation. By
the last mode of communication, many of the inhabitants of this city received
the contagion of the yellow fever -- from lying on beds upon which people had
died, and some from even handling the bedclothes of the diseased before they
had been aired. I am acquainted with a gentleman of this city, who, in all
probability, received the infection, from lying on the sacking bottom and
bedstead on which his wife had died.

Our next proposition is -- In what length of time the disease commences after
a person has been exposed to and received the infection. This was variable and
difficult to be determined; for many exposed themselves so repeatedly that it
was not possible to ascertain the exact time at which they received the
contagion: although in some, from the most accurate information that could be
obtained, it was from nine until fourteen days after they were supposed to have
received the infection. Those, whose apprehensions were much augmented by the
dread of dying, seemed to have the disease sooner completely formed, after
receiving the contagion, than those who did not labor under that anxious state
of mind. But all that can be said on this subject is involved in great
uncertainty. There seems however to be some analogy between this and other
contagious diseases in respect to the time of it is commencement after the
infection is taken. For as the smallpox, gonorrhea, etc. require a certain
length of time after exposure to and reception of the infection, before the
disease is formed -- so does this. Some constitutions seem hardly susceptible
of those diseases, however much they may have been exposed to their influence.
But the constitutions of such people are not often found among the variety of
mankind; yet during the prevalence of the late fever there were numerous
instances of persons who had not been exposed to its influence before, that
were not affected by it. These instances are, however, particularly confined to
the black inhabitants, with but few exceptions of a different color. There was
not one instance of a French West-Indian's having the disease, owing probably
to having had it before; although those from Europe were as susceptible of it
as the inhabitants of America.

With respect to the operation of the matter of contagion on the system, after
being carried into the circulating fluids, and the state in which it continues
from the time of reception until the appearance of the disease -- are very
difficult matters to determine, and I believe, will ever remain involved in
mysterious darkness. But as contagious diseases, in general, exhibit strong
marks of increased excitement and general phenomena of inflammation, requiring,
almost always, a debilitating plan of cure; one would be inclined to think,
with a late celebrated author, that it is operation was a stimulant one, and
that the length of time requisite to produce its complete effect, would be in
proportion to the susceptibility of the constitution, to the action of
contagion. This, of course, will be variable. There is another circumstance of
importance to be ascertained; and with regard to which, it seems difficult to
obtain any satisfactory information: -- indeed, to decide properly on it,
requires much more experience in contagious diseases, than I am possessed of,
and this is, How long convalescents from the yellow fe^^^ should be excluded
from company; or in other words, have the power of communicating the disease?
-- Authors of experience in contagious diseases, recommend people, who have
been exposed to infection, to perform a quarantine of thirty days, after which
their persons and baggage should be fumigated. This practice appears tolerably
well calculated for convalescents. But the safest mode is not to admit them
into company, whilst they have the least symptom of the disease about them.

It does not appear, from accurate observations made by most of the tropical
writers and others, on the state of the weather, that the different seasons, or
any particular state of the weather, produce this disease; for it may be
frequently met with, at every season of the year in the West Indies. See
Hilary's Observations, page 146.
The progress of the disease in this city, was however, much retarded by cold,
and greatly augmented by heat, as obviously appeared to those whose duty it was
to attend the sick. It raged with great violence, during the months of August
and September; continued in a lesser degree until the 24th of October, when it
suddenly declined, without any very great alteration in the temperature of the
atmosphere, and by the 16th of November there was scarcely a case of it in the
city or it is environs.

DEFINITION.
THE disease, which I am about to deliate, may be defined, Synochus Maligna in
which the most conspicuous symptoms were; red and minutely suffused eyes --
painful sensations of them -- sickness, and retching to vomit, accompanied with
burning sensations in the region of the stomach -- great anxiety a^ the
praecordia, with an uncommon deg^^e of restlessness and with frequent sighing:
-- The subsequent stages were sometimes attended with a bilious suffusion in
the eyes and skin, with a corresponding color in the urine -- pulse sometimes
less frequent than natural -- deep respiration with heavy sighing -- diminution
of heat -- confusion of the intellects, often followed by vomiting of black
matter resembling coffee-grounds -- petechiae -- frequently a suppression of
urine, with haemorrhagies from different parts of the body.

The foregoing definition comprehends almost every distinguishing
characteristic, that generally occurred in the progress of this disease; and
has been expressly selected, in so extensive a manner, to serve likewise as a
Diagnosis.

DESCRIPTION OF THE DISEASE.
THIS disease most frequently attack-people in the course of the night or early
in the morning with some degree of general lassitude, loss of appetite,
disagreeable taste in the mouth, sudden prostration of strength, accompanied
with universal pain and soreness over the body particularly about the large
joints; these were soon after succeeded with some degree of chillness, or
alternate chills and flushes of heat, but very seldom a complete rigor; during
the continuance of this state the face appeared pallid, the features
contracted, the whole countenance exhibiting a dejected aspect, with a
corresponding state of mind; after which was perceived a slight pain in the
fore or back part of the head, and frequently some degree of vertigo, with a
sense of fatigue about the loins not unfrequently extending toward the iliae
and pubes; together with an uneasy sensation between the shoulders and back of
the neck. These symptoms hourly increased in violence, attended frequently with
disagreeable eructations, nausea, frequent retching to vomit, particularly
after taking large draughts of warm or cool drinks, or upon motion of the body.

The eyes were generally highly suffused, exhibiting the appearance of a
painted eye or one minutely injected, accompanied with a sensation as if
irritated by sand, and generally an aversion to light. This I have frequently
observed to take place during the rigor although generally at a more advanced
period of the disease, or sometimes not at all during the whole course of it.
--

After the rigor the pulse generally became frequent, tense, and tolerably
even, at other times soft and irregular, the heat mostly a little higher than
the healthy standard. The state of the skin variable, sometimes moist, but
generally dry; respiration a little more frequent than ordinary, attended with
sighing and oppression at the praecordia, indicating great distress. These were
observable even from the accession of the rigor. At other times not until a
more advanced period.

The tongue was generally moist and white, particularly in the middle and red
or of a purplish hue toward the edges and tip. Bowels generally costive, but
sometimes a diarrhoea, urine of a higher color, than natural and small in
quantity.

As the evening approached every symptom became aggravated, the pulse more
frequent, full and strong, heat considerably augmented, pain in the head and
back excruciating, in the former shooting from temple to temple, in the latter
to the hips and extending down the thighs, skin dry and parched, sometimes a
partial moisture, particularly when the bed clothes were increased, but without
any abatement of the febrile symptoms.

The sickness and retching increased, with an ejection of frothy or bilious
matter or whatever fluid was last received into the stomach, accompanied with
pain and soreness in the epigastric region upon the least pressure, with a
sensation of incessant burning, attended with restlessness, so that no posture
afforded any relief. During the exacerbation the respiration became more
frequent, with an increase of sighing and slight pain and throbbing in one or
other of the hypochondriac regions, with strong beating in the most conspicuous
arterial trunks the face was very much flushed, the features considederably
distorted, with a slight haemorrhage from one or both nostrils, and an
increased suffusion of the tunica adnata.

The intellectual faculties at times appeared confused, but seldom a complete
delirium. In the intervals of reason the patient was very desponding, and under
dreadful apprehensions for the event, complained much of thirst which was
almost insatiable, for no sooner did any fluid reach the stomach than it was
instantly rejected with violence. Every morning the symptoms suffered some
abatement It may not be improper to observe that for several weeks after the
contagious fever made its appearance in this city intermitting and remitting
fevers were met with at a short distance off from the place where the malignant
fever was exerting its destructive influence.
, and the patient generally during the first 24 or 48 hours complained of light
shivering, which became varied throughout the day with vicissitudes of heat and
partial moisture on the skin seeming much inclined to doze from which they were
very often awaked by frightful dreams, after which they generally became very
watchful; as the disease proceeded the tongue was very little altered from a
state of health, except appearing in furrows or chopped and of a bluish color,
at other times yellow or brown in the middle and bluish at the edges and tip,
but seldom dry. When stools were procured they were generally faetid and
frothy, but seldom bilious. The urine was variable, generally of a higher
color than natural. Some of these symptoms which marked the first stage
proceeded rapidly to increase with a mitigation of others and the rise of new
ones, unless an intermission supervened on or before the fourth day and the
patient recovered. But most frequently instead of this intermission, a mere
composure of symptoms only took place which was too often fallacious, during
which however the eyes and skin sometimes became yellow, and the sick appeared
so placid to the attendants that they often thought them out of danger. But
this treacherous tranquillity soon vanished, and the second stage commenced
with a different train of symptoms, and with redoubled violence; for the vigor
which before was excessive now declined apace, and the disease put on a
different complexion, the pain in the head and back which was before excessive
and almost intolerable, frequently abated on a sudden and the fever assumed
more and more the symptoms of the typhus kind; the pulse became less frequent,
soft and feeble, and sometimes even slower than in a state of health; the face
much less flushed, the features more tranquil, with a cadaverous aspect of the
countenance, or sometimes it was but little altered, the suffusion of the eyes
frequently increased, the heat became considerably diminished, and in some
cases less than in a state of health, skin cool sometimes with a clammy
moisture on the face neck and back of the hands; the sickness at stomach
increased with a burning sensation in the region of it and continual vomiting
of frothy matter, at other times bilious streaked with blood. In the female sex
if the menses did not flow at their usual period there was generally a quantity
of blood brought up by vomiting, accompanied with violent stricture about the
praecordia, and a sense of weight with great flatulency in the stomach and the
intestines which was very distressing, for they were generally costive, and had
not energy sufficient to expel the wind either upwards or downwards. The tongue
in this stage trembled much, and with respect to color it was variable, as in
the former, frequently nearly natural, at other times covered over with mucus
verging toward black, particularly in the middle, sometimes dry, but generally
moist, and not unfrequently it was of a florid color appearing as if rubbed
over with the red particles of the blood, with deep furrows in it or chopped;
when the patient was desired to put it out of the mouth he would continue it
there until he was told to draw it in. The thirst was much augmented with a
continual dryness of the lips and sauces. The confusion of the intellects
increased to a complete delirium, the restlessness became truly distressing,
and the patient almost outrageous, and in some cases maniacal.

The skin and eyes became of a deep yellow color, with the same appearance in
the urine, which was small in quantity, and discharged with difficulty, when
the skin was not suffused the urine was turbid, depositing a deep brown
sediment. The respiration was slower than natural except when the body was much
agitated by the extreme restlessness, accompanied with heavy sighing, and much
debility in all the moving powers of the body, the patient generally lay on his
back with his feet drawn up toward his body, nevertheless he had sufficient
power when urged by the call of nature to rise from his bed.

In the decline of this stage the skin was sometimes covered over with
petechial eruptions, appearing like the stings of nettles of a dark red color,
principally about the neck and breast, accompanied sometimes with haemorrhages
from different parts of the body, but these symptoms more particularly belong
to the third and last stage; the duration of the second stage was various,
generally according to the violence of the symptoms, or to the duration and
severity of the preceding stage, but it seldom lasted longer than 50 or 60
hours before death took place, sometimes without the occurrence of many of the
symptoms of the last stage.

This stage generally commenced with the pulse becoming very feeble,
intermitting, and almost imperceptible at the wrist, frequently not more than
30 or 35 strokes in a minute, * great diminution of the heat of the whole body,
except about the praecordia, which seemed, if the expression may be used, to be
more tenacious of its heat than any other part of the body, and is the last
part that surrenders it up after death.

The skin became much cooler and covered universally with a clammy moisture;
the countenance exhibited a cadaverous aspect; the eyes less painful but so
dreadfully suffused as sometimes almost to obliterate the color of the tunica
albuginea, with great twitching of the muscles of the face, and general
subsultus throughout the body; the petechiae increased and became of a purplish
color, between which the skin was of a deep yellow; great delirium with
continual restlessness, the patient laying principally on his back, the powers
not being sufficient to retain him on his sides; the feet were generally drawn
up, the whole body frequently sliding down in bed. The vomiting increased, and
the matter ejected was of a dark color, resembling coffee grounds, sometimes
mixed with blood; great flatulency; haemorrhagies from the different parts of
the body; tongue frequently covered over with blood and of a florid color, at
other times black and dry; urine very offensive, sometimes a total suppression
of it, and when stools were procured they were extremely black and foetid;
livid ulcers in the mouth; and the parts where blisters had been applied
assuming a black aspect; laborious and deep respiration* with heavy sighing and
great oppression at the praecordia; faultering in the speech; cold and livid
extremities; involuntary discharges of faeces; loss of swallowing; coma; eyes
glazy; singultus and convulsions frequently closed the miserable existence of
the patient.

These were the appearances of the Malignant Fever through it is several stages.
Although in it is first attack it was frequently much varied; sometimes the
patients were seized of a sudden, at other times in the manner above described;
but often in it is different stages it was much diversified, according to the
violence and duration of the symptoms, to the age sex and constitution of the
patient. In some the disease terminated in death during the inflammatory
period; in others it was hurried so precipitately through the stadiae that they
could hardly be discriminated by the most accurate observer, the patient's fate
being soon determined. In other cases it passed with some degree of regularity,
as above marked, and the dissolution or recovery, was protracted to an uncommon
period. This was particularly the case in those people who labored under a
severe ptyalism from the effects of mercury.

PROGNOSIS.
IN judging concerning the event of the malignant fever in it is first stage,
the danger was generally in proportion to the degree of inflammatory action; of
this a judgment may be formed from the violence and duration of the symptoms.

When the febrile affection was very considerable, which was demonstrated by
the violent pain in the head and back, great suffusion of the face and eyes,
with obvious, distortion of the features; nausea and vomiting, with a sense of
universal soreness, particularly in the limbs, it may be concluded that the
danger is imminent.

When the inflammatory stage was of short duration and of great violence,
accompanied with unusual quick respiration, heavy sighing, and great oppression
at the praecordia from the commencement, together with great restlessness,
confusion of the intellects and deep despondency of mind, with a dread of
speedy dissolution; these were to be considered as very unfavourable symptoms.

When very great prostration of strength or a spontaneous diarrhoea appeared
after bleeding, without manifest relief to the patient, they were generally
unfavourable symptoms indicating danger in proporton to their violence.

Should a yellow tinge in the eyes and skin appear which is merely an
accidental circumstance, although it has been considered by some of the
tropical writers as an unfavourable appearance, by others as expressive of the
crisis of the disease, my experience does not corroborate either the one or the
other, but I am induced to consider it as a favorable, rather than an
unfavourable occurrence. Should the retching and vomiting be much increased,
with dark or coffee-coloured matter ejected, death generally ensued.

The fatal terminations most commonly happened on the fourth or fifth days. In
some cases on the twelfth and even on the twenty fourth and twenty fifth days.
But these patients frequently in addition to the disease, labored under a
severe ptyalism from the administration of large quantities of calomel during
their indisposition, which salivary discharge in all probability protracted the
life of the patient.

A favorable prognosis may be formed in this stage of the disease, from the
febrile symptoms being more moderate, togethe^ with the absence of some of
those before mentioned ones, particularly the suffusion of the eyes, sighing
and vomiting, especially if a slight haemorrhagy takes the place from the
nostrils with eruptions about the mouth, a slight cough and an expectoration of
yellowish matter, with bilious evacuations by stool particularly if they afford
relief to the patient, together with the formation of abscesses in different
part of the body, they are frequently attended with an abatement of almost
every other symptom and the patient recovers.

Prognosis in the second stage. If the pulse became very feeble, small and
intermitting In elderly people I have found the pulse intermitting in several
cases and they always recovered.
with a considerable diminution of heat below the natural standard, excessive
vomiting with great burning in the region of the stomach, particularly if the
matter that was ejected be black which was frequently the case, the patient had
but a short time to live.

There was little information to be acquired in any stage of this disease from
the appearance of the urine, but when it was dark and foetid, the patient
deli^ious, troubled much with flatulency, great suffusion of the adnata, a
cadaverous aspect of the countenance with vomiting of blood, which frequently
occurred in the female sex, when their menses did not flow at the usual period
and when it happened to women at the period of life when they become extremely
irregular and generally cease to slow, the prognosis will be found very
unfavorable, for at that time of life the system undergoes a very material
change, being about to accommodate itself to a new mode of action, is scarce
ever able to withstand this change together with the violence of so dreadful a
disease.

When the tongue was florid appearing as if rubbed over with the red particles
of the blood, accompanied with a clammy moisture on the different parts of the
body, respiration laborious, with sighing and livid petechiae generally spread
over the skin, the parts where blisters were applied becoming of a dark color,
together with the posture of the patient's body indicating great debility, with
difficulty in making water, although the pulse be at the same time tolerable
even and strong which is not unfrequently the case, they are marks of extreme
danger.

A favorable prognosis in this stage as well as in the preceding, does not
depend on a solitary favorable symptom, but on several, therefore we should be
guarded in giving an opinion.

If the pulse from being extremely feeble should acquire more strength and the
heat which was before considerably diminished become general nearer the healthy
standard, together with an abatement of the violent vomiting and burning
sensation in the region of the stomach and praecordia, the brain less confused
If the patients became maniacal the disease generally disappeared and they
frequently recovered.
with a diminution of restlessness and cessation of sighing, gradual
disappearance of petechiae with an enlargement in and about the parotid glands,
disfiguring much the natural form of the visage occurring particularly in
children, sometimes in adults, tongue becoming cleaner from the middle and
point toward the edges, the patient capable of laying in any position with
tolerable facility, with incipient formation of abscesses in different parts of
the body and a slight return of appetite, although the skin and eyes be of a
deep yellow color you may prognosticate with some degree of certainty that the
event will be favorable.

Prognosis in the last stage. This may be considered as only a deeper shade in
the symptoms of the latter part of the second with the addition of others, but
replete with danger so that there is scarce a symptom wearing a complexion
sufficient to inspire the mind of the physician with a ray of hope for the
favorable termination of the disease.

Nevertheless this was sometimes the case with all the disagreeable symptom^ of
the latter part of the second stage with the occurrence and augmentation of
those in the last, including the sighing, yellowness of the skin, delirium,
black, vomiting livid ulcers in the mouth, sphacelation of blistered parts,
haemorrhagies from the nose and mouth, black tongue, with almost every other
symptom that this stage can produce, excepting a remarkable feeble and
intermitting pulse, I have ^een several times perfectly recover. The change
generally took place for the better on the n^nth or tenth days, on which the
pulse became more full strong and even, intellects less confused, tongue more
florid from the middle toward the edges, heat general and more equally
diffused, cessation of vomiting and haemorrhagies, bowels more regular with a
slight return of appetite and beginning absorption of the yellowness and
petechiae, with a capability in the patient of laying in any position, with
increasing strength and complete recovery. But these instances must be
confessed are very rare, though I believe few will deny their occurrence, but
under the above related symptoms, death seems almost the only alternative.

OF THE METHOD OF CURE.
IN the cure of the malignant fever, three indications appeared necessary:
first, to moderate the inflammatory action; secondly, to remove or alleviate
certain distressing symptoms which generally occurred, more or less, through
the several stages of the disease; thirdly, to support the tone and vigor of
the system. In effecting the first indication, the various parts of the
antiphlogistic regimen seemed admirably well adapted. In employing the
debilitating powers, a judgment may be formed by the degree of tone and
inflammatory action prevalent in the system; and the danger of the disease
passing into a state of direct or indirect debility should be steadily kept in
view. The former from the use of too copious evacuations, and the latter from a
deficiency of them; for it is an easy matter to diminish the vigor of the
system, but a very difficult one to rear it when reduced too low: therefore
every endeavor should be exerted to avoid the two extremes, for they are both
accompanied with imminent danger. By observing as near as possible the middle
course, the most judicious plan may be pursued.

The first indication was most effectually answered by the different classes of
evacuants; among the most efficacious was brachial venaesection.

About the tenth of August, which was shortly after the disease made its
appearance in this city, bleeding was not attended with success, at least among
the sick under my care; therefore the practice was discontinued, and I trusted,
with most of my medical brethren, to the milder class of evacuants until the
12th of September. After having dissected several patients, in conjunction with
my friend Dr Physic, and on finding the stomach and intestines highly inflamed,
as will appear from the subjoined dissections, I then, resumed the practice of
bleeding upon good grounds and with evidently better effect. -- The quantity of
blood to be taken away was regulated by the violence of the symptoms, age, sex
and habit of body; for, those who were very corpulent did not bear evacuations
near so well as those of a spare make. But no certain rule can absolutely be
laid down, with respect to the quantity of blood to be drawn, and whenever it
is attempted it must be subject to considerable error, notwithstanding the
number of ounces to be abstracted has been dictated by some authors, whose
opinions on this subject are various; Dr Williams of Jamaica who wrote in 1750
advised plentiful bleeding. Dr Hillary of Barbados, used venesection once or
twice during the first days of the disease Hillary's Observations, page 157.
, and Dr Mosely, a more modern writer, informs us, that bleeding should be
performed and repeated every six or eight hours, and if the symptoms be
obstinate and do not abate, it should be executed usque ad deliquium animi
Mosely, page 429.
. Dr Blane, in his book on the diseases of seamen observes, that if the patient
had not a throbbing pulse, with violent pain in the head and back, it should
not be performed; and that without the presence of those symptoms it was
extremely dangerous, Dr Warren, a gentleman who had passed a considerable time
in Barbados, seems much averse to bleeding, in any stage of this disease."
Such are the different opinions of the tropical writers on this subject. But
during the prevalence of the malignant fever in this city, which nearly
resembled that described under the appellation of the putrid bilious fever of
the West India islands, I was influenced, in the abstraction of blood, by the
tension and fullness of the pulse, the season of the year and other
circumstances previously observed, together with the abatement the sick
experienced of the symptoms during the flowing of the blood. But it was very
seldom that one bleeding, however profuse it may have been, would put an end to
this disease; although the pain in the head and back may be much mitigated. Yet
they too often returned with additional violence, at which time, if the pulse
continued full and tolerably tense, the strength not much impaired, a
sufficient quantity of blood may be taken away to procure an alleviation of the
symptoms, which should be repeated as often as they recur in the inflammatory
stage of the disease, but it seldom appeared necessary to be done later than
the end of the third day, when it was employed at a more advanced period
particularly near the time the disease was passing into its second stage, it
invariably increased the train of terrible symptoms which mark this period,
with a sinking in the pulse that no human effort was able to support. The blood
drawn in this stage of the disease very seldom perfectly separated into serum
and crassamentum; when it did the former was nearly of a natural color, though
small in quantity in proportion to the latter, the crassamentum was generally
of a florid arterial color, tender in the course of the warm weather, as the
cool weather advanced and the disease became more inflammatory it was sizy in
some cases, with a proportionable degree of contraction of its superior
circumference, exhibiting a cup like appearance. This was generally in
proportion to the density of the crassamentum and firmness of the buffy
substance, though sometimes during the warm weather there was a thick tender
sizy coat on its upper surface without the cup or as it is generally called
salt box appearance. When blood was drawn during the yellow suffusion of the
skin, the serum was of a corresponding color but not in the least bitter to
the taste that could be observed in a variety of instances and like healthy
serum it was affected by heat and acids. But to return to the cure at the same
time that great attention was paid to blood-letting, other remedies were not
neglected, especially whatever contributed to diminish the quantity of fluids
in the system and carried off the redundant matter in the first passages, was
proportionably efficacious in diminishing the inflammatory action, such as
cathartics and other evacuants, which were employed as being secondarily the
most powerful remedies, particularly when alternated with bleeding, which
appeared to be the most judicious way of using them, those that were preferred
were such on whose powerful action reliance could be had and when the stomach
was sick required but a small quantity to answer the purpose at the same time
being agreeable to the palate. Calomel possesses most of those properties, and
under certain circumstances could be administered with the greatest advantage.
This medicine was first employed here in large doses by Doctor Rush, and
afterward generally adopted by the practitioners of this city. It should be
given in large doses until it has the desired effect and should be expedited in
it is operation by giving laxative glysters; when the functions of the stomach
were not much deranged which was sometimes the case, the saline purgatives were
made use of, such as sal Glauberi, which were powerful, less stimulating than
the calomel, and of course better antiphlogistics, answering the purpose
equally well, as the object was merely to reduce the energy of the system and
carry off the bilious matter.

During the time those remedies are employed it is hardly necessary to observe
that the patient should abstain from all preparations of animal food, and when
any thing is required it should be gruel, panada, etc. he should use cool
diluting drinks, such as barley water, apple water, and those that are mild and
bland; he may be indulged with small quantities of ripe fruits, which are
agreeable and beneficial by tending to keep the bowels open. Emeties have been
sometimes employed in this stage of the disease with a view to evacuate the
contents of the stomach, but they are seldom used with advantage, for their
highly stimulating power almost always increased every symptom, which of course
precluded their use.

To relieve the violent pain in the head, blisters were employed after general
evacuation had been made use of as far as appeared advisable, but previous to
their application to the neck there were several cupping-glasses set on the
part to be blistered, this mode of practice generally afforded considerable
relief.

It was the custom of some of the French physicians in this city to wrap the
patient's body in a blanket that had been wrung out of warm vinegar and water
in order to induce sweat and a solution of the disease. The former it did
sometimes partially effect, but generally with aggravation of almost every
other symptom. In addition to this practice they frequently gave a few grains
of nitre and camphor in every stage of the disease, but this appeared trifling
with the patient at the expense of his life.

With respect to the chambers of the sick, they should be spacious and airy,
kept cool, and frequently sprinkled with vinegar; great attention should be
paid to these circumstances as they are of infinite importance to those who
frequent the apartments of the sick, and are highly conducive to the cure of
the disease.

Having thus far taken notice of the remedies suitable to answer the first
indication, I come now to a consideration of the second, viz. to alleviate or
remove certain distressing symptoms, such as violent vomiting, costiveness,
flatulency, great restlessness and want of sleep, together with the means used
to divert the deep desponding state of mind of the patient.

First, to moderate the excessive vomiting too often baffled the art and
sagacity of every practitioner, however, various means were employed to effect
it, which may be divided into external and internal; among the former was
blistering the different parts of the body, particularly the region of the
stomach. This remedy from its obvious good effect in cholera morbus would have
induced most people to conjecture that it would have been beneficial in this
disease; but from repeated trials it seemed to have but little influence on the
state of the stomach. Blisters have been recommended to be applied to the legs
by Dr Hume of Jamaica, from which he experienced very good effects, but however
serviceable this mode of practice may have been in the West Indies, it appeared
here only to torture the patient's feelings without the least abatement of the
vomiting; warm bathing was employed in this stage of the disease, sometimes
with a mitigation of the vomiting, but frequently it increased the sickness at
the stomach and produced syncope. In some cases, the application of flannels
wrung out of a warm and strong infusion of aromatics and applied constantly to
the region of the stomach, were sometimes serviceable, but external
applications taken in the aggregate seemed seldom to promise much advantage.

With respect to internal remedies, almost every antiemetic was employed that
the experience of physicians had found useful, but frequently without having
the desired effect, such as the saline mixture in the state of effervescence;
the infusion of rad. Columbo, cinnamon water with liquid laudanum; the
peppermint julep with tinct. Thebaic. and the different articles of drink both
cool and tepid, such as barley water, toast water, apple water, lemonade,
chamomile tea, and a variety of other drinks during the inflammatory period,
after which small doses of tinct. cort. Peruv. with Spt. lavend. comp. was
administered with a good effect, particularly when the symptoms of violent
inflammation of the stomach did not contraindicate its use; and it was
especially serviceable in such patients who had been accustomed to an irregular
mode of life, and drank to excess of spirituous liquors; for when every other
article was immediately rejected it generally continued on the stomach, the
mucilaginous vitriolic mixture Which is mucilage of gum arabic acidulated with
elixir of vitriol.
was used to advantage, and small quantities of wine, porter, cider, or brandy
and water was of service by giving tone to the debilitated stomach.

Fresh buttermilk was frequently found grateful to the sick and very beneficial
as an antiemetic even when from the symptoms it might be concluded that the
stomach was highly inflamed. Likewise a teaspoonful of crem. tart. dissolved in
sugar and water was known to stay on the stomach and pass through the bowels,
when every other medicine and drink was instantly rejected: this medicine was
administered with a view to remove costiveness, which should always be guarded
against in this disease, but the patient finding it so effectual in stopping
vomiting he frequently had recourse to it without being costive with the same
good effect; in several other cases it was made use of but was too often
instantly rejected; castor oil administered under similar circumstances had the
like effect; but this was not often the case, although I have frequently known
it to continue on the stomachs of people violently sea-sick and remove
costiveness when drink of every kind was immediately thrown up. During the
excessive sickness at the stomach in the progress of this disease, it may be
observed that generally the most agreeable medicine and drinks were less
frequently rejected than those of an unpleasant quality, for no sooner did a
draught of any liquid reach the stomach than it was instantly rejected with
violence, it is not to be apprehended from the quality but merely from the
quantity, therefore the patient should not take more than a table-spoonful at a
time, his own feeling with respect to fullness and sickness at the stomach
should always determine the frequency and quantity of drinks to be taken,
however insatiably thirsty he may be, in conjunction with these precautions the
body should be kept as quiet as possible, for the least accelerated motion of
it frequently brought on a paroxysm of vomiting. During this perturbed state of
the stomach Dr Mosely thinks a diaphoretic plan should be adopted, with James's
powders, in order to relieve the internal irritation by revulsion, and enable
the stomach to bear purgatives, which always, says he, carries off the
offending humor Page 448.
with due deference to the experience of Mosely I cannot help dissenting from
him in opinion, and seem to think that he has almost forgotten the irritable
and even frequently inflamed state of the stomach, or surely he would not have
recommended an irritating medicine to soothe an irritation which would come
very near in contact with the villous coat of the stomach, and consequently
from its irritating quality would induce a contraction of that viscus in order
to expel it, accompanied with exquisite torture, a practice which few
physicians would not consider as highly erroneous and extremely prejudicial.

To remove costiveness and flatulency, which were extremely distressing through
the course of this disease, was always a very difficult matter to accomplish,
particularly when there was much sickness at the stomach, with vomiting, for
the intestines were frequently very sluggish in their action, and the stomach
generally rejected every class of purgative medicines. When this was the case,
there was no alternative but that of keeping the bowels open by purgative or
laxative glysters, and those were subject to considerable inconvenience when
they could be administered, which was not often the case, for they frequently
cleared but the lower part of the intestines, whilst those approximating the
stomach were generally distended with faeces, and was an incessant source of
irritation to the sympathizing stomach. Therefore whenever there was a chance
of success in the administration of purgative medicines they were always
attempted, for they generally cleared the whole tract of intestinal canal, and
frequently procured a mitigation of the vomiting, but if they were rejected,
they were not frequently repeated, for fear of exhausting the strength of the
patient without contributing to his relief. By thus keeping the intestinal
canal clear of faeces, you in some measure obviated flatulency. But in an
advanced period of the disease, the stomach and intestines were so much
debilitated, that they frequently had not energy sufficient, when apparently
clear of faeces, to expel the wind either upwards or downwards, but it
continued as it were stationary tormenting the patient. During this state when
the stomach was tolerably tranquil, a strong infusion of semen faeneculi was
administered mixed in a small quantity of brandy with advantage, particularly
when alternated with some agreeable tonic, such as the mucilaginous vitriolic
mixture already recommended, if nothing contraindicated its use, or a small
quantity of a strong infusion of spices, which sometimes afforded relief, but
those symptoms too frequently baffled every attempt to remove them.

The next circumstance that commands attention is the extreme restlessness and
want of sleep. Generally by quieting the former the fatigue from the long
wakefulness will frequently induce the latter. This indication was most
effectually answered by opium, the propriety of employing of which has engaged
the attention of many of the tropical writers, by one it is much approved of,
Hillary's observations, page 160.
by another it is absolutely condemned very justly during the inflammatory
period, as being highly stimulating and acrid, the use of which says he must be
attended with imminent danger. Dr Mosely.
In the subsequent stages good effects have been experienced from the use of
it, particularly in the second and last stages of the disease, in the former by
inducing sleep, consequently refreshing the patient and enabling him in some
measure to resist the extreme violence of the disease, in the latter it
afforded consolation by lulling the inquietude and smoothing the avenue to
death.

With regard to the last head of the second indication, viz. that of diverting
the gloomy and desponding thoughts of the patient, this was attended with
almost insurmountable difculties however it should be always attempted by the
most encouraging language and assurance of a complete recovery, for on this the
favorable termination of the disease much depends. The patient should not be
told that he has the yellow fever even if demanded, for I have known a patient
faint in this disease from an unguarded expression, and afterward die
apparently from a slight attack, for no art could persuade him that his
dissolution was not approaching with hasty speed. Therefore great
circumspection should be observed and the patient encouraged with as much
consistency and boldness as possible, for most of the sick that were slightly
indisposed, would seize hold of the least dubious expression, particularly if
dropped by the physician, respecting their recovery. But after doing this you
should take an opportunity of stating the circumstances clearly to the
connections with the prospect of success, or if you should not succeed the
ignorant and illiberal will censure your conduct.

I come now to the third and last indication which was of all others the most
difficult to accomplish, viz. to support the sinking tone and perishing vigor
of the system, this indication is applicable to the second, but more
particularly to the last stage of the disease, for the latter being an
augmentation of the symptoms of the former, sometimes much diversified,
requiring more powerful remedies. Whenever a change was perceived in the system
indicating that debility was commencing, the nature of the disease must be
considered as materially different, consequently requiring a particular mode of
treatment; the patient should not be restricted to a vegetable diet or watery
drinks, especially if there are no violent symptoms indicating inflammation of
the stomach May not all those symptoms of increased action and inflammation in
the vessels of the stomach at this period of the disease, when the system is so
much debilitated, be supported by an atony subsisting in the diseased vessels
and requiring stimuli to remove it, similar to those recommended by authors to
cure what is called passive inflammation.
, stimuli should be employed both external and internal, according to the state
of debility prevalent in the system, such as blisters to the different parts of
the body in order to excite the system; for the application there when deferred
to a more advanced period was rather of disservice, for the strength of the
patient was so far exhausted, that the parts blistered soon became black and
sphacelated, sometimes attended with profuse haemorrhagy. Therefore their
application was discontinued in the last stage of the disease. Washing the
whole body in brandy and water, or when that could not be complied with, the
face, breast and hands, which always proved refreshing to the sick; cold water
thrown over the head and shoulders, morning and evening, frequently had a good
effect, by giving vigor and supporting the excitement already effected by
stimuli; likewise it invariably induced sleep, with a gentle moisture on the
skin The following case, corroborates the practice of cold bathing in this
stage of the disease. In September last a miller residing on Pennypeck, caught
the malignant fever by coming into Philadelphia; during his illness, the
physician who attended him took the infection from him, and in the course of
the disorder became delirious, and about the third day from the attack (...)
escaped from his attendants through a window with only his shirt and breeches,
and jumped into a mill-dam, from whence he was taken and carried to his bed,
when breaking out into a violent sweat, he was thereby relieved and recovered.
At the time of indisposition, when the patient eloped, it may be concluded that
he was in the second stage of the disease, which is the time cold bathing
should be employed.
. In addition to the external stimuli already mentioned, smapisms should be
applied to the feet and when there were no symptoms contraindicating the use of
internal remedies, such as violent symptoms of inflammation in the stomach,
they should be administered, and one would imagine, from the declining vigor of
the system, that bark as standing foremost in the class of tonic medicines
would be eminently serviceable The intermittent and remittent fevers, mentioned
in a note in the history of this disease, were cured by emetics and the bark,
the latter continued on the stomach as well as usual.
in supporting the energy of the system. Upon this ground it is to be
apprehended that Doctor Kuhn recommended the cortex and wine in this disease,
the former of which in some cases was serviceable particularly when the
functions of the stomach were not much deranged, but nausea and vomiting were
so invariably present, that in almost all cases in whatever manner or form it
was administered it always, at least in my practice, proved detrimental Except
to use it in small doses to quiet the perturbed stomach -- given under the
circumstances formerly mentioned.
, particularly when given by the mouth; for it seldom if ever failed to derange
the state of the stomach in such a manner that it was not susceptible of
retaining any other medicine or drink, when administered in the form of
glysters mixed with London porter and laudanum it did not seem to have any good
effect, for they generally produced a painful sensation over the whole abdomen.
This was sometimes the case even when a common laxative glyster was given, so
that the patient could scarcely retain it a moment. During the time bark was
employed, wine was given, beginning with claret or any other weak wine; but if
there was great defect in the vigor of the system, Madeira was soon found
necessary, if wine could not be taken by the patient, brandy diluted with
water, porter or cider may be substituted; these should be increased in
quantity, according to the state of the stomach and degree of feebleness in the
pulse, at the same time elix. vit. was employed as a tonic; for the bark the
most powerful of all tonics, was found to disagree with the stomach, and was
therefore always omitted, except during the convalescent state, and an entire
dependence was placed in the medicine recommended, together with the wine or
its substitute which should be admistered in large quantities, and continued
until the pulse from being small and sinking, became full, round, and tolerably
strong, the heat more equally diffused, the delirium abating and the patient
becoming more cheerful; such were frequently the effects of those stimuli, and
even when the strength appeared almost exhausted, they would revive and keep up
the spark of life, and sometimes in the most deplorable cases, restore perfect
health and vigor.

However great caution should be observed in the administration of wine that
when the most urgent symptoms are mitigated, and some of them removed, that the
quantity should be diminished gradatim; but should the dangerous symptoms
return, it must be augmented with caution, for fear of hurrying the excitement
beyond the powers of the system inducing indirect debility with haemorrhagies
from different parts of the body: this is not unfrequently the case with those
stimuli, and cold bathing, particularly if the stomach is not in a fit
situation to receive such nutritious articles as would impart a sufficient
degree of energy to render the fluctuating excitement more permanent and
equable: if an adequate quantity of the abovementioned stimuli cannot be taken
to raise the excitement, small doses of volatile alkali may be given with
advantage, increasing the dose as the urgent symptoms may demand. This practice
was more expedient if the patient could take some nourishment that was light
and agreeable, such as panada or gruel, or if there was a slight return of
appetite, some preparation of animal food should be given, such as weak broth,
and at times a few oysters, if the stomach would bear them; however, great
caution should be observed in making use of solid food. If any is advisable,
oysters certainly are the most proper, as they are the most easy of digestion,
affording a sufficient quantity of nourishment.

Having thus far imperfectly sketched the different remedies found most
expedient and beneficial in the cure of this disease, it remains only to take
notice of the conduct to be observed by the patient during the convalescent
state, which was generally tedious, particularly when the disease had been
remedied by profuse evacuations, the recovery was considerably protracted and
precarious, the patient acquiring strength but slowly, and sometimes having a
tendency to ascites: during the recovery the patients should be very
circumspect in their conduct for fear of a relapse of fever; they should choose
food most easy of digestion; eat moderately; and take a dose of bark two or
three times a day, to assist digestion and invigorate the debilitated system.
In addition to this medicine a liberal quantity of wine should be allowed, but
never suffered to be carried beyond the cheerful glass, or that moment it will
become prejudicial. With these, moderate exercise should be conjoined, for on
it the recovery much depends; the bowels should be kept open; the night air
avoided; and every other circumstance attended to, that is found useful and
recommended by authors on this subject.

DISSECTIONS.
1st. The brain was found in all its parts in a natural condition.

2d. The viscera of the thorax were perfectly sound, the blood, however, in the
heart and veins was fluid, similar in its consistence to the blood of persons
who had been hanged, or destroyed by electricity.

3d. The stomach and beginning of the duodenum were the parts that appeared
most diseased in two persons who died with the disease on the fifth day, the
villous membrane of the stomach, especially about its smaller end was found
highly inflamed, and this inflammation extended through the pylorus into the
duodenum some way; the inflammation here was exactly similar to that induced in
the stomach by acrid poisons, as by arsenic, which we have once had an
opportunity of seeing in a person destroyed by it.

The bile in the gall bladder was quite of its natural color though very
viscid.

In another person, who died on the eighth day of the disease, several spots of
extravasation were discovered between the membranes, particularly about the
smaller end of the stomach, the inflammation of which had considerably abated:
Pus was seen in the beginning of the duodenum and the villous membrane at this
part was thickened.

In two other persons who died at a more advanced period of the disease, the
stomach appeared spotted in many places, with extravasations, and the
inflammation disappeared, it contained, as did also the intestines, a black
liquor similar to what had been vomited and purged before death; this black
liquor appears clearly to be an altered secretion from the liver, for a fluid
in all respects of the same quality was found in the gall bladder; this liquor
was so acrid that it induced considerable inflammation and swelling on the
operator's hands, which remained some days, the villous membrane of the
intestines in these last two bodies was found inflamed in several places.

The liver was of its natural appearance, excepting in one of the last persons,
on the surface of which a very few distended veins were seen; all the other
abdominal viscera were of a healthy appearance.

The external surface of the stomach as well as of the intestines was quite
free from inflammation, the veins being distended with blood, which appeared
through the transparent peritoneum, gave them a dark color, the stomach of
those who died early in this disease was always contracted, but in those who
died at a more advanced period of it, when extravasations appeared, it was
distended with flatus.

THE END.

