CONGREGATIONALISM, AS CONTAINED IN THE SCRIPTURES, EXPLAINED BY THE CAMBRIDGE
PLATFORM, AND BY APPROVED AUTHORS: Or, the RIGHT and POWER of CONGREGATIONAL
CHURCHES to choose their OFFICERS, to exercise DISCIPLINE, and to remove their
OFFICERS from OFFICE, according to the PLATFORM.

In a SERIES of LETTERS to a GENTLEMAN from his FRIEND.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, JANUARY, 1794.

CONGREGATIONALISM, etc.
LETTER. I.
SIR,
WITH pleasure I take my pen to answer the questions you put to me. What is the
RIGHT and POWER of Congregational Churches, to choose their Officers; to
exercise Discipline; and to remove their Officers from their Office, according
to the CAMBRIDGE PLATFORM?

These enquiries are truly of importance: since people appear to be divided in
their sentiments about them.

Perhaps I shall not be able to give a satisfactory answer to your questions;
but, since you have desired it, I will give you my idea of the subject, which I
have acquired by attending to the principles and practice of Congregational
Churches, as I find them by their writers, both before and since their
Platform, as well as the Platform itself. This you will allow is a just way to
determine the Right and Power by the Platform; as those who composed, and
practiced upon it, must be allowed to be the best interpreters of it.

And though the Platform was composed by men under very different circumstances
from what we are in this day; and having a different phraseology, and it being
but short and summary; there is some obscurity as to the meaning of it, in all
its parts; yet, by recurring to the writings of those who lived in those days,
we may find what their principles and practice were, and learn what the meaning
and extent of the Platform is.

You ask, what is the Right and Power of Congregational Churches to choose
their officers, etc. Many people seem to blend these together, as if whatever
any one has power to do, he has right to do also. But you will readily grant
there is a distinction to be made. Persons may have a right to have, or to do
things, which they have not power to do or perform: so also persons have power
to do many things which they have no right to do, else there could be no such
thing as evil works. Thus a thief has power to steal, to take some of my
property from me; a ruffian may have power to wound and murder me; a slanderer
may have power to destroy my character, and innumerable ways men may have power
to hurt and wrong one another. But perhaps no one will in earnest pretend he
has any right to injure his neighbor.

This may be applied to Churches: If they are supposed to have right to do
every thing, they have power to do; the enquiry is wholly at an end, what is
their right and power; because, upon that supposition, they cannot do any thing
wrong; and this, as extravagant as it is, seems to be the real sentiment of
some; what else can be made of the professed sentiment and practice of those,
who assert that a Church may do as they please and not be responsible, or under
any check or control whatever? These however call themselves
Congregationalists, and sometimes they will say they are Independents, as if
both were the same thing. But the idea I have conceived of those two
denominations, by examining the writings of the founders of CONGREGATIONALISM,
is, that they are as different one from the other; as the system of religion
and policy, by Moses, was, from the confusion of Babel. Those of Babel
scattered into parties; and every person or party, did as they pleased,
independent of each other. The system of policy by Moses was a well connected
scheme, wherein was a proper subordination and check upon every individual
family, and tribe; being responsible to each other for their conduct; with as
much liberty to every individual as the present state admits of.

This is my idea of Congregationalism; it is a connected scheme, and, if well
adhered to, would produce great beauty and order.

You will see that, in my answer to your questions, I shall not content myself
in saying what Churches will do, or have power to do; but what they have both
right and power to do: and this leads to enquire into the nature and
constitution of Congregational Churches, which will be the subject of my
following letters.

LETTER. II.
SIR,
THE definition of a Congregational Church, as I find it by the Platform and
other writers, is, a number of professing believers in Christ, such as can
conveniently congregate together for worship, covenanting and confederating
together to observe all things whatsoever Christ has commanded.

This contains all his worship and ordinances; the sacraments and discipline of
his house; which consists in a friendly watch over each other, and using such
means as Christ, the King, has instituted for the reclaiming and recovering of
such as have fallen into any fault: and purging out or rejecting such as, after
such means are used with them as Christ has instituted for their re-recovery,
continue incorrigible.

This description of a Church, excludes from it every thing of the nature of
legislation. They covenant to execute laws already made by Christ, the King;
and no other. They cannot therefore, make any thing a crime, which is not made
so in God's word. Neither may they take any other method of proceeding, than
what Christ has instituted: if they do, they go out of their province, profane
the name of Christ, pretending to do that as a Church of Christ, i. e. in his
name, which he has not instituted. It would be as great an impropriety for any
Church to undertake to do thus; as it would be for any member of the judicial
or executive authority in America, to undertake to execute the laws and customs
of the piratical Algerines. And as much worse for any Church to do thus, as
much more heinously impious, as Christ the Lord, in whose name they pretend to
act, is greater than the authority of the American nation.

That such a covenanting together, is what constitutes a Church, was the idea
of the founders of Congregational Churches in this country, appears by other
writers as well as the Platform. Mr. Hooker, who was in the highest repute for
his piety, learning, and political genius, both in Europe and America, who
early emigrated into this country, and after a short stay at Newtown, near
Boston; he, with some planters, went to Connecticut River, to Hartford, there
they began a new colony, which, with the colony of Newhaven, is now the State
of Connecticut. It is said that Mr. Hooker instituted such a transcendent
system of state policy and laws for the colony, as that, when they applied to
the Crown for a charter, their constitution and laws commanded the admiration,
astonishment and applause of the most sage counselors in that old country,
which had for many ages been building on the policy of the Romans and
politicians of the whole world. This great man wrote his Survey of Church
Discipline, some years before the Platform was made; and if you compare, you
will find the Platform was very much founded upon it.

In his Survey, Part 1, page 46, he says, "Mutual covenanting and confederating
of Saints, in fellowship of the faith, according to the order of the Gospel, is
that which gives constitution and being to the visible Church." Again, speaking
of the same thing, "This Covenant is an engagement to walk in the ways of
Christ." "This covenant (he says) may be either explicit or implicit. Explicit,
when there is a formal covenant. Implicit, when they practice without a verbal,
written, or formal covenant; yet is binding by their thus practicing." Page 50,
to show the reasons of a Church Covenant; he compares it to corporations for
civil purposes. By the combination they have power over each other, for the
purposes for which they are combined.

The same idea is fully expressed in the Platform, Chap. iv. Sec. 1. "Saints,
by calling, must have a visible political union among themselves; or else they
are not yet a particular Church." Sec. 2d. "Particular Churches cannot be
distinguished one from another but by their forms.' Sec. 3d. "This form is a
visible covenant, agreement and consent, whereby they give themselves unto the
Lord, to the observing of the ordinances of Christ, together in the same
society; which is usually called the Church Covenant. For we see not otherwise
how members can have power one over another." Again, Chap. vi, Sec. 1. "A
church is a company of people combined together for the worship of God."

Mr. Davenport, who was first Minister of Newhaven after he came into this
country in 1639, afterward became Pastor of the first Church in Boston, in his
Power of Congregational Churches, which he wrote about 18 years after the
Platform, compares the Church to the natural body; to a body corporate; to a
wife with her husband; and says, "All voluntary relations are by covenant."
"Visible privileges, powers, etc. must be by visible confederation."

This covenant is for life, as essentially as the marriage covenant. Hence the
Platform utterly disapproves of persons forsaking the Church, Chap. xiii, Sec.
2d. "They who are joined with consent, should not depart without consent;
except forced thereto." Which force, as explained by the Platform, and other
writers, means personal or general persecution.

On this principle, the first settlers of New England acted; they did not
separate from the communion of the Church of England, but were driven out by
persecution, and brought this noble Christian spirit across the Atlantic, and
incorporated it into their Platform. This, I said, was a Christian spirit; for
Christ himself never separated from the communion of the Jewish Church; though
they were very corrupt and wicked in their principles and practices; but bore
testimony against them. I might add, that Martin Luther never separated from
the Church of Rome, but strove for a reformation; till he was driven out by the
thundering BULLS of the LATERAN: which he considered as a dissolution of his
solemn engagements. Thus he imitated his Lord and Master, Jesus Christ; which
every Christian is bound to do. And, I doubt not you will join with me, when I
assert, that for persons to separate from the Church, or withdraw from
communion with it, because of some faults or errors, real or supposed, in
opinion or practice, in the Pastor or some of the members, or indeed by the
whole Church; is schismatical, antichristian, and a flagrant violation of
covenant obligations, and solemn vows.

The Platform considers this covenant bond so indissolvable, that, as it may
not be broken by any part's separating; so neither may the body of the Church
dismember any one. Chap. xiii, Sec. 7th. "The Church cannot make a member no
member, but by excommunication."

This is not meant to preclude persons moving their habitations, when
Providence calls thereto; but they are still members of the same Church; until,
by letters recommendatory, they move their particular relation from one
particular church to another; and they are still members of the Church by the
same combination as long as they live, unless they so violate their covenant as
to forfeit it.

A forfeiture also dissolves the marriage covenant and relation. And that God's
Church, being formed by covenant, is of the same antiquity with the marriage
covenant, Mr. Davenport asserts it was so, even from ADAM.

As all covenants must be ratified before witnesses: and those of great
importance before some proper authority; so, this covenant or combination of a
Church, is to be solemnized and ratified in presence of witnesses; and the
authority of a Council of Churches; at least of Pastors of churches; who
consider the propriety of their thus covenanting, and combining in church
state; as also the fitness of the covenant they propose; the members sign the
covenant in their presence. And the Council of Churches, or Pastors, thus
publicly own the new church, a new branch, or member added to the body of the
Churches. And thus they are consociated with the other churches, by covenant of
fellowship and combination, in their very formation. Their covenant among
themselves and their consociation with other churches, are blended and ratified
by a most religious solemnization. See Platform, Chap. xv, Sec. 3d. and
Mather's Ratio Disciplinae, page 8 and 9.

Thus, Sir, I have given you my idea of the formation of a Congregational
Church; I shall in my next give you my notion of the ORGANIZATION of a Church
with officers.

LETTER III.
SIR,
ALTHOUGH a number of professing believers combined together to observe all
things whatsoever Christ has commanded, are a Church: yet they cannot perform
what they have covenanted and combined for; without being ORGANIZED with
Officers.

Christ has, therefore, instituted Officers proper for the executing of all
those laws and ordinances which he has commanded.

What those officers are, seems to have undergone a variety of sentiments among
Christians of various denominations; and even among Congregationalists.

Mr. Hooker evidently supposed, there should be Pastor and Teacher, Ruling
Elders and Deacons. And the Platform is evidently composed with the same idea.
Yet the Synod which assembled at Boston, in 1662, but 14 years after the
Platform was made; in their result assert, that, "A Church with a teaching
Elder have full power and authority, from the Lord Jesus, regularly to
administer all the ordinances of Christ." This being so soon after the Platform
was made, there can be no doubt but that most of the same men were in this
Synod, that were in making the Platform. And this being done by the same
authority, and mostly by the same persons the Platform was; may be considered
as an appendix to it, and of the same authority, in these churches with that:
and the general practice of these churches, having been according to it, I
shall not enquire after any other ruling Officer in Christ's Church, beside a
teaching Elder, Pastor, or Bishop.

This Officer is to teach and administer all things whatsoever Christ has
commanded. He is necessarily and essentially a Ruler; for rule, government, and
authority, must accompany a Teacher. Accordingly, the Ministers of Christ are
spoken of as Rulers in his House, frequently in the New Testament: and Christ's
addressing the Churches, by addressing the Angel of the Church, is evidence
that he considers it so. Such an Officer is now certainly belonging to the
Church of Christ, as appears from what he says, Matt. xxviii. Lo I am with you
always to the end of the world.

There is also another Officer instituted in Christ's Church to take care of
the temporalities thereof, who is called Deacon.

These two Officers appear plain, according to scripture, to belong to the
Church. But the first is the principal one, without which the spiritual
institutions of Christ's Kingdom cannot be executed. Which therefore will be
the principal subject of enquiry.

LETTER IV.
SIR,
I HAVE in my former letter considered what Officers are essential to the
Church of Christ. I will now say something how a Church is to be furnished with
those Officers according to Congregational principles. I shall specially attend
to the first, without which the Church is incapable of carrying into execution
what they have covenanted and combined to do.

Here again are a variety of opinions and practices. Episcopatians suppose a
National Church, of which the King, or Supreme Magistrate, is head; who
appoints Archbishops and Bishops, having certain districts or bishoprics,
containing a number of parishes, over which the Bishops appoint Curates, who
are to their several parishes the same as Ministers are to our congregations.
But here is no select Church, therefore no covenant, neither with each other,
nor with their teacher; and he receives all his official authority from the
bishop who send him. Here Church power and authority is derived from the King,
primarily; and to the several orders from the higher dignitaries.

Presbyterians suppose that all ecclesiastical authority is in the Sessions,
Presbyteries, Synods and General Assembly: this last body is the highest
authority in the Presbyterian Church. They admit lay Elders; but the
brotherhood have no more voice in choosing their officers, exercising dicipline
or removing their officers, than Episcopalian parishes have in choosing their
officers, etc.

These schemes, or plans of church policy, the Congregationalists disliked;
supposing that they derived all church power and authority, both official and
fraternal, directly from Christ; that they were not dependent on any superior
order of men therefore. Hence they were called Independents. This they also
disliked, and expressly rejected; as may be found in many of the early writers
of this country, and particularly is rejected in the Platform, Chap. ii, Sec.
5th. For they held strong to a reciprocal dependence, duty and obligation upon,
and toward each other: not only of members in the same congregation; but of
Churches one upon, and to another. Hence one of their early writers, said of
Congregational Churches, that they were INTERPENDENT.

But Independents admit of no such reciprocal obligation, connection or
dependence; and hold themselves at a loose to do just as they please, without
any check or control. They sometimes affect to have connection with
Congregationalists, to serve a turn, and when it serves their turn will not
admit they are connected. Wild enthusiastic ranters, who do not admit ordinary
Ministers, but that every one might pray, exhort, etc. RAPIN THOYRAS, in his
History of England, calls Independents; this however need not be considered as
inconsistent with calling any other disorderly people Independents, for they
are properly the strange woman, Solomon speaks of. "Her ways are moveable that
thou can not know them," they are properly an anarchy, a chaos; rather than
any rule, order, or system.

The first settlers of this country were harrassed and pressed between these
two extremes, of Prelacy on the one hand, and selfish, self sufficient,
ungoverned disorderly Independents on the other; and it is not to be wondered
at, if their Platform is tinctured in phraseology with both; but especially
with the latter, to avoid the former, by which they were greatly persecuted.
Yet inspired with the generous and christian principles of reciprocal duty, by
love to serve one of another, considering all Christ's Church as members one of
another, members of the same body, having the same care one for another, that
therefore all connexions and relations in his kingdom are voluntary covenant
combinations. They have considered, not only their embodying in church state, a
covenant combination: but their organization with officers a covenant.

Thus Mr Hooker, "There is (says he) a particular covenant between those that
choose, and those that are chosen' and says, "The relation between Pastor and
people is a covenant: that without this covenanting, there neither is, or ever
was, or ever will be, a Pastor and Flock" Mr. Hooker further asserts, that "By
choosing an officer they voluntarily subject themselves to him, according to
the laws and orders of Christ." The same says Mr. Davenport, "The relation
between pastor and people is a covenant." The Platform is very full in the same
idea, Chap. viii. The organizing with officers is by the election of the Church
and the acceptance of the person chosen. Here is all the form and essence of a
covenant, a proposal on the one part; and the acceptance of the proposal on the
other part. The Church choose him to be such an officer therein as Christ has
instituted; they covenant and engage to submit to him as such an officer. And
he, by his acceptance, covenants and engages to be such an officer to them; so
it is a mutual covenant and engagment on both sides.

Here also, in the Congregational system, the corporate body or parish,
including the Church; by a corporate act concur with the Church in their
election or choice; and make proposals to the officer for his support and
maintenance, by which there is a parochial civil covenant and contract, blended
with his office, to both Church and parish; by all which the Minister's
relation to his people, becomes a complex relation; formed by a triplicate
covenant with them. This also is for life, for it is so connected with the
incorporating covenant of the Church, of which he is a member, and blended with
his calling, which includes his local situation, that they cannot properly or
consistently be separated; he is a member of the body, and covenants to be such
a member. This complex covenant, when properly solemnized, cannot be dissolved;
unless by consent of all parties concerned, or the Minister forfeits it, by
doing something inconsistent with his office, as Christ has instituted the
office; for it is not for the Church to say what shall belong to the office;
they may not presume to add to, or diminish from the duties or powers belonging
thereto; for Christ has determined the duties and powers of it. And it is not
for the Church, or any man or order of men, to add to, or diminish therefrom;
if they do presume any such thing, they expose themselves, to have all the
plagues added to them written in God's word; and to have their names taken away
out of the Book of Life. Rev. xxii. 18, 19. This threatening in God's word,
should make all very careful how they treat the laws of Christ, both as to his
Ministers and all matters of discipline in his Church.

But though a single Congregational Church has both right and power to choose
and covenant with their officer, i. e. Elder or Pastor. Or, as it is sometimes
termed, call to office; yet it cannot, according to scripture, or
Congregational principles or custom, put into office.

I shall in my next letter give you my idea of the Congregational principles
and practice of investing or putting into office.

LETTER V.
SIR,
AS I wrote you in my last letter, I shall now speak of ORDINATION,
INSTALLATION, or putting into office.

I find much dispute has been about ordination. Some think it ought to be
before election. I shall not enter that dispute; it being foreign from my
purpose; for if a man has been ordained, yet according to Congregational
principles and practice, he must be installed in office where he settles;
before he is considered as the officer in that place. In which every ceremony
is performed, which is in ordination, except the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery.

This laying on of the hands of the Presbytery in ordination, according to 1 Timothy iv. 14. is what is considered as the ceremony confering the Presbytery,
which Christ has instituted in his Church; so that this is something distinct
from, and independent of, the person's particular relation to any people.

But what I have to enquire after, is, the ordaining or installing a man in
that office relation to a Congregation. This, as I have before observed, from
Mr. Hooker and others, is a covenant, and all covenants as I have before said,
must be ratified before witnesses, and by proper authority, which the
constitution, law, or custom has assigned for that purpose. Especially all
covenants of any great importance must be ratified and solemnized with all
those formalities. So the Platform, Chap. i. Sec. 4. speaking of Church
affairs, says, "In respect of the manner according to civil and Church custom."
And Chap. ix, Sec. 2. "Ordination is the solemn putting a man into his office in
the Church, being like installing a magistrate in the Commonwealth." Mr. Hooker
speaks the same, Preface, page 16.

Here then, according to the Platform and Mr. Hooker; Ordination is the solemn
installing the man in his office. And as it is fixing him in office relation to
a congregation or flock, it is solemnizing the covenant between him and his
people by proper authority.

This leads to enquire what is proper authority, for solemnizing this covenant,
according to congregational principles and Church custom.

The Platform considers the power of ordination of their Pastor to be in the
Church; but with this proviso, that the Elders of other Churches may do it, if
the Church where the officer is to be ordained desire it.

This sentiment in the Platform is obscure, and seems to favor lay ordination,
and is that on which some wild, haughty, arrogant, supercilious, separately,
independent people, have pretended to justify lay ordination. But though there
might be some degree of mistake in the first settlers of this country as to
this matter; yet they are in my opinion, very excusable, seeing they had been
so oppressed, harrassed and persecuted with prelatical impositions and
depositions of Pastors; it would be strange, if not a miracle, if mere men,
however wise and pious, should not vibrate in some degree into the opposite
extreme; yet Dr. Styles, who has spared no labor and attention to investigate
the principles and customs of these Churches ever since the first settlement in
this land, says, "that he has never found with certainty, more than one
instance of lay ordination of a person never before ordained, the last century;
and this was done by advice, and under the inspection, of Ministers ordained by
Bishops in England, one of whom prayed at the solemnity of consecration, and
all gave their approbation and right hand of fellowship, which, in my opinion,
says this ecclesiastical historian, amounts to their performing the ordination
themselves, they being present and assisting in the transaction." (Election
Sermon, page 60, 62.) It is worthy to be noticed, that although they a short
time entertained a mistake about lay ordination; yet at the same time held to,
and practiced fellowship and consociation of Churches in the putting or
constituting in office; so that even their mistake makes no precedent for what
self sufficient, schismatical Independents pretend to make from it, viz. of a
right and power to ordain and depose of themselves alone.


The Doctor further observes, the time was very short in which this idea
prevailed, and providentially brought no mischief, as the body of the Pastors
had been ordained by Bishops in England. And says, that the ordination of our
Clergy is regular and scriptural and may be traced in the line of Presbyters up
to the Apostolic age.

Through this mistake, which those pious Patriarchs of this country were, as I
have observed, drove into; we may heartily and justly attribute that obscurity
in the Platform about ordination or installation. Yet by other writings soon
after, and the custom which uniformly prevailed among Congregational Churches
professedly on the Platform, it appears that the meanning of the Platform is;
that the power of ordination or installation is in every Congregational Church
in such a sense, as that no Bishop, Prelate or Presbytery have any right to
impose a Minister upon them: but that their Minister or Elder, shall be
ordained or installed by coordinate Elders or Presbyters in Council of Churches
of their own choice, jointly with their Pastor elect, who is a party in the
solemnity. So that here is another covenant; for upon Congregational principles
every Church transaction is, according to covenant or confederation, a
voluntary covenant transaction; in opposition to being forced by superior
power: see Mr. Davenport, page 29, and onward. Thus, in ordination or
installation of a Pastor, the Church sends out, with consent of the Pastor
elect, to such Churches as they please, inviting them with their Pastor and
delegates to come and join in Council to ordain or install their Pastor elect.
They come, look into their state and order; their covenant with their Pastor
elect, and his qualifications for the office; and conclude to proceed, or not,
as they find circumstances. If they find all things proper, they proceed; and
in the most public and solemn manner, ordain and solemnize the covenant between
Pastor and People. And there covenant with both Pastor and people, in that
relation to each other, by the RIGHT HAND OF FELLOWSHIP.

Here is the most public, solemn, religious covenant and combination of
fellowship, union and reciprocity, consociating for mutual help, one to another.

Here is covenant upon covenant, one covenant solemnizing and ratifying
another; the strongest, most solemn and sacred combination, professedly
solemnized, even as an oath before God, Angels and Men, as witnesses to the
confederation.

That what I have said, is the true intent and meaning of the Platform, though
but obscurely hinted therein, is evident; since the Synod in 1662, about 14
years after, in which must doubtless be most of the same members, who composed
the Platform; in their result assert the communion, fellowship and consociation
of Churches; and that the ordination, translation and deposition of Elders are
important things to be performed by the consociation of Churches.

And this is of the more authority not only, as there were the same men to
explain their meaning in the Platform: but it shows the sense of both Church
and State at that time; as this Synod was convened by the order of the General
Court to answer certain questions, one of which was, "Whether, according to the
word of God, there ought to be a consociation of Churches; and what should be
the manner of it."

They answer that there ought to be a consociation of Churches; and propose
about the same which is now partly practiced in Connecticut, viz. those who
live in a convenient vicinity to consociate; though with liberty reserved,
without offense, to make use of others. They assert, that "there has
constantly been in these Churches a profession of communion, in giving the
right hand of fellowship at the gathering of a Church and ordination of Elders,
which imports a consociation, and obliges to the practice of it." Here is
the highest evidence of there being a constant profession of communion in these
Churches from the beginning in giving the right hand of fellowship at the
gathering of Churches and ordination of Elders; for this was but about 41 years
after the first arrival at Plymouth, and there cannot be a doubt but that there
were many men in this Synod who had been eye witnesses all that time of the
things they asserted: there is also the witness of the General Court of the
same thing in their approbation and acceptance of that result; which two bodies
of men, so venerable, honorable and respectable, is such superlative evidence
of the order and fellowship of Congregational Churches in this country from the
beginning, as ought to silence and shame all those schismatics who arrogantly
and insolently pretend to patronize their disorderly Independent sentiments and
conduct by the Platform.

Dr. Increase Mather, who was on the stage when that result was made, in his
Testimony, in 1720, asserts, that agreeable to that result, there was a law of
the Colony which required the approbation of three or four Churches to every
ordination: so that we have it from the highest authority or evidence, that the
sense and practice of these Churches from the beginning was, that ordination,
translation, and deposition of Elders should be by communion, fellowship, or
consociation of Churches. And it also appears that both Church and State soon
after the Platform was made, were so far from that independent, schismatical,
despotic sentiment, which some of late a vow, that every individual
congregation has right and power alone to call and put into office and dismiss
from, and put out of office; that they made both a result of Synod and law of
the State against it. But though they supposed the forming into particular
consociations proper; yet, considering the whole body of Congregational
Churches one general consociation, out of which they might choose and employ
such as occasion called; this practice has uniformly prevailed, by which it is
become a Church custom, and, according to the Platform, is as binding as any
thing can be. Hence the forming into particular local consociations has never
prevailed in Massachusetts or Newhampshire.

You may perhaps conclude that I have brought in witnesses enough already
against those schismatical, insolent Independents, who do not blush to
challenge the pious founders of Congregationalism to be for them. Doubtless
when such an august body of witnesses, that venerable Synod of Divines, and
that honorable assembly of Politicians are brought in against those insolent
usurpers, it is deservedly enough to condemn them to perpetual banishment.

But witnesses throng in before me, as if eager to cast in their weight against
those defamers of the characters and principles of those pious fathers and
founders of Congregationalism.

Dr. Cotton Mather, in his Ratio Disciplinae, asserts, that the manner and
custom of solemnizing the ordination of a Pastor is by inviting in a Council of
other Churches and proceeding as above described. And this account which he
gives, you will allow to be incontestibly true, since there is an attestation,
to the truth of his account of the discipline of New England Churches, by his
father, Dr. Increase Mather; who according as he asserts his age, at the time
of signing his attestation, was ten years old when the Platform was made, and
had been above seventy years an eye witness of the practice of the Churches
upon it from the beginning. And it is well known that he was a man of
unquestionable probity, great learning, universal knowledge, uncommon
observation and accuracy. And he, in the same attestation, asserts in behalf of
New England Churches, that they disliked and disclaimed the name Independent:
And that the reason that name was imposed upon them was, because they disowned
a dependence on superior ecclesiastical power on earth, from which to derive
their forms and officers: But says, they revere Synods and Ecclesiastical
Councils. He also in the same attestation speaks of Mr. Hooker's Survey of
Church Discipline; as being esteemed a most accurate logical composure; as
unanswerable; had the approbation of all the Ministers that were then in that,
and the next colony, (i. e.) Connecticut and Massachusetts Bay colonies. The
same Mr. Hooker says, the Dr. "has leave to profess, that all or nearly all the
Elders of those colonies approved of what he had written, under their hands,
and, by their desire in a common meeting, of his publishing it." From which
writers, we have ample evidence, what the general sense and practice of the
Ministers and Churches were, before and at the time of making the Platform; and
since for seventy years, which brings it to the time of many persons now living.

Another witness against Independents, that the ordination of a Pastor is a
covenant, and asserting the consociation of Churches, is Dr. Samuel Mather, who
in his Apology, says, "That our platform of Church discipline is deemed a
Covenant." And for the proof of this, he observes, that the platform was
composed by these churches in a body representative. And further to establish
this idea, he notices the unanimous vote of the Synod in 1679, approving of the
Platform for the substance of it, desiring that the Churches might continue
steadfast in the order of the Gospel according to what is therein held forth,
from the word of God.' The Dr. here observes, that the original compilers of
the Platform, as well as this Synod; reserved an entire and perpetual liberty
in their covenant and combination, to search the Scriptures and go according to
them; that, doing thus, they were still within this Consociating Covenant, and
fully kept it. He further argues, "that it is to be deemed a covenant from the
Synods and Councils which have met by virtue of it; maintaining a constant
fellowship, in many federal overt acts; and so have transmitted this covenant
they made to succeeding generations, in gathering new churches, and ordaining
Pastors from time to time; these churches, he says, have so often renewed their
original pact or covenant.

You will readily see from what has been offered from the writings and practice
of Congregationalists, why they so much disliked Independents. All men of
principle must detest them, they are properly a pest to society, while they
hold themselves at a loose from check or control; but Congregationalism is all
by covenants, holding themselves under the strongest ties, the most sacred
obligations: the whole scheme of church order and discipline, is by covenants,
by which the parties confederate together in the most solemn mutual engagement;
in which are many covenants blended together, viz. The Church Covenant, forming
or connecting an individual Church; which is blended with the Consociating
Covenant that combines the Churches together; and here is the Pastor's Covenant
with his people, both ecclesiastical and parochial, blended with the Church and
Consociating Covenant by the manner of ordaining or installing him in office by
the Fellowship of Churches. All which if it were only merely lawful thus to
unite, without its being any duty thus to combine, would be of the nature of a
vow; and could not be violated in any branch thereof without being highly
displeasing to God. Eccle. v. 4. When thou vowest a vow unto God defer not to
pay it; for he has no pleasure in fools. Hence for any people after they have
chosen and installed a minister; if they afterward conceive a notion that he
is weak or not so polite or popular a speaker as they wish for, or whatever; if
it be not a real crime that he is guilty of; for the people to raise a cry
against him to turn him away; is at least, after vows to make enquiry, as in
Prove. xx. 25, or, Saying before the Angel it was an error, Eccle. v. 4, that
they have made a foolish choice and covenant. This neither the law of God or
man admits of, that men should avail themselves of their own blunders, or to
stuliify themselves; for God has said, in this very case, he has no pleasure
in fools, but is angry with them to destroy the work of their hands.

The scriptures are very full and frequent in speaking against the violating of
covenants; covenant breakers are repeatedly reckoned in scripture, in the
blackest catalogue of criminals, and God often threatened and punished covenant
breakers in the severest manner. Thus the covenant which Joshua and the princes
of Israel made with the Gibeonites, though it was obtained by collusion, and
they were not the people they pretended they were, yet, God would not suffer
that covenant to be broken with impunity. You recollect how God afflicted the
whole nation of Israel for Readiness violating this Covenant with the Gibeonites,
many generations after it was made; and how Readiness posterity of the third
generation had to suffer even a violent ignominious death for his breaking this
Covenant; this shows how greatly God abhors Covenant breakers; and will not
forget their perfidy; they entail curses on their posterity.

This affair of the Gibeonites, and God's dealings respecting it, shows the
absurdity of their notion, who pretend that ancestors have no right to make
covenants binding on their posterity, that parents cannot make covenants to
affect or bind their children, that rulers cannot make covenants to affect or
bind their people: And, in a word, argue that no one can be obligated only by
his own personal act: Such very highly and daringly impeach the divine conduct
in the affair of the Gibeonites.

For there was a covenant made by Joshua and the princes of the congregation,
with the Gibeonites, which God held sacred above four hundred years after, and
punished all Israel with famine three years successively for Readiness breaking
this Covenant. And finally Readiness children and grandchildren many of them must
die for it, and then God was entreated for the land.

Covenant breakers of all kinds; and especially those who break this sacred
complex Covenant of which I am treating, in any branch of it, either with
individuals in the same Church, by separating, or otherwise; or with their
Minister, by forsaking of him, or by violently turning him away; or with other
Churches, by breaking fellowship with them; they would do well to consider what
an accumulated scene of wrath and curses from the Almighty they are treasuring
up for themselves and posterity.

Instances of God's threatening and punishing covenant breakers are numerous.
You remember how God threatened and punished Sennacharib for his perfidy in
breaking Covenant with Hezekiah. The Angel of the Lord destroyed an hundred and
eighty five thousand of his army in one night, and wholly broke it up: he went
home and there was treacherously and paricidiously assassinated when at his
devotion.

Zedekiah is another instance of God's threatening and punishing perfidy; when
he had sworn fealty to the King of Babylon, sent to Egypt for help against the
king he had sworn to. As I live, says the Lord God, surely in the place where
the King dwells, who made him King, whose oath he despised, and whose
Covenant he broke, even with him in the midst of Babylon he shall die. Ezekiel.
xvii. 16.

I need not multiply instances; you well remember, that God says, Though it be
but a man's Covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth, or adds
thereto.

But when it is considered that these Covenants of which I am treating are not
merely man's Covenants, but are God's Covenants, what he has instituted for us
to observe; and that his dealings with man are federal; even in innocence it
was a Covenant; and the scheme of restoration by grace, is a Covenant with
Christ, and through him with all believers, has given him for a Covenant of the
people; and has set us social ordinances to perform, commanding us to do them.
And when Christ, who is the Covenant of the people, in his last prayer, prayed
for their unity, and, by his Apostle, asserted, that his Church is one, as the
natural body, all the members caring one for another. This Church combination,
will appear to be, not merely a man's Covenant; and not only a personal
covenanting one with another; but a Covenant with God, commanded by him, and is
the strongest obligation upon every one of the members, bound by so many sacred
Covenants, that whoever presumes to violate this complicated confederation,
they make such a wound, fracture or dislocation in the body of Christ, as they
can never answer before him, who has declared, that, Who so shall offend one of
these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone
were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea.

For if offending the least member deserves such a heavy doom; what shall they
deserve who offend and wound the whole body; therein trampling on the divine
law; and violating their own most solemn and sacred vows and covenant personal
obligations.

By this view of the matter may be seen, in the most striking light, why Mr.
Hooker, the Platform, and other venerable writers, were so decidedly against
separations from the Church, and other schismatical conduct; even though there
are some things amiss which ought to be healed. And those who are sensible of
the disease should be in the use of such means as Christ instituted for
healing; and not rend away, wounding and dismembering the body.

If those that despised human temporal Covenants were subjected to such a heavy
doom, as Saul, Sennacherib and Zedekiah were; of how much sorer punishments
shall they be thought worthy who tread under foot so many sacred Covenants with
God, Jesus Christ, and one another.

LETTER. VI.
SIR,
A CHURCH formed and organized as I have said, is fitted to execute all those
laws and ordinances they confederate for.

Those things which are merely official, such as dispensing the word and
ordinances, leading and ruling the Church; are peculiarly and solely the
province of the Pastor, therefore do not strictly come under the present
enquiry about the right and power of the Church. But there is a right and power
of a Church thus organized to exercise DISCIPLINE; they all covenant to watch
over each other, not for their halting, but for their good; that if any one
falls, the other may help him up; if any one goes astray, i. e. does any thing
contrary to any divine rule; to use such means as Christ has instituted to
recover him. Hence, the Platform repeatedly asserts, that it is to be done to
EDIFICATION. In the 1st, Chap. Sec. 4th, says, with respect to the end, must be
done to edification. Again in the same Sec. "Must be done in such a manner as
is most expedient for edification; so that the end in view, or object to be
obtained in Church discipline, and the manner of obtaining it, must be for
edification. Or, as the Apostle says, by love to serve one another. And the
Platform in Chap. xiv. repeatedly asserts, that the object of Church discipline
is, to recover and gain a lapsed member.

In this every member has a right and power; and, it may be added, is under
obligation, by the laws of God, and by his own Covenant, to tell his brother
his fault, privately; and endeavor to recover him; and if he hear thee thou
have gained thy brother. If he will not, then to take one or two more, that in
the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.

But, if he neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church, Mat. xviii. This is
plain, simple, and easy to be understood; and is directed to by the Platform,
Chap. x. Sec. v. yet has of latter years seldom been practiced.

Many absurd notions, and wicked practices have been advanced to evade, and
avoid this plain simple law of the Lord Jesus Christ, the sole King and
Lawgiver of his Church. Some have in earnest pretended that this law of Christ
respected only private personal offenses, known only to the offender, and one
individual offended. But it is plain this cannot be any thing intended; for no
WORD is to be advanced to the Church, but what may be established by the mouth
of two or three witnesses.

To supply the want of witnesses they will obliquely charge the Person with
something, and demand of him whether it is not so? We understand you did, or
said -- You know whether you said so! Or, you must be sensible that you * * *
*. You ought to own the truth: DID NOT YOU SAY SO? If he will not deny it, he
is to be deemed guilty; or, however, if he declines owning or denying of it; he
is condemned as criminally obstinate. All such kind of procedures, you will
join with me in saying, are horridly wicked practices; have for their precedent
the Papal Inquisition; and that it is a real virtue in any one not to answer
such questions; because it is following the example of Christ, when he in like
manner, was accused and interrogated; and it ought to be remembered that, that
great example of the world, and especially of all christians, never did give a
direct answer to any captious question, in all we have recorded of him. And the
conduct of Christ when he was under trial show that he infinitely abhors such a
practice; that therefore he was infinitely far from intending any such thing,
in his Law in Matthew. 13th. And as all such or similar practices are not only
contrary to the Laws of Christ, but are contrary to human rights, as have long
been adopted and established in the English nation, and particularly and
expressly by the American States; that no man shall be compelled to accuse or
excuse himself, or produce witnesses against himself. Therefore such practice
is an insult upon, if not treason against the constitution and laws of both God
and man.

Another wicked practice to avoid this divine law of the Supreme Majesty of
heaven and earth, is, the collecting in companies either with or without the
person who is the object of their enquiry, to confer with him, or with one
onother, to be agreed how to proceed with a brother, or Pastor: if it is the
Pastor; a very proper preparatory for such meeting is, to collect in companies
on Sabbath-noons, and some of the leading Church members find fault with his
preaching, and one tells one thing, another another thing, and many of the
things so long ago that if they are true, must undoubtedly be in a great
measure, if not wholly forgot. Or however or whatever the particulars are, they
are talking against him by the walls, and in the doors of the house, as the
people did against Ezekiel; This is an ungodly digging up evil with burning
fire in their lips. Like the devising devices as against Jeremiah, smiting with
the tongue, defaming on every side; report say they, and we will report it.
Prove. xvi. 27. and Jer. xviii. 18. and xx. 10.
and in proper time they are prepared to have a more general collection or
meeting, and require the object of their inquisitions to be with them. Such
kind of meetings whatever they may call them, are unlawful assemblies, they are
riots both as to Church and State, being expressly repugnant to the
constitution, laws and rules of both. Mr. Hooker says, "Such a company wants
precept or example." He means examples to justify it. For as to examples of
people meeting together in an unlawful, riotous manner, there are a multitude
of them recorded in Scripture. Thus the people gathered together against Moses
and Aaron, against David, and many of the Prophets; thus against Christ,
Stephen and many of the Apostles: The collection against the Apostle Paul, at
Ephesus, was an eminent pattern for all such kind of meetings.

But for any Church of Christ, or company of people, to pretend to meet as a
Church of Christ, to enquire into matters of complaint against any of its
members; without matters properly stated, and the accused's being privately and
previously informed of what they have against him, according to the law, in the
xviii th of Matthew. and to pretend to proceed to act upon matters of complaint
thus; is a high, and (when objected to by any of its members) is an audacious
profanation of the name, and insult of the majesty of the Lord Jesus Christ.
And it is no less an insult of the constitution of Massachusetts, which
expressly provides that "No subject shall be held to answer for any crime or
offense, until the same is fully and plainly, substantially and formally,
described to him." Declaration of Rights, Art. xii. Hence if any Church Member
in Massachusetts be arraigned before a Church, to answer to any matters not
introduced according to the 18th of Matthew. and said Declaration of Rights, he
has full right, according to the Platform, to deny their jurisdiction, and
avoid their action: for that asserts, that as to the manner of Church
proceedings, it must be according to Civil and Church custom. The Bible, the
Platform, the Constitution therefore, are all against them; and if they pretend
to proceed in that manner it is no better than riotous conduct, and void by all
the rules and order of proceedings in both Church and State.

Mr. Hooker in his Survey, speaking of Church procedings in discipline, says,
"Common human infirmities must not be made crimes of. If the matter be
doubtful, and yet so much ground that we think we cannot be clear without
rebuking him; search into the matter; for it is a safe rule when there is not
ground of conviction, not to censure. If there is ground of conviction, then
proceed according to the rule in the 18th of Matthew. He says, if these things
were well attended; those mistakes, clashings, sayings, gainsayings, and the
many offenses committed among brethren, while they come to reform an offense
given, would easily be prevented through the help and assistance of Christ; if
the party that comes to rebuke would be sure,

First, That the sin was committed.

Secondly, That he has evidence, that such a brother committed it.

Thirdly. That such a rule is fair and full to convince of such a sin.

The Majesty of Christ's Ordinance would appear with much evidence; and with
much ease and comfort on all hands; in all the degrees of it; in private,
before one or two, or before the Church."

He further says, "The preparation of the action lies in two things.

The Cause must be examined presently.

The Examination recorded exactly.

HE THAT COMPLAINS MUST KNOW TWO RULES.

First, He must not dare complain, unless he can plainly and peremptorily lay
in his accusation of another, touching such speeches and carriages. I say,
peremptorily accuse. Because I would prevent such weak and windy kind of
expressions, as too often we meet with. I take it so: I conceive it so: It was
so reported: I met with it in that manner."

If Mr. Hooker was against such weak and windy accusations or witnessing; most
certainly he would be against such a wicked and abusive accusation or
witnessing as the following: There is a general uneasiness: It is in every
body's mouth: We really believe he is a bad man: He must be cast out: Away with
him. By such kind of witnessing or rather clamours, the virtuous Naboth, and
the Holy Jesus lost their lives. Of Naboth they said, He blasphemed God and the
King, but told no fact or words of blasphemy: For they knew he had used none.

So as to Christ: Away with him: Crucify him. Pilate said, what evil has he
done? They would not risque the issue upon FACTS: but say, If he were not a
malefactor we would not have delivered him unto thee.

All such kind of accusations, witnessing, or clamours, where facts are not
clearly stated and proved, are false and wicked; and will most certainly be
rejected and detested by all rational judicious people.

We will hear further from Mr. Hooker, he says, " Secondly, as his (i. e. the
complainer's) accusation must be plain; so his proofs must be direct and
pregnant; that such words for the substance and reality of them were spoken,
and such things done. There must be two witnesses to establish every word.

ON THE ELDERS' PART TWO RULES, if attended to, make great riddance of
occasions, and prevent distempers.

First, let the accusation be presently and exactly recorded; together with the
answer thereto, in like manner; for experience teaches, that in a multiplicity
of debates, parties are apt to forget, or else not willing to remember; and
some ready to mistake, add, alter, vary in expression as they see there may be
an advantage come to their own, or disadvantage to the contrary cause.

Secondly, Let the Elders confine all parties to the point in hand, and not
suffer them by extravagancies to darken the truth."

Speaking of Church censures, he says "It must not be for small petty
aberrations; but such as are abominable; carry the face of evil in their
forehead, upon the first well grounded consideration of reason; pertinaciously
and obstinately persisted in."

From what has been extracted from Mr. Hooker, it appears, that the only proper
season of complaining, of an offending member, is immediately. Mr. Hooker says,
presently. This in every view is necessary; not only that it be done, while
things are fresh in the mind, so as that truth may be investigated; but to
suffer sin long on a fellow member, they make themselves transgressors; and to
rake up old things, or pretend matters of long standing, when things must in a
great measure be forgot; must have all the appearance of falsehood and ought to
be treated as slander.

The Civil law provides that actions of trespass shall be outlawed in a short
term of years; with proper savings, where inevitable necessity prevents
bringing the action within the general limitation. And the Platform says, that
Church matters should be conducted according to civil custom. And Christ has
limited actions of traspass in his Kingdom even shorter than any civil State,
Luke xvii. 3, 4. Take heed to yourselves; if thy brother trespass against thee
rebuke him; and if he repent forgive him. And if he traspass against thee seven
times in a day; and seven times in a day turn again unto thee saying, I repent;
thou shall forgive him. All this proves in the most decided manner that
Christ's Law is, that the accusation shall be made immediately. Take heed to
yourselves; if thy brother trespass, thou shall rebuke him. As much as to say,
if you neglect rebuking of him you make his sin your own. Therefore take heed
to yourselves, that you do not make his sin your own: his speaking in the next
verse of seven times in a day, proves that he means it should be done
immediately; else, there could not be so many times in a day. He does not set
any particular length of time; the case may be such that it cannot be done
instantly after the fault is committed; the person may not be in a proper
temper of mind to admit a rebuke; or some other circumstances. But, it is a
plain law that it shall be done as soon as circumstances and the nature of
things will admit of it; or it is outlawed in his Kingdom; the person has fixed
the sin on himself, and if he brings an accusation against his brother after
that, it is slander. All this perfectly agrees with Mr. Hooker, where he says,
"It must be done PRESENTLY."

You will also readily see by what I have entertained you with, from that great
divine and politician Mr. Hooker; the same which I have said before: That the
only proper or legal way of introducing accusations into the Church and
conducting them therein, is according to the xviiith of Matthew. First
privately tell the offender, or supposed offender, his fault: This can be no
other than, to point out to him the fact he has done, and the divine law or
rule he has thereby violated. And this Mr. Hooker has proved, by unanswerable
reasons, should be done in writing. This must be attended to in the next trial
before one or two; also before the Church; and this is the most peaceable and
likely way to recover a lapsed member; and to maintain order and peace in the
whole Church.

In this way, the person is privately and previously certified what he has to
answer to, as I before showed, that the Bible, Platform and Constitution; or
rights of mankind require.

Although different faults require different Church animadversions; as heresy
is to have a first and second admonition before rejection: But moral scandal
requires immediate rejection; yet there is but one way to introduce all matters
of offense for trial into the Church, viz. as above stated from the Bible and
the rights of mankind.

And if any Church pretends or presumes to act upon a case, any other way
introduced; and especially when that is claimed by the party accused; they act
out of character, and it invalidates all their procedings therein; and though
they may have power to pass votes and condemn a member; yet they have no right
to do so any more than a civil Court have right to arrest a man contrary to the
Constitution and law; which if any Judges of court should presume to do, their
being judges would not legitimate their conduct; any more than if any other men
should set up a mock court and trial and condemn a man: but it would be much
worse for judges to do thus, as they thereby violate their trust, and insult
that authority which had thus dignified them. And it is still as much more
heinous for a Church of Christ to presume to go on so, in a pretended trial
contrary to his law; as it is profaning Divine Authority, and violating their
own most solemn vows and engagements.

LETTER VII.
SIR,
A CONGREGATIONAL Church, organized as I have said, and regularly assembled
with a cause before them, introduced according to Christ's law, under the
presidency of their pastor, have both right and power, to proceed decently and
orderly to hear, examine, try and finally determine the cause; if they can do
it to the general satisfaction of the whole body. But if there arises a
difference to that degree they cannot acquiesce; they are then according to the
example in the xvth chap. of Acts, to refer it to a Consociation, or Council of
Churches, verse 2d. When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension
and disputation with them, they determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain
others of them, should go up to Jerusalem, unto the Apostles and Elders about
this question. Here was a dissension among them, and a mutual agreement to
refer it to a Council of Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem. It appears that it
was a mutual agreement, because both parties had an equal voice in it. Paul and
Barnabas were evidently one party, and they went to this Council; and no doubt
those certain others who were sent, were of the other party. Hence therefore,
is a Scripture example for a mutual Council, by which is meant mutual in the
choice of the parties, or an equal choice in both parties. Not that the members
of the Council should come together agreed in sentiment about the matter in
question. Such a Council would not answer to the pattern, for there was MUCH
DISPUTING in that Council, verse 7th. Here therefore is a divine rule for all
Christian Churches when there is a division and dissension among them.

And especially Congregational Churches, are under covenant obligation by their
Platform, in case of division and dissension to refer it to a Council, see
Chap. xv. Sec. 2. "If a Church be rent with divisions among themselves, or lie
under any open scandal, and yet refuse to consult with other Churches, for
healing or removing of the same, it is matter of just offense, both to the Lord
Jesus and to other Churches."

Agreeable to what I have now said; you may find that Mr. Hooker, in his Survey
of Church Discipline, Part III. p. 40, says, "When evils are presented to the
Church and there is a mutual and joint concurrence of all; every particular
congregation has received power from Christ to proceed to excommunication
without any more ado. But in case things prove doubtful and the difference grow
wide and great, it is then seasonable to crave the help of neighboring
Churches, that they may see the truth cleared, the erring parties may be
convinced, the way also warranted; which being done either all will agree; or
the major part of the Church has POWER and RIGHT to proceed; and the
disseating part are bound to sit down satisfied therewith. But in case the
Council of consociated Churches shall advise to withold, they must stay their
proceedings."

Mr. Hooker here plainly asserts a decisive power in Councils, so far, that all
parties must be guided by their result. And his sentiment herein exactly agrees
with the pattern Acts xv. That Council had a right and authority to lay a
burden on the Church, i. e. assign them something to observe, verses 28 and 29,
and they were under obligation to observe and do according to what they
directed; for it was an ordinance of Christ that his Churches should be thus
counseled and directed by other Churches in Council, and it seemed good to the
Holy Ghost. If, therefore, they neglected or refused to observe and conform to
the result, they rebelled against Christ, the King and resisted the Holy Ghost.

But here some will say, that Council, in Acts, was divinely inspired, and
could say, it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, what they wrote. I am willing to
allow that they were divinely inspired to set an example, for all Christians
and Councils, how to investigate the truth, and find out the will of God, viz.
by disputing, by attending to facts and comparing them with the Scriptures.
This it is evident that Council did. First there was much disputing, verse 7.
Then Peter, and Paul, and Barnabas gave in their testimony; that the HOLY GHOST
and God's miracles attended the uncircumcision, making no difference between
them and the circumcision. Then James sums up the evidence and compares it with
the Scriptures, and observes that it agrees with the words of the Prophet. From
all which they deduce by fair reason and argument, that it SEEMED GOOD TO THE
HOLY GHOST; and when they had thus argued it out, and proved that it seemed
good to the Holy Ghost; it seemed good to them too, i. e. according to reason.
So all religious or ecclesiastical decisions ought to be as fairly argued as
that Council did, by comparing facts with Scripture, so as to appear ACCORDING
TO GOD'S WORD AND HUMAN REASON.

But though it is not to be expected that a Council of uninspired men, will
always proceed so impartially, accurately and judiciously, in examining
evidence; and comparing of facts and Scripture, as that Council in the xvth of
Acts did; yet they are doubtless as likely, and more so, to act impartially,
accurately and judiciously, than the brethren of a Church heated with
contention and biased with prejudice.

Councils therefore being an ordinance of God, and as likely a way to have
disputes and differences settled properly as the imperfection of human affairs
admits of; differing parties in Churches are under obligation by the word of
God, and human reason, to agree and refer their differences to an
Ecclesiastical Council: as the differing parties in Antioch did, to the Council
at Jerusalem. Who, when the matter was referred to them, had a right to judge,
and direct them what to do; or, as they term it, lay a burden upon them, which
they were under obligation to observe and conform to.

But for a party to go off from the result, even if it is the major part; let
them call themselves THE ORIGINAL CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH; or, THE NEW REFORMED
CATHOLIC SOCIETY; or whatever; or if it is nearly every member of the Church
against their Pastor; or even the Pastor and Church against a private member;
it is disorderly and schismatical, resisting God's ordinance, in that pattern
in Acts, and a violation of their own solemn Covenant and Combination, as Dr.
Mather terms it, in many overt acts; especially in their inviting in such
Council. And such Church, or part of a Church, are by such conduct out of
fellowship of all Congregational Churches; and ought to be so treated: As they
violate the fellowship of Churches, and reject their advice, they ought to be
rejected by all to whom they seek for assistance; until they comply with the
advice given them; or otherwise settle it to the satisfaction of the parties
concerned.

Mr. Wise, in his vindication of New England Churches, speaking of decrees or
results of Synods or, Councils, asserts, "That they are obligatory; else it
would be fruitless to make wearisome journies with great cost and pains to
determine such things as they judge expedient for the Churches well being; if
after all it were indifferent whether they were obeyed or not; especially when
things are fairly settled by joint suffrage in Synods: Some small set of wise
men, hold themselves wiser than whole Synods; and afterward of their own
heads, in their more private apartments, set forward new schemes; which is
itself disorderly; and a way to keep the Churches constantly fluctuating like
the ocean; considering that, in Synods, all sorts of persons have their full
liberty in debates and votes, in drawing up their decisions; it is a bold
intrusion, and little better than defying and trampling under foot the unity of
the Churches, to run counter with Synodical settlements, till they are fairly
repealed by the like power which made the settlements."

LETTER. VIII.
SIR,
WHEN it will serve a turn and persons wish to avoid a result, or part of it,
and regard only what their own humor or caprice dictates, you will hear it
confidently asserted, Councils are only ADVISORY; that they are not binding or
decisive; but all power is in the Church.

But though we allow the executive power is in the Church; yet they have not
right to exercise this power, in case of division, or respecting their Pastor,
unless it be agreeable to the advice of Council.

The Platform in the very beginning of it, fixes as a fundamental maxim of the
whole structure of Church order and discipline; that, " In respect to the
manner; decently and in order, according to the nature of the things
themselves, AND CIVIL AND CHURCH CUSTOM."

You will readily grant there is no decency nor order, for Churches to go on
and continue in a broil, contention and division, without seeking help for a
settlement of their divisions or differences; neither that it can be decent or
orderly, when they have invited a Council, to set their result at naught, or to
mutilate, mangle or distort a result to just what they please, or to nothing,
or to take part and reject the rest of it.

You will also grant that this is not according to Church CUSTOM, as we have it
from Mr. Hooker, the Platform, the Mathers and other venerable writers.

And if we examine the matter by Civil CUSTOM we shall find it will exactly
agree with what Mr. Hooker says about Councils, that the Church must proceed or
not, according to the advice of Council. For according to the wisdom and
experience of ages, the Supreme Executive in civil policy, is to do the most
important executive acts by and with the advice and consent of Council. And it
would be invalid, and such a high handed usurpation as would merit an
impeachment, and degrading from his office, if he should pretend to do such
things without, or contrary to the advice of Council. Thus it is with the King
of England, thus with the President of the United States, thus also with the
Governor of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Do our Churches or some parties
of them claim a more despotic power than the King of England, whom they have
long since dubbed a tyrant. Do they wish to be more uncontrolable than
President Washington, who is so universally esteemed one of the first
characters for probity, wisdom, impartiality and integrity? And why should any
of our Churches or parties of them, claim to themselves an exemption from all
check or control, so much above the Governor of Massachusetts; who cannot
appoint and commission a common Justice of the Peace; nor issue out a death
warrant against a malefactor, even after he has had a full and fair trial by
jury, in a Judicial court, without the advice and consent of Council? Yet some
of our Churches, or parties of Churches, claim an exclusive right and
prerogative to appoint and invest officers; and to degrade them at pleasure;
and to be accusers, witnesses, judges, and executioners; and have the insolence
to claim all this by the Platform; when that, in the very first chapter, places
the SCRIPTURES and CIVIL and CHURCH CUSTOM as the foundation of the whole
superstructure of Church proceedings and discipline; but according to what is
already observed, the Scriptures and Civil and Church Custom are all aagainst
them.

But this prerogative which they claim, outvies the claims or pretensions of
the despots of ancient Babylon, who had their Counselors; and even shames the
pusillanimity of the whore of Babylon who reigns over the Kings of the earth;
whose Executive, the POPE himself, with all his infallibility and despotism,
does not presume or pretend to determine and execute his important Church
matters without the advice of Council, viz. the CARDINALS in CONCLAVE.

Well might Dr. Mather say, as in his Apology, speaking of the consociation of
Congregational Churches, and of such as will not consociate, "they (i. e.
Congregationalists) judge it will not be safe or prudent for any Christian to
commit his soul to the direction and conduct of such an independent Church."

Mr. Wise, also in his Vindication of the Government of New England Churches,
speaking of regular establishments of civil and Church communities, says, "for
particular subjects to break in upon them, is to violate the Law of Nature, and
is a high usurpation upon the first grand immunities of mankind, and says, such
rebels in States, and usurpers in Churches, affront the world."

But here is an outcry about conscience; that Councils must not have any
decisive power, control or check upon the Church, for say they, that will be
encroaching upon the conscience of the Church!

This appears to be a partial defiled conscience, because it is only on one
side; and does not allow all to have a conscience. For suppose a Church have a
complaint against a member, and the major part condemn him; a Council comes,
and advises to take off the censure; is the Church's conscience encroached
upon? they say it is. I say then the conscience of the minor part is encroached
upon by the major part; and have as good a right to challenge exemption from
conforming to the major part, as the major part have right to challenge
exemption from the determination of the Council.

Hence this must be a partial conscience; monopolizing all conscience to the
party which makes the cry.

But here again they will say, that results of Council bind no farther than
they are according to the word of God. Upon the same ground I demand, are
individuals in a Church bound any further than the doings of a Church are
according to the word of God? And another important question arises, Who is to
be judge, whether the doings of a Council, or a Church, are agreeable to the
word of God? The answer must be, the party or person it respects, and who
dislike it; or the objection means nothing, has no force in it. So here is a
conscience which effectually prevents any issue or settlement of differences,
throws all into parties, breaks up societies; which I think cannot be a
conscience void of offense, either toward God, or toward man, but must be
offensive to both, therefore must be an evil conscience.

You may ask what cases properly require a Council? I will not be so vain as to
pretend I can describe all cases that may arise, and which properly require a
Council. However, you will readily see by what has been adduced from the
Scriptures, the Platform, and other approved authors, that, the settling and
removing of a Pastor require Councils.

Also when there is a division in a Church which they cannot reconcile among
themselves. This implies that there must be proper essays among themselves for
reconciliation; therefore, that things should, when the condition and
circumstances of the Church will admit, always be heared and tried in the
Church before they are brought to a Council. Here, if the parties agree, and
send for a mutual Council, there is no difficulty. But if either party refuses,
it is a question of considerable importance, what shall be done? The Platform
assigns the third way of communion; this would answer if the Churches would
carry it into execution, but through a modesty in the Churches lest they should
seem officious, this has rarely ever been attempted. Both Church and State were
soon sensible of the imbecility of this method; therefore, about 14 years
after, viz. in 1662, the General Court called a Synod, to answer some
questions, one of which was, "Whether, according to the word of God, there
ought to be a consociation of Churches, and what should be the manner of it?"

The Synod answer, that "there has constantly been in these Churches a
profession of communion in giving the right hand of fellowship at the gathering
of Churches, and ordination of Elders; which imports a consociation, and
obliges to the practice of it."

They propose consociations of those who live in convenient vicinity; though
with liberty reserved without offense, to make use of others. But considering
all Congregational Churches as one general consociation, out of which any
parties may choose at pleasure; that plan of classical or local consociations
never was adopted in Massachusetts; yet, in conformity thereto, most of the
Ministers have formed themselves into associations. The question therefore
returns; what shall be done in case of difficulty in a Church, and one party
refuses to join in calling in a Council? It will no doubt be answered, if we
were formed into consociations according to the proposal of that Synod, they
might apply to the Consociation and that would be valid, being established by
both Church and State. But it was equally acknowledged by both Church and State
at the same time; that all Congregational Churches are one general
consociation. Hence by plain and conclusive reason; if one party is obstinate
and will not join in applying to the Consociation, when the case requires it;
according to the principles and constitution of Congregational Churches; the
other party, after having used proper means to induce them to it, has a right
to call in such Churches as they think proper, and it must be valid; for every
man ought to find his remedy, and not be defeated because his antagonist is
obstinate, and the other party is justly holden to abide the consequences; for,
in the very formation of a Church they are consociated, and every member is
included in the consociating covenant, and all are bound to conform to
consociation acts respecting them; and if they refuse, they break their
covenant, and forfeit their relation, and ought to be considered as
excommunicates, or outlaws; till they will regularly reunite with the
Consociation, by conforming to their decrees; or properly join with the other
party, in mutually applying to the Consociation according to Church usage or
custom.

But here some make a difficulty in what you will scarcely think they can make
any, viz. about a Mutual Council. You will scarcely believe this can need any
explanation.

I assure you I should not think it needed any; had I not heard several absurd
and contemptible aphorisms, in earnest asserted, and obstinately maintained; to
serve a selfish, contracted design. In which are the following, viz. A Mutual
Council is one chosen by both Parties involving into one Body! Or when one
Party (for certain reasons) gives up to, or consents that the other Party may
choose all; this is a Mutual Council. These you will readily conceive are made
by the Party who know they have numbers sufficient to swallow up the other
Party and not feel any encumbrance thereby You will also readily see that these
schemes are repugnant to any such thing as Mutual: where there is but one
acting body, there can be no mutual actions of parts or parties, simplicity and
mutuality being repugnant to each other.

But I have heard other schemes for a mutual Council, which though not so
selfish as the above, yet are a great mistake, and wholly inconsistent with the
pattern we have in the 15th Chap. of Acts. The scheme is, for both parties to
agree to all the men, so as to get a Council all of one mind as much as
possible. This certainly is not according to the pattern, for there was much
disputing among them. And, in such a Council, all of one mind about a question
before them, there is no means to bring the truth to light; and if they happen
to be in an error, they are likely to remain so. Consequently where there are
differing parties, it appears most according to Scripture and reason, that each
party should equally choose; and this is the only way there can be any mutual
choice; consequently Mutual Council. But many object against this, saying the
Council come together like two armies. But so long as we know that this method
is according to Scripture, reason, and the most likely way to investigate the
truth; we need not be terrified by any epithets that may be put upon it.

LETTER IX.
SIR,
I NOW give you my thoughts, as to the Right and Power of Congregational
Churches to dismiss or remove their Officers. I shall confine myself to the
dismissing of a Pastor; for other Officers of the Church, even if they have
Ruling Elders, are never considered as having any official power out of their
own Church; or to do any official act. Hence their introduction into office is
never taken notice of by other Churches, neither were they considered by the
Synod in 1662, as being essential to the organization of a Church. Moreover, as
to any other Officer in the Church beside the Pastor; their being in office or
out of office does not affect their local situation, or temporal circumstances.
But a Pastor's or Minister's local situation and condition of life are wholly
determined by his office. For the Lord has ordained, that they who preach the
Gospel should live of the Gospel; even as all other occupations live of their
labors, or by their occupations. For Christ, when he sent out his Disciples,
forbade their taking with them of their own estate to live upon; either purse
or scrip; for the labourer is worthy of his meat, and of his wages or hire.
Hence, God provided in his law to Israel, even that the Priesthood should be
hereditary, with a suitable living annexed; so that the ministering office in
his Church might not run out, and be void. For it would be irrational and
inconsistent with God's creation of man and institutions to him, for any man to
undertake a calling which in its own nature would divest him of all the social
enjoyments, and good things of this life; which God had created for man and
conferred upon him. And though God has not made the ministerial office in the
Christian dispensation hereditary; yet he has very plainly instituted, that a
Bishop should have a family, and ordained that he should live by his labor in
his office, and lay up for his family, as another man may, by his labor and
occupation. All which are absolutely incompatible with an unsettled life;
therefore fully amounts to an institution of God, that a Bishop's office is for
life; indefeasable, unless he forfeits it by misdemeanor. Hence the Platform
assigns incorrigible offending as the only ground of removing an Elder from his
office. This essentially implies that there have been means used to reclaim the
Elder, for no one can be deemed incorrigible, till means have been used to
recover or gain him. This must be done according to Christ's law, as I have
before shown, respecting discipline; or it can be no means to recover or gain
him. There be those who pretend that these private steps are not to be used
with the Pastor; but no one that ever I heard, did or could assign any
scripture or reason why a Pastor should be deprived of this privilege. Christ
no where makes any such exemption; but by the Apostle Paul to Timothy, appears
rather to ratify it to them, above others, where he says; a against an Elder
receive not an accusation, but before two or three Witnesses. This, so
literally referring to the law in the 18th of Matthew. is a plain command or
interdiction, against calling an Elder in question as faulty, unless on the
most regular process and decided proof according to law. This being spoken to
Timothy, exactly agrees with what Mr. Davenport says, Page 137, that a Church's
dealing with their Elder, and questioning him must do it by the advice, and
under the presidency, of neighboring Pastors and to this answers the common
usage of Churches having a neighboring Pastor motioned for, when a difficulty
is with a Minister.
It is evident by the express letter of the Platform, that a Minister shall not
be removed for some foibles; or as Mr. Hooker calls them petty aberrations; nor
even if he is overtaken in a real fault, some violation of a divine rule;
unless he continue irreclaimable in it. All this must be manifest, Chap. viii.
Sec. 7. Here is a question. To whom is this to be manifest? Is it to the
accusers? Why may we not as well say it must be manifest to the accused? One
party has as good a right to be judges as the other. What is said in the 10th
Chap. Sec. 6, decides this; it must be manifest or evident to the Council of
other Churches; who are to direct to the removal of an incorrigibly offending
Elder; in order that the Church may have right and power to dismiss or remove
him.

That this is the true intent and meaning of the Platform, as to dismissing an
Elder; you will readily allow when you recollect what I before mentioned from
Mr. Hooker, where he asserts, that a Church must proceed or not, according to
the advice of the Council. And you will be further established in this
construction of the Platform, by viewing the sentiments or various other
writers both before and since the Platform, and the uniform practice of the
compilers of it, and their successors for above an hundred years; in which you
will find previous to the Platform, beside Mr. Hooker, Mr. Cotton on the Keys:
which book it is asserted by ancient writers, was used as a guide or Platform,
by the New England Churches, before the Platform was made. Dr. Increase Mather
and other Ministers of Boston, in their Testimony to the order of the Churches,
in the year 1720, say, that in Mr. Cotton's Book of the Keys he asserts, "That
it is an ordinance of Christ, for particular Churches to join together in a
consociation among themselves, to administer their Church affairs which are of
weighty, difficult, and common concernment; of which kind he reckons the
Election, Ordination or Excommunication of an Elder or any Person of public
note."

You will be gratified in hearing something from the compositions and writings
since the Platform.

In this venerable throng, is the Synod in 1662, (about 14 years after the
Platform) which assert the duty and importance of Consociations or Councils, in
matters of more than ordinary importance; as Ordination, Translation, and
Deposition of Elders and such like.

It is evident that writers both before and since the Platform, consider the
relation between Pastor and People very sacred, and not to be rashly and
precipitately dissolved, even if both sides were disposed for it, not to be
done without the advice or concurrence of a Council of other Churches. Dr.
Increase Mather and other Ministers, in their beforementioned Testimony, say,
"That as there is, according to the order and practice of these Churches, a
Council for the ordaining a Pastor; it stands to reason that there should as
much be requisite for his removing."

But there are still more important reasons those writers allege against the
dissolution of the relation between a Pastor and his People, viz. because they
consider it a Covenant and very similar to the marriage relation.

And here I cannot forget Mr. Hooker. He says it is of the nature of the
marriage relation in many respects. And Mr. Wise, in his Church's Quarrel
Espoused, compares the relation between Minister and People to the marriage
relation. His words are. "Husband and Wife, Pastor and Church, by our sort of
government, are bound for term of life, or so long as both shall live; these
Churches are settled Congregational, and by their principles, the ordination
is, as it were, the nuptials or marriage day of two lovers, that nothing but
death, or a bill of divorce (for betraying the glory of the union) can part."
This, as far as I have had opportunity to observe, has been the general notion
and sense of people: but however more or less general it may have been; yet Mr.
Wise's observation and comparison will appear to be just, when we consider,
that, upon Congregational principles, the Minister's relation to his people is
by mutual and voluntary choice and covenant; and his office relation is blended
with his relation as a Brother in the Church, and also blended with his local
situation and living in the world, through the whole of his life; that they
cannot be parted: and has therefore nearly all the perpetual indissolvable ties
that the marriage relation has.

And when we advert to scripture, we shall find, that God made it more
indissolvable than the relation between husband and wife: for the latter he
allowed to be dissolved because of the hardness of their hearts; but the former
he made hereditary. Yet this was not so, but that for high crimes and
misdemeanors they might be deposed. Thus Solomon thrust out Abiather, for
treason. This is the only instance we have in the Bible of any Priest's being
regularly deposed by lawful authority. And Christ, though he reprobated the
practice of their putting away their wives for every cause; yet he allowed that
the relation might be dissolved in case of fornication. And very similar to
that, as if copied in imitation of it, the Platform allows a People to put away
their Minister, for incorrigibly offending.

But as the marriage relation is not to be dissolved by either party, even in
case of fornication, without the decree of divorce by proper authority: So
neither may a Church put away their Minister, even in case of incorrigibly
offending, without the Council of other Churches properly introduced, directing
thereto. When, according to such direction, they have both Right and Power to
remove him from his office; or put him away.

LETTER X.
SIR,
IN my last letter, I said that Abiather was the only instance in the Bible, of
a Priest's being regularly deposed by lawful authority; which I suppose you
will allow to be true; notwithstanding Jeroboam when he set up his false
religion, cast out, and in a sense deposed, the Priests of the Lord. And his
having the major part of Israel on his side did not sanctify his conduct
herein; but it is always spoken of as his sin.

But, in the New Testament, we read of no Bishop or Elder's being superseded or
deposed: Or of their forsaking or leaving their people.

Yet some in our day assert, that a Church may, or have a right to dismiss, or
turn away their Minister, when they please, with a Council, or without; or
contrary to a Council, and it will be valid. Otherwise, as the case may be,
they cannot get rid of a Minister when he ought to be dismissed.

This sentiment will justify all the villainy that can be committed. Upon this
doctrine or sentiment, a man may turn his wise out doors, when he pleases, and
it will be a valid divorce.

A russian may assassinate a man when he pleases; and it will be a lawful and
just putting him to death.

A thief or a robber may take away a man's property from him when he pleases,
and it will be a righteous conversion of property.

For the case may be, that a woman ought to be divorced, a man ought to die, a
man ought to have his dues of another; when neither of these things can be
obtained in due course of law; on this sentiment, therefore, the woman is not
abused by her husband, nor the deceased injured by the assassin, nor the
plundered person, wronged by the robber: for according to this sentiment, the
husband, the assassin, the robber, have a right to perform all those acts of
violence: and there is no outrage or villainy which may not be amply vindicated
by it; and especially all perfidy, breach of faith, and violation of covenants
and contracts; for this, which is asserted in the very sentiment itself, is a
right to break the most solemn, sacred and complicated covenants that can
possibly be made.

Those of this cast call themselves Independents; and have the audacity to
father their sentiments on the Platform; when that utterly rejects
Independents. But let them call themselves what they will, according to what I
have before noticed from the Synod in 1662, and from Dr. Mather, of the
determinations of the General Court; and the practice of the Churches from the
beginning; these Independents are OUTLAWS of both Church and State, and they
very grossly defame the Platform in pretending to father such sentiments upon
it; and they are unsufferably assuming and arrogant; for by their pretending to
father such sentiments on the Platform, they no less than boldy assert that
they understand it, better than the compilers of it, and Ministers and General
Court in the time of it; and for some years after, while the compilers of it
were alive. Such arrogant monopolizers of wisdom, as Mr. Wise says, " Defy and
trample under foot the Honor and Authority of the Churches; and as he says in
another place, such Usurpers in Churches, Affront the World." And that the
more, when the way they must explain or read the Platform to get their
sentiment from it, must be to read it, as the vain wretch did the Bible, to
prove from it, there is no God; who reads only these words, and asserts that it
is proved from the Bible there is none. Or as another, to prove that the Bible
directed to hearken to bad advice, reads it, My son if sinners entice thee
consent THOU. But if they should say, these are fabulous; they may turn to Mat.
iv. 6. and find an example; which you will allow, they cannot deny, either the
authenticity of the example; or the fitness of the Author for their pattern.
The example is, It is written he shall give his angels charge concerning thee,
and in their hands they shall bear thee up. Here the words, To keep in all thy
ways; are omitted in what was pretended to be quoted. So these Independents, as
they call themselves, must read the Platform to make what they pretend from it.
As the Church had power to call to office, so they have power to remove him
from his office. Here, as in the above text of Scripture, an essential part is
omitted, viz. The Council of other Churches, where it may be had, directing
thereto.

But though the Platform is somewhat obscure as to this matter and many others,
and is easily accounted for; considering they had so newly escaped the furnace
of Prelacy, and kept their eye so intently on that, to guard against it, that
they did not so strongly, in words, guard against evils among themselves. Yet
it is evident they were far from practicing any such things, as the licentious
pretended Independents of the present day, claim by it. And the Synod in 1662,
as I have frequently observed, set this matter in a clear light; whose result,
is of as much and the same authority with the Platform itself, being sanctioned
by both Church and State as much as that, and is as really a part of the
Platform of these Churches, as the explanatory Charter by King George, was
really a part of the Charter of the Massachusetts Bay, as that by William and
Mary. Or as a codicil to a will, is as really part of the will as the body of
it; and must be executed, as much as any part of it.

Those ancient worthies, were not so vain and arrogant as to suppose they had
arrived at the ne plus ultra of wisdom, when they first composed the Platform
in 1648.

Again I have seen it in writing seriously asserted for a SENTIMENT, "That, the
majority of a people expressing their minds against their Minister, that he
should not continue their Minister, it so vacates his office relation to them,
that it is right for any other man to officiate in his place, whether he is
willing or not."

This sentiment has for its precedent in the Bible, the conduct of Jeroboam and
the majority of Israel, thrusting out the Priests of the Lord, and supplying
their place with others; which I mentioned to you before; and you will join
with me in saying it matters not as to its being right, whether those that are
introduced to supply, are of the lowest of the people; or those that esteem
themselves the highest.

This SENTIMENT also censures the conduct of Moses and Aaron, that they did not
leave the people and give place to Korah, Dathan and Abiram when the major part
of the people had so expressly decided against Moses, the servant of the Lord,
and Aaron his Priest. For according to this sentiment, it was right for Korah,
to assume and occupy the Priest's Office instead of Aaron, when the majority of
the people were so decidedly for it. And it also impeaches the divine conduct
in the miraculous fire, and chasm in the earth, which destroyed them and their
associates; and that Moses and Aaron were not rather the victims of vengeance
for their obstinacy and impiety in not being willing immediately to give place
to them, when the majority of the people had so expressly decided against their
continuing in office: For Vox populi, vox est Dei; Et, Voluntas populi Suprema
est lex. These are fundamental maxims: yet the Declaration of Rights in
Massachusetts Constitution of Government, has the audacity to claim that it
shall be a Government of Laws, and not of Men.

The above sentiment is no doubt founded on a mistaken notion many people
imbibe and obstinately hold, as to the temporary mission of Christ to the
twelve; when he sent them to preach the kingdom of Heaven is at hand, to work
miracles, etc. He tells them whosoever shall not receive you, etc. when ye
depart out of that house or city, shake off the dust off your feet, etc. and in
the same mission he tells them, if they persecute you in one city, flee to
another. This direction of Christ to his Disciples in this short temporal
itinerant mission, they obstinately hold and urge is a direction to settled
Ministers. But it cannot be any thing to them; for as to them, the people have
received them; and if they start off and flee, when difficulties, or some
disagreeable things arise, they prove themselves not to be true Ministers of
Christ, or Pastors of his flock; but hirelings who flee when they see the wolf
come or coming.

This direction therefore of Christ to his Disciples, in that mission to pass
from one place to another, can be no direction to settled Ministers; to suppose
it to be a direction to them carries in it a contradiction in terms.

But the Commission which was to last to the end of the world, was, to preach
the Gospel to every Creature; to teach them to observe all things whatsoever
Christ has commanded, which includes all the divine precepts, and to administer
his ordinances; all which was at first to the Apostles, extraordinary Officers
from Christ, who were to introduce the Gospel, being accompanied with the power
of Miracles. This belonging to their mission, it was incompatible with a
settled life. But after they had planted Churches, they ordained Bishops,
Pastors, Teachers or Elders, to rule and feed the Church; whose office relation
was more especially stated and local, which is the office now in the Church of
Christ which is under consideration.

This office relation, as you have heard, is blended with so many covenant
ties, and connected with so many conditions and circumstances of very great
magnitude and importance; and so ratified, established and made permanent by
God's Word; that it may not be trifled with, or slightly dissolved. Thus Dr.
Mather and other Ministers of Boston, in their Testimony before mentioned,
speaking of the removal of a Pastor, where the Pastor himself is for parting,
say, it must be proceeded in with great caution, that it becomes not any
Minister to seek it by offering himself to it. That the reasons for removal be
laid before authentic judges, such as are most likely to pass an impartial
judgment upon them, that nothing less than a Council of Churches may be those
judges, and that the reasons be found such as are consistent with the solemn
vow he is under.

In the Preface of said Testimony it is said that, about 20 years after the
Platform, it was asserted and vindicated, that the ordaining, deposing and
translating of a Pastor should be by common consent; and that it was so in the
next ages after the Apostles. By this common consent, they mean not only the
Pastor and People, but other Churches.

From all which you will see that it is a violation of our Congregational
principles, and therefore unlawful, for a Pastor and people to part, by his
motion, or by theirs, or both; or by the people pretending a fault in him;
without the advice and concurrence of a Council. As the Platform makes no
provision for removing an Elder from his office; but upon incorrigibly
offending, and the Council of other Churches directing to the dismission. All
other pretenses of dismission of an Elder are absolutely unknown by the
Platform.

However I will not pretend to assert that there can be no dissolution of the
relation, between Pastor and People, unless by his incorrigibly offending and
the advice of Council. There may be by agreement to part, and a Council
assenting to it, as Dr. Mather and Ministers of Boston propose; which you
recollect; and I will not say it is a violation of Congregational principles,
or unlawful. And there have been instances of later years where Councils have
advised to a separation on account of the uneasiness of the people; with
proviso for a settlement of his contract; similar to Moses' suffering Israel to
put away their wives because of the hardness of their hearts. But from the
beginning it was not so. Neither from the beginning of God's instituting the
Priesthood; nor from the beginning of setting up Congregationalism in this
country. For as I before said, the Platform knows of no such way of Minister
and People parting. But though these various grounds or occasions of Pastor and
People's parting, have been tolerated, and may be thought to be reasonable or
lawful where it is done by agreement or consent of all parties, viz. the
Pastor, the People, and the Consociation, i. e. a Council of Churches. Yet for
any Minister to break from his People without their consent, and the advice of
Council; or for any people to pretend to dismiss or turn away their Minister of
themselves at their own pleasure, and by their own power, is such a breach of
faith and infraction on the whole foundation of society as I presume cannot be
found among the most savage nations; I am very certain the aboriginals of this
country would scorn such perfidy. And for them to pretend to justify it by the
Platform, because the Platform positively asserts and scrupulously reserves to
Ministers and People the right of covenanting and contracting, and of holding
this right, in opposition to prelatical imposition or deseasance; and therein
saying that they have a right to choose and refuse; that the Churches' having a
right to covenant; no power, without their consent, can dissolve it. For any to
say, or pretend to argue, that because a people have a right to make a covenant
or contract, they have a right to break it and avoid their obligation at
pleasure, without the agreement or consent of all parties, or a forfeiture on
one side; is a heinous reproach on the compilers of the Platform, and an
affront upon common sense.

And for any people to turn away or reject their Minister when he is old, or by
infirmity is past, or nearly past, his labor; resembles the practice of those
savage nations who turn off their parent into the deserts in their old age, to
perish.

A reflection on what I have wrote in this and the foregoing letter, I doubt
not will induce you to join with me, in saying, that the practice which is so
prevalent, and growing at this day, of Minister and People making particular
agreements about parting, on any other conditions, or in any other way, than
the general plan of the Scriptures and Platform, is very improper, and a great
evil. It is unsafe both for Minister and People. Many people seem to be fond of
having it expressed in their settling a Minister, that he shall be dismissed
when a major part or a major vote shall be against him. They must allow the
same to the Minister. Such a precarious tenure is no settlement either of
Minister or People, and must in its own nature keep Ministers and People
perpetually fluctuating.

The Minister does not stand upon good behavior, but upon pleasure; he is
therefore under a temptation to be a timeserver, if he wishes to stay with the
People: And at the same time he is also under a temptation to be plotting for a
more promising and permanent place and employment; and prudence and duty will
dictate, that he always is looking out and ready for a retreat. And in this
case, if he has a proper forecast, he will see that he has a much larger salary
that he may lay up for old age, or infirmity, when he is near past his labor.
When it will be almost a miracle if the people do not take care to rid
themselves of a burden; when he is so old or infirm he cannot settle again, or
go into any other business, and must lose the rest of his time: and if he does
not take care of this to have an additional salary, it will be his prudence to
avail himself of his own liberty to go, and take his day before him. And this
precarious scheme must in its own nature tend to breed jealously between
Minister and People; and it is inviting to restless, litigious minds,
innumerable occasions to excite a party and dismiss a Minister in a heat; it
may be, in revenge upon the Minister, or some other persons in the town or
parish.

I have not mentioned all the evils I discern in that way; neither do I suppose
I could possibly think of all it is exposed to. I will only add, that it is so
contrary to what God has established, as to the religious order of men, that
doubtless it must be exposed to innumerable evils; the greatest of which is, it
tends to run out the Ministry, and all religious order, especially since it is
a departure from order and a breach of the Fellowship of Churches.

LETTER XI.
SIR,
THEORY, which leads into the principles of any art or science, will leave it
still in a great measure in obscurity without experience. Thus you see it was
with the compilers of the Platform, and other writers of that day, there
appears profound theory in their compositions; but for want of experience, some
dark sayings, which men of corrupt minds wrest as they do also the holy
Scriptures: notwithstanding those wise and pious worthies, by practice and
experience, soon discovered and explained them, not only by particular able
writers, but by the same formality and authority by which the Platform itself
was made. But notwithstanding all the light which they have offered and left
for their successors, those who choose darkness rather than light, who love not
the truth, but delight in iniquity; have furnished us of the present day with
many very striking instances of the subversion of order in Congregationalism.

A few cases of this kind may reflect some light on what I have essayed to give
you as the theory of Congregationalism.

Among which cases you will join with me in considering it as a very dark scene
in PROVIDENCE, when a People violently break off from their Minister; and,
because they can have a majority, employ a stranger, like a young Korah, to
crowd out their aged Pastor, whom they ought highly to esteem, in love, for his
work sake; and to venerate as a Father. Yet they load him with calumny, by
accusations to destroy his ministerial character. And like the people running
upon Stephen, stop their ears against his repeated and earnest entreaties to
join with him in calling in a Mutual Council. They pretend to dismiss him, yet
refuse to give an official copy of their proceedings. To crown their insults, a
boy is sent to inform him they have no more service for him. The Pastor, with a
few friends that adhered to him, called in a Council twice, who incessantly
labored to bring them to peace, but unsuccessfully; they acquit the Pastor of
the accusations against him, and approve of his conduct. But the majority, like
the multitude against Christ, cry out, away with this man and choose Barabbas.
Now Barabbas was a robber. So here they chose another, rather than their aged
and Reverend Pastor, to rob him of his people, his Meeting House and his
living; and send to other Churches, as the people applied to Pilate to assist
and gratify them in their outrage.

What they will style themselves, I know not; neither do I know of any ONE
class or denomination they rank with. I will therefore for the present, leave
them with the style of POLYKAKONONYMOUS.

There is no pleasure in relating such tales. But evil conduct and
consequences, by the divine direction, are sometimes to be related for an
admonition to those that come after; to the intent they should not lust after
evil things.

A wealthy people who had always been favored with Ministers of the most
respectable characters, their Minister by age and incidental infirmities became
unable to supply; they employ a candidate, they invite him to settle with them,
colleague with their aged Pastor; he accepts their invitation. But, before
ordination, several respectable characters in the parish became suspicious of
his character; a large and respectable Council was invited for ordination, who
had several sessions, and after a long and deliberate hearing, concluded, it
was not proper he should be ordained there.

The major part determined they would have him, in opposition to this full,
fair and deliberate trial and decision of that Mutual Council, the only
constitutional power to determine it; break off from Congregationalism, erect
themselves into a separate society by the name of The New Reformed Catholic
Society in --. Their refuse condidate joins with them, and they send to
Churches, and raise a Posse to FOSTER their proceedings and conduct; and thus a
venerable divine, and once happy people, are almost desolate.

The wise Man tells us, the way of the strange woman is variable. You will not
wonder therefore that the following case differs in many things from those I
have related.

A respectable town which had long been noted for union and good order; settled
a Minister in peace. But soon there arose a disaffection, and some movements
against him. The beginning of strife is as when one lets out water: The
breach is constantly increasing. So here the contention increased till the
disaffected party called in an ex part Council, who advised them to deal with
their Pastor according to the xviiith of Matthew. and, if they could not obtain
satisfaction thereby, to seek for a Mutual Council. They execute the process.
The Church acquit the Pastor. The opposers are not satisfied; the Church offer
to join in a Mutual Council. But the disaffected do not accede to it: they call
in their ex part Council again; who, upon their arrival, express their
surprise; and being so sensible of their condition, they prudently waved
entering into any examination of the Scripture Authority of the proceedings of
the Church; and RETIRED.

Both parties then joined and invited a large Mutual Council, who came,
deliberated on their matters, and resulted thereon. In which they advised the
Church to exercise tenderness and candor to their Pastor, and all parties
concerned, carefully to guard against prejudice and cultivate a spirit of
Christian love.

Within a month after this Mutual Council, a town meeting was called to take
measures to remove their Minister; and to choose a committee to supply the
pulpit with a preacher, and to take care of the meeting house until it can be
done. Many of the inhabitants protested against their proceedings.

They met, and voted they had no further service for their Minister.

About six weeks after the above Mutual Council and advice; without any new
matter offered to the Pastor or Church; part of the Church send out for a
Council. They came, expressing their regret of a division in the town; they
recognize those that are disaffected with their Minister The Original Church.

Soon after this, about half the Church form, and style themselves, The
Original Church, in --, vote the dismission of their Minister. The town vote it
also.

Soon after these movements the Pastor warned a Church meeting. In which
meeting, the Pastor and Church mutually agreed to invite in a Council, to look
into their situation and give their advice. They came, attended to their
matters, and resulted; that the Mutual Council, left the Pastor and Church in
good standing, and that they have done nothing since to forfeit their standing,
and advise to hold on and persevere.

Between the time of sending for this Council, and their coming; the town shut
the meeting house against the Pastor. And soon after supply the pulpit with
other preachers.

You will say, those who conduct thus, are not Congregationalists; they do not
act as if they were under any covenant obligation, either to their Pastor, or
to one another; or in any consociated connection or obligation to other
Churches; nor under any obligation to their Pastor or one another to seek and
conform to consociated advice and counsel. Certainly they cannot be considered
as Congregationalists. Neither can they be called Independents; for they seek
help from other Churches; which is incompatible with Independency.

But these, though they seek help; it is not that they hold to any reciprocity
of duty or obligation; what they are after is to get their own ends answered;
but they do not hold themselves responsible, or under any obligation to conform
to their advice or determination, as you see in the cases.

You will ask, if they are neither Congregationalists nor Independents. What
are they?

I answer. They are a mongrel production between both. And you will recollect
that mongrels and muslins and linsey woolsey, were forbidden by the divine law;
it is supposed by expositors that this law originally had a special eye to
mixtures in religion, and forbidding them; to guard them from admitting any
heathen institutions with the ordinances of God. In this view you will grant
that law is of as much force now as ever. Hence the Bible is expressly against
them.

I suppose you will not envy any set of existences the honor of being the
sires or manufacturers of such mongrels or linsey woolsey productions.

However, though the Bible is against them, yet there is a sampler of them in
the Bible; turn to the xviith Chap. 2d Kings. You find that the people who
dwelt in the cities of Samaria were infested with lions; which they attributed
to their not knowing the manner of the God of the land; and they got one of the
Priests of the land to teach them the manner of the God; and he taught them.
Howbeit every nation made Gods of their own. So they feared the Lord and served
their own Gods.

You will please to observe the analogy. It is those that occupy the place of
Congregationalists, as those of old did the land of Israel. They meet with
difficulty in their religious schemes. They send for Congregationalists, to
teach them the manner of the God, or to put on the mask. Howbeit they are not
Congregationalists after all. They still serve their own Gods. Serve their own
views, without any regard to reciprocal duty and responsibility. The analogy
goes through, those of old and these now; all agree in seeking help as to their
difficulties from the Priest of the Lord. Yet there was then a variety among
them as to their Gods. One was Ne^gol, another Ashimo, etc. So it is now; one
is the New Reformed Catholic, another The Original Church, etc.

The analogy appears to me so exact, that I see not why they may not with those
of old, properly be denominated SAMARITANS.

In the 4th Chap. of Ezra you find, that those ancient Samaritans applied to
the Governor, Priest, and chief Fathers, offering to join and be connected with
them in building the house of God; but they would have nothing to do with them,
or have any connection with them. Which no doubt you will esteem a divine
example, how to treat all such Samaritanist people. And as those wise and pious
Fathers asserted they would build the House of God, as the King had commanded:
So Congregationalists, I suppose, would do well to be tenacious of their
constitution as was established by civil authority.

After I had written the foregoing cases I recollected a case of a Minister
with his people which I saw published in the Massachusetts Spy, 25th of April,
1793.

It would be too tedious to give you even a minute account of what is there
published. I will give you the general idea which I collected from said
publication. Which is, that there arose a disturbance with the Minister about
his domestic affairs, particularly about his daughter; that they accused and
judged him without any regard to the law of Christ in the 18th Chap. of Matthew.
That the Minister repeatedly offered to refer all matters to a mutual Council;
which they as often refused.

But at length, in December 1791, they had a Council, which they claimed the
exclusive prerogative of choosing all themselves. The Minister consented to
this. This Council result, that a separation take place upon condition that if
they could not agree on the pecuniary terms of their separation, they submit
the matter to indifferent men mutually chosen, and abide the award. The
Minister offered to leave them, according to that result of their own Council.
But the people would not comply with it, although they vowed to comply with it;
but instead of doing any thing to comply with their result, they pretended to
dismiss their Minister themselves: and did shut the Meeting House against him.
The Minister has since often called upon them to settle with him according to
that result; and used proper means to induce them to join with him in calling
in a mutual Council, which they have always rejected. They applied to gentlemen
to preach with them; but being unsuccessful, they applied to the Church under
the care of the Moderator of their own Council, to send their Minister to
preach, etc. among them. That Church returned answer to them that they could
not think their Minister was dismissed according to the result. The Minister
called in a respectable Council, who in their result say, that his pastoral
relation continues, notwithstanding all the people have done to dismiss him,
and that he is in good standing, not having forfeited his ministerial
character. And very solemnly exhort the people to return to their duty under
his ministry, or if they wish for a dissolution, to comply unreservedly with
the result of their own Council. The Minister has since repeatedly urged them
to a settlement; and it appears has always offered, and stood ready, to submit
all their differences to indifferent men mutually chosen; but the people always
refused, claiming to themselves the sole and exclusive prerogative of accusing,
judging and executing, and of dissolving their own engagements at pleasure,
though ratified in the most religious and sacred manner; defying and condemning
all advice and decisions, of men and bodies of men, even when they had desired
it, and promised, (i. e. voted) to comply with it. They are not Independents,
for they seek help, but it is in a supercilious manner as if all were to serve
them. They are not merely what I have above called Samaritans; for they vie
with the Pope, in exalting himself with INFALLIBILITY above all obligation,
usurping a right and power to break FAITH and dispense with obligations at
pleasure.

You will ask, if they are neither Independents nor what I have denominated
Samaritans; what are they? I know not what they will style themselves. You know
people of high taste affect to name their children after some high personage,
and to style or denominate themselves by some eminent patron, high character,
personage or important name. I am content they should search the whole world
for a patron, personage, or name, till they come to ADAM, and then they may
denominate themselves ADAMITES.

LETTER. XII.
SIR,
YOU will observe in the course of these letters, that the Minister's connection
with his people includes in it a civil covenant or contract blended with his
other covenants with them; which is of great importance, since his office is so
blended with his occupation, his local situation, his domestic comfort, and
almost all circumstances of life.

Accordingly, the Platform does not fail to assert the right and duty of civil
authority's making provision for the support and maintenance of Ministers,
which the civil authority have generally done where Congregationalism has
prevailed; and I am well assured there was an old law of the Province of
Massachusetts Bay, among other laws ratified and perpetuated by the
constitution of Massachusetts: Which enacts, "That the respective Churches
shall be encouraged in the peaceable and regular profession and practice of
their Church order and discipline."

I have in these letters given you my idea of what their order and discipline
is; as established by their Platform, Synods and usage; now for more than an
hundred and forty years. And Mr. Wise, in his Church's Quarrel espoused, says
"Custom, when full of days, and of noble examples, becomes the common law of a
nation, and is as sovereign and pleadable as the dictates of parliamentary
power." But you will readily join with me, in saying, there is no peace,
regularity or order, in such conduct as the cases I have mentioned. Nor any
custom of noble examples to legitimate or countenance them.

But such conduct, if countenanced and prevalent, must, in its own nature, run
out the Ministry; for it must be inconsistent with common prudence for men to
undertake a calling which in its own nature and according to the tenor of it,
destroys them as to this world. It is what God never required of any order of
men; but his word is expressly and abundantly against it, especially in his
instituting religious officers, both in the Old and New Testament. It is very
common for many people to cry out against a minister; if he takes any proper
care of his secular interest, to call him a worldling, and say he is only after
money; or some such opprobrious epithets. But therein they very highly and
audaciously reproach the divine institution concerning that order of men, as
well as vilify his servants.

But such disorder and clamor, not only destroys Ministers; but destroys
society, makes divisions in Parishes, and disables them from supporting the
public worship of God; and thus destroys religion, and defeats social
happiness, and not only oppugnates the divine law, but undermines civil
government: and in Massachusetts may properly be considered as a conspiracy
against their constitution, which states as a fundamental maxim, "That the
happiness of a people, and the good order and preservation of civil government
ESSENTIALLY depend upon piety, religion, and morality. And that these cannot be
generally diffused through a community; but by the institution of the public
worship of God and of public instruction in piety, religion, and morality;
therefore provides that the several towns, parishes, etc. shall make suitable
provision, at their own expense, for the institution of the public worship of
God, and for the support of public Protestant Teachers of religion, etc. And
that the several towns, parishes, etc. shall contract with their Teachers for
their, support and maintenance." Hence such schemes and practices as are
inconsistent with, and subversive of the regular establishment of public
Teachers of religion, morality, and piety, are essentially treason against that
constitution.

Should therefore any such cases come before the civil authority, may we not
depend that the civil magistrates, who are the guardians of Liberty and
defenders of the Constitution, will exert their authority to crush such
treasons, and hold such covenants and contracts sacred; not suffering people
wantonly and arbitrarily to avoid their contracts; or dispense with their own
engagements.

LETTER XIII.
SIR,
THE investigation of CONGREGATIONALISM has required the obviating so many
perversions which selfish minds have loaded upon it, to serve partial views:
and has lead into so many observations on the various false notions and wicked
practices which have been fathered upon the Platform; that I doubt not you will
take pleasure in a summary review of the whole; in a concluding epistle.

CONGREGATIONALISM, as contained in the Scriptures, and explained by the
Platform and other approved authors, Is Congregations' covenanting to Walk in
all the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances of God.

1st. So many as can conveniently congregate together, or whose local situation
and circumstances conveniently admit of it; covenant to observe all things
whatsoever Christ has commanded.

2d. This Covenant being of so great importance, it must be ratified before
proper witnesses and authority; which is called the gathering a new Church,
under the countenance, and by the advice and assistance of a Council of
Churches; or at least of ministers. The members of the New Church signing in
their presence, and receiving from them the right hand of fellowship: Or at
least, an owning of them in some explicit manner, a new branch added to the
body of the Churches. This is a Consociating Covenant.

3d. This Congregational Church, thus formed, have Right and Power to choose
proper Officers, such as Christ, the King, has instituted. And particularly
which is the most important, a Pastor. Which choice or election is a proposal
to him for a Covenant to be such an officer among and over them, as Christ has
instituted. And he, by accepting; it becomes a confederation between them. And
the parish or corporate body including the Church, concurring, and contracting
with him as to temporalities; it becomes a threefold Covenant between Pastor or
Minister and people.

4th. Although each Congregation has an exclusive right to choose and Covenant
with their own officers; yet as to their Pastor, they have not right by their
own immediate hands, to put him into office: But mediately by a Council of
other Churches, with their Elders; which Council, the Church, with the consent
and concurrence of the Pastor elect, has both right and power to call in.
Which Council, has right and power to approve or disapprove of their
proceedings: and if they disapprove of their proceedings, their choice will be
void; because official authority to administer Christ's ordinances is derived
from him by laying on of the hands of the Presbytery; and also because this
Covenant between Pastor and People is of such importance, that, it must be
ratified before proper witnesses and by proper authority. Which only is such a
Council; according to Congregationalism. But being performed by them, another,
viz. a Consociating Covenant, by the right hand of fellowship, is added to, and
blended with the Pastor's and peoples' Covenants, and their relation becomes a
fourfold covenant relation.

5th. A Church thus organized with a ruling Officer, has Right and Power to
exercise all parts of Discipline of Christ's Institution, according to his
laws: Introducing all matters of complaint or accusation into the Church for a
hearing and trial according to the 18th Chap. of Matthew. having previously
stated in writing the fact committed, and the Divine Law transgressed, to the
person accused, in the first and second step with him; for there can be no
trespass, sin or fault, where there is no Divine Law or Rule transgressed.

The case thus before the Church, they have Right and Power to proceed
according to the Laws of Christ, under the presidency of their Pastor, and
finish it; unless there is a division about it; or it respects the Pastor: In
which cases they are to call in a Council.

Here the case is plain, if both parties mutually agree, and invite one by
mutual choice. But if one party is obstinate, and will not join in such mutual
choice and invitation; it is a question of some importance; what shall be done?

The Platform proposes the third way of Communion. But this has rarely ever
been attempted to be carried into practice; it is probable, for the same
reason, that when a matter is of public notoriety in the Church, every one
excuses himself from undertaking to deal with an offender that he may not seem
officious.

It seems both Church and State early saw this; therefore called together the
Synod in 1662, to answer the question, Whether there ought not to be
Consociations? The Synod answered, there ought to be. Yet this never was
carried into execution. Perhaps all would say, if there were classical
consociations and one party would not join; the other would have a right to
complain to the Consociation, as well as to complain to a Civil Court in a
civil matter.

I query why he may not complain to the Consociation now, taking such and so
many of them as he thinks proper, after he has properly invited and reasonably
waited on the adverse party to join with him? I see not why this should not be
valid, and the adverse party holden to abide the consequences. For all
Congregational Churches, are considered as one general Consociation combined
for those purposes; so combined by the manner of gathering a Church, and
settling a Minister, in which transactions every party and individual by the
nature and design of them, covenant and engage to call in Councils; in all such
cases as Congregational principles require them.

Such a Council ought not to be deemed a party Council, any more than a Civil
Court, is a party court, because one man sues another before it, whom he cannot
induce to settle with him otherwise.

This can give no countenance to those ex part Councils, who take up matters
before they have been properly prepared; or who go directly in the face of a
fair mutual Council; or soon after them, and pretend to act relative to those
things which have been before the mutual Council, contrary to what they have
done. Such may be called party Councils indeed; and may doubtless be reckoned
of those who, Mr. Wise says, defy and trample under foot the Honor and
Authority of the Churches.

You will readily notice, from what I have said in the course of my letters,
that, upon Congregational principles, a single Church is the executive power,
in matters of discipline; yet must execute or stay executing in cases of
division, and respecting their Pastor, according to advice of Council, similar
to executive powers, in civil administration. Which if they neglect or refuse
to do; their doings are invalid and void: And they forfeit the Fellowship of
Churches; and a Council have a Right and Power to declare sentence of
Noncommunion against them.

6th. A Church has Right and Power to remove their Pastor from his office, for
offending incorrigibly; a Council of other Churches directing thereto. And they
may, by advice of Council, dismiss their Pastor in other cases, as I have said
in the foregoing letters, when it is agreed to by all parties.

But their having a Right and Power to choose their Officers; or to call to
office, by no means gives them or implies a power to reject them at pleasure,
or to put them out of office, after they are in office; any more than a man's
having a right to choose a wife and to choose the officer that shall marry
them, implies that he has a right to turn away his wife at pleasure.

But people having this right to Covenant with their Minister, makes so much
stronger against their breaking from him, or pretending to turn him away: as a
man's own voluntary act, is stronger against him than what is in any sense
imposed upon him. So the Platform, Chap. viii. Sec. 6th, "The Church being
free, cannot become subject to any, but by a free election; yet when such a
people do choose any to be over them in the Lord, then they do become subject."

And as a man has no right to break from his own voluntary Covenant; so no one
has any right to absolve him from his Covenant; or defease him of it.

This brings up to view the true intent and meaning of the Platform. Where it
speaks of the right of the people to choose and remove their own Officers. It
is an assertion of a Congregation's having a right to Covenant with their
Officers, and to hold and enjoy their choice, in opposition to Prelatical
imposition, or defeasance of Church Officers. And thus to assert and fix this
Covenant, where it ought to be, viz. on the same ground with all other
Covenants of importance. Hence also Congregationalists do not admit that a
Council should dissolve this Covenant. Neither can one party dissolve it.

But all covenants, being by mutual, voluntary consent of parties, cannot be
dissolved; but by mutual consent and agreement of the original covenanting
contracting parties, or by forfeiture on the one part.

And here you will notice that a Minister's covenant with his People is
involved in the consociating covenant by the manner of solemnizing and
ratifying of it. The Covenant between Minister and People, therefore, cannot
regularly be dissolved without the consent and concurrence of a Council of
Churches. This is sacredly reserved to every individual contracting party, the
mutual and exclusive right of voluntary consent, to dissolve his voluntary
Covenant.

Hence, should a Minister break away from his People without consent or
agreement; he breaks Covenant with them, both ecclesiastical and civil; and
breaks Covenant also with the Consociating Churches, and thereby forfeits his
Covenant relation to them; and official character; and breaks his civil
contract, forfeits that; and ought to pay damages as indifferent men shall
judge, and this has been the case in several instances; where the Minister did
not break away; but only was the first mover for parting, and they parted
regularly by Council.

It is in all respects the same on the other side as to the People; with
respect to their Minister. Should they wish to have him leave them, or the
relation dissolved without his incorrigible offense, it ought to be by advice
of Council, and an allowance of damages to him as indifferent men shall judge.

But if they crowd him away without his consent or the concurrence of a
Council, they forfeit their fellowship with the Consociating Churches; and
ought to continue his salary till they give a regular dismission, and
aggravated damages beside: as indifferent men shall judge.

Again should both Minister and People agree and dissolve their Covenant,
without a Council; it would be irregular, inconsistent with Congregational
principles, and a breach of Fellowship of Churches.

Again, should an Elder offend incorrigibly, whereby he forfeits his Covenant
and contract with his People. The People being one party, cannot, according to
any rule of God or man, be judges of the delinquency or forfeiture of the other
party; any more than the other party may be judge of himself, which certainly
he has as good a right to; as they have to judge him. Moreover, they not being
coordinate officers; nor of a coordinate calling: neither having authority to
put into office; cannot be proper judges of his official character, nor put out
of office, according to the very words of the Platform. Chap. viii. "to
constitute in office, and remove from office; are acts belonging to the same
power."

But a Council of other Churches properly introduced, and regularly hearing and
judging upon the cause, and finding him incorrigibly offending; and directing
to a dismission. The Church has then Right and Power to dismiss him.

Yet even then, if the Church will not dismiss, will not consent to give up
their Covenant with him, he is not dismissed; the Council cannot destroy the
Covenant. The right of covenanting contracting parties must forever remain
sacred to the parties who made the covenant, contract or confederation. Yet
however they cannot be considered in Fellowship with other Churches so long as
they remain so, until such advice is conformed to: or, as Mr. Wise says, is
repealed by a like power which made it.

I have now, my dear Friend, in compliance with your desire, in the course of
my letters, given you my idea of CONGREGATIONALISM: have endeavored to wipe
off the reproach, and obviate the absurdities which many have loaded it with,
by their foolish sentiments and wicked practices, which they have audaciously
asscribed to it.

That IT may be rightly understood and carefully practiced by our CHURCHES,

Is the fervent wish of one Who is, Sir, With sentiments of cordiality, Your
humble Servant.


