A VIEW OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, IN A SERIES OF PAPERS, WRITTEN AT
VARIOUS TIMES, BETWEEN THE YEARS 1787 AND 1794, BY TENCH COXE, OF PHILADELPHIA;
INTERSPERS^D WITH AUTHENTIC DOCUMENTS: THE WHOLE TENDING TO EXHIBIT THE
PROGRESS AND PRESENT STATE OF CIVIL AND RELIGIOUS LIBERTY, POPULATION,
AGRICULTURE, EXPORTS, IMPORTS, FISHERIES, NAVIGATION, SHIP-BUILDING,
MANUFACTURES, AND GENERAL IMPROVEMENT.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR WILLIAM HALL, No. 51, Market Street, and WRIGLEY and
BERRIMAN, No. 149, Chestnut Street. 1794.

DISTRICT of PENNSYLVANIA, to wit:
SEAL. BE IT REMEMBERED, That on the twenty-fourth day of October, in the
nineteenth year of the Independence of the United States of America, WILLIAM
HALL, and WRIGLEY and BERRIMAN, of the said district, have deposited in this
office, the Title of a Book, the right whereof they claim, as proprietors, in
the words following, to wit:

A View of the United States of America, in a series of papers, written at
various times, between the years 1787, and 1794; by TENCH COXE, of
Philadelphia; interspersed with authentic documents: the whole tending to
exhibit the progress, and present state of civil and religious liberty,
population, agriculture, exports, imports, fisheries, navigation,
ship-building* manufactures, and general improvements: in conformity to the act
of the Congress of the United States, entitled, An act for the encouragement
of Learning, by securing the copies of Maps, Charts and Books, to the Authors
and Proprietors of such copies, during the times therein mentioned.

SAMUEL CALDWELL, Clerk of the District of Pennsylvania.

A TABLE of the CONTENTS.
BOOK I.
CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY Remarks, Page. 1 CHAPTER II. Facts and considerations
relative to the agriculture, manufactures, fisheries, navigation, and the
import, export and coasting trade, intended to elucidate the commercial
interests of the United States, Page. 3 CHAPTER III. Sketches of the subject of
American manufactures, in 1787, preparatory to exertions for their advancement
and increase, Page. 34 CHAPTER IV. A summary view of the state of Pennsylvania,
intended to exhibit to the inhabitants of the populated districts of the other
states, and to foreigners, the real and great advantages to be obtained by
trade, manufactures, and purchases of estates therein, and by migration
thither, Page. 57 CHAPTER V. Containing some information relative to maple
sugar, and its possible value in certain parts of the United States, Page. 77
CHAPTER VI. A concise general view of the United States, for the information of
migrators from foreign countries, Page. 83 CHAPTER VII. Concerning the
distilleries of the United States, Page. 106 CHAPTER VIII. S^a^ements, relative
to the agriculture, manufactures, commerce, population, resources and public
happiness of the United States, in reply to the assertions and predictions of
lord Sheffield, Page. 111 CHAPTER IX. Reflections on the state of the American
union in the year 1792, Page. 286 CHAPTER X. Some ideas concerning the creation
of manufacturing towns and villages in the United States, applied, by way of
example, to a position on the river Susquehanna, Page. 380 CHAPTER XI. Abstract
of goods, wares and merchandise, exported from the United States, from the 1st
of October, 1790, to 30th September, 1791, Page. 405 CHAPTER XII. Abstract of
goods, wares and merchandise, exported from each of the United States of
America, (with the aggregate of the whole) from the 1st October, 1791, to 30th
September, 1792, being one year, Page. 413 CHAPTER XIII. A return of the
imports into the United States, for one year, ending on the 30th day of
September, 1790, Page. 421 CHAPTER XIV. An account of the tonnage of vessels,
on which the duty was paid, in the United States, from the 1st of October,
1789, to the 30th September, 1790, inclusively, Page. 423 CHAPTER XV. General
abstract of duties arising on the tonnage of vessels, entered into the United
States, from the 1st of October, 1790, to the 30th September, 1791, Page. 425
CHAPTER XVI. Containing a summary statement of the principal facts, which
characterize the American people, and their country or territory, in 1793,
Page. 427
BOOK II.
CHAPTER I. Introductory remarks, Page. 449 CHAPTER II. Reflections upon the
best mode of bringing the forest lands of the United States into cultivation
and use, Page. 450 CHAPTER III. Containing the tariff of the United States, for
the information of merchants and manufacturers, Page. 458 CHAPTER IV. A
statement of the tonnage of vessels, which have paid duty in the ports of the
United States of America, between the 1st day of October, 1791, and the 30th
day of September, 1792, including the coasting and fishing trades, Page. 470
CHAPTER V. An abstract of goods, wares and merchandise, exported from the
United States, from the 1st October, 1792, to 30th Sept. 1793, Page. 471
CHAPTER VI. Miscellaneous facts and observations concerning the state of
Pennsylvania, supplementary to the fourth chapter of the first book, Page. 477
CHAPTER VII. Containing a view of the subject of foreign distilled spirits,
extracted from a publication in the year 1789, Page. 492 CHAPTER VIII.
Concerning the public debts and revenues of the United States, Page. 496
CHAPTER IX. Miscellaneous reflections upon certain important facts and
considerations, which occur, at this time, in the affairs of the United States;
intended as a conclusion to this collection, Page. 498
BOOK I.
A PREFATORY NOTE ADDRESSED TO THE CITIZENS OF PENNSYLVANIA.
AFTER the following pages were delivered from the press some observations upon
those parts of their contents, which relate to our particular state, occurred
with very considerable force. These were accompanied by interesting reflections
upon the existing circumstances of the country. It appeared useful to introduce
them in a prefatory note, that they might encourage our perseverance in the
ancient line of policy and conduct, which have produced effects so
transcendently favorable to our local interests, without injustice to our
sister states, or to the foreign world.

It appears by the return on the 476th page, that the state of Pennsylvania (or
the city of Philadelphia) exported in the year, ending in September, 1793, of
foreign and domestic goods, nearly seven eighths of the sum exported by
New York, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, and New Hampshire; and that
those exports of Philadelphia were 1,717,572 dollars, more than all the exports
of New England. At the same time, it is well known, that Baltimore received a
considerable part of the produce of this state, and that some of it is usually
sent out by land to the Patowmac, and by water through the river Ohio. The
migrators from New England, New York, New Jersey, Delaware and Maryland, from
Europe and in that year, from the West Indies, were consuming largely of
articles, which would otherwise have greatly increased the value of our
exportations.

Having reference to the number of tons and to the quality, it will be found,
that we built new vessels in the same year to an amount double that of any
other port in the United States.

The increase of the exports of the United States in flour, since the year
1786, has been about 800,000 barrels. This article is received by New England,
the Carolinas and Georgia, in a much greater degree from the middle states,
than it is exported from the former seven. This very great increase is
therefore confined to Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York, Delaware, Maryland
and Virginia; and it is not the principal staple of the two last states, which
export more in value of tobacco than of flour. The difference in the value of
the flour shipped from those six states, in 1786, and that in 1793, is about
six millions of dollars, calculating as well upon the increase of price as of
quantity. The whole increase of the exports of the union, since March 1789, is
about eight millions of dollars, of which more than two millions were in
foreign goods.

Pennsylvania, and Maryland (which exports considerably for Pennsylvania)
shipped, of domestic and foreign goods, in 1792, Dollars, 6,370,904

The same two states shipped in 1793, 10,645,855

The difference in favor of the latter year was 4,274,951 dollars. This was
about seventeen twentieth parts of the increase of the exports of the United
States in the same time.

The whole exports of New York, in 1793, were 2,934,370

The mere increase of the exports of Pennsylvania, between 1792 and 1793, was
3,138,090

The exports of Pennsylvania, for the half year only, ending on the 30th March,
1794, were, Dol^. 3,533,597

The increase of the exports of the United States, in 1793, beyond those of
1792, was about 5,000,000 dollars, of which the above increase of Pennsylvania
alone, in that time, was thirty-one fiftieth parts: or more than three fifths.

The population of Pennsylvania appears to have increased, in 23 years, nearly
in the proportion of 39 to 91, though the whole term of a revolutionary and
invasive war of seven years was included. See page 481.
This considerably exceeds Dr. Franklin's estimate of doubling in twenty years.
Now, that all New England is full, except Main and Vermont, the contiguous
states of New Jersey and Delaware are overstocked, and Maryland nearly so; and
above all, now that Europe is full and much disturbed, a curious rapidity of
population is to be expected in a state with so much unimproved land,
disposition and capacity for manufactures, wealth, foreign intercourse, energy
and enterprise as Pennsylvania. The surplus population of New England,
New Jersey, Delaware, and Maryland, at five per cent. is above 60,000 persons
per annum; and the surplus of the old settlements of this state is above
twenty-two thousand per annum.

The plenty of pit-coal in Pennsylvania will very soon give it an immense
advantage over all the interior country north and east of it, in which, though
colder than Pennsylvania, it is not known, that there is one coal mine open, or
that there is any considerable appearance of that invaluable fossil. Wood and
timber are very much decreased in the principal part of New England and in
New Jersey, but is abundant in Maine and Vermont, and in many parts of New York.

It cannot be too much enforced and reiterated, that the interior and western
counties of Pennsylvania, and the western country in general, ought to procure,
at any expense, the most valuable breeding animals, which can be obtained --
Horses, mares, horned cattle and sheep: because their distance from the
seaports dictates the most intelligent and particular attention to the grazing
husbandry. Horned cattle have been driven to Philadelphia, from Massachusetts
and North Carolina, and mules from Connecticut to Baltimore. The journey from
the Ohio to Philadelphia, is not more difficult.

The practice of the eastern states, in regard to schools deserves the most
serious attention of the wise and good. It appears to have resulted in
New England from their settling in townships of four, five and six miles
square. Perhaps it would be most easily accomplished in Pennsylvania by
dividing the state into such townships. The utmost distance from a school, in
the center of a division of four miles square, would be very little more than a
mile.

It is obviously of the greatest importance to this country and to
Pennsylvania, that its citizens should continue to be firmly attached to the
union of the American states. An opposite disposition would be an error the
most fatal and the most extreme.

There was never applied, to the improvement and advancement of Pennsylvania,
so great an aggregate of money as is employed directly or indirectly at the
present time. The improvements at the falls of Delaware, at Alexandria on the
same river, opposite to Bucks, at Wilsonville on the Walenpaupack, at Assylum
on the Susquehannah, at Connewaga by that company, at the Brandywine,
Schuylkill and Tulpehocken canals, at the Lancaster turnpike road, at the Black
Friar falls of Susquehanna, in the private buildings at Pittsburg, the mills,
work-shops and dwelling houses in every town and every quarter of the state,
together with the expenditures upon roads, bridges and rivers, amount to a
prodigious sum, have attracted artists, mechanics and laborers from other
states, and even from Europe, and have catched the stream of emigration ere it
passed from east to west, and from north to south. It may be truly said, that
the profits, not only of agriculture, but of trade, manufactures, funds and
banks are turned, to a great amount, to the promotion of the landed interest,
by Pennsylvanians, by many other Americans and foreigners of several nations.

The manufactured imports of the state of Pennsylvania, are somewhat less than
those of New York; though the exports of this state are so much greater. This
is a clear proof of the magnitude of the manufactures of Pennsylvania.
Gunpowder, linseed oil, glue, paper, books, engravings, carriages, braziery,
copper ware, tin and pewter wares, iron castings, saddlery, hats, carriages for
pleasure and work, paper hangings, pasteboards, boots, shoes, tanned and tawed
leather, parchments, earthen and stone ware, cedar ware, corn-fans, Windsor and
rush bottom chairs, household manufactures of woolen, cotton and linen, set
work, gold work, silver plate, rolled and slit iron and steel, and manufactures
thereof and of lead, leather breeches, whips, gloves, horsemens' caps, cartouch
boxes, canteens, sword blades, bayonets, muskets, rifles, drums, boats, ships
and vessels, beer, distilled spirits, and many other articles to a great amount
indeed, are manufactured in the city of Philadelphia, in the boroughs, and in
the counties of Pennsylvania; are transported, in many instances, by land and
water, to several other states; and, in many instances, are exported to foreign
countries. This is the real cause of a difference, which has attracted some
observation; and this important circumstance is conceived to be one of the
strongest points in favor of the resources, powers and efficiency of
Pennsylvania. From this solid truth it is obvious, that upon an accurate and
comprehensive statement of her commerce, foreign and domestic, by sea and land,
a great balance would appear in favor of this state.

The people of Pennsylvania owe very little money indeed, to their American
brethren, but on the contrary, have always much due to them on all sides. They
partake more largely in the ready money branches of foreign commerce, because
of their own valuable staples and of the extent of their capital and their
habits of exporting to foreign countries, from the southern ports, the
productions of those states. In the credit trades, they take a very large share
and are second to none in punctuality of payment.

The citizens of Philadelphia consume in their arts, trades and families, and
export to foreign countries so much of the produce of the fisheries, that they
appear to have a strong interest to participate in them. While the British and
French partake in the American fisheries, and in the whale fishery of every
sea, it will continue to be a matter of certainty, that the enterprizing ship
owners and mariners of Philadelphia may at any time make the experiment.

The facts and ideas in this note, relative to the state of Pennsylvania,
together with those in the 4th chapter of the first book and in the 6th chapter
of the second book will tend to prove to us, who are of that prosperous state,
its very deep interest in maintaining just government and public order.

VIEW OF THE UNITED STATES.
CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.
THE progressive course of things, in young countries, renders the talk of
those, who undertake to treat of their affairs, particularly difficult. The
incessant changes, produced by public operations and private industry, occasion
the representations of one year to be imperfect and dissimilar pictures, in
those which follow soon after. In no country have these observations been more
strikingly exemplified, than in the United States of America. The actual
situation of many parts of their affairs is nearly the reverse of what it was
at times within the memory of children. This circumstance has suggested the
idea, that collections of papers, which have been published at the different
stages of American affairs during the existing peace, (like those, which occupy
this volume) introduced in each instance by concise explanatory remarks, and
closed by such brief observations on its particular subject, of the country
required the appointment of another convention, with more general powers. Such
a body was soon after constituted, and commenced its sittings at Philadelphia
in the spring of 1787. The following considerations relative to the American
trade, were published in that city, and inscribed to the members of the
convention at an early period of their business. It is proper to remark (and by
the kindness of heaven it can be said with truth) that the unfavorable part of
the circumstances, which are detailed in this essay, have given place to that
prosperous state of commerce, which a country of diversified and productive
agriculture must ever possess, either in the foreign or domestic line, while it
maintains with sincerity and vigilance the freedom of its citizens, and with
energy and firmness, the rights of property.

An enquiry into the principles, on which a commercial system for the United
States of America should be founded; to which are added some political
observations connected with the subject. -- Read before the society for
political enquiries, convened at the house of Benjamin Franklin, in
Philadelphia, May 11, 1787. There are in every country certain important crises
when exertion or neglect must produce consequences of the utmost moment. The
period at which the inhabitants of these states have now arrived, will be
admitted, by every attentive and serious person, to be clearly of this
description.

Our money absorbed by a wanton consumption of imported luxuries, a fluctuating
paper medium substituting in its stead, foreign commerce In regard to its old
channels under the British monopoly -- and the new channels not having then
discovered themselves, or their importance.
extremely circumscribed and a federal government not only ineffective but
disjointed, tell us indeed too plainly, that further negligence may ruin us
forever. Impressed with this view of our affairs, the writer of the following
pages has ventured to intrude upon the public. But as neither his time nor
opportunities will permit him to treat of all the great objects, which excite
his apprehensions or engage his wishes, he means principally to confine himself
to that part of them, which have been most subjected to his observations and
enquiries.

Just opinions on our general affairs, must necessarily precede such a well
devised system of commercial regulations, as will extend our trade as far as it
can be carried, without affecting unfavorably our other interests. It may
therefore be useful in the first place, to take a comparative view of the two
most important objects in the United States -- our agriculture and commerce.

In a country blessed with a fertile soil, and a climate admitting steady labor,
where the cheapness of land tempts the European from his home, and the
manufacturer from his trade, It may be truly affirmed in the middle states that
agriculture draws more of the emigrating European artizans from manufactures
than manufactures draw of the farmers from agriculture.
we are led by a few moments reflection to fix on agriculture as the great
leading interest. From this we shall find most of our other advantages result,
so far as they arise from the nature of our affairs, and where they are not
produced by the operation of laws -- the fisheries are the principal exception.
In order to make a true estimate of the magnitude of agriculture, we must
remember that it is encouraged by few or no duties on the importation of rival
produce A. D. 1787, and under the laws of the several states.
-- that it furnishes outward cargoes not only for all our own ships, but those
also which foreign nations send to our ports, or in other words, that it pays
for all our importations The fisheries were then the only exception, but
manufactures are beginning to form another, though much less important, yet: A.
D. 1789.
-- that it supplies a part of the clothing of our people and the food of them
and their cattle -- that what is consumed at home, including the materials for
manufacturing, is many times the value of what is exported -- that the number
of people employed in agriculture, is at least nine parts in ten of the
inhabitants of America A. D. 1787.
-- that therefore the planters and farmers compose the body of the militia,
the bulwark of the nation -- that the value in property, occupied by
agriculture, is manifold greater than that employed in every other way -- that
the settlement of our waste lands, and subdividing our improved farms is every
year increasing the pre-eminence of the agricultural interest -- that the
resources we derive from it are at all times certain and indispensibly
necessary -- and lastly, that the rural life promotes health and morality by
its active nature, and by keeping our people from the luxuries and vices of the
towns. In short, agriculture appears to be the spring of our commerce, and the
parent of our manufactures.

The commerce of America, including our exports, imports, shipping,
manufactures and fisheries, may be properly considered as forming one interest.
So uninformed and mistaken have many of us been, that it has been stated as our
greatest object, and it is feared that it is yet believed by some to be the
most important interest of New England. But calculations carefully made do not
raise the proportion of property, or the number of men employed in
manufactures, fisheries, navigation and trade, As regular oocupations, etc. A.
D. 1787. The manufacturers are but little more than ^alf of the people of
England.
to one-eighth of the property and people occupied by agriculture, even in that
commercial quarter of the Union. In making this estimate something has been
deducted from the value and population of the large towns for the idle and
dissipated, for those who live upon their incomes, and for supernumerary
domestic servants. But the disproportion is much greater, taking the union at
large, for several of the states have little commerce, and no manufactures --
others have no commerce and scarcely manufacture any thing. The timber, iron,
cordage and many other articles necessary for building ships to fish or trade
-- nine parts in ten of their cargoes -- the subsistence of the manufacturers,
and much of their raw materials are the produce of our lands. In almost all the
countries of Europe, judicious writers have considered commerce as the handmaid
of agriculture: if true there, with us it must be unquestionable. The United
States have yet few factories to throw into the scale against the landed
interest. We have in our lands full employment for our present inhabitants, and
instead of sending colonies to newly discovered islands, we have adjoining
townships and counties, whose vacant fields await the future increase of our
people.

If a comparative view of the importance of our various interests should
terminate in a conviction of the great superiority of agriculture over all the
rest combined -- if emigration and natural increase are daily adding to the
number of our planters and farmers -- if the states are possessed of millions
of vacant acres, that court the cultivator's hand -- if the settlement of these
immense tracts will greatly and steadily increase the means of subsistence, the
resources and powers of the country -- if they will prove an inherent treasure
of which neither folly nor chance can deprive us, let us be careful to do
nothing, which may interrupt this happy progress of our affairs. Should we,
from a misconception of our true interests, or from any other cause, form a
system of commercial regulations, prejudicial to this great mass of property,
and to this great body of the people, we must injure our country during the
continuance of the error, and we must finally return under the disadvantages of
further changes, to that plan, which it must be our sincere desire, as it is
our serious duty, at this time to devise The state of information, connected
with commercial legislation was very unsatisfactory in 1787. We had very few
state documents, and less of national. To legislate then on the subject was a
more difficult and uncertain business than it now is. -- A. D. 1793.
.

While we feel an absolute conviction, that our true interests should restrain
us from burdening or impeding agriculture in any way whatever, we must be ready
to admit, that sound policy requires our giving every encouragement to commerce
and its connexions The fisheries and manufactures.
, which may be found consistent with a due regard to agriculture.

The communication between the different ports of every nation is a business
entirely in their power -- The policy of most countries has been to secure this
domestic navigation to their own people. The extensive coasts, the immense bays
and numerous rivers of the United States have already made this an important
object, and it must increase with our population The coasting vessels, entered
at the custom-house of Philadelphia in the year 1785, were 567 sail; all the
other entries of sea-vessels in the same year were 501.
. As the places at which the cargoes of coasting vessels are delivered must be
supplied with American produce from some part of the Union, and as the merchant
can always have American bottoms to transport the goods of the producing state
to the state consuming them, no interruption to the market of the planters and
farmers can be apprehended from prohibiting transportation in foreign bottoms
from port to port within the United States -- A single exception may perhaps be
proper, permitting foreign vessels to carry from port to port, for the purpose
of finishing their sales, any goods that shall be part of the cargoes they
brought into the Union, from the last foreign place at which they loaded. The
fleets of colliers on the British coast evince the possible benefits of such a
regulation The freight made by a foreign vessel from Boston to Philadelphia, or
from New York to Virginia, or from Philadelphia to Charleston, is a total loss
to the United States.
.

The consumption of fish, oil, whalebone and other articles obtained through
the fisheries, in the towns and counties that are convenient to navigation, has
become much greater than is generally supposed. It is said that no less than
five thousand barrels of mackarel, salmon and pickled cod-fish, are vended in
the city of Philadelphia annually. Add to them the dried fish, oil, spermaceti
candles, whalebone, etc. and it will be found that a little fleet of sloops and
schooners must be employed in the business.

The demand for the use of the inhabitants of those parts of the Union to which
these supplies can be carried, is already considerable, and the increase of our
towns and manufactures will render it more so every year. In the present state
of our navigation we can be in no doubt of procuring these supplies by means of
our own vessels. The country that interferes most with us in our own market is
Nova Scotia, which also, it is said, has had some emigrants from our fishing
towns since the decline of their business. Such encouragement to this valuable
branch of commerce, as would secure the benefits of it to our own people,
without injuring our other essential interests, is certainly worth attention.
The Convention will, probably, find on consideration of this point, that a duty
or prohibition of foreign articles, such as our own fisheries supply, will be
safe and expedient The plan of the Convention was not at that time known.
Instead of a power to lay particular duties being granted to Congress, the
better grant of a power to regulate our national commerce was made.
.

The article in the British trade laws, which confines the importation of
foreign goods to the bottoms of the country producing them, and of their own
citizens, appears applicable to our situation. By means of those two flags we
should be certain of the necessary importations, and we should throw out of
each department of the carrying trade every competitor, except the ships of the
nation by which the goods were produced or manufactured. All trade whit several
countries, such as China and India, whose vessels seldom or never make foreign
voyages, would be secured in our own hands. It will be found, that a modified
application of this regulation in practice, will be attended with no
difficulties or inconveniences, and besides the immediate benefits already
mentioned, our merchants will be led directly to the original market for the
supplies of which we stand in need. Instead of purchasing the goods of Russia
or the East Indies in England, France or Holland, our own ships will sail
directly to the fountain from whence they have hitherto flowed to us through
foreign channels. The credits given to us in Europe after the peace, kept us in
the practice of going to a very few places, for all our importations. But they
have trusted us in many instances at a dear rate indeed, and however useful
credit may be as a supplement to our means of trade in this young country, it
is very certain that we should first lay out, to the best advantage, our funds
in hand.

These are the principal encouragements to foreign commerce, which occur at
present as proper to form a part of a permanent system for the United States.
Regulations for temporary purposes, such as restrictions and prohibitions
affecting particular nations, it is not meant to speak of here. It must be
observed, however, that they should be adopted with great prudence and
deliberation, as they may affect us very unfavourably, if they should be tried
in vain.

In taking measures to promote manufactures, we must be careful, that the
injuries to agriculture and the general interests of commerce do not exceed the
advantages resulting from them. The circumstances of the country, as they
relate to this business, should be dispassionately and thorougly examined This
has been frequently done since 1786, and the subject is now reduced to some
plain and safe principles.
. Though it is confessed that the United States have full employment for all
their citizens in the extensive field of agriculture, yet as we have a valuable
body of manufacturers already here, as man^ more will emigrate from Europe,
most of whom may choose to continue at their trades, and as we have some
citizens so poor as not to be able to effect a little settlement on our waste
lands, there is a real necessity for some wholesome general regulations on this
head. By taking care not to force manufactures in those states, where the
people are fewer, tillage much more profitable, and provisions dearer than in
several others, we shall give agriculture its full scope in the former, and
leave all the benefits of manufacturing (so far as they are within our reach)
to the latter. South Carolina, for example, must, in many instances,
manufacture to an evident loss Domestic manufacturing must be always excepted.
, while the advancement of that business in Massachusetts will give the means
of subsistence to many, whose occupations have been rendered unprofitable by
the consequences of the revolution. A liberal policy on this subject should be
adopted, and the produce of the southern states should be exchanged for such
manufactures as can be made by the northern, free from impost From the clause
in the Federal Constitution, which secures this advantage, a great spring is
given to the coasting trade, and to American manufactures.
.

Another inducement to some salutary regulations on this subject, will be
suggested by considering some of our means of conducting manufactures. Unless
business of this kind is carried on, certain great natural powers of the
country will remain inactive and useless. Our numerous mill seats, for example,
by which flour, oil, paper, snuff, gunpowder, iron work, woolen clothes, boards
and scantling, and some other articles are prepared or perfected, would be
given by Providence in vain. If properly improved, they will save us an immense
expense for the wages, provisions, clothing and lodging of workmen, without
diverting the people from their farms -- Fire, as well as water, affords, if we
may so speak, a fund of assistance, that cannot lie unused without an evident
neglect of our best interests. Breweries, which we cannot estimate too highly,
distilleries, sugar houses, potteries, casting and steel furnaces, and several
other works are carried on by this powerful element, and attended with the same
savings, as were particularized in speaking of water machines -- It Is probable
also that a frequent use of steam engines will add greatly to this class of
factories. In some cases, where fire and water are not employed, horses are
made to serve the purpose as well, and on much lower terms than men. The
cheapness and the easy increase of these serviceable animals insure us this aid
to any extent that occasion may require, which however is not likely to be very
great.

The encouragement to agriculture, afforded by some manufactories, is a reason
of solid weight in favor of carrying them on with industry and spirit. Malt
liquors, if generally used, linseed oil, starch (and were they not a poison to
our morals and constitutions we might add grain spirits) would require more
grain to make them, than has been exported in any year since the revolution A
sensible and well-informed English writer states the quantity of grain made
into drink in Britain at twenty-four millions of bushels, valued at L.3,000,000
sterling.
. -- We cannot omit to observe here, that beer strengthens the arm of the
labourer without debauching him, while the noxious drink now used enervates and
corrupts him -- The workers in leather too of every kind, in flax and hemp, in
iron, wood, stone and clay, in furs, horn, and many other articles employ
either the spontaneous productions of the earth, or the fruits of cultivation.

If we are convinced, by these considerations, that regular factories of many
kinds should be promoted in the most suitable part of the Union, let us next
consider, whether the encouragements now held out to them are at present
sufficient and proper.

The nearest rivals of our manufacturers are those of Europe, who are subjected
to the following charges in bringing their goods into our market: The
merchant's commission for shipping from the foreign port, and the same charge
for selling here, the cost of packages, custom-house papers in Europe, and the
same charge with a duty of five per cent. here The duties have been raised,
with a view to revenue, to at least 7 per cent. on all manufactured good^: and
with a view to the protection of manufactures, they have been advanced upon
several classes of articles to 10, 12, 15, and 15 per cent. The specific duties
are much higher. See table of duties. A. D. 1793.
, porterages, freight, insurance, damage, interest of money, waste, and loss on
exchange -- These may be rated at twenty-five per cent. on the least bulky of
our manufactures We have no manufacture more compact than a piece of yard wide
linen, equal to what cost 15d. sterling in Europe. The following minute
calculation will show the charges, under which a package of 100l. sterling
value of that article can be imported.

Currency. 64 pieces of linen of 25 yards each, will be 1600 yards, which, at
15d. amount to 100l. sterling, 166 13 4 Outward entry, debenture certificate,
and searchers fees, porterage, wharfage, bill of lading in Europe are 15^.
sterling, or in currency 1 5 0 Insurance to cover charges, commission for
effecting and part policy, L.3 3^. sterling, or currency, 5 5 0 Cost of case,
ropes, and packing, 15s. sterling* 1 5 0 One year's interest on first cost, and
European charges on the goods, L.5 5s. sterling, 8 15 0 [ N. B. This is too
low, for the manufacturing houses put twice that advance upon what the goods
are worth in cash.] Carried over, L.183 3 4 Currency. Brought forward, L.183 3
4 Duty on the value of goods in America estimated at 160l. currency for 100l.
sterling cost, at 5 per cent. 8 0 0 Commission on shipping, L.183 4 4 in
Europe, at 2 per cent. 4 11 7 Part custom-house bond and permit, and primage, 0
1 6 Commission on the sales and remitting, supposing the goods to sell for
210l. currency, per 100l. sterling cost, at 7 per cent. 11 5 0 Freight of 13
1-3 feet, at 1 s3 sterling per foot, 1 7 9 Porterage, 0 1 0 208 10 2 Deduct the
first cost as above, 166 13 4 L.25 2 1 sterling, being the charges, is equal to
L.41 16 10 In this calculation, waste, which of some articles is great, damages
below 5 per cent. which the underwriters do not pay, injuries not within the
risk insured, difference of exchange now 6 per cent. above part, and other
losses on remitting, postages of letters, and bad debts on sales at a long
credit, as well as the profit of the importer and the higher rate of duties,
which several classes of goods pay are not taken notice of, though several of
them really occur in every importation.


Here is a solid premium, operating like a bounty, while it happily costs the
consumer nothing but what he would otherwise be obliged to pay; for the charges
of importation are unavoidable, and the duty being merely for the purpose of
revenue, is applied to pay the public debts and expenses of which he owes his
proportion. This encouragement can be somewhat increased by exempting raw
materials from duty, which may be very safe and proper, and by additional
duties and prohibitions, which might induce the loss of the revenue and an
injury to morals from smuggling, and would throw upon the other members of the
commercial interest and the cultivators and improvers of our lands an
unnecessary burden. The manufacturers are a judicious body of men, and love
their country. There is every reason to confide therefore, that when they see a
substantial advantage of twenty-five per cent. at least in favor of their
goods, which cannot be taken from them, they will desire that government should
refrain from further duties and prohibitions. This estimate being made upon the
finest of our manufactures, it is evident that the more bulky and weighty would
exhibit the advantages of our own workmen in a yet stronger light.

The clear air and powerful sun of America are other advantages which our
manufacturers enjoy. When the linen and cotton branches shall become
considerable, a great saving of time and money will be made by the climate, and
where bleaching is effected principally by the sun and water, the quality of
the cloth is known to be more excellent. The European process by drugs and
machines impairs the strength. Ireland, it is confessed, with a climate very
different from ours, is remarkable for the quality of its linens, but they do
not equal the American homespun in strength. In confirmation of the above
opinion, it may be mentioned, that there was a plan formed before the
revolution, by a number of English merchants, of establishing a company with a
large capital, to import the brown linens of Europe to be bleached here for the
supply of our markets.

In this country the consumer's money follows the delivery of the manufacture,
therefore less capital is required. In every part of Europe extensive credits
are given upon their goods. For though some nations have not got into the habit
of trusting us, their own merchants are known to buy on easy terms of payment.
France is, perhaps, as little accustomed to give these indulgencies as any
other great country in Europe, yet nothing is paid for there, in less than two
months, and the credits are extended from that time to twelve months according
to the article. At the expiration of the term an accepted bill at sixty days is
considered as prompt payment, so that the actual term of credit is from four
months to fourteen.

To these might be added several other little advantages, the joint benefits of
which are sensibly felt, but it is presumed that enough has been said to
satisfy the just and patriotic mind, though concerned in the business, that a
further addition of duties would not promote the general interests of the
country. We must here beg leave however strenuously to recommend, that every
duty on American produce or manufactures, impoliticly and unkindly imposed by
the laws of several of the states, should be taken off, and that the justice
and sound policy of the alteration should be declared and admitted in some
public instrument: and (...) ships may be very properly considered as the
greatest article we make, the tonnage on our own bottoms should be equalized
throughout the Union, and the extra duties on goods imported in vessels not
belonging to the state in which they are landed, should be done away --
Complaints against the trade laws of foreign nations come not consistently from
those who lay similar burdens on their sister states.

A further encouragement to manufacture^ will result from improvements and
discoveries in agriculture -- There are many raw materials, that could be
produced in this country in abundance, which have hitherto been very limited.
Cotton for many years before the revolution was not worth more than nine pence
sterling in the West India Islands. The perfection of the factories in Europe
has raised it to such a pitch, that besides the prohibition against shipping it
from the colonies to any foreign port, the price has risen fifty per cent. The
consumers in Pennsylvania have paid near two shillings sterling for the
importation of this year. This article must be worth the attention of the
southern planters.

If the facts and observations in the preceding part of this paper be admitted
to be true and just, and if we take into consideration with them the
superiority of foreign commerce, and the fisheries over our manufactories A. D.
1787.
, we may come to the following conclusions -- That the United States of America
cannot make a proper use of the natural advantages of the country, nor promote
her agriculture and other interests without manufactures, that they cannot
enjoy the attainable benefits of commerce and the fisheries, without some
general restrictions and prohibitions affecting foreign nations, that in
forming these restrictions and prohitions, as well as in establishing
manufactories, there is occasion for the greatest deliberation and wisdom, that
nothing may be introduced, which can interfere with the sale of our produce, or
with the settlement and improvement of our new lands.

Among the political considerations, which must necessarily be admitted in
treating of this subject, the force that may be required for our protection is
not to be forgotten. It is certainly the greatest that attends it. America, we
may assume, can have no inducement to engage in European wars. From our local
situation we may keep ourselves long disengaged from them. The principal
European nations would find us an unprofitable and troublesome enemy. The trade
of France, Great Britain, Spain, Holland and Portugal, which passes by our
coasts, are a security against their hostilities. A war among them, in which we
should take no part, would be more beneficial to our farmers, merchants and
manufacturers than all the advantages we could obtain, if engaged in it
ourselves. Our ships would carry for them, or instead of theirs, and our lands
and manufactories would furnish the supplies of their fleets and islands in the
West Indies. To counterbalance these advantages, and to pay the expenses of a
war would require capture^ rich and numerous indeed; but what would compensate
us for the drain of peasantry and the lost opportunity of cultivating commerce
and the arts of peace. A war merely offensive cannot be apprehended. The
fortune of the British arms against America undisciplined and divided, will
instruct our enemies to beware of invasions after the military lessons taken
from that long and serious contest. Having no foreign colonies whose situation
and weakness would subject them to their attacks, and having all our resources
at hand to defend our own coasts, and cut up their trade in its passage by our
doors, no European power will be inclined to insult or molest us. Should any of
them be so insensible to their own interests, as to depart from the policy,
which evidently ought to govern them, America, by acting in concert with the
most powerful enemy of such hostile country, must commence a war, which however
inconvenient and disagreeable to us, would be ruinous to their West India
trade, and fatal to their colonies. We are not destitute of resources and
powers to injure them or defend ourselves. Our inland navigation, coasting
trade and fisheries, and the portion of foreign commerce we must inevitably
enjoy, are no inconsiderable nurseries for seamen. Good naval officers we
should not want: they have never been scarce, and one happy effect of the
revolution has certainly been to raise the reputation of the marine life, and
to increase the talents and respectability of its followers. Foreign seamen
too, would find great temptations to enter on board our privateers and ships of
war, and might be hired in any numbers we could pay. The increase of the
strength and riches of the country, by filling up our vacant lands, is the
infallible method by which the necessary means may be acquired.

It will not be amiss to draw a picture of our country, as it would really
exist under the operation of a system of national laws formed upon these
principles. While we indulge ourselves in the contemplation of a subject at
once so interesting and dear, let us confine ourselves to substantial facts,
and avoid those pleasing delusions into which the spirits and feelings of our
countrymen have too often misled them.

In the foreground we should find the mass of our citizens -- the cultivators
(and what is happily for us in most instances the same thing) the independent
proprietors of the soil. Every wheel would appear in motion that could carry
forward the interests of this great body of our people, and bring into action
the inherent powers of the country. A portion of the produce of our lands would
be consumed in the families or employed in the business of our manufacturers --
a further portion would be applied in the sustenance of our merchants and
fishermen and their numerous assistants, and the remainder would be transported
by those that could carry it at the lowest freight (that is with the smallest
deduction from the aggregate profits of the business of the country) to the
best foreign markets. On one side we should see our manufacturers encouraging
the tillers of the earth by the consumption and employment of the fruits of
their labors, and supplying them and the rest of their fellow citizens with
the instruments of their occupations, and the necessaries and conveniences of
life, in every instance wherein it could be done without unnecessarily
distressing commerce and increasing the labors of the husbandmen, and the
difficulties of changing our remaining wilds into scenes of cultivation and
plenty. Commerce, on the other hand, attentive to the general interests, would
come forward with offers to range through foreign climates in search of those
supplies, which the manufacturers could not furnish but at too high a price, or
which nature has not given us at home, in return for the surplus of those
stores, that had been drawn from the ocean or produced by the earth.

On a review of the preceding facts and observations there appears good reason
to believe, that the necessary measures might be taken to render our farms
profitable and to improve our new lands, and that our manufactures, fisheries,
navigation and trade, would still be considerable. The long voyage by which all
interfering foreign articles must be brought to these markets, and the
inevitable necessity for a revenue, give us, as has been demonstrated, a
virtual bounty of twenty-five per cent. in favor of our own commodities, and
this in the least favorable instances. When returning economy, and the fall of
rents and provisions shall have reduced the expenses of living, when our
increasing farms shall have poured in their addition of raw materials, and we
shall have felt the shortness of importation produced by the suffering of our
credit abroad, and by the check which has been given to foreign adventurers in
our trade, this difference of twenty-five per cent. will have a sensible effect
This has now become very evident. A. D. 1793.
. Being rated on the whole value of the article, that is, as well on the labor
as the raw materials, it is in fact fifty per cent. on the labor in all cases
wherein the workmanship is half the value of the manufactured goods, and so in
proportion where it is more. (...), distilled liquors, pot-ash, gunpowder,
cordage, loaf sugar, hanging and writing paper, snuff, tobacco, starch,
anchors, nail rods, and many other articles of iron, bricks, tiles, potters
ware, millstones, and other stone work, cabinet work, corn fans, Windsor
chairs, carriages, sadlery, shoes and boots, and other wearing apparel, coarse
linens, hats, a few coarse woolen articles, linseed oil, wares of gold and
silver, tin and copper, some braziery, wool cards, worms and stills, and
several other articles may be considered as established. These are tending to
greater perfection, and will soon be sold so cheap as to throw foreign goods of
the same kind entirely out of the market.

Many of the same circumstances, that favor the manufacturer, will render the
fisheries more profitable, and from the cheapness of vessels, they will be
carried on at less expense than in the few last years. The American market,
where the consumption (with population) is increasing fast, may be entirely
secured to them. Our manufactories and town^ will annually make larger demands
for candles, oil, whalebone and pickled fish, and it would be good policy to
extend the consumption of the dried cod. The Danish and French islands, and the
free ports in the West Indies, receive some of the produce of the fisheries --
France is likely to take off a considerable quantity, as also are the
Spaniards, Portuguese and Italians, and the English will always want certain
articles for their manufactories, though not to any great amount --
New England, the seat of the fisheries, has the great advantage of being the
cheapest and most populous part of America. Its inhabitants are healthy, active
and intelligent, and can be frugal; wherefore there appears good reason to be
believe, that many factories will in the course of a very few years revive
their declining towns.

The commercial citizens of America have for some time felt the deepest
distress. Among the principal causes of their unhappy situation were the
inconsiderate spirit of adventure to this country, which pervaded almost every
kingdom in Europe, and the prodigious credits from thence given to our
merchants on the return of peace. To these may be added the high spirits and
the golden dreams, which naturally followed such a war, closed with so much
honor and success. -- Triumphant over a great enemy, courted by the most
powerful nations in the world, it was not in human nature that America should
immediately comprehend her new situation. Really possessed of the means of
future greatness, she anticipated the most distant benefits of the revolution,
and considered them as already in her hands. She formed the highest
expectations, many of which however, serious experience has taught her to
relinquish, and now that the thoughtless adventures and imprudent credits from
foreign countries take place no more An application of the foregoing
observations to the commercial subject, can only be admissible into this essay.
, and time has been given for cool reflection, she can see her real situation
and need not be discouraged.

Our future trade may comprehend the fisheries, with the exclusive benefit of
supplying our own markets, as has been already observed. The coasting trade
This, though not in form, is yet, in effect, secured to us. The coasting trade
will receive a great spring from the Chesapeak collieries in a few years,
should no others be discovered on navigable water.
will be entirely secured to us. The right of bringing the commodities of
foreign countries may be divided with the ships of the nation from whom they
come, or in those cases where they have no native ships, the carrying trade may
be our own This idea remains for consideration as before observed.
. The revolution has opened to us some new branches of valuable commerce. The
intercourse with France was next to none before the war, and with Russia With
Russia it is not at present likely to be very great. Our products and
manufactures are similar and bulky: Our positions remote.
, India and China not thought of. With activity and strict economy we may pay
Europe with some of the produce of India, for a part of the goods with which
they supply us, and if we do not over-regulate trade, we shall be an entrepot
of certain commodities for their West-Indian and South-American colonies.
Besides these objects all the manufacturing countries and many free ports will
be open to us, and we may adventure in foreign ships to a considerable extent,
though it would be more desirable to employ our own. As the proposed
regulations would compel the British or Dutch merchants, to import into the
United States a part of the produce of France and Spain in American bottoms, so
may ours serve the general interests of their country by sending tobacco to
Sweden, or flour, rice and live stock to the British colonies in the vessels of
the respective nations.

The foundations of national wealth and consequence are so firmly laid in the
United States, that no foreign power can undermine or destroy them. But the
enjoyment of these substantial blessings is rendered precarious by domestic
circumstances. Scarcely held together by a weak and half formed federal
constitution, the powers of our national government, are unequal to the
complete execution of any salutary purpose, foreign or domestic. The evils
resulting from this unhappy state of things have again shocked our reviving
credit, produced among our people alarming instances of disobedience to the
laws, and if not remedied, must destroy our property, liberties and peace.
Foreign powers, however disposed to favor us, can expect neither satisfaction
nor benefit from treaties with Congress, while they are unable to enforce them.
We can therefore hope to secure no privileges from them, if matters are thus
conducted. We must immediately remedy this defect or suffer exceedingly.
Desultory commercial acts of the legislatures, formed on the impression of the
moment, proceeding from no uniform or permanent principles, clashing with the
laws of other states and opposing those made in the preceding year by the
enacting state, can no longer be supported, if we are to continue one people. A
system which will promote the general interests with the smallest injury to
particular ones has become indispensibly necessary. Commerce is more affected
by the distractions and evils arising from the uncertainty, opposition and
errors of our trade laws, than by the restrictions of any one power in Europe.
A negative upon all commercial acts of the legislatures, if granted to Congress
would be perfectly safe, and must have an excellent effect The power over
commerce granted by the federal constitution is far preferable to this.
. If thought expedient it should be given as well with regard to those that
exist, as to those that may be devised in future. Congress would thus be
enabled to prevent every regulation that might oppose the general interests,
and by restraining the states from impolitic laws, would gradually bring our
national commerce to order and perfection.

We have ventured to hint at prohibitory powers, but shall leave that point and
the general power of regulating trade to those who may undertake to consider
the political objects of the Convention, suggesting only the evident propriety
of enabling Congress to prevent the importation of foreign commodities, such as
can be made from our own raw materials Though this should be most cautiously
done, it merits careful attention.
. When any article of that kind can be supplied at home, upon as low terms as
those on which it can be imported, a manufacture of our own produce, so well
established, ought not by any means to be sacrificed to the interests of
foreign trade, or subjected to injury by the wild speculations of ignorant
adventurers. In all cases careful provision should be made for refunding the
duties on exportation, which renders the impost a virtual excise without being
liable to any of the objections which have been made against an actual one, and
is a great encouragement to trade.

The restoration of public credit at home and abroad should be the first wish
of our hearts, and requires every economy, every exertion we can make. The wise
and virtuous axioms of our political constitutions, resulting from a lively and
perfect sense of what is due from man to man, should prompt us to the discharge
of debts of such peculiar obligation. We stand bound to no common creditors.
The friendly foreigner, the widow and the orphan, the trustees of charity and
religion, the patriotic citizen, the war-worn soldier and a magnanimous ally --
these are the principal claimants upon the feelings and justice of America. Let
her apply all her resources to this great duty, and wipe away the darkest
stain, that has ever fallen upon her. The general impost -- the sale of the
lands and every other unnessary article of public property -- restraining with
a firm hand every needless expense of government and private life -- steady and
patient indusstry, with proper dispositions in the people, would relieve us of
part of the burden, and enable Congress to commence their payments, and with
the aid of taxation, would put the sinking and funding of our debts within the
power of the United States.

The violence committed on the rights of property under the authority of tender
laws in some of the states, the familiarity with which that pernicious measure
has been recurred to, and the shameless perseverance with which it has been
persisted in after the value of the paper was confessedly gone, call aloud for
some remedy. This is not merely a matter of justice between man and man. It
dishonors our national character abroad, and the engine has been employed to
give the coup de grace to public credit. It would not be difficult perhaps to
form a new article This idea is most happily carried to the utmost length we
could desire in the federal constitution and the clause is no less favorable to
commerce than to private virtue and national honor.
of consederation to prevent it in future, and a question may arise whether
fellowship with any state, that would refuse to admit it, can be satisfactory
or safe. To remove difficulties it need not be retrospective. The present state
of things instead of inviting emigrants, deters all who have the means of
information, and are capable of thinking. The settlement of our lands, and the
introduction of manufactories and branches of trade yet unknown among us or
requiring a force of capital, which are to make our country rich and powerful,
are interrupted and suspended by our want of public credit and the numerous
disorders of our government."

The measures of the convention of 1787, issued, as it is universally known, in
imposing a constitutional prohibition upon paper emissions, paper tenders and
other pernicious violations of the rights of property, in the confirmation of
the foreign treaties by an act of the people, in the establishment of a
national legislature with complete powers over commerce and navigation,
defense, war and peace, money, and all the other great objects of national
economy. The consequences of this wise and singular effort of the American
people are beginning to be known to the world, and some of them will appear in
the latter chapters of this volume.

CHAPTER III. SKETCHES OF THE SUBJECT OF AMERICAN MANUFACTUR^^ IN 1787,
PREPARATORY TO EXERTIONS FOR THEIR ADVANCEMENT AND INCREASE.
THE various political disorders of 1787, and the want of national system,
affected very severely a number of persons in the large towns, who were engaged
in the different branches of manufactures. These were more numerous and much
more important, than was at that time perceived by persons of the closest
observation. The laws of some of the states imposed considerable duties upon
the fabrics of all the rest; in some instances as high as the impost on similar
articles manufactured in foreign countries. The remains of the excessive
importations of the four preceding years were constantly offered for sale at
prices lower than their cost in Europe, and less than they could be made for in
America. From a deep sense of these inconveniences exertions were commenced,
in various parts of the United States, by persons of all descriptions, to
relieve the manufacturing citizens; which appeared the more desirable to many,
because the necessary measures tended, at the same time, to promote the great
cause of union among the states, and to repress habits of expense, which the
war, and the peace likewise, though from very different causes, had introduced
into most of the towns, and into too many parts of the country. The citizens of
Philadelphia took a very active part in these salutary measures, and instituted
a society, which afterward proved of considerable utility, to carry their
views into execution. The address, which is comprised in this chapter, was
prepared in consequence of a request from one of the meetings, which were held
by the promoters of the institution, and other patrons of the internal trade
and manufactures of the United States.

An Address to an assembly of the friends of American manufactures, convened
for the purpose of establishing a Society for the encouragement of Manufactures
and the useful arts, in the University of Pennsylvania, on Thursday, the 9th of
August, 1787, and published at their request.
GENTLEMEN,
WHILE I obey with sincere pleasure the commands of the respectable assembly
whom I have now the honor to address, I feel the most trying emotions of
anxiety and apprehension in attempting to perform so difficult and serious a
duty, as that prescribed to me at our last meeting. The importance and novelty
of the subject, the injurious consequences of mistaken opinions on it and your
presence necessarily excite feelings such as these. They are lessened however,
by the hope of some benefit to that part of my fellow citizens, who depend for
comfort on our native manufactures, and by an ardent wish to promote every
measure, that will give to our newborn states the strength of manhood.
Supported by these considerations and relying on the kind indulgence, which is
ever shown to well-meant endeavors, however unsuccessful, I shall venture to
proceed.

Providence has bestowed upon the United States of America means of happiness,
as great and numerous, as are enjoyed by any country in the world. A soil
fruitful and diversified -- a healthful climate -- mighty rivers and adjacent
seas abounding with fish are the great advantages for which we are indebted to
a beneficent creator. Agriculture, manufactures and commerce, naturally arising
from these sources, afford to our industrious citizens certain subsistence and
innumerable opportunities of acquiring wealth. To arrange our affairs in
salutary and well digested systems, by which the fruits of industry, in every
line, may be most easily attained, and the possession of property and the
blessings of liberty may be completely secured -- these are the important
objects, that should engross our present attention. The interests of commerce
and the establishment of a just and effective government are already committed
to the care of THE AUGUST BODY The Federal Convention.
now sitting in our capital. -- The importance of agriculture has long since
recommended it to the patronage of numerous associations, and the attention of
all the legislatures -- but manufactures, at least in Pennsylvania, have had
but few unconnected friends, till found policy and public spirit gave a late,
but auspicious birth, to this Society.

The situation of America before the revolution was very unfavourable to the
objects of this institution. The prohibition of most foreign raw materials --
considerable bounties in England for carrying away the unwrought productions of
this country to that, as well as on exporting British goods from their markets
-- the preference for those goods, which habit carried much beyond what their
excellence would justify, and many other circumstances, created artificial
impediments which appeared almost insuperable. Several branches however were
carried on with great advantage. But as long as we remained in our colonial
situation, our progress was very slow; and indeed the necessity of attention to
manufactures was not so urgent, as it has become since our assuming an
independent station. The employment of those, whom the decline of navigation A.
D. 1787.
has deprived of their usual occupations -- the consumption of the increasing
produce of our lands and fisheries, and the certainty of supplies in the time
of war are very weighty reasons for establishing new manufactories now, which
existed but in a small degree, or not at all, before the revolution.

While we readily admit, that in taking measures to promote the objects of this
society, nothing should be attempted, which may injure our agricultural
interests, they being undoubtedly the most important, we must observe in
justice to ourselves, that very many of our citizens, who are expert at
manufactures and the useful arts, are entirely unacquainted with rural affairs,
or unequal to the expenses of a new settlement; and This has been the great
dependence and the great means in the business of handicraft manufactures in
Pennsylvania.
many we may believe, will come among us invited to our shor^s from foreign
countries, by the blessings of liberty, civil and religious. We may venture to
assert too, that more profit to the individual and riches to the nation will be
derived from some manufactures which promote agriculture, than from any species
of cultivation The manufacture of malt liquors and fruit and corn spirits might
be the means of preventing the importation of rum, brandy, gin, etc which must
amount to two millions of dollars per annum taking in all our ports.
whatever. The truth of this remark however, will be better determined, when
the subject shall be further considered.

Let us first endeavor to disencumber manufactures of the objections, that
appear against them, the principal of which are, the high rate of labor, which
involves the price of provisions -- the want of a sufficient number of hands on
any terms, -- the scarcity and dearness of raw materials -- want of skill in
the business itself and its unfavorable effects on the health of the people.

Factories which can be carried on by water-mills, wind-mills, fire, horses and
machines ingeniously contrived, are not burdened with any heavy expense of
boarding, lodging, clothing and paying workmen, and they supply the force of
hands to a great extent without taking our people from agriculture. By wind and
water machines we can make pig and bar iron, nail rods, tire, sheet-iron,
sheet-copper, sheet-brass, anchors, meal of all kinds, gunpowder, writing,
printing and hanging paper, snuff, linseed oil, boards, plank and scantling One
mill of Ramsey's (the improvement on Barker's) near Philadelphia, grinds by
water, chocolate, flour, snuff, hair-powder, and mustard* and shells chocolate
nuts; also presses and cuts tobacco for chewing and smokeing, and boults meal.
; and they assist us in finishing scythes, sickles and woolen cloths. Strange
as it may appear they also card, spin and even weave, it is said, by water in
the European factories. Bleaching and tanning The leather branch in
Great Britain is estimated at eleven millions of pounds sterling, or more than
a fifth of all their staple manufactures, and we eat more meat than they, and
have the command of much more deer-skins.
must not be omitted, while we are speaking of the usefulness of water.

By fire we conduct our breweries, distilleries, falt and potash works, sugar
houses, potteries, casting and steel furnaces, works for animal and vegetable
oils and refining drugs The American improvements in steam have been brought
forward since this publication.
. Steam mills have not yet been adopted in America, but we shall probably see
them after a short time in places, where there are few mill seats and in this
and other great towns of the United States. The city of Philadelphia, by
adopting the use of them, might make a great saving on all the grain brought
hither by water, which is afterward manufactured into meal, and they might be
usefully applied to many other valuable purposes.

Horses give us, in some instances, a relief from the difficulties we are
endeavoring to obviate. They grind the tanners bark and potters clay; they
work the brewers and distillers pumps, and might be applied, by an inventive
mind, as the moving principle of many kinds of mills We might cut stone and
marble by horse and water mills. In Italy the latter is the mode.
.

Machines ingeniously constructed, will give us immense assistance. -- The
cotton and silk manufacturers in Europe are possessed of some, that are
invaluable to them. Several instances have been ascertained, in which a few
hundreds of women and children perform the work of thousands of carders,
spinners and winders. In short, combinations of machines with fire and water
have already accomplished much more than was formerly expected from them by the
most visionary enthusiast on the subject. Perhaps I may be too sanguine, but
they appear to me fraught with immense advantages to us, and not a little
dangerous to the manufacturing nations of Europe; for should they continue to
use and improve them, as they have heretofore done, their people may be driven
to us for want of employment, and if, on the other hand, they should return to
manual labor, we may underwork them by these invaluable engines. We may
certainly borrow some of their inventions 1790. We have since obtained the mill
for spinning flax, hemp and wool.
, and others of the same nature we may strike out ourselves; for on the subject
of mechanism America may justly pride herself. Every combination of machinery
may be expected from a country, A NATIVE SON of which, reaching this
inestimable object at its highest point, has epitomized the motions of the
spheres, that roll throughout the universe David Rittenhouse, of Pennsylvania.
.

The lovers of mankind, supported by experienced physicians, and the opinions
of enlightened politicians, have objected to manufactures as unfavourable to
the health of the people. Giving to this humane and important consideration its
full weight, it furnishes an equal argument against several other occupations,
by which we obtain our comforts and promote our agriculture. The painting
business for instance -- reclaiming marshes -- clearing swamps -- the culture
of rice and indigo and some other employments, are even more fatal to those,
who are engaged in them. But this objection is urged principally against
carding, spinning and weaving, which formerly were entirely manual and
sedentary occupations. Our plan, as we have already shown, is not to pursue
those modes unless in cases particularly circumstanced, for we are sensible
that our people must not be diverted from their farm^. Horses, and the potent
elements of fire and water, aided by the faculties of the human mind, are to be
in many instances, our daily laborers So far as we depend on our own resources.
. After giving immediate relief to the industrious poor, these unhurtful means
will be pursued and will procure us private wealth and national prosperity.

Emigration from Europe will also assist us. The blessings of civil and
religious liberty in America, and the oppressions of most foreign governments,
the want of employment at home and the expectations of profit here, curiosity,
domestic unhappiness, civil wars and various other circumstances will bring
many manufacturers to this asylum for mankind. Ours will be their industry,
and, what is of still more consequence, ours will be their skill. Interest and
necessity, with such instructors, will teach us quickly. In the last century
the manufactures of France were next to none; they are now worth millions to
her yearly. Those of England have been more improved within the last twelve
years, than in the preceding fifty. A^ the peace of 1762, the useful arts and
manufactures were scarcely known in America. How great has been their progress
since, unaided, undirected and discouraged. Countenanced by your patronage and
promoted by your assistance, what may they not be 'ere such another space of
time shall elapse?

Wonderful as it must appear, the manufacturers of beer, that best of all our
commodities, have lately been obliged to import malt from England. Here must be
inexcusable neglect, or a strange blindness to our most obvious interests. The
cultivation of barley should certainly be more attended to, and if I mistake
not exceedingly, the present abundant crop of wheat The price of flour had
fallen in December, 1788, to 30 s. per barrel. The French demand then took
place and raised it on a medium since to 38 s. and 40 s. and often more.
will so fill our markets, that the farmer, who shall reap barley the ensuing
year, will find it the most profitable of all the grains. We cannot, however,
have any permanent difficulty on this article The importation of malt has
ceased, and the breweries are greatly increased. A. D. 1793.
.

Of flax and hemp little need be said, but that we can increase them as we
please, which we shall do according to the demand.

Wool must become much more abundant; as our country populates. Mutton is the
best meat for cities, manufactories, seminaries of learning, and poor houses,
and should be given by rule as in England. The settlement of our new lands,
remote from water carriage, must introduce much more pasturage and graizing,
than has been heretofore necessary, as sheep, horses and horned cattle will
carry themselves to market through roads impassable by wagons. The foreign
restrictions on our trade will also tend to increase the number of sheep.
Horses and horned cattle used to form a great part of the New England can goes
for the English West India islands. These animals are exported to those places
now in smaller numbers, as our vessels are excluded from their ports. -- The
farms, capital and men, which were formerly employed in raising them, will want
a market for their usual quantity, and the nature of that country being unfit
for grain, sheep must occupy a great proportion of their lands.

Cotton thrives as well in the southern states, as in any part of the world.
The West India islands and those states raised it formerly, when the price was
not half what it has been for years past in Europe A. D. 1787.
. It is also worth double the money in America, which it sold for before the
revolution, all the European nations having prohibited the exportation of it
from their respective colonies to any foreign country There was a long and
great mercantile speculation that had a great artificial effect. But this
bubble being broken by the increase of cotton from their islands, and the
importations from Surat, Bombay, etc. the price is now much reduced. It is
supposed to be now in America about 25 per cent. higher than in the five years
preceding the revolution war. We have imported cotton into America since this
publication from Bombay and Mauritius.
. It is much to be desired, that the southern planters would adopt the
cultivation of an article from which the best informed manufacturers calculate
the greatest profits, and on which some established factories depend.

Silk has long been a profitable production of Georgia and other parts of the
United States, and may be increased, it is presumed, as fast as the demand will
rise. This is the strongest of all raw materials and the great empire of China,
though abounding with cotton, finds it the cheapest clothing for her people A.
D. 1789. Forty-three chests of this article were imported from China in the
last ships and re-shipped to Europe advantageously. We have a large nursery of
the white Italian mulberry established here this summer. Within ourselves
little can be expected, but the idea of the nursery has been encouraged upon
this principle that it prepares things for an emigration from a silk country.
This perhaps is refining, but the expense is small -- the trees are wanted to
replace those destroyed by the British army -- and the measure falls in with
our plan to foster and encourage, but not to force manufactures.
.

Iron we have in great abundance, and a sufficiency of lead and copper, were
labor low enough to extract them from the bowels of the earth.

Madder has scarcely been attempted, but this and many other dye stuffs may be
cultivated to advantage, or found in America.

Under all the disadvantages which have attended manufactures and the useful
arts, it must afford the most comfortable reflection to every patriotic m^nd,
to observe their progress in the United States and particularly in
Pennsylvania. For a long time after our forefathers sought an establishment in
this place, then a dreary wilderness, every thing necessary for their simple
wants was the work of European hands. How great -- how happy is the change* The
list of articles we now make ourselves, if particularly enumerated would
fatigue the ear, and waste your valuable time. Permit me however to mention
them under their general heads: meal of all kinds, ships and boats, malt
liquors, distilled spirits, pot-ash, gunpowder, cordage, loaf-sugar,
pasteboard, cards and paper of every kind, books in various languages, snuff,
tobacco, starch, cannon, muskets, anchors, nails and very many other articles
of iron, bricks, tiles, potters ware, millstones and other stone work, cabinet
work, trunks and Windsor chairs, carriages and harness of all kinds, corn^fans,
ploughs and many other implements of husbandry, sadle^y and whips, shoes and
boots, leather of various kinds, hosiery, hats and gloves, wearing apparel,
coarse linens and woolens, and some cotton goods, linseed and fish oil, wares
of gold, silver, tin, pewter, lead, brass and copper, clocks and watches, wool
and cotton cards, printing types, glass and stone ware, candles, soap, and
several other valuable articles with which the memory cannot furnish us at once.

If the nations of Europe possess some great advantages over us in
manufacturing for the rest of the world, it is however clear, that there are
some capital circumstances in our favor, when they meet us in our own markets.
The expenses of importing raw materials, which in some instances they labor
under, while we do not -- the same charges in bringing their commodities hither
-- the duties we must lay on their goods for the purposes of revenue -- the
additional duties, which we may venture to impose without risquing the
corruption of morals or the loss of the revenue by smuggling -- the prompt
payment our workmen receive -- the long credits they give on their goods -- the
sale of our articles by the piece to the consumer, while they sell theirs by
great invoices to intermediate purchasers -- the durable nature of some
American manufactures, especially of linens -- the injuries theirs often
sustain from their mode of bleaching -- these things taken together will give
us an advantage of twenty-five to fifty per cent. on many articles, and must
work the total exclusion of several others.

Besides the difference in the qualities of American and European linens,
arising from the mode of bleaching, there is a very considerable saving of
expense from the same cause. So much and so powerful a sunshine saves a great
loss of time and expense of bleaching stuffs and preparations, and this will be
sensibly felt in our manufactures of linen and cotton.

We must carefully examine the conduct of other countries in order to possess
ourselves of their methods of encouraging manufactories and pursue such of
them, as apply to our situation, so far as it may be in our power -- exempting
raw materials, dye stuffs, and certain implements for manufacturing from duty
on importation is a very proper measure. Premiums for useful inventions and
improveme^ts, whether foreign or American, for the best experiments in any
unknown matter, and for the largest quantity of any valuable raw material must
have an excellent effect. They would assist the efforts of industry, and hold
out the noble incentive of honorable distinction to merit and genius. The
state might with great convenience enable a^ enlightened society, established
for the purpose, to offer liberal rewards in land for a number of objects of
this nature. Our funds of that kind are considerable and almost dormant. An
unsettled tract of a thousand acres, as it may be paid for at this time, yields
little money to the state. By offering these premiums for useful inventions to
any citizen of the union, or to any foreigner, who would become a citizen, we
might often acquire in the man a compensation for the land, independently of
the merit which gave it to him. If he should be induced to settle among us with
a family and property, it would be of more consequence to the state than all
the purchase money.

It might answer an useful purpose, if a committee of this society should have
it in charge to visit every ship arriving with passengers from any foreign
country, in order to enquire what persons they may have on board capable of
constructing useful machines, qualified to carry on manufactures, or coming
among us with a view to that kind of employment. It would be a great relief and
encouragement to those friendless people in a land of strangers, and would fix
many among us whom little difficulties might incline to return There are many
societies in Philadelphia, New York, etc. for the patronage of emigrators from
foreign countries.
.

Extreme poverty and idleness in the citizens of a free government will ever
produce vicious habits and disobedience to the laws, and must render the people
fit instruments for the dangerous purposes of ambitious men. In this light the
employment, in manufactures, of such of our poor, as cannot find other honest
means of subsistence, is of the utmost consequence. A man oppressed by extreme
want is prepared for all evil, and the idler is ever prone to wickedness; while
the habits of industry, filling the mind with honest thoughts, and requiring
the time for better purposes, do not leave leisure for meditating or executing
mischief.

In this particular there has been a meritorious reform, amply compensating
every good citizen for the exertions he may have made to promote manufactures.
An extravagant and wasteful use of foreign manufactures, has been too just a
charge against the people of America, since the close of the war. They have
been so cheap, so plenty and so easily obtained on credit, that the consumption
of them has been absolutely wanton. To such an excess has it been carried, that
the importation of the finer kinds of coat, vest and sleeve buttons, buckles,
broaches, breast-pins, and other trinkets into this port only, is supposed to
have amounted in a single year to ten thousand pounds sterling, which co^^
wearers above 60,000 dollars. This lamentable evil has suggested to many
enlightened minds a wish for sumptuary regulations, and even for an unchanging
national dress suitable to the climate, and the other circumstances of the
country. A more general use of such manufactures as we can make ourselves,
would wean us from the folly we have just now spoken of, and would produce, in
a less exceptionable way, some of the best effects of sumptuary laws. Our
dresses, furniture and carriages would be fashionable, because they were
American and proper in our situation, not because they were foreign, shewy or
expensive. Our farmers, to their great honor and advantage, have been long in
the excellent economical practice of domestic manufactures for their own use,
at least in many parts of the union. It is chiefly in the towns that this
madness for foreign finery rages and destroys -- There unfortunately the
disorder is epidemical. It behooves us to consider our untimely passion for
European luxuries as a malignant and alarming sympton, threatening convulsions
and dissolution to the political body. Let us hasten then to apply the most
effectual remedies, ere the disease becomes inveterate, lest unhappily we
should find it incurable.

I cannot conclude this address, gentlemen, without taking notice of the very
favorable and prodigious effects upon the landed interest, which may result
from manufactures. The breweries of Philadelphia, in their present infant
state, require forty thousand bushels of barley annually, and when the stock on
hand of English beer shall be consumed, will call for a much larger quantity
This presumption has been fully realized. We have besides, a very lively export
trade in malt liquors and if we had a sufficiency of black beer bottles, it
must become very great.
. Could the use of malt liquors be more generally introduced, it would be, for
many reasons, a most fortunate circumstance. Without insisting on the
pernicious effects of distilled spirits, it is sufficient for our present
purpose to observe, that a thousand hogsheads of rum and brandy Worth about
L.20,000, and our imports of ardent spirits are estimated at ten times that sum
in the port of Philadelphia only.
, mixed with water for common use, will make as much strong drink as will
require one hundred and twenty thousand bushels of grain to make an equivalent
quantity of beer, besides the horses, fuel, hops, and other articles of the
country, which a brewery employs. The fruits of the earth and the productions
of nature in America are also required by various other manufacturers, whom you
will remember without enumeration. But it is not in their occupations only,
that these valuable citizens demand our native commodities. They and their
brethren, who work in foreign articles, with their wives, children and
servants, necessarily consume in food and raiment a prodigious quantity of our
produce, and the buildings for the accommodation of their families and business
are principally drawn from our lands. Their effects upon agriculture are of
more consequence than has ev^^ been supposed by those, who have not made the
n^cessary estimates. So great are the benefits to (...) landed interest, which
are derived from them, (...) I venture to assert without apprehension of
mistaking that the value of American productions annually applied to their
various uses as above stated, without including the manufacturers of flour,
lumbe^ and bar-iron, is double the aggregate amount of all our exports in the
most plentiful year with which Providence has ever blessed this fruitful
country. How valuable is this market for our increasing produce -- How clearly
does it evince the importance of our present plan. But we may venture to
proceed a step further -- Without manufactures the progress of agriculture
would be arrested on the frontiers of Pennsylvania Manufacturing establishments
on the banks of Susquehannah are of the utmost consequence to our western and
mid-land counties. It is supposed that the manufacture of distilled spirits in
the country on the waters of the Ohio around Pittsburg, has occasioned, a
surplus to be sent down that river of 100,000 gallons.
. Though we have a country practicable for roads, some of our western counties
are yet unable to support them, and too remote perhaps to use land carriage of
the most easy kind. Providence has given them, in certain prospect, a passage
by water; but the natural impediments, though very inconsiderable, and the more
cruel obstructions arising from political circumstances, are yet to be removed.
The inhabitants of the fertile tracts adjacent to the waters of the Ohio,
Pato^mac and Susquehannah, besides the cultivation of grain, must extend their
views immediately to pasturage and grazing and even to manufactures. Foreign
trade will not soon take off the fruits of their labor in their native state.
They must manufacture first for their own consumption, and when the advantages
of their mighty waters shall be no longer suspended, they must become the
greatest factory of American raw materials for the United States. Their
resources in wood and water are very great, as are their mines of coal. As they
do not sell much grain, but for home consumption and must propagate sheep and
cattle for the reasons above stated, their country will in a short time be the
cheapest upon earth.

How numerous and important then, do the benefits appear, which may be expected
from this salutary design! It will consume our native productions now
increasing to superabundance -- it will improve our agriculture, and teach us
to explore the fossil and vegetable kingdoms, into which few researches have
heretofore been made -- it will accelerate the improvement of our internal
navigation and bring into action the dormant powers of nature and the elements
-- it will lead us once more into the paths of public virtue by restoring
frugality and industry, those potent antidotes to the vices of mankind; and
will gave us real independence by rescuing us from the tyranny of foreign
fashions, and the destructive torrent of luxury There is one peculiar means of
advancement in the United States of the most striking and serious importance,
as it regards manufactures. Being an unimproved country, we have the
inestima^ble advantage of importing skillful cultivators of raw materials and
manufactures from nations, which are more advanced than we are, together with
their capital and their skill. We can have no doubt of the fulfilling of this
expectation, for every town and county of the middle and southern states, and
many of those in the eastern states abound with proofs, that the hope has been
already realized in numerous instances. But were these proofs wanting there
could be no doubt that strangers of every description will resort to a country
so fit for their reception -- so pregnant with the means of human happiness.
.

Should these blessed consequences ensue those severe restrictions of the
European nations, which have already impelled us to visit the most distant
regions of the eastern hemisphere, defeating the schemes of short-sighted
politicians, will prove, through the wisdom and goodness of Providence, the
means of our POLITICAL SALVATION.

Opinions had prevailed in America, that manufacturing employments were
injurious to the best interests of the country, that the pursuit of agriculture
should occupy all our citizens, and that labor was so dear as to preclude all
chances of success. Yet it was observed that many emigrators, and others in the
manufacturing branches, had actually succeeded, and it was manifest that the
civil and relgious freedom of the country, and the low price of food, of fuel
and of raw materials would continue to attract persons of that description.
Further investigation and reflection threw new and pleasing lights upon the
subject. It was perceived, that children, too young for labor, could be kept
from idleness and rambling, and of course from early temptations, to vice, by
placing them for a time in manufactories, and that the means of their parents
to clothe, feed and educate them could be thereby increased; that women,
valetudinarians and old men could be employed; that the portions of time of
housewives and young women, which were not occupied in family affairs, could be
profitably filled up, that machinery, horses, fire, water and various processes
requiring only some incipient labor, were the principal means of manufacturing
in Britain, that manufactures, instead of impeding agriculture in that country,
are actually its greatest and most certan support, and that, in truth, they are
indispensibly necessary to the prosperity of its landed interest. It has been
ascertained on further examination, that wages in several parts of the United
States are not higher than in parts of Britain, as had been erroneously
supposed, especially taking into consideration the prices of provisions and the
same degree of comfortable living. It was therefore confidently expected by
many, who carefully examined the subject, that great advantages would result
from a rational, and steady course of attention, private and public, to the
advancement of manufactures. It will appear in the sequel, that the prudent
exertions, which have been incessantly made have been crowned accordingly with
abundant success, considering the shortness of the time and how many other
matters of great importance have called for attention, industry and capital in
the United States.

CHAPTER IV. A SUMMARY VIEW OF THE STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA, INTENDED TO EXHIBIT
TO THE INHABITANTS OF THE POPULATED DISTRICTS OF THE OTHER STATES, AND TO
FOREIGNERS THE REAL, AND GREAT ADVANTAGES TO BE OBTAINED BY TRADE, MANUFACTURES
AND PURCHASES OF ESTATES THEREIN, AND BY MIGRATION THITHER.
THE judicious and temperate proceedings of the American people in the reform
of their national constitution in 1787, 1788, and 1789, the magnanimous
resolution to impose upon themselves the wholesome restraints of a just
government, which they exhibited to each other and to mankind, the moderation
and impartiality of their deportment to foreign nations under their new
government, and their early attention to the restoration of public credit at
home and abroad were followed by the most beneficial consequences in the
beginning of 1790. The little essay, which enters into the composition of this
chapter, was published about the middle of that year in order to remind the
people of the state of Pennsylvania, in which it was written, of their
prospects of future comfort, and to facilitate the answers to numerous
enquiries, which were beginning to be made concerning that state by persons of
various descriptions in other countries. It was sincerely intended to be an
unexaggerated statement of the principal facts on which depend the comforts and
prosperity of the inhabitants of that part of the American union.

Notes on the state of Pennsylvania.
THE state of Pennsylvania is an oblong, of about one hundred and fifty-six
miles wide from north to south, by about two hundred and ninety miles in length
from east to west. On the east of it lies the Delaware river, dividing it from
West-Jersey and New York; on the north New York, and a territory of about two
hundred thousand acres on lake Erie, which Pennsylvania purchased of Congress.
On the north west lies lake Erie, on which it has a considerable front and a
good port, lying within the purchase from Congress, on the west are the new
lands called the western territory, and a part of Virginia: On the south lie
another part of Virginia, Maryland, and the state of Delaware. The contents of
Pennsylvania are about twenty-nine millions of acres, including the lake Erie
territory. It lies between 39 43 and 42 of north latitude. The bay and river of
Delaware are navigable from the sea up to the great falls at Trenton, and have
a light-house, buoys, and piers, for the direction and safety of ships. On this
river are the small towns of Chester and Bristol, and the city of Philadelphia,
which is the capital of the state, and by much the largest and most populous
seaport and manufacturing town in the United States. The distance of this city
from the sea is about sixty miles across the land to the New Jersey coast, and
one hundred and twenty miles by the ship-channel of the Delaware. A seventy gun
ship may lie before the town, and at many of the wharves, which occupy the
whole east front of the city for near two miles, affording every vessel an
opportunity of unlading and lading without the expense of lighterage. Rafts of
masts, timber, boards, hoops and staves, with other articles upon them, can be
brought down the Delaware from the counties of Montgomery and Otsego, in
New York, two hundred miles above the city, by the course of the river. Some
money was expended by the government and landholders in improving the
navigation up toward the source, before the revolution; and there has been a
survey lately begun, for the purpose of proceeding in the improvement of this
and other principal rivers of Pennsylvania, and for making communications by
canals in the improved part, and by roads in the unimproved part of the state.
The Pennsylvanians are much inclined to such enterprises, having found great
benefit from them. On the completion of the present plan, the state will be
more conveniently intersected by roads than any other of its size in the union,
which will greatly facilitate the settlement of its new lands. A slight view of
the map of Pennsylvania, by Howell, that in Mr. Jefferson's notes on Virginia,
or that in Morse's geography, will show how advantageously this state is
watered by the Delaware and its branches, the Schuylkill, the Juniata, the
Susquehanna and its branches, the Ohio, Allegeny, Yougbiogeny, and Monongahela.
The Patowmac and lake Erie also afford prospects of considerable benefit from
their navigation. Nature has done much for Pennsylvania in regard to inland
water carriage, which (...) strikingly exemplified by this fact, that although
Philadelphia and lake Erie are distant from each other above three hundred
miles, there is no doubt that the rivers of the state may be so improved, as to
reduce the land carriage between them nine tenth^: In the same way the
navigation to Pittsburg, after due improvement, may be used instead of land
carriage for the whole distance, except twenty or thirty miles -- By these
routes it is clear, that a large proportion of the foreign articles, used on
the western waters, will be transported; and that their furs, skins, ginseng,
hemp, flax, pot-ash, and other valuable commodities, may be brought to
Philadelphia. The hemp and oak timber for the Russian navy i^ transported by
inland navigation one thousand two hundred miles: and yet hemp is shipped from
that kingdom on lower terms than from any other part of the world. Russia, for
some time after the settlement of Pennsylvania by civilized and enlightened
people, was in a state of absolute barbarism, and destitute of these
improvements. Much therefore is to be expected from the continued exertions of
the prudent, industrious and intelligent inhabitants of Pennsylvania, in the
course of the present century In the last three years more public funds and
private capital have been applied to the improvement of roads and rivers and
the cutting of canals than in all the time between the year 1790 and the first
settlement of the state. A. D. 1793.
.

Considerable bodies of new lands in this state remain for sale by individuals.
Purchases can be always made, partly or wholly on credit, from those persons,
who take mortgages on the lands they sell to emigrants, and indulge them
sometimes with a very easy credit. The Pennsylvanians having no disputes with
the Indians about boundaries. All the lands within the state having been
purchased at a fair and open treaty, and there being some settlements westward
of Pennsylvania on the new lands of Congress, we have little apprehensions from
the Indians any where; and in most of our new country there is no danger at all.

Improved lands, in the old counties of this state, sell generally at a certain
sum for a farm, including the buildings. This, before the war, was, in most of
the thick settled counties within a day's ride of Philadelphia, from four
pounds ten shillings sterling, to thirty shillings per acre, and less,
according to the quality, unless in situations very near the city or some town,
or in cases of very valuable buildings, mills, taverns, or situations for
country trade. In one or two counties, remarkable for the richness of the
lands, they sold higher, sometimes considerably. Farms can be purchased upon
terms as favorable as then, owing to the quantity of new lands for sale in
this and several other states* and owing to the many new and profitable uses
for money, which did not exist before the revolution.

The produce, manufactures, and exports of Pennsylvania are very many and
various, viz. wheat, flour, midlings, ship-stuff, bran, shorts, ship-br^^d,
white water biscuit, rye, rye flour, Indian corn, or maize, Indian meal,
buckwheat, buckwheat meal, bar and pig iron, steel, nail rods, nails, iron
hoops, rolled iron tire, gunpowder It is said there are at this time near
50,000 quarter casks of gunpowder in the Philadelphia magazine, manufactured
in the state of Pennsylvania -- A. D. 1793.
, cannon ball, iron cannon, muskets, ships, boats, oars, handspikes, masts,
spars, ship-timber, ship-blocks, cordage, square timber, scantling, plank,
boards, staves, heading, shingles, wooden hoops, tanners' bark, corn fans,
coopers' ware, bricks, coarse earthen or potter' ware, a very little
stone-ware, glue, parchment, shoes, boots, soal-leather, upper leather, dressed
deer and sheep skins, and glove^ and garments thereof, fine hats, many common,
and a few coarse; thread, cotton, worsted, and yarn hosiery; writing, wrapping,
blotting, sheathing and hanging paper; stationary, playing cards, pasteboards,
books; wares of brass, pewter, lead, tin-plate, copper, silver and gold; clocks
and watches, musical instruments, snuff, manufactured tobacco, chocolate,
mustard seed and mustard, flaxseed, flaxseed oil, flax, hemp, wool, wool and
cotton cards, pickled beef, pork, shad, herrings, tongues and sturgeon, hams
and other bacon, tallow, hogs' lard, butter, cheese, candles, soap, beeswax,
loaf-sugar, pot and pearl ashes, rum and other strong waters, beer, porter,
hops, winter and summer barley, oats, spelts, onions, potatoes, turnips,
cabbages, carrots, parsnips, red and white clover, timothy, and most European
vegetables and grasses, apples, peaches, plumbs, pears, and apricots, grapes,
both native and imported, and other European fruits, working and pleasurable
carriages, horses, horned cattle, sheep, hogs, wood for cabinet makers,
limestone, coal, freestone and marble.

Some of these productions are fine, some indifferent. Some of the manufactures
are considerable, for a young country, circumstanced as this has been; some
inconsiderable: but they are enumerated, to show the general nature of the
state, and the various pursuits of the inhabitants. In addition to them we may
mention, that a lead-mine and two or three salt-springs have been discovered in
our new country, which will, no doubt, be worked, as soon as the demand for
lead and salt to the westward increases. We ought also to notice our great
forests for making pot ashes, and glass.

The manufactures of Pennsylvania have increased exceedingly within a few
years, as well by master-workmen and journeymen from abroad, as by the
increased skill and industry of our own citizens. Household or family
manufactures have greatly advanced; and valuable acquisitions have been made of
implements and machinery to save labor, either imported or invented in the
United States. The hand-machines, for carding and spinning cotton, have been
introduced by foreigners, and improved, but we have obtained the water mill for
spinning cotton, and a water mill for flax, which is applicable, also to
spinning hemp and wool. These machines promise us an early increase of the
cotton, linen, and hempen branches, and must be of very great service in the
wooden branch. Additional employment for ^eavers, dyers, bleachers, and other
manufacturers must be the consequence. Paper-mills, gun-powder-mills, steel
works, rolling and slitting mills, printing figure^ goods of paper, linen, and
even of cotton, (...) making, book printing, and several other branches are
wonderfully advanced: and every month see^^ to extend our old manufactures, or
to introduce new ones.

The advancement of the agriculture of Pennsylvenia is the best proof that can
be given of the comfort and happiness (...) affords to its farming,
manufacturing, and trading citizens. In the year 1786, our exports of flour
were one hundred and and fifty thousand barrels: in 1787, they were two hundred
and two thousand barrels: in 1788, they were two hundred and twenty thousand
barrels: and in 1789 they were three hundred and sixty-nine thousand barrels:
which exceed any exports ever made in the times of the province, or in the
times of the commonwealth The exports of flour in the year 1792 from
Philadelphia, amounted to above 420,000 barrels, and in the spring quarter of
1793 it exceeded 200,000 barrels.
. The produce of flax is increased in a much greater degree: and that of wool
is considerably more than it was before the revolution. A new article is added
to the list of our productions, which is a well-tasted and wholesome sugar,
made of the maple tree. It has been proved, by many fair and careful
experiments, that it is in the power of a substantial farmer who has a family
about him, easily to make twelve hundred weight of this sugar every season,
without hiring any additional hands, or utensils, but those that are necessary
for his family and farm use. The time, in which it can be made, is from the
middle of February to the end of March, when farmers in this country have very
little to do, as it is too early to plough or dig. The price of sugar being
lower here than in Europe, this article may be reckoned at one hundred and
fifty dollars per annum, to every careful and skilful farmer, who owns land
bearing the sugar maple. Of these there are some millions of acres in
Pennsylvania and the adjacent states. It seems also highly probable, that this
valuable tree may be transplanted, and thus be obtained by almost any farmer in
the state; and that men of property, who will purchase kettles, and hire hands
for the above short period, may make larger quantities.

The situation of religion and religious rights and liberty in Pennsylvania is
a matter, that deserves the utmost attention of all sober and well-disposed
people, who may have thoughts of this country. This state always afforded an
asylum to the persecuted sects of Europe, and of the other states in former
times. No church or society ever was established here; no tithes or tenths can
be demanded: and though some regulations of the crown (...) Britain excluded
two churches The Roman and Hebrew.
from a share in our government, in the times of the province, that is now done
away with regard to every religious society whatever, except the Hebrew church*
But at this time a convention of special representatives of the citizens of
Pennsylvania have under consideration all the errors which have inadvertently
crept into our constitution and fra^e of government; and in the act which they
have published for the examination of the people, they have rejected the
halfway doctrine of toleration, and have established upon firm and perfectly
equal ground, all denominations of religious men. By the provisions of the new
code, a Protestant, a Roman catholic, and a Hebrew, may elect or be elected to
any office in the state, and pursue any lawful calling, occupation, or
profession This code has been confirmed in Pennsylvania.
. The constitution of general government of the United States also guarantees
this inestimable and sacred right -- and it is surely a sacred right; for it
belongs to the Deity to be worshipped according to the free will and
consciences of his creatures.

We lay no difficulty in the way of any person, who desires to become a free
and equal citizen. On the day of his landing, he may buy a farm, a house,
merchandise, or raw materials; he may open a work-shop, a counting house, an
office, or any other place of business, and pursue his calling, without any
hindrance from corporation rules or monopolising companies, or the payment, of
any sum of money to the public. The right of electing and being elected (which
does not affect his business or his safety) is not granted till the expiration
of two years* which prudence requires.

A privilege, almost peculiar to this state, has been granted to foreigners by
the legislature of Pennsylvania, that of buying and holding lands and houses
within this commonwealth, without relinquishing their allegiance to the country
in which they were born. They can lease, hire, sell or bequeath the lands,
receive the rents, and, in short, have every territorial and pecuniary right,
that a natural-born Pennsylvanian has* but no civil rights. As they profess to
owe allegiance to a foreign prince or government, and reside in a foreign
country, where they, of course, have civil rights, they cannot claim them* nor
ought they to desire them here* for if they choose, at any time after the
purchase to come out to this country, and make themselve citizens -- or if they
choose to give their estates to their children or other persons, who will do
so, any of them may become citizens to all intents and purposes. This
indulgence to purchase is granted for three years from January 1789: and all
lands bought by foreigners before January 1792, may be held forever on those
terms. Whether a right to make purchases upon those terms will be allowed to
foreigners, after that time, i^ uncertain, and will entirely depend upon the
opinion of our then legislature, as to the safety o^ utility of it This law has
been continued till the year 1795, when it may be renewed.
.

Useful knowledge and science have been favorite objects of attention here. We
have an university, three colleges, and four or five public academies, besides
many private academies and free schools, in the city and several of the
county-towns of this state. Considerable grants of moneys, rent charges and
particularly of new lands, have been made for this purpose by our legislature,
and very liberal private subscriptions have been added at various times. Though
our government and citizens have been always attentive to the important object
of useful and liberal knowledge, yet an increased regard for learning has been
manifested since the revolution. Rising from a provincial to an independent
situation, appears, and very naturally, to have expanded our ideas, and to have
given an enhanced value to improvements of the human mind Much has been done
since 1790 in regard to schools. A. D. 1793.
.

Among the natural advantages of Pennsylvania, her almost innumerable
mill-seats ought not to be omitted. They are conveniently distributed by
Providence throughout the state, and afford the means of establishing every
species of mill-work and labour-saving machines, to meet the produce and raw
materials almost at the farmers' doors. In the present situation of this
country, wanting hands for farming, and in the present state of manufacture^,
when ingenious mechanism is every day and every where invented, to lessen the
necessity for manual labor, this natural advantage must appear of inestimable
importance. Hemp and flax are among the most profitable productions of our rich
midland and new counties, the cream of which is yet to be skimmed. It is
therefore a most pleasing fact, that we have in the state the full-sized and
complete movements or works of a water mill and machinery, to sliver, rove, and
spin flax and hemp into threads or yarns, fit for linen of thirty cuts to the
pound, or any other coarser kind, sheetings, towelling, sail-cloth, ozanbrigs,
twine, and the strands or yarn for cordage. The same machinery is calculated
for the roving or preparing, and spinning combed wool into worsted yarn. We
have also the movements and complete machinery of Sir Richard Arkwright's
water-mill for spinning yarns of cotton. And though the climate of this state
is not fit for cultivating that raw material, yet cotton can be raised with
profit in every state in our union southward of Pennsylvania, and imported from
the East and West Indies.

It is certain, that this extraordinary capacity of our country for mechanical
works has either called forth, in an unusual degree, the mechanical power of
the human mind, or that Providence has bestowed upon the people of this and our
sister states (...) uncommon portion of that talent, which its nature and
situation require. Our Rittenhouse and Franklin stand unrivalled in mechanical
philosophy: and those, who know our country, are well informed* that to these
two great names we could add a considerable list of philosophical and practical
mechanicians, in a variety of branches.

So many of the necessary and convenient arts and trades depend upon the plenty
and cheapness of (...)* that it appears proper to take notice of this article
Till the revolution, our dependence was almost entirely upon wood fuel, of
which, in the (...) populous places, we have still a great abundance and in all
interior situations immense quantitie^ but the increase of manufactures has
occasioned (...) to turn our attention to coal. Of this useful (...) Providence
has given us very great quantities, i^ our middle and western country. The
vicinity of Wyoming, on the Susquehanna, is one bed of coal, of the
open-burning kind, and of the most intense heat. On the head waters of
Schuylkill and Le^^ are some considerable bodies. At the head of the western
branch of Susquehanna is a most extensive body, which stretches over the
country south-westerly, so as to be found in the greatest plenty at Pittsburgh,
where the Allegeny and Youghiogeny unite, and form the head of the Ohio. It has
been lately discovered on the waters of Nescopeck.

All our coal has hitherto been accidently found on the surface of the earth,
or discovered in the digging of common cellars or wells: so that when our
wood-fuel shall become scarce, and the European methods of boring shall be
skilfully pursued, there can be no doubt of our finding it in many other
places. At present, the ballasting of ships from coal countries abroad, and the
coal mines in Virginia, which lie convenient to ship-navigation, occasion a
good deal of coal to be brought to the Philadelphia market. From this great
abundance and variety of fuel, it results, that Pennsylvania, and the United
States in general, are well suited to all manufactories which are effected by
fire, such as furnaces, founderies, forges, glass-houses, breweries,
distilleries, steelworks, smiths' shops, and all other manufactories in metal,
soap-boiling chandlers' shops, pot ash works, sugar and other refineries, etc.
etc.

Ship-building is a business in which the port of Philadelphia exceeds most
parts of the world. Masts, spars, timber, and plank, not only from our own
state and the other states on the Delaware, are constantly for sale in our
market: but the mulberry of the Chesapeak, and the evergreen or live oak, and
red cedar of the Carolinas and Georgia, are so abundantly imported, that
nine-tenths of our vessels are built of them. No vessels are better than these:
and in proof of it, English writers of rank might be quoted, who have published
for and against us. A live oak and cedar ship of two hundred tons, carpenter's
measurement, can be fitted to take in a cargo for fourteen pounds currency per
ton A. D. 1790.
: and there is not a port in Europe, in which an oak ship can be equally well
built and fitted for twenty pounds per ton i^ our money, or twelve pounds
sterling. This fa^^ may appear doubtful or extraordinary; but it i^ certainly
true; and it is greatly in favor of our ship carpenters and other tradesmen
employed in fitting and building ships, as well as our merchants and farmers,
whose interests are so much connected with navigation.

The distance of Philadelphia from the sea, has been made an objection by some,
and the closing of our river by the ice, which happens almost every winter.
Amsterdam, the greatest port in Europe, is inaccessible in the winter. But it
is a fact, that, notwithstanding these objections, our vessels make as many
West India voyages as those of the two other principal sea ports of the middle
states: and though the river is frozen from three to nine weeks almost every
winter, yet there are occasional openings, which give opportunities for fleets
of merchantmen to go out and come in. The fine corn and provision country,
which lies near Philadelphia, enables the merchants to load their vessels in
the winter: and the market is regularly supplied with flour, pork beef, lumber,
staves, iron and many other of our principal articles of exportation. Little
time is therefore lost: and we find that our trade increases. The crop of 1789,
and other exports from the harvest of that year to that of 1790, it is
supposed, will load one hundred and twenty thousand tons of shipping. We have a
very extensive back country* and many large bodies of new land, which must send
their produce to the Philadelphia market, are settling fast. The population of
Pennsylvania, by the last accounts taken, was three hundred and sixty thousand
men, women and children: but, as some years have since elapsed, it is supposed
it will not fall much short of four hundred thousand when the present
enumeration shall be completed. It proved to be 434,000 by the census of 1791.


No country in Europe has paid off so much of her public debt, since the late
general war, as this state, notwithstanding the past disorders and difficulties
of the United States, arising from the weakness of our late general government,
and the shocks of an invasive war. She has paid off and sunk a sum equal to her
full share of the interest and a considerable part of the principal of her
state and federal debts. Yet she has laid no excise or internal duty, but eight
pence currency upon spirituous liquors, which has since been repealed.

The inhabitants of Pennsylvania are principally descendents of English, Irish,
and Germans, with some Scotch, Welsh, Swedes, and a few Dutch. There are also
many of the Irish and Germans, wh^ emigrated when young or in the middle time
of life: and there is a number of each of those two nation^ now in legislative,
executive, and judicial statio^^ among us. It has ever been the policy of our
government, before and since the revolution, and the disposition of our people,
to receive all sober emigrants with open arms, and to give them immediately the
free exercise of their trades and occupations, and of their religion. Latterly
there are many French.


Such is the present situation of things in Pennsylvania, which is more or less
the same in several other of the American states, viz. New York, Main,
Virginia, the Carolinas, Georgia, Vermont, and Kentucky: but though not so in
the rest, the principal difference is, that they are so fully peopled, that
there are no new lands of any value unsol^* and farming lands, which are
improved, are of course dearer than with us. In those states, however,
agriculture, commerce, manufactures, the fisheries, and navigation, afford
comfortable subsistence and ample rewards of profit to the industrious and well
disposed, amidst the blessings of civil and religious liberty.

Before this paper shall be concluded, it may be useful to recapitulate the
various productions and exports of the United States, which are the sure
foundations of a grand scene of agriculture -- the resources for an extensive
trade -- and the materials for a great variety of useful and elegant
manufactures. From our new country we have ginseng, and several kinds of skins
and furs; in the settled parts of the states, rice, indigo, cotton, silk,
tobacco, flaxseed, wheat, rye, barley, oats, spelts, Indian corn, hemp, flax,
wool, iron, lead, copper, coal, freestone, limestone, marble, sulphur,
saltpetre, a great variety of ship timber, ship plank, masts, spars, tar, pitch
and turpentine, pork, beef, cider, fish oil, spermaceti, whalebone, dried fish,
pickled fish, hides, leather, black cattle, sheep, cheese, butter, tallow,
hops, mustard seed, staves, heading, shingles, boards, plank, scantling, square
timber, black walnut, wild cherry and curled maple for cabinet wares, potash,
pearl ashes, potters clay, brick clay, etc. etc. with apples, and all the other
principal fruits, and potatoes, and all the other principal vegetables. During
the late war, considerable quantities of sea salt were manufactured on our
coast, as far north as New Jersey: and this article will no doubt one day
become an object of attention. It may be safely affirmed, that no European
nation whatsoever unites in its dominions, even including distant colonies,
such a variety of important and capital productions* nor can there be any
doubt, in the mind of a candid and serious observer, that such a country must
rise with common prudence, in agriculture* manufactures and commerce, affording
to every industrious and virtuous citizen, and emigrant, the certain means of
comfortable subsistence, and the fairest prospect of establishing a family in
life.

THE progress of the state of Pennsylvania in the great business of
agriculture, since the return of peace, is strikingly evinced by the increased
exportation of flour between 1786 and 1792, which being extracted from the
public records may be relied on as accurately true. The extension of the grain
distilleries and breweries, in the same term, has been at least equally great:
the demand of bread for the increasing manufacturers has been enlarged in full
proportion: ship-building has made a corresponding progress: and the opening of
roads through the new country, the improvements of the old roads, the building
of bridges, the clearing of rivers, and the cutting of canals in the three last
years have exceeded the similar operations of any other equal term, either
before, during, or since the revolution, beyond all comparison It has
astonished those best acquainted with the affairs of Pennsylvania to find, that
the exports from Philadelphia (the only port in that state) proved to be near
seven millions of dollars during the year ending on the 30th September, 1793.
For the particulars see the return of exports of the United States for that
year, in this volume.
.

CHAPTER V. CONTAINING SOME INFORMATION RELATIVE TO MAPLE SUGAR, AND ITS
POSSIBLE VALUE IN CERTAIN PARTS OF THE UNITED STATES.
THE disposition of the people of America to examine and discuss the topics of
the day, the increased intercourse among the states since the late war, and the
diffusion of knowledge through the channels of their numerous gazettes naturally
occasion information, which used to be local, to be much more generally
extended. The easy and profitable practice of making sugar from the sap or
juice of the maple tree, had prevailed for many years in the nothern and
eastern states. The facility and advantages of this pleasing branch of
husbandry, had attracted little attention in Pennsylvania, though a few of its
inhabitants were in the habit of manufacturing small quantities of this kind of
sugar. In the year 1790, it became more generally known to the Pennsylvanians,
that their brethren in the eastern and nothern parts of the union, had long
made considerable quantities, with their family utensils, and without the
expense of hiring assistance, that the same tree might be carefully tapped
without injury for many successive years, that the process was simple and very
easy, and only required to be carried on between the middle of February and the
end of March, when the farmer has little to do, and that a very large
proportion of the unsettled lands of the state abound with this valuable tree.
The great and increasing dislike to negro slavery, and to the African trade
among the people of that state, occasioned this new prospect of obtaining a
sugar, not made by the unhappy blacks, to be particularly interesting to them.
The following estimate, which was founded on the best materials attainable at
that time, was published among other things to elucidate the subject.

An estimate of the capacity of sugar maple lands of Pennsylvania and New York,
to supply the demand of the United States for sugar and molasses.
THE DEMAND.
By authentic documents obtained from the custom-house of Philadelphia, it
appears -- That the medium importation of brown sugar, for each year, from 1785
to 1789 was lbs. 5,692,848 Of loaf sugar, on a medium 4,480 And of molasses --
543,900 gallons, which at 10lb. per gallon, is 5,439,000 lbs. half of which
weight in sugar may be considered as equal to 543,900 gallons of molasses
2,719,500 Total quantity of sugar required -- lbs. 8,416,828


THE CAPACITY OF SUPPLY.
The information of William Cooper, Esquire, of Coopers town, One of the judges
of the court of common pleas in the county of Otsego, and state of New York.
is that there are usually made from a tree five pounds weight of sugar, and
that there are fifty trees on an acre at a medium, but suppose only four pounds
to be produced by a tree and forty trees on an acre, then 52,605 acres will
yield 8,416,828 lbs. and supposing the whole demand of the union 42,084,140
lbs. or five times the importation into Philadelphia, then 263,000 acres will
yield a supply for the United States. It need not be observed, that there are
very many more than 263,000 acres of sugar maple lands in each of the eight
following counties. Albany, in New York. Montgomery, in New York. Otsego, in
New York. Tyoga, in New York. Ontario, in New York. Northampton, in
Pennsylvania. Luzerne, in Pennsylvania. Northumberland, in Pennsylvania.
Also that the sugar maple tree is found in many other parts of those two
states, and of the United States.

It will be frankly admitted, that the result of the above estimate has a wild
and visionary appearance; but as it is made upon facts, very carefully
ascertained, and as the whole calculation is exposed to examination, it will
not be unreasonable to give some faith to it, until exaggeration of fact or
error shall be pointed out.

Philadelpha, 1790 In the spring of the year 1793, the following letter was
received from judge Cooper, and several other persons, who had emigrated from
Pennsylvania, New Jersey and France, into the present county of Otsego (at the
heads of the rivers Delaware and Susquehanna) which is distant from
Philadelphia about 137 miles, and from the city of New York about 100 miles, in
direct lines. Coopers Town, April 9 th, 1793. GENTLEMEN,
Being convinced that you feel an interest in the manufactory of maple sugar,
and that your wishes and exertions to prevent the destruction of the trees from
whence it is produced, have been of public utility -- We are encouraged to
transmit to you the statement we have been able to make from actual observation
of the quantity of sugar, which has been made this season, in the former
township of Otsego, and which was an entire wilderness in 1786 -- We find upon
a moderate calculation, that there has been made at least one hundred and sixty
thousand pounds weight, which at nine pence per pound is equal in value to
15000 dollars. This plain demonstration of the importance of this article, will
we hope, induce you to continue your endeavors to promote and encourage it,
and we would submit to your consideration whether it is not an object of
sufficient consequence to claim the encouragement of the legislature of your
state.

WILLIAM COOPER, RICH. R. SMITH, RENSSEL. WILLIAMS, jun. CHARLES FRANCIS, LEWIS
DE VILLERS, EBBAL.


TO HENRY DRINKER, BENJAMIN RUSH, TENCH COXE, Philadelphia.


.

Since the publication of the foregoing calculation, it has been ascertained,
that the balance of the medium imports and exports of foreign sugar, (that is
the consumption of that article in the United States) is about 20,000,000 of
pounds weight per annum. The quantity of molasses, used in substance (and
exclusively of distillation) probably does not exceed 1,500,000 gallons, which
may be deemed equal to about half their weight in sugar, or six millions of
pounds. The total sum of these, being the whole consumption of sugar and
molasses in substance, is 26,000,000 of pounds. It is certain that every farmer
having one hundred acres of sugar maple land, in a state of ordinary American
improvement, (that is, one third covered with judicious reserves of wood and
timber, and two thirds cleared for the culture of grass and grain) can make one
thousand pounds weight of sugar with only his necessary farming and kitchen
utensils, if his family consists of a man, a woman and a child of ten years,
including himself. It would therefore require the attention of 26,000 of such
small families occupying (at one hundred acres each) 2,600,000 acres of those
lands to make (at 1,000lbs. each) 26,000,000 of pounds, or a quantity of sugar
equal to all the molasses and sugar, annually consumed in substance in the
United States. The operation in a family is as easy, as to make household soap
or cheese, or to brew ale or beer, and as there is in this country much more
than twice the above quantity of sugar maple lands, in situations not too
southern, the only object that requires attention is to give, as fast as
possible, generality to this simple, profitable, and comfortable manufacture.

CHAPTER VI. A CONCISE GENERAL VIEW OF THE UNITED STATES, FOR THE INFORMATION
OF MIGRATORS FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES.
CIRCUMSTANCES of the same nature, as those, which led to the notes on the
state of Pennsylvania, suggested the utility of a similar detail concerning the
United States; which will be found in this chapter. A disposition to promote
general prosperity and the wisdom of a reliance upon collective national
advantages, in preference to detached local interests gave additional force to
these considerations. However true the account of Pennsylvania might be, it was
well known that scenes, promising great comfort and a rapid prosperity, were to
be found in other parts of this country. The district of Maine, parts of
New Hampshire, Vermont, the Genesee country and other parts of the state of
New York, the westernmost parts of Maryland, of Virginia, of the two Carolinas
and Georgia, with the state of Kentucky, containing large quantities of
sparsely settled and, of course, cheap lands, it appeared really inequitable to
pass them over in silence. The best information concerning them, which could be
promptly collected, was therefore consolidated into the little publication,
which forms the body of this chapter.

Notes concerning the United States of America, etc.
THE United States of America are situated in the northern division of that
extensive portion of the globe, between the thirty-first and forty-sixth
degrees of northern latitude. The extreme length of their territories is about
1250 miles, the breadth about 1040. Their superficies is computed to be
640,000,000 acres of land and water: and, after deducting the space occupied by
the capacious lakes and mighty rivers, which fertilize and accommodate this
country, and occupy above a seventh part of its surface, there remain about
590,000,000 of acres of fast land.

In so very extended a scene, it will be naturally expected, that the fruits of
the earth are many and various: and accordingly we find, in the present
half-tried state of the capacities of our soil and climate, a list of
invaluable productions present themselves, some found by the first discoverers
of the country -- others introduced by mere accident -- and others transported
from Europe, during the simple state of agriculture in the last century. In our
southern latitudes, including the states of Georgia, South Carolina and North
Carolina, rice, much superior to that of Italy or the Levant, is raised in very
great quantities. The comparative value of this grain was twenty five per cent.
in the English markets, for the American more than the Italian or Levant rice,
as long as the latter was sold there: but, from the ample quantity and goodness
of our rice, it seems probable, that no Mediterranean rice is now imported into
England, as it has been omitted for some time in their general accounts of
prices. The South Carolina crop alone, of 1789, appears to have been above
100,000 tierces, 141,762 Tierces were exported from the United States in the
year ending on the 30th September 1792, though the consumption in the middle
and nothern states has increased considerably.
weighing sixty millions of pounds. It is expected that Virginia will add this
article to her list of exports; as it is supposed, a large body of rich swamp
in her most eastern counties, is capable of producing it; and mountain rice has
been raised by way of experiment, in her new country near the head of the Ohio.

Tobacco is a staple article of all the states, from Georgia as far north as
Maryland, including both. Virginia, alone, generally exported before the
revolution, 55,000 hogsheads, weighing fifty-five millions of pounds --
Maryland 30,000 hogsheads. The Carolinas and Georgia, which raised but little
of this article before the revolution, have, of late years, produced very large
quantities: and as Virginia and Maryland are turning more of their attention to
the cultivation of wheat, Indian corn, flax, and hemp, the Carolinas and
Georgia will probably extend the cultivation of this plant, to which their soil
and climate are well suited 112,428 Hogsheads were exported in the year ending
on 30th September 1793, besides snuff and manufactured tobacco.
.

Indigo is produced by North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia: but this,
and the other two articles before mentioned, are raised in much less
proportions in North Carolina, than in South Carolina and Georgia. The uniform
of our national troops has been heretofore of blue cloth, as also of the
militia in general. Our clergy are also permitted by our customs to wear this
color: and it is generally liked among the most frugal and most expensive
people. These circumstances will no doubt be duly attended to in our future
laws and regulations, and will operate very favorably for the indigo planters,
without any expense to the country.

Cotton has been lately adopted as an article of culture in the southern
states: and if the prices of rice, tobacco, and indigo decline, it must be very
beneficial to the owners and purchasers of lands in that part of our union.
This article is raised with ease in Spain, every part of which kingdom lies
further north than the Carolinas, and in the same latitudes as Virginia,
Maryland and the Delaware state. It is also raised in all that part of Asiatic
Turkey, which lies between Scanderoon and Smyrna, which are in the latitudes of
the three last states. As our people will increase very rapidly by emigration,
and the course of nature, it is certain we cannot procure wool from our own
internal resources in sufficient quantities. The owners of cotton plantations
may therefore expect a constant and great demand for this article, as a
substitute for wool, besides its ordinary uses for light goods.

Tar, pitch, and turpentine are produced in immense quantities in North
Carolina, which state ships more of these articles, particularly the last, than
all the rest of our union. Tar and pitch are also produced in the southern
parts of Jersey, and more or less in all the states southward of that.

Besides these, myrtle wax, and those two invaluable timbers, the live oak and
red cedar, are abundant in the Carolinas and Georgia: and they have Indian
corn, hemp, flax, boards, staves, shingles, leather, beef, pork, butter,
minerals, fossils, and many other articles in common with the middle, or
eastern states; also skins, furs and ginseng from their Indian country.

The wheat country of the United States lies in Virginia, Maryland, Delaware,
Pennsylvania, New Jersey and New York, and the westernmost parts of
Connecticut, as also the western parts of the two Carolinas, and probably of
Georgia, for their own use. The character of the American flour is so well
known, that it is unnecessary to say any thing in commendation of it here.
Virginia exported before the war 800,000 bushels of wheat -- Maryland above
half that quantity. The export of flour from Pennsylvania (with the wheat) was
equivalent to 1,200,000 bushels in 1788, and about 2,000,000 of bushels in
1789, which, however, was a very favorable year. New York exports i^ flour and
wheat equivalent to 1,000,000 of bushels. In the wheat states are also produced
great quantities of Indian corn, or maize. Virginia formerly exported half a
million of bushels Virginia exported in the above year 684, 627 bushels of
Indian corn, besides her increased shipments coastwise.
. Maryland ships a great deal of this article, and considerable quantities,
raised in Virginia, Delaware, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York, and
Connecticut, are exported -- as are the wheat and flour of the la^^ five
states, from Philadelphia and New York, there being little foreign trade from
Delaware or Jersey -- and the western parts of Connecticut shipping with less
expense from the ports on Hudson's river than those of their own state.

Hemp and flax are raised in very large quantities throughout the United
States: and though South Carolina and Georgia produce less than any other
states, of these two articles, they are capable of raising immense quantities.
From the advantage they have in the Savannah and other rivers, they could
produce hemp with great profit. Large portions of the new lands of all the
states are well suited to hemp and flax.

Though sheep are bred in all parts of America, yet the most populous scenes in
the middle states, and the eastern states which have been long settled, and
particularly the latter, are the places where they thrive best. In the eastern
or New England states, they form one of the greatest objects of the farmer's
attention, and one of his surest sources of profit. The demand for wool, which
has of late increased exceedingly with the rapid growth of our manufactures,
will add considerably to the former great profits of sheep: and the consumption
of their meat by the manufacturers, will render them still more beneficial.

Horned or neat cattle are also bred in every part of the United States. In the
western counties of Virginia, the Carolinas, Georgia, and Kentucky, where they
have extensive ranges, and mild winters, without snows of any duration, they
run at large, and multiply very fast. In the middle states, cattle require more
of the care and attention they usually receive in Europe, and they are
generally good; often very large. But in the eastern states, whose principal
object on the land, have until lately been pasturage and grazing, cattle are
very numerous indeed, and generally large. Cheese is, of course, most abundant
in those states. No European country can exceed the United States in the
valuable article of salt provisions. Our exports of this kind are every day
increasing; as the raising of cattle is peculiarly profitable to farmers, the
greater part of whom have no more land, than they can cultivate even with the
plough. Barley and oats are the productions of every state, though least
cultivated to the southward. Virginia however is turning her attention to
barley, as also Maryland, and can raise great quantities.

Masts, spars, staves, heading, boards, plank, scantling, and square timber,
are shipped from almost all the states: New Hampshire, and the adjoining
province of Maine, which is connected with Massachusetts, are among the most
plentiful scenes. In New York they abound: and in North Carolina and Georgia,
the pitch-pine plank, and scantling, and white oak staves, are excellent, and
abundant, especially in the former. The stock of these articles on the
Chesapeak and Delaware bays is more exhausted: but yet there is a great deal on
the rivers of both for exportation, besides abundance for home consumption.
Considerable quantities are also brought to the Charleston market, but a large
part of them is from the adjacent states of Georgia and North Carolina. When
their internal navigation shall be improved, South Carolina will open new
sources of these articles.

Potashes and pearl-ashes have become very valuable articles to both the
land-holders and merchants of the United States: but their importance was
comparatively unknown twenty years ago. A single fact will illustrate the
wealth that may be accquired by this manufacture. The state of Massachusetts,
which has been settled twice as long the other states on a medium -- which
contains about a fiftieth part of the territory of the United States -- which
is among the most populous of them -- and consequently must have far less wood
to spare than many other parts of the union -- has nevertheless shipped two
hundred thousand dollars worth of these two articles in a year. New England and
New York have derived great advantage from their attention to pot and
pearl-ashes: but it has hitherto been made in very inconsiderable quantities,
in the states to the southward of them. In most of them it has been entirely
overlooked. New Jersey and Delaware have more forests than Massachusetts: and
as there is no part of either of those states, that lies twenty-five miles from
navigable water, they may venture to expend their wood, and to depend upon
coal. In the other six states, which lie south of Hudson's river, the materials
for pot-ash are immense -- as also in the state of New York.

A grand dependence of the eastern states is on their valuable fisheries. A
detail of these is unnecessary. It is sufficient to say, that, with a small
exception in favor of New York, the whole great sea fishery of the United
States, is carried on by New England: and it is in a variety of ways highly
beneficial to our landed and manufacturing interests. Massachusetts very far
exceeds all the other states, in the fishing business.

Iron is abundant throughout the union, except in the Delaware state; which can
draw it as conveniently from the other states on the Delaware river, as if it
were in her own bowels. Virginia is supposed to be the state most pregnant with
minerals and fossils of any in our union.

Deer-skins, and a variety of furs, are obtained by all the states from the
Indian country; either directly, or through the medium of their neighbors.
Hitherto they have been exported in large quantities.: but from the rapid
progress of our manufactures, that exportation must diminish.

The article of pork, so important in war, navigation and trade, merits
particular notice. The plenty of mast or nuts of the oak and beech, in some
places, and Indian corn every where, occasion ours to be very fine, and
abundant. Two names among us are pre-eminent -- Burlington and Connecticut: the
first of which is generally given to the pork of Pennsylvania, and the middle
and northern parts of Jersey: the second is the quality of all the pork north
of Jersey. It may be safely affirmed, that they are fully equal to the pork of
Ireland, and Britanny, and much cheaper.

Cider can be produced with ease in considerable quantities, from Virginia
inclusive to the most northern states, as also in the western country of the
Carolinas and Georgia: but New Jersey and New England have hitherto paid most
attention to this drink. An exquisite brandy is distilled from the extensive
peach-orchards, which grow upon the the numerous rivers of the Chesapeak, in
North Carolina, in Georgia, and in Pennsylvania, and may be made in the greater
part of our country.

Silk has been attempted with success in the southernmost states, so far as due
attention was paid to it: but is not well suited to the nature of their
laborers, who, being blacks, are not sufficiently careful or skilful: and
there are many other objects of more importance and profit in the agriculture
of those fertile states. In Connecticut, where there is a sensible and careful
white population, and where land is comparatively scarce and dear, it is found
to be practicable and beneficial. A project to extend the white Italian
mulberry-tree over all the states, has been formed by some persevering
individuals, acquainted with the propagation of them. A great part of
Connecticut is already supplied. An extensive nursery has been established near
Philadelphia; another at Princeton, in New Jersey; and two more are at this
time commenced on New York and Long Islands.

Rye is produced generally through all the states north of the Carolinas, and
in the western parts of the three southern states. But the detail of American
productions, and the parts in which they most abound, would be very lengthy. It
will therefore be sufficient to say, that, in addition to the above capital
articles, the United States produce or contain flaxseed, spelts, limestone,
alum, saltpetre, lead, copper, coal, freestone, marble, stone for wares,
potters' clay, brick clay, a variety of ship-timber, shingles, holly, beech,
poplar, curled maple, black walnut, wild cherry, and other woods suitable for
cabinet makers, shingles of cedar and cypress, myrtle-wax, beeswax, butter,
tallow, hides, leather, tanners' bark, maple sugar, hops, mustard seed,
potatoes, and all the other principal vegetables; apples, and all the other
principal fruits; clover, and all the other principal grasses. On the subject
of our productions, it is only necessary to add, that they must be numerous,
diversified, and extremely valuable, as the various parts of our country, lie
in the same latitudes as Spain, Portugal, the middle and southern provinces of
France, the fertile island of Sicily, and the greater part of Italy, European
and Asiatic Turkey, and the kingdom of China, which maintains by its own
agriculture more people than any country in the world.

The lands of the United States, though capable of producing so great a variety
of necessary and useful articles, are much cheaper than in Europe. Farms which
lie in such of our states as have been longest settled and improved, can be
purchased for less money than the medium value of farming lands in any
civilized part of the world: and our new lands, as well within the particular
bounds of the several states, as those in the western territory of our
confederated republic, are to be procured at very low prices, either for cash
at the time of purchase, a reasonable credit for a part, or a long credit on
mortgage for the whole. This difference in the price of new or unsettled lands
is occasioned by the difference of situation and quality, their nearness to
good roads and water carriage, the quantity wanted by the purchaser, his
capacity to pay cash, the length of the credit given, the wants or necessities
of the sellers, and other circumstances, which reason will naturally suggest.
The most advantageous mode is, for a number of persons to emigrate together,
with a minister and schoolmaster. If such small bodies of people can only
command money enough to erect their little buildings, where timber and stone
cost nothing and are abundant, and to buy provisions to live on for a year,
they may procure lands upon very convenient and easy terms for several years,
with little advance, and in many instances without the least advance of
purchase money.

Laboring people in the farming, manufacturing, and mechanical trades, can
have constant employment, and better wages, than in the dearest countries of
Europe; because we have so much land, so many new dwelling-houses, work-shops,
barns, and other buildings to erect, and so many new trades and manufactories
to establish. And though the wages of the industrious poor are very good, yet
the necessaries of life are cheaper than in Europe, and the articles used are
more comfortable and pleasing. The medium price of meat and fish in many parts
of America, is lower than the price of flour in Europe, especially if bought by
the carcass. The French fleet were supplied with their beef last year, at ten
shillings sterling, for one hundred pounds weight, in the city of Boston. --
Pickled beef was sold in the same year, in the city of New York, for twenty to
twenty-two shillings sterling per barrel, of two hundred pounds weight,
including the cost of salt and cask. Beef was sold by the side and carcass at
Trenton, in New Jersey, at less than ten shillings sterling per hundred pounds;
and in Philadelphia, at ten shillings sterling, in 1789. These parcels were of
the inferior kind. The first cuts of the finest cattle are higher as must be
supposed, especially in those three cities, which are the largest in the United
States; but it may be safely affirmed that an American cent (being equal to the
hundredth part of a Mexican dollar) will buy as good butchers' meat in the
capitals of the several states, as a penny sterling will buy in Amsterdam,
Paris, or London. Fish, in all our cities and towns near the sea, are
excellent, abundant, and cheaper far than butchers' meat: and poultry is so
low, that a turkey, of fourteen or fifteen pounds weight, may be bought for
three shillings and nine-pence to four shillings and sixpence sterling. Add to
this, many principal necessaries and conveniences of life are entirely free
from excise or duty, at this time; and will be lightly charged for a long while
to come -- such as home-made malt liquors and cider, coal and firewood,
candles, oil, soap, tobacco, and leather, none of which pay excise, and even
foreign salt pays only about sixpence sterling duty on importation, and no
excise whatever. Nor have we any window-tax or hearth-money, nor several other
taxes, by which large sums are raised in Europe.

Many things are daily presenting themselves, by which the profits of land will
be greatly enhanced in this country. We have hitherto imported a great part of
our drink from abroad, viz. rum, brandy, gin, etc. but we find, if we extend
our breweries so far as to render these spirituous liquors unnecessary, that we
shall want above two millions of bushels of barley for the purpose, and large
quantities of hops, besides having use for a further part of the immense
quantities of firewood and coal with which our country abounds. We have also
obtained the European cotton mill, by means of which* and a few of our
innumerable mill seats, the owners of lands* in the six southern states, will
be called upon to supply great quantities of cotton. The movements of a mill
for spinning flax, hemp, and combed wool, have also been constructed here, by
which our farmers, throughout the union, will be called upon to supply further
quantities of flax and hemp, and to increase their sheep. The rolling mill for
iron and other metals -- and the tilt-hammer for all large iron work -- have
been brought into extensive use, and will no doubt be erected in all the
states. But the detail of waterworks, and mechanism which may be introduced
into a country* that has, moderately speaking, ten thousand (and probably
nearer twenty thousand) mill-seats, would be endless.

There is a striking invaluable difference between the navigable waters of the
United States and those of any country in the old world. The Elbe is the only
river in Europe, which will permit a sea vessel to sail up it for so great a
length as seventy miles. The Hudson's, or North-River, between the states of
New York and New Jersey, is navigated by sea vessels one hundred and eighty
miles from the ocean; the Delaware, between Pennsylvania, New Jersey and the
Delaware state, one hundred and sixty miles; the Patowmac, between Virginia and
Maryland, three hundred miles: and there are several other rivers, bays, and
sounds, of extensive navigation, far exceeding the great river Elbe. The inland
boatable waters and lakes are equally numerous and great.

In a country thus circumstanced, producing the great raw materials for
manufactures, and possessing unlimited powers by water and resources of fuel,
subject also to considerable charges upon the importation of foreign fabrics,
to neglect manufactures would have been highly criminal. These important ideas
have taken full possession of the American mind. The theory is now every where
approved: and in New England, Pennsylvania, and several other states, the
practice has been taken up with considerable spirit and very extensively.
Master workmen in every manufacturing and mechanical art (except those of
superfluous or luxurious kinds) with their journeymen and laborers, must
succeed here. The freight, insurance, and other charges of a long voyage, of
more than three thousand miles and the duties laid here, operate greatly in
favor of American fabrics. Manufactures by fire, water, and emigrating
workmen, must succeed even in the most agricultural of our states, and will
meet every encouragement in the New England states, and others whose lands are
nearly full. A regard for the republican manners of our country, renders it a
duty to warn the manufacturers of very fine, superflous, and luxurious
articles, not to emigrate to these states. Gold and silver and other laces,
embroidery, jewelry, rich silks and silk velvets, fine cambrics, fine lawns,
fine muslins, and articles of that expensive nature, have yet few wearers here.

Ship-building is an art for which the United States are peculiarly qualified
by their skill in the construction, and by the materials, with which this
country abounds: and they are strongly tempted to pursue it by their commercial
spirit, by the capital fisheries in their bays and on their coasts, and by the
productions of a great and rapidly increasing agriculture. They build their oak
vessels on lower terms than the cheapest European vessels of fir, pine, and
larch. The cost of an oak ship in New England, is about twenty-four Mexican
dollars per ton fitted for sea: a fir vessel costs in the ports of the Baltic,
thirty-five Mexican dollars: and the American ship will be much the most
durable. The cost of a vessel of the American live-oak and cedar, which will
last (if salted in her timbers) thirty years, is only thirty-six to
thirty-eight dollars in our different ports; and an oak ship, in the cheapest
part of England, Holland, or France, sitted in the same manner, will cost
fifty-five to sixty dollars. In such a country, the fisheries and commerce,
with due care and attention on the part of government, must be profitable.

The public debt of the United States, occasioned by the revolution war, is
estimated at about eighteen millions of pounds sterling; It proves to be less.
but as they have an extensive settled territory -- above two hundred and forty
millions of acres of vacant land -- as their duties upon foreign articles are
not more than one fourth of those of Great Britain -- as they have no excises
or duties upon articles of their own growth or manufacture -- and lastly, as
they are every year saving large sums by the introduction of new manufactures
and the extension of old ones, this debt cannot be considered as heavy. The
interest of the public debts of France and Great Britain (which are nearly
equal to each other) is, in each instance, above nine millions sterling: And as
our debt, like the debt of all nations, is sold below its nominal value, less
than two years interest of the debts of either of those two nations would
entirely sink it. The capital of the British debt is above fourteen times as
great as ours -- and the annual expenses of their government exceed ours beyond
all comparison. The annual expenses of France are still greater, being about
one hundred and five millions of dollars. If nations thus circumstanced can
have comfort and ease, under such debts and expenses, America can have no
hardships or difficulty to apprehend.

The people of the principal European nations will find themselves more at home
in America than in any foreign country, to which they can emigrate. The
English, German, and Dutch languages are fluently spoken by large bodies of our
citizens, who have emigrated from those countries, or who are the descendants
of emigrants. The French language is also spoken by many in our towns. There
are many emigrants from other nations, and the descendants of such emigrants.
Our population has been derived from England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland,
Germany, the United Netherlands, Sweden, and France, and a few from several
other countries. It is computed to be above three millions at this time: It was
a matter of agreeable surprise, that our population in 1791, proved to be about
4,000,000.
and the population of no country can increase so rapidly: because living is no
where so cheap, and we are constantly gaining people from the nations of the
old world.

The state of literature in the United States is respectable, and is rapidly
advancing and extending. Seminaries of learning are spread from north to south.
There are five universities, no one of which, however is on a very extensive
scale -- fourteen colleges, and forty eight public academies, besides very many
establishments of schools, in the townships or hundreds, and under the care of
religious corporations and societies. There is scarcely an instance of a state
constitution, which does not recognize the utility of public schools, and the
necessity of supporting and increasing them. Liberal grants of land and other
real estates, and of moneys, for these salutary purposes, have been and are
continually made.

The situation of civil liberty in America is so universally known that it is
scarcely necessary to add any thing upon that head. Yet it may not be amiss
briefly to mention, that no man can be convicted of any crime in the United
States, without the unanimous verdict of twelve jurymen -- that he cannot be
deprived of any money, lands, or other property, nor punished in his person,
but by some known law, made and published before the circumstance or act in
question took place -- that all foreigners may freely exercise their trades and
employments, on landing in our country, upon equal terms with our own natural
born citizens -- that they may return at any time, to their native country,
without hindrance or molestation, and may take with them the property they
brought hither, or what they may have afterward acquired here -- that if they
choose to remain among us, they will become completely naturalized free
citizens by only two years residence; but may purchase and hold lands on the
day of their arrival, and that a free citizen of the United States has a right,
directly or indirectly, to elect every officer of the state in which he lives,
and every officer of the United States.

The situation of religious rights in the American states, though also well
known, is too important, too precious a circumstance, to be omitted. Almost
every sect and form of christianity is known here -- as also the Hebrew church.
None are merely tolerated. All are admitted, aided by mutual charity and
concord, and equally supported and cherished by the laws. In this land of
promise for the good men of all denominations, are actually to be found, the
independent or congregational church from England, the Protestant Episcopal
church (separated by our revolution from the church of England) the Quaker
church, the English, Scotch, Irish and Dutch Presbyterian or Calvinist
churches, the Roman Catholic church, the German Lutheran church, the German
reformed church, the Baptist and Anabaptist churches, the Hugonot or French
Protestant church, the Moravian church, the Swedish Episcopal church, the
Seceders from the Scotch church, the Menonist church, with other Christian
sects, and the Hebrew church. Mere toleration is a doctrine exploded by our
general constitution; instead of which have been substituted an unqualified
admission, and assertion, that their own modes of worship and of faith equally
belong to all the worshippers of God, of what ever church, sect, or
denomination The writer of the foregoing publication has found himself
restrained in the statement of facts concerning the United States, by the want
of that accurate and various information, which a full account of so extensive
and grand a scene necessarily requires: and his narrow limits obliged him to
omit several important facts, very interesting to emigrants of every
description. He hopes that some of the excellent pens, which abound in every
part of our union, will be employed in showing the true situation of things in
each state, that, from the several details, the extraordinary capacity of the
United States of America, to promote the comfort and happiness of the human
race, may be duly manifested.
.

AT the time of the foregoing publication, the the exports of the United States
amounted to above 18,000,000 of dollars. The progress of industry had advanced
them in 1792, to the sum of 21,000,000 of dollars In the year ending on the
30th September 1793, the exports of the United States were 26,000,000 of
dollars.
. A very large proportion of this increase, consists in articles for the
sustenance of man -- the food of our increasing manufacturers, or the prime
necessaries of other countries. The useful art of ship-building has kept more
than equal pace with our agriculture, because it has felt the impulse of the
revival of the fisheries, and of foreign demand. The price of iron, which is a
good general index of industry and arts, has been greatly advanced by the
progress of public and private improvements, and useful manufactures: and
eleven great and important canals have been actually comm^nced in a country,
which before the late revolution did not exhibit a single instance of those
invaluable improvements.

CHAPTER VII. CONCERNING THE DISTILLERIES OF THE UNITED STATES.
THE importance of molasses to the United States has been so frequently a topic
of observation, that it is presumed to be generally understood. No less than
7,194,606 gallons were regularly entered in the custom-houses, from various
places, during the year ending in September 1791. When the disorders in the
French part of the island of St. Domingo commenced in the autumn of that year,
apprehensions arose, that those citizens of the United States, who were
interested in the distilleries from foreign materials, might sustain a grievous
shock, unless they would adopt the substitutes, which our own agriculture
afforded. It was manifest, that these individual inconveniences, by due
anticipation, might be considerably diminished; and it was no less evident,
that the agriculture of the United States might be exceedingly benefited by the
distillation of fruit and grain, instead of molasses. From a desire to bring
these circumstances into that notice, which their importance required, the
following paper was introduced into public view in the state of Massachusetts,
in which the molasses distillery greatly exceeds those of all the other states
together.

Reflections on the present situation of the distilleries of the United States
heretofore employed on foreign materials.
IT has been a subject of frequent apprehension, to attentive observers on the
internal industry of our country, that the distilleries in the seaport towns
would one day be deprived of their necessary supply of foreign materials: the
obvious possibility of various events suggested these fears. A contingency as
deplorable as it was unexpected, has at length happened, which menaces a long
interruption, perhaps a total privation, of that large part of those supplies,
which has been drawn from Hispaniola; and the late disorders in Martinico, have
conspired to heighten the evil.

In consequence of these events, the ordinary operations of above one hundred
distilleries will be affected, and the subsistence of those numerous families,
that are dependant on them, will be for a time or in a degree cut off. The
ravages already committed in the West Indies, must occasion a defalcation of
produce, which it will require several years of industry to restore, after
tranquillity shall be established. To supply our demand for the raw materials
from any other source, is impracticable; and if it were possible to procure
from the islands of other nations, distilled spirits, equal to our consumption,
yet the importation would be excessively expensive, as well as impolitic.
Little more than eight millions of gallons are annually made in those islands;
and the demand for the expected Spanish war advanced the price of rum in
Jamaica, fifty per cent. -- What then would be the effect of a new and constant
demand for several millions of gallons?

But were it practicable to procure the distilled spirits from abroad, upon
moderate terms, what would be the fate of the American distillers, their
workmen and assistants? Would not their capitals become unproductive, and their
distilleries* sink into ruin? It is to be feared, too, that the ship^ping
connected with this branch of industry, will feel a share of these unfortunate
events.

To avoid evils so great and extensive, must be the wish and should be the
endeavor of every good citizen. If, however, they cannot be altogether
prevented, prudence may perhaps mitigate them. It is thought that a diminution
of them may be found in the application of our distilleries to the manufacture
of grain and fruit spirits.

The harvests of Europe are said to have been abundant; those of the United
States are known to be so; and a reduction of the prices of grain seems to be a
probable consequence: the present time, therefore, is the proper one to
commence this business. The transportation of grain and cider coastwise, to the
distilleries; and of the distilled spirits to the consumers, on all the
navigable waters of the United States, will give employment to those vessels
which may necessarily relinquish the French West India trade.

It will not escape the observation of those who meditate the establishment or
extension of breweries, that the present is a favorable moment for proceeding
in that most beneficial branch. It is well known that brewing, and the
distillation of spirits from grain, are two very profitable manufactures in
Great Britain; although the brewer and distiller there pay fifty per cent.
higher for grain than the ordinary price of the same article in this country.
Holland also brews extensively, and in distillation from grain exceeds
Great Britain; yet she imports more grain than she manufactures, and more fuel
than her breweries and distilleries consume.

The difference of eleven cents per gallon (about forty per cent. on the value
of the article) in favor of spirits distilled from native materials, when
compared with imported spirits, gives an advantage to the home manufacture,
which will be duly estimated by every judicious calculator: there can be no
doubt, that this advantage will be always preserved, and probably increased by
the laws of the United States Among the inducements which the national
government have to adhere to this policy, is this very important one, that the
encouragement to the culture of grain, which would be derived from the use of
it in brewing and distillation, would prove the most effectual security against
a scarcity of bread.
.

The strongest inducement to reasonable men, for the employment of their
capital and industry in any undertaking, is the hope of permanent profit*
founded on fair calculation: this calculation the distillers are best able to
make: to them, therefore, the ideas herein suggested are all submitted.

THE great stock of molasses, which was left on hand from the unusual
importation of 1791, and the exertions of the merchants and distillers to
procure supplies of that article from new sources, have occasioned the mutation
of the molasses distilleries into fruit and grain distilleries, to be yet
inconsiderable. It is certain however, that the new distilleries have been
principally confined to fruit and grain, and that the manufacture of spirits,
from domestic materials, has greatly increased. The high price of grain,
arising from the European demand, has occasioned the gradual manner, in which
the change of our distilleries is taking place, to be perfectly convenient. The
inhabitants of the United States are thoroughly prepared, by their own
reflections on this branch of their business, to make such further alterations,
as circumstances may require, whenever they shall become necessary Breweries,
which are more estimable kind of liquor manufactory, have greatly increased.
1793.
.

CHAPTER VIII. STATEMENTS, RELATIVE TO THE AGRICULTURE, MANUFACTURES, COMMERCE,
POPULATION, RESOURCES AND PUBLIC HAPPINESS OF THE UNITED STATES, IN REPLY TO
THE ASSERTIONS AND PREDICTIONS OF LORD SHEFFIELD.
THE misconceptions in regard to American affairs which prevailed in many parts
of Europe in the year 1791, and particularly in the British dominions, were
deemed to be very great. They appeared to be founded, in no small degree, on
the disquisitions of an English writer Lord Sheffield.
whose errors, it was therefore, necessary to demonstrate.

An examination of his work was commenced in the American Museum and continued
monthly, as circumstances permitted. Further reflection and opportunity
produced additional facts and some relative considerations, which, on a
re-publication, were intermixed with the original materials, or were comprised
in a seventh number, and in two additional notes on American manufactures.

It is possible, that a question may have arisen, why an examination of a work,
first published in 1783, should have been instituted in 1791? The observations
of lord Sheffield had gone through six enlarged editions, and the same writer
having disseminated ideas, very unfavourable to the Unite^ States, in his book
upon the commerce of Ireland, it was conceived that a developement of his
errors was due no less to those who are misinformed in Europe, than to those
interests, which are not understood in this country. It had been frequently
observed, that when American affairs were discussed in Britain, lord
Sheffield's work was quoted with symptoms of conviction and belief. Under
circumstances like these, an examination of his allegations, predictions and
remarks, even at that day, would not, it was hoped, appear unseasonable.

A Brief examination of Lord Sheffield's Observations on the Commerce of the
United States, with two supplementary notes on American manufactures.
SECTION 1.
THE facts and observations of this writer have, in the opinion of many of his
countrymen, so firmly endured the touchstone of experience, that an attempt to
demonstrate errors in both, may appear to deserve little attention. The
brevity, however, which is intended to be observed, may induce the parties
concerned, to give these papers an attentive perusal.

It is remarked, in the last edition of the publication referred to, that a
knowledge and consideration of the American trade should dictate to
Great Britain the measures she ought to pursue The good sense of that
observation, in relation to the time when it was written, is admitted, without
hesitation, and it is considered as equally proper, in regard to the present.
It is believed, indeed, to comport most perfectly with the dignity and true
interests of nations, not to induce into injurious grants those foreign powers,
with whom they may find occasion to treat. No observations need be offered, to
show the respectability, which is acquired by negociations conducted with a
liberal and magnanimous policy. It will be sufficient to remark, that
arrangements, solidly founded in the mutual interests of the contracting
parties, will always be satisfactory to the intelligent part of their
respective citizens, and consequently most permanent; but that injudicious
grants of unreasonable advantages, especially if obtained by deceptive means,
dishonor the character of the overreaching party -- lead to murmers among the
people of the mistaken nation, often to expensive and bloody wars -- and give
immense hazard to the commercial enterprises, which are usually instituted in
consequence of new treaties. It may be considered, therefore, as wisdom in
negociating nations, diligently to search for their common interests, as the
fitted ground of treaty. In order to discover these with case, and to view them
with just impressions, it is a measure not only of primary importance, but of
indispensible necessity, to remove established errors in the public creed of
either country. It is not by way of apology, that these prefatory remarks are
offered to all concerned, but to show, that a rational pursuit of the interests
of their respective countries, should lead both Americans and Englishmen, to
develope the errors, in regard to facts and opinions, discoverable in a
publication, Lord Sheffield's Observations, etc.
which appears to have been the cause of a change of measures in the British
nation, or to have been intended to vindicate one, which it was pre-determined
to make.

It is not proposed to go into a full and regular reply to the writer of the
observations, but rather to point out so many real and important errors in his
facts and predictions, as may shake the unlimited confidence, which has been
reposed in him by his countrymen, in order to lead to a different legislative
deportment toward us. Little regard will be paid to order, in this cursory
examination; but any important object, which presents itself, will be concisely
noticed.

THE CARRYING TRADE.
in the opinion of lord Sheffield, is lost to the people, inhabiting these
states, by their choice of independence. Let us examine the proofs. His seventh
table states the inward tonnage of all the British provinces in North America,
in 1770, to have been 365,100 tons. From this amount are to be deducted the
entries in Newfoundland, Canada, Nova Scotia, the two Floridas, the Bahamas,
and Bermuda, being 33,458 tons, which leaves the entries in those provinces,
which are now the United States, at 331,642 tons. We are also to deduct the
ships owned by British subjects, not resident in those thirteen provinces.
Champion considers these to have been nearly the whole in the European trade,
it is believed erroneously; but they must have been very considerable: yet the
return of entries of American vessels for the last year, rendered by our
treasury to the House of Representatives, though known to have been incomplete
from inevitable causes, amounts to above 363,000 tons, exclusive of fishing
vessels Our numerous coasters also not being entered, but only renewing their
licenses in that trade, once a year, form no part of the 363,000 tons.
.

It is manifest, then, that the carrying trade, which results almost unaided
from an agriculture, that fully lades 650,000 tons of vessels to foreign ports,
is considerably greater than what we enjoyed as British provinces. A very
beneficial coasting trade (employing above 100,000 tons Our numerous coasters
also not being entered, but only renewing their licenses in that trade, once a
year, form no part of the 363,000 tons.
) has moreover grown up, partly from the variety of our productions and mutual
wants, and partly from the introduction of manufactures, which it was believed
we could never attain, and with which Great Britain alone used to supply us.
The building of ships has also increased, as we undertake hereafter to show,
and the tonnage owned by the merchants of the United States or late American
provinces, was never so great as at the present moment. It is believed*
moreover, that the American carriers derive greater profit from the business,
than the British nation, who builds ships two-thirds dearer, and who maintain
themselves in what they possess of the carrying trade, at the expense of great
bounties out of their public treasury, by burdensome restrictions on all their
dominions, but the island of Great Britain* and by regulations to savor their
shipping, which increase the price of raw materials for their manufactures, and
of bread and other food for their workmen and for their poor.

BEEF AND PORK,
in the opinion of our author, are not likely to become considerable articles
of export, so as to interfere with Ireland for some time. The medium annual
quantity exported from the United States, before the revolution, he states at
23,635 barrels. Our treasury return, for the last year, exhibits 66,000
barrels, besides 2,500 barrels of bacon, 5,200 head of horned cattle, and an
equal number of hogs. The medium price of the pork was thirty-seven shillings
sterling, or about 8 dollars per barrel, and that of beef twenty-eight
shillings sterling, or about 6 dollars per barrel. Besides this exportation,
263,000 tons of foreign vessels, in a great degree, and all our own, were
victualled from our markets. But a moments reflection will convince any man,
who knows this country, that it will, in the course of a few years, offer to
all foreign nations such quantities of salt provisions, especially of beef, as
must seriously affect Ireland, where that article is sold at eight dollars per
barrel. It is a fact no less curious, than important to our provision trade,
that the French fleet has been supplied with beef in the port of Boston, at
prices lower than the then current value of wheat-flour in any of our seaports,
although our expors of the latter article are fourteen times as great as those
of Ireland. The owners of the interior lands of the United States, on which
settlements have but lately become considerable, find a particular advantage in
raising cattle, because those animals transport themselves to the seaports at a
very small expense. The exportation of beef and pork, in the year ending on the
30th September, 1792, was 112,436 barrels.
.

TEAS.
It is known to persons acquainted with American commerce, that teas of various
kinds form a very considerable proportion of our importations. The rich and the
poor consume them freely. Their value, as they were entered in our
custom-houses, for the year preceding the first of October, 1790, was 2,784,000
dollars, which was about a seventh of our imports. On this very capital article
of commerce and consumption, lord Sheffield hazards the following opinions --

That as the English East India company (...) afford to sell this tea, on full
as good, if not better, terms, than the Dutch, or any other nation in Europe,
there is no danger of losing the American market. And

That the allowing the drawback upon teas e^ported from Great Britain, will
generally enabl^ the English to command the tea trade to America.

His lordship had forgotten that Canton is an open market, equally accessible
to all nations. The American ships have accordingly gone thither, not only in
the ordinary seasons, but in those, which usually restrain European
expeditions. The United States produce the great article of ginseng in large
quantities, which renders this trade convenient to them. The teas, imported by
our merchants directly from China, in the last year, were two millions six
hundred and one thousand eight hundred and fifty two pounds, which is fully
equal to our consumption, c^uld we obtain coffee, and the requisite quantity of
Muscovado sugars, of which our people are universally and passionately fond.
There were imported also from Europe, 416,652 pounds of teas, shipped from
foreign ports, other than British, to the extreme disadvantage of the shippers,
and to the great injury of our merchants. But the values of commodities in any
two markets are the best illustration of the relation of those markets to each
other. The article of tea will therefore be passed over, after the following
statement of the current prices on a given day in America and Great Britain.

In Philadelphia, on the 5th day of November, 1790, after paying the duty
inward.
Bohea, 1 s3 Sterling. or 30 cents, Souchong, 3 s4 Sterling. or 75 cents, No
teas have been imported from Britain into the United States since the first
publication of this work. A. D. 1793.
Hyson, 4 s6 Sterling. or 100 cents.
In London, on the 5th day of November, 1790, after deducting the drawback of
12^. 10^. per cent.
Bohea, 1 s5 Sterling. or 32 cents, Souchong, 4 s6 Sterling. or 100 cents,
Hyson, ^ s Sterling. or 133 cents.
The same circumstances, which facilitate and insure the attainment of the
requisite quantity of teas, not only by means other than British, but indeed by
American means, certify to us the acquisition of the necessary supplies of
porcelain, nankeens, silks, and all other China commodities: and upon the
whole, we dare venture to appeal to the books of the inspector general of the
British commerce, when we affirm that Great Britain does not supply us with
with a fortieth shilling of the various kinds of China merchandise, consumed in
America, though they probably fall little short of a sixth of our importations.

SALT FROM EUROPE.
This article, the writer of the observations says, will be taken
indiscriminately from Europe: thereby misleading the government and people of
England into a belief, that they will have a chance of supplying a considerable
proportion. The quantity imported into the United States, from vario^^
countries, in the last year, was 2,337,920 bushels; besides which it was
manufactured in interior situations. The price of salt in Kentucky, where it i^
home made, is about one third of the market ra^e at Pittsburgh, where foreign
salt is used.

The British salt is what is called fine in America, from the small size of the
crystals. Of thi^ kind the price is greater than that of the coarse, and not a
twentieth bushel was imported before the present year, it being little used but
at the table, and inconvenient to transport to the interior country; but the
new duty, near the eighth of a Mexican dollar, will render its importation very
unprofitable in future. A bushel of rock or alum salt, as it is termed, from
the size of the crystals, will go as far in use, as a bushel and an half or two
bushels of the finer kind; and the duty is equal. The price, as before
observed, is less. Besides, our grain and lumber ships to Portugal, our tobacco
ships to France, our corn, flour and lumber ships to Spain, our vessels to the
Cape-de-Verd and West India islands, are accommodated by ballasts of salt,
which is cheap and abundant in those places. It never fails to yield some
profit to the owner of the ship, (though it will very seldom pay a freight) and
it is exceedingly beneficial to the timbers of a vessel. The liberation of this
article in France will occasion it to be better made there in future, and the
French will consequently supply us with larger parcels than heretofore. The
approximation of our settlements to the salt springs, and the increase of white
population on the southern sea coasts, will occasion additions to the quantity
made at home. Should any impediment be thrown in the way of the reception of
our lumber and other bulky articles, and of our vessels in Great Britain, the
importation of salt, and indeed of most other coarse British articles, will be
exceedingly diminished, as they are brought now to ballast our return vessels.
It appears, however on examining better documents than were procurable at the
first publication of this paper, that our British lumber trade had induced a
greater return in salt, than was at that time supposed; and as truth is the
sole object of this examination, the error is made known without hesitation.

SHOES,
Our writer says, were, and must continue to be imported in considerable
quantities, and principally from Britain! It Is probable that not less than
eight millions of pair of shoes, boots, half boots, guetres, slippers, clogs,
and goloshoes, are annually consumed in or exported from the United States. Our
population proves to be about 4,000,000; and if each person wears a quantity of
the above shoemakers' wares, equivalent to two pair of shoes per annum, the
number will be made up. If the medium value be taken at 75 cents or 3 s4
sterling per pair, this valuable article will amount to six millio^^ of
dollars. Of this prodigious quantity, only 70,450 pair of shoes, boots, etc.
were imported into the United States in the last year. It must be highly
satisfactory to the people of the United States, that they actually make of one
necessary article by hand so very great an aggregate value, as six millions of
dollars. All argument against the possibility of manufacturing by hand with
profit i^ ended by this fact.
Tanned leather, weighing 22,698 pounds, was exported within the same time, and
5,700 pairs of boots and shoes. Of unmanufactured hides, only 230 we^e shipped
abroad. Leather and shoes were sent in some degree from the western country.
The leather branch is the second in England, and it is eq^^l to one-fifth of
their staple manufactures. Our shoemakers' wares alone appear to be more in
value than one fourth of our exports: and as New England is our greatest cattle
country, and the (...) advanced in handicraft-manufactures, it is (...) that
its inhabitants must be in a considerable degree indemnified for the effects of
those regulation^ which injured their fisheries. The coarser oils, it may be
also observed, are demanded in large quantities by the leather dressers, whose
requisitions of them will increase with our population, and exports of leathern
manufactures.

PAPER.
This article, it is alleged by our author, will continue to be sent in
considerable quantities from England; and that although some coarse paper for
newspapers is made in America, it is not equal to the demand. From a return
made to the manufacturing society of Philadelphia, it appears, that there are
forty-eight paper mills in Pennsylvania alone. Five more are building in one
county of that state. Others are known to exist in North Carolina, Delaware,
Maryland, New Jersey, New York and New England. The United States, till very
lately, were insensible of the facility with which this branch can be carried
on, of the profit which results from it, and of the great degree in which it is
established. The treasury of the United States, and the several banks, have
paper of the most perfect kind, specially made for them; the printing of books
has increased in an astonishing degree; and factories of paper hangings are
carried on with great spirit in Boston, New Jersey, and Philadelphia. In short,
there are abundant proofs of establishment and progress toward perfection, in
this valuable branch, in which every thing is made, as it were, out of nothing.

RUM.
It is the opinion of lord Sheffield, that the whole of the West India rum used
in America, except a small quantity from Demarara, and some from St. Croix, may
be supplied by the British islands The British West India islands do not make
as much distilled spirits, as are consumed in the United States.
. The following scale may be relied on* as the present state of this business
in the United States. If the whole quantity of molasses, of distilled spirits
imported, and of distilled spirits made at home of fruit and grain, should be
divided into 132 parts, it would stand thus.

Molasses imported would be 60 parts. British, Danish, and other rum, taffia,
brandy, geneva, arrack, cordials, and other distilled spirits imported, would
be There is reason to affirm, that the two first articles have decreased, and
that an increase in the quantity of the article which follows them, has taken
place. A. D. 1793.
. 37 parts. Spirits distilled from the native fruits and grain of the United
States would be at least 35 parts. Total 132 parts.
It is ascertained, that the British spirits are not more than twenty-one parts
of the second item of thirty-seven; and it appears that the West India rum,
supplied by all nations, is reduced to about one fourth of our consumption and
sale to foreign nations of distilled spirits. How long we shall continue to
take even that proportion is very uncertain. Breweries are multiplying: as
their value is becoming manifest. Grain and fruit distilleries are rising up
every where. From interior situations two gallons of spirit, extracted from a
bushel of rye, can be brought to markets where it will realize to the farmer
two thirds of a dollar for his grain, at less expense than if made into flour,
and carted to the same spot. The country is abundantly supplied with stills;
and were the British islands to be refused our flour and grain by their own
government, as lord Sheffield advises, this country would be compelled to
indemnify itself by making grain spirits and malt liquors in lieu of their rum,
which it is reasonable to suppose we should no longer import. Indeed the
exportation of liquors of all kinds, made from grain, will probably become very
considerable. Some countries refuse our flour: and the freight to Europe is a
heavy charge upon grain. This will induce brewing and distillation, even when
markets abroad are not bad; but when prices in Europe are very low, we shall be
more strongly impelled to them. Fruit spirits must be made continually, and
will add much to the aggregate of distilled liquors. The grain consumed in
Great Britain, in their breweries and distilleries, is computed to be
twenty-four millions of bushels, though they are obliged to import considerable
quantities of flour, meal and grain and though they have rum colonies to
support, and to supply with spirits. Holland also carries on the liquor
manufactories to a great extent, though far from able to feed itself. The
ability in the United States to do the same, cannot be doubted, and will
certainly increase. The facilities, which are or may be granted to our ships
and trade by foreign nations, who make spirits from the vine, the cane, or the
several kinds of grain, will induce returns in brandy, rum, or gin, which will
diminish the American demand for British rum.

The idea that the United States are a country, sui generis.
This position the writer of the observations treats as perfectly whimsical --
As a figure of rhetoric conveying no distinct idea, or an effort of cunning to
unite, at the same time, two inconsistent characters. Yet it will not be
difficult to demonstrate to an unprejudiced mind, that the circumstances, in
which the people of these states were placed at the peace of 1783, were
different from those of any other nation; and that there were some
peculiarities in them, considered with respect to British affairs, which
rendered it a serious question, whether they did not require a particular
arrangement. It is true, that the citizens of the United States had renounced
the duties of British subjects, or, in other words, that they had assumed an
independent station: but this measure was fully justified, if we may so speak,
by Britain's abandoning the ground, which produced the war -- the assertion of
the right to bind the people of America in all cases whatsoever. It will be
acknowledged, too, that we manufactured less at that time than any other nation
in the world; consequently we were a more profitable commercial connection. We
shipped, in proportion to our population, more raw materials, and provisions,
which they want, than any other nation; for it appears we load 650,000 tons of
shipping, and our cargoes were then almost entirely unmanufactured. We were, by
much, the first customer for British manufactures; for it appears by their
exports for 1784, that the greatest value was shipped to the United States,
being L.3,648,0007. sterling, including no raw articles; and that the next
greatest foreign shipment was to Holland, being only L.1,277,480, part of which
was for German consumption, and some part probably was in raw articles -- and
that in the year 1785, also, the greatest value was shipped to the United
States, being L.2,308,023, sterling, and that the next greatest foreign
shipment was likewise to Holland, amounting to L.1,605,303, part of which was
not manufactures. The exports to Russia in each of those two years were less
than half the exports to New York or Pennsylvania. It is to be remembered, too,
how very great a proportion of the British export trade these shipments to
America constituted. In 1784, their whole exportations were L.15,733,847 and in
1785, L.16,770,228 Recent and authentic information warrants the assertion,
that the United States, for six years subsequent to the treaty of Paris in
1783, imported more goods from Great Britain than were imported from thence by
any other foreign country, by the difference of at least half a million of
sterling money, and probably more, though their exports to foreign nations were
composed in part of our tobacco, rice, indigo, etc.
.

In addition to merchandise from Britain, we took very large quantities of
linen and other dry goods from Ireland, and an enormous value in rum and other
produce of their West India islands: and further we were a nation of planters
and farmers, whose quantities of unimproved and uncultivated lands were
manifold greater than those which were or are yet brought into use, and
consequently a great and constant demand might have been reasonably expected to
exist for those supplies, which Britain, upon reasonable terms of intercourse,
would be able to furnish. Our distant situation, and the transportation of
goods, which will lade 650,000 tons of shipping, were circumstances favorable
to the carrying trade of our liberal connexions and allies, which no other
country presented to Great Britain. -- We have hitherto suffered her to
participate freely in this, for it appears, that in the last year, 230,000 tons
of British vessels, a fourth of all their private ships, were loaded in our
ports.

If then the United States actually furnish the most solid items of British
foreign commerce -- if the raw materials they afford be the precious elements
of a large proportion of the British manufactures -- if our demands from that
nation be not only much the largest, but also of kinds the most profitable to
them -- if our peculiar situation would have drawn us, in a greater degree,
than any other country to agriculture, and from manufactures -- if our
language, our religion, our theories of liberty and law, were in many respects
the same as theirs -- the idea of our being a people peculiarly circumstanced,
such a people as exist not elsewhere cannot, in candor, be treated as
fanciful: and, indeed, did not the seriousness of a subject, which involves the
interests of two nations, suppress every feeling, which might tend to obscure
them, the indecorum and acrimony, with which this and other pages of "the
observations" are marked, ought not to pass without due animadversion.

The prosecution of this examination will be continued in a subsequent paper.
In the mean time, what has been already thrown out, may be duly and temperately
considered. The present season is interesting and critical. The policy, which
the United States ought to observe, in the legislation of commerce, is likely
to be formally discussed. At such a moment, facts, accurately ascertained and
heartily stated, are of the utmost importance; for how shall we so well reason,
as from what we know? It is to be desired, that the light of indisp^table truth
may enable our own legislators and those of foreign nations, to discover the
ground of common interest, and that no erroneous maxims, however sanctioned,
may close one avenue of mutually beneficial communication.

SECTION II.
IT was premised, in the first section, that no particular attention would be
paid to order in this examination. We shall therefore proceed to remark upon
timber, scantling, boards, shingles, staves, heading, and hoops, under the
general denomination of

LUMBER.
These articles are of the greatest importance to the Irish provision trade, to
every branch of the fishery, to British navigation, commerce and manufactures
in general, and particularly to the profitable management of West India
estates. Lord Sheffield is of opinion, that most of them may be imported from
Canada and Nova Scotia, on as good, if not better terms, than from these
states; and that Nova Scotia will, at least for some time, have little else to
depend on, but her fisheries, provisions and cutting of lumber. But the
experience of 1790, seven years after those provinces began to regain order,
instructs us, that there were shipped in that year, from the United States to
Nova Scotia alone, 540,000 of staves and heading, 924,980 feet of boards,
285,000 shingles, and 16,000 hoops.

The legislature of Jamaica (the imports of which island directly from the
United States, might be estimated, in 1784, at half our shipments to the
British West Indies) accompanied their address to the parliament of Britain,
with proofs that only 20 bundles of hoops, 301,324 shingles and staves, and
510,088 feet of lumber, were imported into that island from Canada,
Nova Scotia, and St. John's, between the 3d of April 1783, and the 26th of
October 1784, a term of nearly nineteen months! It appears probable, then, that
they did not supply their West India brethren with more than one half of what
they import, at this mature stage of their settlements, from us. It is to be
remembered, that Jamaica drew no supplies of our lumber through the Dutch and
Danish islands; though the more windward islands at that time did. From 1768,
to 1772, only 36,100 shingles and staves, and 27,235 feet of lumber, were
shipped annually from the northern British colonies to the island of Jamaica.

In another page of the observations, we are told, that hoops, staves, and
boards may be sent out to the West Indies from England, because the freight is
lower than from the United States. Here again, the writer of the observations
is unfortunate in his proposed means of supply: for it appears, that there were
shipped, in the year above mentioned, to the European dominions of
Great Britain, 13,306,000 staves and heading, 3,000,000 feet of boards,
4,000,000 feet of timber, 253,000 shingles, and 6000 of hoops. We learn, too,
from Mr. Anderson's history of commerce, that there were imported from England
to the West Indies, in 1787, the value of L80:12:5 sterling and no more, in
boards, staves and other lumber, toward the supply of the demand of those
islands, which lord Sheffield admits to have been, in 1770, about thirty-five
millions of boards, scantling, staves and hoops, and fifteen millions and a
half of shingles, It will appear to him an extraordinary fact, (and must excite
a smile in the gravest countenance,) that the balance of the lumber account
between Great Britain and her West India colonies, is actually against the
former: for we learn, from another of Mr. Anderson's documents, that there were
shipped thither from those colonies, between Michaelmas 1786, and the same day
in 1787, L.3070:13:11 sterling, in boards, staves, and timber. These were
probably for dunnage, or the stowage of cargoes of sugar, coffee, pimento, etc.
But if the project of shipping from Europe were as rational, as it is wild,
what would become of the low freights, upon which it is chiefly founded? The
lumber actually taken by the British West Indies from the United States,
"exhausted," as this writer misrepresents them to be, would load all the
vessels that depart from Great Britain to the West Indies; for it would fill
above 100,000 tons of shipping; and a large quantity of tonnage would still be
required for the coal, malt-liquors, wines, loaf sugar, candles, soap,
provisions, cordage, bale goods, earthen ware, nails, tallow, lime, carriages,
etc. which are constantly shipped thither from Europe.

The prices of lumber, in London and the United States have been gravely
compared; and December 1783, was taken as the common season. It is unnecessary
to lose time in disproving an allegation about a period so long passed, which,
however, could be satisfactorily done, or to animadvert upon the suppression of
the price of boards in which we had so much more the advantage. Our public
returns from the several ports, which cannot be supposed to undervalue the
article, nor indeed do they vary materially from the shipping prices give the
medium rate of twelve and two-thirds dollars or L.2:17 sterling for red oak and
white oak staves, and heading, fit for barrels, hogsheads, and pipes. The
prices of staves vary exceedingly in the different markets of the United
States; and that, which was selected by the writer of the observations, is
known not to be among the cheapest. Even there the article is at this time
thirty per cent. below the quotation in the observations. But we have already
noticed the very large exportation of lumber from the United States to the
British European dominions, which alone is a sufficient contradiction of the
fact, and is a satisfactory correction of the observations.

The following statement of the prices in St. Domingo and Jamaica will not be
deemed uninteresting, as tending to show the rates at which French and American
vessels supply the former, and British vessels supply the latter, although the
home dominions of France were incapacitated from furnishing their usual
quantity of provisions.

At Kingston in Jamaica, 1790.
June. Oct. Nov. dolls. dolls. dolls. dolls. dolls. Super. flour, per lb. 10.20
to 10.50 7.50 7.50 to 8.25 Common do. do. 9.37 6.75 7.12 to 7.50 Ship bread,
do. 5.25 4.50 4.87 Indian meal, do. 5.25 4.50 5.25 Rice, per 100 lbs. 3.37 4. 2
4.50 to 5.25 Pork, do. 14. 12. Hams, per lb..12.16 15. Butter, do.15 15. Pine
boards, 24. 27. 30. R. O. hhd. staves, 24. 31. 27. Wooden hoops, 30. 36. 30.

At Cape Francois The duties, from one to twelve and a half per cent. are
included.
, 1790.
July. Oct. Nov. dolls. dolls. dolls. dolls. Superfine flour, per bbl. 10. 6.50
6 to 6.50 Common do. do. 9. 5. 5 to 5*45 Ship bread, 3.52 Indian meal, do. 3.64
2.50 Rice, per 108 lb. 3.50 2.91 Beef, do. 6.6 7. 7. to.8 Hams, per lb..9 9..9
Butter, do. 9..12 Pine boards, 15.76 12.12 10.91 R. O. hhd. staves The French
West-Indians use very few white oak hhd. staves, making little rum, or taffia,
and having a sufficiency of old casks, in which brandy has been imported.
. 14. 16. 12.

N. B. Wooden hoops vary in Cape-Francois from 14 to 28 dollars.

It is not easy to ascertain the precise degree in which the British West India
islands are supplied with lumber from their own dominions. But much light is
thrown upon the enquiry, by the information of the Jamaica legislature: and it
appears, that the British European ports furnish none. Their northern colonies
are proved to import from us now, more than they exported in 1784: and as our
return of exports of lumber to the West India islands, for the last year,
exceeds the quantity shipped thither before the revolution, the supplies from
Canada and Nova Scotia, even now, must necessarily be very inconsiderable After
the first publication of this examination a proclamation of the governor of
Nova Scotia was received in the United States, permitting the importation of
every speices of lumber, from hence into that province, for six months of 1791,
during all which the St. Lawrence is free from ice. As they would have
preferred to draw their supplies during the term of the license, from Canada*
if that country could have furnished them -- and as lumber does not depend on
seasons, and is not, like crops of grain, liable to sudden failures, an
irrefragable proof is afforded, that Canada cannot supply the demand of Nova
Scotia, much less of the West Indies, and that Nova Scotia wants population, or
timber, or both, to enable her to furnish lumber enough for her own demand. It
seems highly probable, that without our lumber, the West India trade of the
northern British colonies would suffer deeply, they having neither grain,
flour, biscuit, nor lumber, to fill up the vessels, which take out their
parcels of fish; and, it is also probable, that a prohibition on our part, were
we inclined to it, would affect their fisheries, by enhancing the price of
casks for its package. The cost of casks in Nova Scotia, at this time, is a
heavier charge on their fish, than our impost, as it now stands.

The opening of the northern British colonies has been repeated twice since,
and a similar measure has been recently adopted in the British West India
islands. A. D. 1793.


.

The state of Georgia, which is penetrated by large rivers, would probably
furnish more lumber and timber than the British dominions will require in the
next twenty years. It can be cut at all seasons from the nature of the climate,
and her ports, which are more conveniently situated, to supply the West Indies
(though lord Sheffield says, those of Canada are more so!) are open in the
middle of winter. The improvement of the inland navigation of South Carolina
will bring into the abundant lumber-market of Charleston, a new and large
supply. North Carolina has very great magazines of timber, and the openings of
the Pasquotank canal will give it to all the ports of the Chesapeak. The middle
and eastern states are more exhausted; but large quantities will long be
exported from the Dela^are, much larger from the Hudson, and still greater from
the province of Maine.

NOVA SCOTIA AND CANADA.
Great reliance is placed by this and other Engglish writers on the supplies,
which may be derived by the West India islands from the northern British
colonies. It has been already shown, that they hitherto afford little or no
lumber. Of rice and naval stores they cannot furnish any, producing none. Of
flour, Canada can yet have supplied but a small proportion, having very few
mill, having to support cattle through long winters, and the climate preventing
shipments during half the year Canadian flour will always be subject to
spoiling, as it must be made in summer.
. The voyage is a very heavy (...)* being long and on a single freight. Nova
Scotia can never supply much of this article, and has taken from the United
States above 40,000 barrels of meal and bread, within the last year, besides
80,000 bushels of grain. There are fewer mills there than in Canada.
Canada is too remote to send supplies of cattle, hogs, sheep, and horses; and
our exports of these animals to Nova Scotia, prove they have not yet any to
spare. Of horned cattle 899, of horses 12, of sheep 2,244, of hogs 267, and of
poultry 2376, were shipped from the United States to the northern British
colonies, in a little more than one year, from the autumn of 1789 to that of
1790. Very little beef, pork, hams, tongues, tallow, lard, butter, cheese,
candles, or soap, can be spared to the West Indies, by countries which import
neat cattle, hogs, sheep, and poultry.

The documents adduced by the Jamaica legislature went further to show, that
between the 3d of April, 1783, and the 26th of October, 1784, they had received
in that populous and extensive island, from Canada, St. John's Meaning
New-Brunswick.
and Nova Scotia, no flour -- no Indian corn, beans, or oats -- no ship bread
or other biscuit -- no Indian or other meal -- no horses, cattle, sheep, hogs
or poultry -- 10 barrels of rice -- 180 bushels of potatoes -- 751 hogsheads,
37 tierces, 39 half tierces, and 457 barrels of fish, 45 barrels of oil, 100
oars, 710 shaken casks (or puncheon packs) 21 masts and spars, with the small
parcels of lumber mentioned under that head, and no other goods. They also
show, that all the imports of Jamaica from Canada, Nova Scotia, and St. John's,
Meaning New-Brunswick.
were, on an average of the five years, from 1768 to 1772 but 33 barrels of
flour, 7 hogsheads of fish, 8 barrels of oil, 3 barrels of tar, pitch and
turpentine, 36 thousand of shingles and staves, and 27,235 feet of lumber.

How far it has been in the power of the northern British colonies, or of the
British European dominions to furnish their West India islands with flour,
bread and Indian corn will further appear from the following facts. It is
stated by lord Sheffield, that there were imported from hence into those
islands, in a year of great plenty and trade, before the revolution, 132,426
barrels of flour and biscuit; but our returns for 13 months, already mentioned,
show that their late demand from us in that term, was 139,286 barrels of flour
alone, and 77,982 barrels of Indian meal, middlings, ship-stuff, rye meal, and
biscuit. Their former annual supply of Indian corn, received from hence, was
401,471 bushels; and their recent importations prove to have been 516,794
bushels, in the space of time stated in our late return.

It is unnecessary to dwell longer upon the supplies which the remaining
British American colonies were expected to afford to their West India
plantations. An experiment of years has been fairly made -- The returns from
their custom houses, and from those of the islands, will inform the government
of Great Britain what they really furnish at this time, and the proportion it
bears to the whole demand. This head will therefore be passed over with the
reiteration of a few remarks -- that the British West India islands are proved
to have been indebted to the United States in 1790, for more lumber, more
grain, and more bread and flour, than they imported from these states before
the revolution -- that their remaining colonies can therefore have furnished
them, in their present mature state, but in very small quantities -- that those
colonies have required of us near half the amount in cattle, hogs and sheep,
which the West India islands formerly took off Besides what go to upper and
lower Canada by land.
-- and that the high prices of salt and smoked provisions in the British
West Indies, which are greater than those in the French islands, where those
articles are prohibited or heavily dutied, fully prove, that they depend for
them on Ireland alone, and receive no sensible relief from the British American
colonies. Their inability to furnish supplies of provisions to the West India
islands is fairly to be presumed from the proclamation of the governor of Nova
Scotia, already mentioned, which, besides the article of lumber, permits the
importation from the United States, of grain, flour, biscuit, cattle, sheep,
poultry, etc. through the whole season of 1791, when the St. Lawrence and bay
of Fundy are certainly navigable, and the province of Canada is exporting
whatever it has of surplus produce.

LINSEED OIL.
This article is said, in the observations, to be made in some parts of
America, from the refuse of the flaxseed, and that the quantity is trifling
compared with the consumption. It is added, that considerable quantities went
from Britain to America, before the war; and the English nation are left to
believe, that this will continue to be the case, though they actually import
seed from hence to make oil.

The cultivation of flax is exceedingly increased in this country, particularly
in interior situation^, and is very general. Oil mills having become more
numerous, the seed in inland places is manufactured into oil. This will bear an
expense of transportation, which so bulky an article as the seed, cannot
sustain. Hence the present price of linseed oil, after it is brought down to
the Philadelphia market, is about 2 s1 sterling, while the price in London is
from 2 s3 to 2 s4. The Irish demand for our seed is about 42,000 hogsheads:
after deducting that, the remainder must be made into oil here, or shipped to
Europe for that purpose. This manufactory being effected by water mills, there
can be no doubt that the former disposition of the surplus seed will be made.

PAINTERS' COLORS.
Several of the ochres are found in abundance in Virginia, Connecticut, and
other parts of the United States. The interior situation of the Virginia lead
mine, which now yields very copiously, will soon occasion the manufacture of
white lead, and of all the preparations of lead, from the same cause that has
been mentioned in the case of linseed oil, and rye spirits -- economizing in
the transportation. The patent colors have been imitated with great success.
The trade with Holland and the Hanse towns, as also with the Mediterranean and
the East Indies, gives us many colors, which were formerly imported from
Britain, like apothecaries articles, at immense advances.

COACHES AND OTHER CARRIAGES.
The importation of these was formerly very great. Virginia, in 1788, had 360
coaches and chariots, 365 phaetons and other pleasurable four-wheeled
carriages, and 1,967 one-horse chairs and solas. New Jersey, in 1789, had 38
coaches, chariots, and phaetons, 1,549 one-horse chairs and solas, and a very
great number of plain decent light-waggons, on steel or wooden springs. From
these facts, and similar truths in the other parts of the union, it is certain
that the pleasurable carriages of the United States amount to a very large sum.
Though to be obtained on credit from Britain, no more than L.5,000 sterling in
carriages, or parts of carriages, were imported in the year following August
1789, including those of numerous travelers and emigrators: and 220 carriages
were exported to foreign countries, within the same year. All the wood and iron
work, the harness and other leathern materials, frequently the brass work,
fringe, lace, and lately the plated work, are made in America. Lord Sheffield
seems to have expected a considerable importation of these articles: but he did
not advert to the possibility, that the manufacturers themselves would emigrate
to us; which is every month taking place.

MEDICINES AND DRUGS will be imported from Great Britain, says the writer of
the observations, on account of the knowledge, which the physicians, surgeons
and apothecaries, in the American states, have of the method of preparing and
procuring them there. Many drugs and medicines are imported without
preparation. There is, in many important instances, no difference in the modes
of different nations. The Materia Medica, Chemistry, etc. are taught in America
from the books of Europe. Men of the requisite skill from other countries are
to be found in most of our principal seaports. To these many of the chemical
and Galenic operations of Holland, France, and Germany are not unknown.
Saltpetre, musk, camphor, rhubarb, and other East India articles in this line,
have been shipped occasionally from the United States, in considerable parcels.
Bark, sulphur, balsam capivi, and many other medicinal productions, have been
obtained from Spain, the Mediterranean, the West Indies, and other places.
Holland participates largely in our importations of chemical preparations; but
many, which used to be imported, are begun to be manufactured here: and
exportations of them to advantage, have, in some instances taken place. The
knowledge which our medical gentlemen have acquired abroad, and in their
professional reading at home, of the methods of procuring drugs, has been
communicated to our merchants: and their information of the methods of
preparing chemical articles, has been often put in practice here. There is, no
doubt, a considerable trade in these commodities from Great Britain. But it is,
even now affected by the above circumstances, and is not by any means a
monopoly. From our free and enterprising commerce, the natural productions of
the country, and chemical skill, it must decrease every year. Great Britain
possesses, from nature, less of these commodities than the United States.
Foreign trade, and skill employed at home, will give us a great share of those,
which are not spontaneous productions of our various soil and climate.

NAILS, SPIKES, AND OTHER MANUFACTURES OF IRON AND THOSE OF STEEL,
are placed second on the list of articles, in which it is alleged
Great Britain will sustain little competition: and lord Sheffield remarks, that
whatever we make of them, is at the expense of at least three times the amount
of what the same articles could be imported for from Europe. The iron branch is
highly important and growing in the United States. In Massachusetts, there were
seventy-six iron works, many of them small, in 1784. The Virginia works make
above 5,300 tons of iron. The slitting and rolling mills of Pennsilvania, are
ascertained to cut and roll 1500 tons or 3,360,000lbs. per annum: and so
completely do they obviate the objection of manual labor, which is constantly
urged against American manufactures, that they employ but twenty five hands. In
that state, there are also sixteen furnaces and thirty-seven large forges. In
New Jersey alone, in the year 1789, the number of forges were seventy-nine and
of furnaces eight. And though the details are not so well known, they are very
numerous in Maryland and most of the states. These works are annually
increasing, and particularly in interior situations. The nails and spikes
consumed yearly in the United States, (calculating on 4,000,000 people, at ten
to a house, including negroes, which gives 400,000 houses) allowing ten pounds
for the average use of all the persons living in each house, in building,
repairing, fencing, and in their business, and manufacturing, would be
4,000,000lbs. Of this quantity there were imported in the returned year,
1,800,000lbs: and about 2,200,000lbs. must, therefore, have been made at home.
The remainder of the slit and rolled iron is either exported or made into tire,
hoops, springs for carriages, or some other substitutes for foreign imported
articles. Ship-building also demands very large quantities of iron work.
Ploughshears, carriages, axes, saws, hoes, spades, shovels, kitchen utensils,
and many other articles employ the American workers in this raw material. About
one half of the steel, consumed in the United States, is home made, and new
furnaces are building at this moment. The works being few, and the importation
ascertained, this fact is known to be accurate. Bar iron before the revolution,
was usually sold for sixty four dollars. It fell, after the war, to the same
price; and large quantities of iron in bars and pigs were exported. The
progress of manufactures has raised these articles to the highest prices ever
known in peace; and only 200 tons in bars, and 3,555 tons in pigs were exported
in thirteen months and a half of 1789, and 1790. The exportation of this
quantity was principally to throw the requisite weight into the bottoms of the
ships laden with cargoes of tobacco or lumber. Lord Sheffield states, that we
shipped 2,592 tons of bar iron, and 4,624 tons of pig metal per annum, in
several years before the revolution, when it is known our commerce and
population were not at the highest. It is also to be observed, that we now
import considerable quantities of bar iron from the Baltic and its vicinity,
particularly into the eastern states. One thousand two hundred and eighty-eight
tons of bar iron, were imported from St. Petersburg alone, in the year 1790,
and above forty tons of iron hoops and nail rods. From these facts may be
collected convincing proofs of the state of the iron manufactures of this
country, strongly opposed to the presumptions of lord Sheffield, as well with
respect to the dearness of those manufactures, as the monopoly of our supplies.

FLOUR AND WHEAT.
These inestimable commodities are not, in the opinion of lord Sheffield, the
best staples for the United States to depend on; because as he observes, in
general the demand in Europe is uncertain. He again repeats his unfounded
notion of a competition between us and Nova Scotia for the supply of Europe, in
these articles; and adds, that it is a fortunate consequence of American
independence, that the British European islands may regain the supply of their
West Indies, with bread and flour, and that they can furnish them cheaper than
we. In regard to the prospects from Nova Scotia, enough has been already said,
and particularly till they discover symptoms of internal resources for their
own use, by ceasing to import grain and flour from the United States. As to the
European corn trade, authentic and important information, indeed, is to be
derived from a report of the British privy council, of March 1790, which is
said to have been drawn by lord Hawksbury. It is wisely observed, in that
report, that the culture of grain is the most important object, that can
receive the public attention: and it is stated that the demand of Great
Britain, for flour and grain, has produced an average balance against the
nation, of L.291,000 sterling, for the last nineteen years, although from the
year 1746, to the year 1765, they had annually gained, by their corn trade,
L.651,000 sterling on a medium. Ireland, it is true, has greatly increased its
exports of grain, flour, and biscuit, but by no means in proportion to this
falling off by Great Britain, and its whole exports of flour and grain are much
less than our shipments to the British West Indies. Their lordships proceed to
state, that in consequence of information received by them from the principal
corn countries of Europe, they are of opinion, that the quantity of grain
raised in Europe, in common years, is not more than equal to the ordinary
consumption of its inhabitants; and that, in the event of a failure of their
crops, a supply can only be expected from America. In verification of this
formal official communication, on a subject of such high importance, we find,
that the influence of the late scarcity in France, not only pervaded all
Europe, but was extended to the most interior counties of these states. Wheat
was sold on that occasion three hundred miles from the ocean, for prices which
have been usually acceptable in our seaport towns: and at the places of
shipment, it was advanced to rates beyond what had ever occurred since the
settlement of the country.

When we remember, that by grain liquors we may avoid the purchase of eleven
millions and a half of gallons of the spirits, or ingredients for spirits of
foreign nations; that by grain these states are rendered the alternate ground
of dependence of every European nation, in time of need; that we are protected
from the possibility of dreadful famine by this blessed production; that grain
is the raw material in which some considerable manufacturers work, and which
all must necessarily consume; we must smile at the ideas which lord Sheffield
has hazarded, in regard to those precious staples, wheat and flour.

GUNPOWDER,
It is asserted, will be imported cheaper than it can be manufactured in
America. The price of this important article has been reduced in the
Philadelphia market to sixteen dollars, or L.3:12 sterling per 100 with. by the
free importation of brimstone and saltpetre from India and other countries. Our
merchants usually pay for it in England at the rate of 75 to 76 shillings
sterling, after deducting the drawback on exportation. Twenty-one powder mills
have been erected in Pensylvania alone, since the year 1768 or 1770 -- much the
greater part of them since the commencement of the revolution war: four new
ones are now building in that state, one at Baltimore, and others in different
parts of the United States; and it is certain they will be multiplied in
proportion to the demand, whether it be for home consumption or exportation. Of
the quantity commonly on hand in the Philadelphia magazine, not more than seven
per cent. is of foreign manufacture None, but American powder is now received
there. A. D. 1793.
. Saltpetre and sulphur are found in considerable quantities, particularly in
the interior parts of Virginia: but at present the commercial supplies are so
plentiful and cheap, that our internal resources are little used. Saltpetre is
cheaper in Philadelphia than in London.

THE ABILITY OF GREAT BRITAIN TO MAKE HER SHIPS THE CARRIERS FOR THE UNITED
STATES.
It is explicitly declared, in the 39th page of lord Sheffield's introduction,
that the adoption of the ground proposed by him, will insure to British ships
the carrying trade of the United States; for (he adds) it is certain, if our
navigation laws be maintained, it will not answer the Americans to keep many
ships. This it will be admitted, is to us, if true, a very interesting
position, and demands our most serious attention. It will, however, be very
easy to show, that the private shipping of the United States does not depend
upon British laws. The tables, which accompany the report on the American
fisheries, from the department of state, clearly prove, that we are not
dependent on Great Britain for that branch of commerce. In the regulation of
our coasting trade, which employs above 100,000 tons of shipping, and which
will constantly increase with our population, manufactures, and use of coal,
British laws can have no operation. In our commerce with the Baltic, and the
North, with all the Netherlands, the Hanse towns, France, Spain, Portugal,
through the streights, with most parts of Africa and India, and the colonies of
the European nations, except the British, their navigation act cannot affect
us. It appears moreover, that our ships are so "many," as to have amounted to
360,000 tons of vessels laden in our ports, by a return which is incomplete,
while those of Great Britain and her dominions were 225,000 tons. But it is
possible, that considerable deductions from the British tonnage may happen.
There is little doubt, that the diminutions of our importations from their
dominions, which have taken place, in regard to China merchandise, and other
India goods, Italian, Russian, Dutch, and German goods, paper, nails, sheet
iron, steel, shoes, and boots, gunpowder, lead, coal, salt, malt liquors, loaf
and brown sugars, coffee, cocoa and spirituous liquors, by reason of our
intercourse with other nations, and the great improvement of our own resources
and manufactures, will be followed by further commercial acquisitions from
liberal nations, by the constant introduction of new foreign manufactures, and
the discovery and attainment of new internal resources. If, for example, cotton
be raised and imported, and spinning mills be erected, Manchester importations
will decrease: if flax and hemp be raised and imported, in greater quantities,
and flax and hemp spinning mills be erected, sail-cloth sheeting, and shirting
linens, checks, oznabrigs, table and towel linen, etc. will be imported more
sparingly. If by these and other means, our imports from Great Britain should
be finally reduced to such a sum, as will purchase only so much rice, tobacco,
and other articles as its people consume, those articles will not be shipped
indirectly to foreign countries, through British ports, as is now the case.
These indirect shipments afford British vessels more than an equal chance in
the competition with ours from America to England; because the property is
generally on English account, and it gives them so far the command of the
carriage from England to other parts of Europe. From these circumstances, it
will be perceived, that it is interesting to our private shipping, and
consequently to our success in the establishment of a navy, that we continue by
prudent and salutary means, to decrease our importations from each foreign
country, so as in a greater degree to equalize them with the consumption, which
that country actually makes of our productions: this, however, it is conceived,
ought not to be attempted, by any precipitate or coercive means; but by the
establishment of our mercantile credit in other countries, by commercial
enterprise, capital and and manufacturing industry.

A second cause, which renders the intercourse in the shape of exportation to
Great Britain inordinately great, is to be found in the old private debts due
to that country from this. These, so far as they will be paid by money or
goods, are considerably diminished. The rise of our stocks, and the sales of
them to foreigners, have enabled many to lessen those debts: and British
subjects will continue to find it their interest to buy into them. These are
payments, which occasion only a remittance of the interest; and the commutation
of private for public debts is therefore to be desired. Part of the old debts
which remain due to the English merchants, must be received in the soil and
buildings of this country. When these shall be accepted by the creditor, they
will still remain immovable: and he will find himself, or his child,
transformed into an American freeholder, to his profit and that of the United
States, though to the injury, and sometimes the ruin of the unfortunate debtor.
This change of the creditor's situation, will not be unpleasing to a liberal
mind of any country, and, if properly understood, may greatly meliorate the
prospects of the family and connexions of many in Britain, who are concerned in
American debts. A country, of great native strength, becoming energetic,
intelligent, free, not disposed to provoke either insults or injuries, and in a
situation not to submit to a wanton imposition of either, holds out as great
promises of human happiness, as any, of which the foreign creditor can have
been a citizen* He is sure of a kind reception, and of the protection of the
laws and constitution in his person, property, and religion.

A third cause, which has produced an extraordinary intercourse in the shape of
importations from Great Britain, has been the want of credit from other
nations. We now annually import from that kingdom about 900,000 dollars, in
articles not of its growth, produce, or manufacture; and though we have reduced
this from about 2,200,000 dollars since the separation of the two countries,
there is yet that great value expensively, because circuitously, imported. The
pursuit of this accustomed track, established in the time of the old British
monopoly, has been one cause of these unnatural importations -- but the chief
cause was the credit we found from England. The British merchants will probably
continue to afford the greatest accomodations of this kind; but it is evident,
that the citizens of other countries will furnish us with credits, and
sometimes in more eligible shapes. They will give us their cash articles and
their coin, to be employed in ready-money trades at home and abroad, in
manufactures and foreign commerce. In proof of this may be adduced the
respondentia credits in India and China, the purchases into our several bank
stocks, the investment of moneys in our lands, These continue in numerous and
great instances -- 6,500,000 acres of our new lands have been purchased by
foreigners within the last two years. A. D. 1793.
and in our navigation, trade, and manufactures. The medium imports from
Great Britain for several years before the revolution, appear, from European
accounts, to be to the medium imports for an equal term of years antecedent to
1790, as 27 to 23, though our population has probably almost doubled; and
though much larger importation^ than heretofore, by persons intending to remain
here, have also contributed to swell the quantity in the latter term. What is
to follow in this wa^ time, it is believed, will very quickly show.

In addition to the foregoing causes, which seen likely to occasion a
diminution of the proportion of shipping employed directly and indirectly by
Great^Britain in the American trade (including the e^portation of our
productions from the British po^^ to other markets in Europe) one other, which
does not seem to have sufficiently engaged their attention, may produce, it is
believed, very considerable effects. The regulations of the British navigation
act do not appear to have been duly examined by other European powers, with a
view to the adoption of such of them as will apply beneficially to their own
affairs. If they have had effects so favorable to the shipping and naval power
of Britain, it is possible, and highly probable they might be, in a greater or
less degree, beneficial to other countries. The present appears a fit season
for such an examination in America: and we cannot suffer, if we enter on it
with temper and discretion. That it would diminish the number of British
vessels, for example, if the United States and all other maritime countries,
should deem it expedient to enact into a law of their respective nations, the
clause of the British statute, by which the importation of all foreign goods is
confined to native bottoms and to those of the nation producing the articles,
cannot be doubted. Whether this regulation will be convenient to the United
States -- to France -- to Spain -- to Portugal -- to Russia -- to Prussia, who,
exporting twenty or thirty times the bulk of goods, that Great Britain ships,
do not, altogether enjoy a part of the carriage for foreign nations, equal to
what she possesses, is a question those nations are severally to consider and
determine, Facts, in the mean time, are highly interesting. In the year 1772,
as Mr. Anderson informs, the imports and exports of the Baltic were made in
6680 vessels, of which the British were 1894, the French, Spanish, Portuguese,
and Russian only 45. The commodities carried thither (in addition to their own
manufactures) were the produce and fabrics of all the countries of Europe and
of the East and West Indies, which, by their navigation act, could not have
been imported into Great Britain in like manner. The same may be said of the
cargoes they brought away, so far as they were carried directly to the ports of
other nations, or were re-shipped from their own ports in their original form.
The same writer states the British entries in Lisbon, in the year 1788, to have
been 351, and those of Portugal, in her own metropolis and emporium, to have
been only 283. The Spaniards had but 31, the Russians one, the Prussians one,
and Dantzickers one. By the same authority we are instructed, that the British
entries in Malaga in 1787, were 189, the Dutch 24, the Portuguese five, the
Russians, Prussians, and Dantzickers, none. In the year 1778, the British
entries in Cronstadt, the port of the city of St. Petersburgh, were 25^* those
of Russia, though in her own capital, were only twelve, of Spain six, of
Portugal two, of Hamburg and Bremen five. In the year 1790, the British
entries, in the same port, were 517 out of 932: and we have recently seen, that
the British have supplied themselves and the other nations of Europe, with
cargoes of our commodities amounting to 230,000 tons, while those Europeans
carried for themselves no more than one sixth of the quantity! It is not
intended to discuss, in this place, the policy of adopting so momentous a
regulation as that alluded to, observations on which are rendered peculiarly
delicate by the situation in which it is placed by the national legislature.
The instance, it is conceived, however, will forcibly inculcate the utility of
the examination suggested in the beginning of this paragraph, and will lead to
useful reflections on the consequences, which such an examination may induce.
The facts, by which it is illustrated, appeared too serious and important to
Americans and to foreigners, not to be adduced. It will be perceived, that it
is equally ^he interest of those who are Englishmen, to consider the certain
effects of such an examination of the British trade laws, and of those who are
not. Some of the convictions, which such an enquiry, made with judgment, would
create in the minds of candid men, would probably be, that Great Britain cannot
not make her ships the carriers for the United States: and that rather than
make the attempt, it would be better far to commence the formation of liberal
arrangements, solidly founded in the mutual interests of the two nations.

SECTION III.
IN the prosecution of this examination, our attention is drawn to the article
of

FINE AND COARSE HATS.
The writer of the observations remarks, that the high price of wool and labor
must induce the Americans to import the felt and common hats. The increase of
our population, as in other new countries, has been accompanied by an increase
of the quantity of wool. Sheep have been found, on frequent and fair
experiments, to be very profitable to the farmer The American farmers are
become very generally sensible of the great profits of breeding sheep.
. Importation, though hitherto casual, has supplied us with some wool. Hatters
are found in every part of the United States. The following table, which was
contained in a report made by a committee to the manufacturing society of
Philadelphia, will show the state of the hatting business in Pennsylvania, and
discovers a fact little known even to her own citizens, that 12,340 hats are
annually made in the four counties beyond the Allegany mountains*.

Hatters. Fur hats. Wool hats. In the city and county of Philadelphia, 68
31,637 7,60^ Montgomery, 10 800 1,000 Delaware, 14 1,500 4,000 West-Chester, 14
1,300 4,000 Lancaster, 16 3,000 15,000 Dauphin, 10 1,200 4,000 Bucks, 12 1,000
1,000 Berks, 38 2,200 54,000 York, 26 2,600 30,000 Cumberland, 16 1,300 9,000
Northumberland, 10 700 5,000 Northampton, 12 1,000 7,000 Bedford, 8 800 2,000
Franklin, 10 800 2,000 Luzerne, 6 400 1,400 Huntington, 6 1,400 2,000 Mifflin,
6 400 2,000 Westmoreland*, 10 600 3,000 Fayette*, 7 400 1,540 Allegany*, 6 400
1,600 Washington*, 10 800 4,000 315 54,237 161,140

From this return, it appears that every county in the state participates in
the hatting business, there being none but what are in the above list The
county of New London, in Connecticut, contains seventeen hatters, who make
yearly 10,000 wool and fur hats. The army of the United States has been
furnished with American hats, made by contractors, who did and could obtain the
contract only by underbidding, in sealed proposals received from importers and
hat-makers. A. D. 1791.
.

The United States are found to contain near 4,000,000 inhabitants, and of that
number the whites are conjectured to be about 3,300,000. If a hat per annum, be
allowed for every third person of this last number, 1,100,000 hats per annum,
would be a supply for the United States, and the above ^15,000 made in a single
state, may be considered as more than equal in value to one fifth of the
demand, a quarter of the number being of fur. It is to be remembered, that
leathern hats and fur caps are not rarely seen in the interior country. This
branch has not grown up suddenly in America; but was commenced among our first
manufactures, and has made a regular progress with the population. The furs of
the country have at once held out a strong temptation, and afforded the easy
means. Latterly, the increase of wool has given a great extension to the
manufacture. The practical difficulties, suggested by lord Sheffield, can gain
little credit under so successful a course of the business; but the truth is,
that few handicrafts are more quickly acquired by apprentices, who can open
shops for themselves long before they are permitted in many parts of Europe.
Foreign shops have also been established here, by emigrants from Germany,
France and Britain. This is likewise a branch effected by manual industry.


BOOKS.
All school and common books, in the opinion of lord Sheffield, may be sent
cheaper from Britain, than they can be printed in America. The great and
constant increase of paper mills in the United States, the extention of those
longe^^ erected, the establishment of type founderies and the introduction of
engravers and book-binders, have made a greater change in regard to the
business of book printing, than has happened with respect to any other equally
valuable branch of manual art. The advertisement of a single book-store in
Philadelphia, published in the gazettes of the present year, contains seventy
editions of different books printed in the United States. This, it is to be
observed, is also a branch effected by hand.
The Latin and Greek school books are imported in greater numbers than
heretofore; because our population is considerably increased, since the
separation from Great Britain, and the use of them is too limited to render an
edition profitable: but a very great proportion of the English school books
(which are in general use) are printed here. Of some kinds there are none
imported; and several of them, with alterations and improvements, have been
published. A number of the law books, which are most demanded, have been
reprinted with advantage: and an edition of the Encyclopoedia, in fifteen large
quartos, containing about 5 per cent. more matter than that printed in
Great Britain, is now publishing at seventy dollars, or fifteen guineas --
precisely the price charged to subscribers for the British edition. The cuts in
the American copy are equally numerous, and are really the best.

There are two circumstances, which will establish the book-printing business
in this country -- the opportunity of publishing immediately, for the American
demand, all books in every European language, The first premium for excellency
in printing was adjudged by the Pensylvania manufacturing society to the
publishers of a book in the German language, in the inland town of Lancaster,
in that state several attempts at French gazettes have been made; and French
advertisements are frequent in our newspapers. German gazettes are constantly
printed. The laws of Pennsylvania, and of the United States are published in
the German language.
within the term of the copy right; and the printing of moderate sized and
plain editions, instead of the large, ornamented, and expensive copies which
are now the fashion in Europe. A superb quarto, on the best vellum paper, with
an elegant but unnecessary copperplate frontispiece, richly gilt and lettered,
(the dress in which modern writers often introduce their works) costs more than
is agreeable to the people of this country, who desire valuable matter for
their money. The freight, duties, and other charges of importation, depending
either on the bulk or value, are very much enhanced; and our printers find it
easy to embrace the opportunity which these circumstances afford them to
furnish their counrty with a cheap octavo, and sometimes even a duodecimo, in
its stead.

German school books are much demanded in this country, as may be supposed,
when it is remembered how numerous, in the United States, the persons are, who
read and speak that language -- probably 150,000 to 180,000 of our people.
These books are either imported from Holland, or the Hanse towns, or printed in
America. England supplies none of them.

The extension of the French language, together with the intercourse between
the United States and that nation, which took place in the year 1776, and the
alliance in 1778, with which it was followed, will naturally be supposed to
have increased the demand for French books. These are principally imported from
France, the Hanse towns, Holland, and Flanders; and some few are printed in
America.

Books in these two languages could not be imported, before the revolution,
from any country, except Great Britain: but are now drawn, as above mentioned,
from other foreign sources, or the American printing presses.

THAT THE AMERICANS WILL IN FUTURE GIVE A PREFERENCE TO BRITISH MANUFACTURES
BEFORE ALL OTHERS -- THAT IT WILL BE A LONG TIME BEFORE THE AMERICANS WILL
MANUFACTURE FOR THEMSELVES -- AND THAT OUR DEMAND FOR BRITISH GOODS WILL
INCREASE IN PROPORTION TO OUR POPULATION.
The manufactures of Great Britain and Ireland The linens, and flaxen hosiery
of Britain and Ireland are however much fallen off in goodness, since they have
applied the tow and worst flax to the manufacture of coarse goods, wherein
strength is indispensible.
are very generally good, often excellent, and almost always as handsome as the
nature of the article will admit. Yet, there are not wanting proofs, that we
shall take considerable quantities of goods from other countries. Twenty-two
ships, for example, arrived in the United States from St. Petersburg, in the
year 1790, with cordage, ticking, drillings, diaper, broad linens, narrow
linens, printed linens, crash, sheetings, ravens duck, Russia duck, nail rods,
and rolled iron for hoops. The remainder of their cargoes were bar iron, hemp,
and flax, which were intended to be manufactured here. Nankeens, silks,
long-cloths, porcelain and some small articles, are imported regularly from
China: and muslins, plain, striped, figured, and printed, with silks, and a
variety of other articles, are imported from India. It being manifestly very
injurious to the manufacturing interest of every nation in Europe, even to
import, and much more so to consume these goods, there can be no doubt, that
they will be supplied to us in the East Indies, with more readiness every year;
and if a few more callico printers were to establish themselves among us, the
importation of printed linens, callicoes and cottons might be exceedingly
diminished. The importation also of dowlass, oznaburghs, ticklenburgs, and
other German linens, and of Haerlem stripes, and tapes, from Bremen, Hamburgh,
and Amsterdam, together with the manufactory of every ton of hemp, and almost
every ton of flax, which we raise or import, together with some cotton, has
very much affected the British and Irish linen trade The use of cotton shirts
is extending in America, being thought very favourble to health. A. D. 1793.
. It appears from various documents, that the average exports of their
manufactures to the United States for several years prior to the year 1789,
were near half a million of dollars less than the average exports of several
years immediately antecedent to the war, though our population has probably
doubled in the last twenty-five years. It is not improbable, however, that the
great quantities of goods shipped since 1789, in consequence of the jealousy of
American manufactures, the apprehension of a rupture with Spain, and the
efforts of the British cotton manufacturers to banish East India goods from our
markets, would show a considerable increase in the last and present years. In
short, the United States are an open market: the American merchants are men of
judgment and enterprise; and consequently the goods of every country in the
world, which are adapted to our consumption, are found in our warehouses. It
is certainly true, that among them are very large quantities of British
manufactures, being much and justly approved, and being imported on convenient
credits by our merchants, and copiously shipped by British merchants and
manufacturers on their own account, to their correspondents here. If properly
conducted on both sides, it may yet be a very beneficial trade to the two
countries; but it has not excluded the valuable goods of other nations, nor has
it prevented a very great progress of our own manufactures, particularly in the
family way. Cordage, gunpowder, steel, nails, paper, paper-hangings, books,
stationary, linseed oil, carriages, hats, wool and cotton cards, stockings,
shoes, boots, shot, and many other articles are made in considerable
quantities, some of them as far as fifty per centum on the demand, and other in
quantities nearly equal to the consumption. Substantial freedom, liberal wages,
and cheap and excellent living, free from any excise, except a very small one,
(compared with any in Europe) upon spirituous liquors, operate daily to bring
us manufacturers and artizans in the manual branches; and we are beginning to
see the great, and to us, the peculiar value of labour-saving machines. The
rate of manual labor is no objection against them, but absolutely in their
favor; for it is clear, that they must yield the greatest profit in countries
where the price of labor is the highest. The first judicious European
capitalists, who shall take good situations in the United States, and establish
manufactories, by labour-saving machines, must rapidly and certainly make
fortunes. They cannot, it is presumed, be long insensible of this; but if they
should continue so, the appreciation of our public stocks will probably bring
some of our own capitalists into the business. The public creditors, the owners
of perhaps fifteen millions sterling of now inactive wealth, might at this
moment do much toward the introduction of the cotton mills, wool-mills, flax
and hemp-mills, and other valuable branches of machine manufacturing. It is
past a doubt, that were a company of persons of character and judgment to
subscribe a stock for this purpose of 500,000 dollars in the public paper, they
might obtain upon a deposit of it, a loan of as much coin from some foreign
nation, at an interest less than six per cent. Was such a company to be
incorporated, to have its stock transferable as in a bank, to receive
subscriptions from 400 dollars upwards, to purchase 500 or 1000 acres of land
well situated for receiving imported materials and exporting their fabrics --
were they to erect works in the center of such a body of land, to lay out their
grounds in a convenient town-plat, and to proceed with judgment and system in
their plan, they would be sure of success in their manufactories; they would
raise a valuable town upon their land, and would help to support the value of
the public debt. This measure, which was in contemplation at the time when
these papers were written, has been since digested and commenced. This capital
already engaged amounts to above 600,000 dollars. A. D. 1791. The proprietors
of all the inland towns in the United States appear to have become sensible of
the advantages, which will arise from attracting manufacturers to them. A. D.
1793.
Were a few establishments, like that described, to take place (and there are
room and funds for many of them) even the manufactories of piece goods, of
every kind in which machinery could be applied, would soon be introduced with
profit into the United States. It cannot, on cool reflection, be expected, that
a country remote from all the manufacturing nations, able to produce the
requisite raw materials and provisions, and subject to many interruptions in
their exportation to foreign markets, will continue to depend on distant
transmarine sources, for the mass of her necessary supplies. The wonderful
progress of other nations, which have commenced manufactures under
disadvantages much greater than any we have to contend with, will powerfully
incite us to exertion. Until the year 1667, a piece of woolen cloth was never
dyed and dressed in England. This great manufacture was quickly after improved
by the skill of foreign emigrants, (a mean at our command;) and so rapidly has
the woolen branch advanced, that it was estimated, in 1783, at the immense sum
of L.16,800,000 sterling (above seventy-four millions of dollars) per annum,
and was equal in value to all the exports, and superior to all the revenues of
Great Britain. It may, perhaps, be asked, why manufactures were not established
in the late war? Any man, who makes a comparison of a variety of branches, as
they were in 1774, and as they stood in 1782, will perceive a great advance to
have actually taken place, though manufactures were little encouraged through
the intermediate eight years, by reason of the total occupation of government
in the prosecution of the war: their importance moreover was not duly
estimated. The British manufacturers, who can now emigrate with the greatest
convenience, then viewed the people of this country as enemies. Neither they,
nor the people of other nations (who indeed knew little of us) cared to risk
themselves in an invaded country, nor would they hazard a capture in their
passages hither. Notwithstanding these impediments, the manufacturers of the
United States have been found to be the most successful competitors with those
of Great Britain in the American market. They have not made fine linens, fine
cloths, silks, stuffs, and other articles requiring a great degree of skill,
labor, or capital; but they have made common cloths of linen, woollen, and
cotton, steel, nails, sheet iron, paper, gunpowder, cannon and muskets,
cabinet work, carriages, shoes, and fabrics of the simple but most important
and necessary kinds. See the supplementary note, concerning the progress and
present state of American domestic or household manufactures, which follows,
No. VII.

THAT IT WOULD BE IMPOLITIC IN GREAT BRITAIN, TO ADMIT AMERICAN VESSELS INTO
HER WEST INDIA ISLANDS.
This is a very momentous question to Great Britain; and therefore whatever may
be the real merits of it, the people of that country might have been expected
to consider it with first impressions unfavourable to the admission of
foreigners. It is also probable, that the Americans may have taken a partial
view of the subject, from the great interest, they suppose they have, to obtain
a participation in the British West India trade. There are two positions of
lord Sheffield, relative to this subject, which appear conformable with truth
and reason, and in which it is of great consequence, that we should, on mature
reflection, agree. The first is, That the cultivation of the British West India
islands might be carried much farther than it is, which he supports by
observing that the produce of the island of Jamaica might be trebled at least.
The second is, That the nation which may hereafter be in possession of the most
extensive and best cultivated sugar islands, Or transmarine coloni^^.
will take the lead at sea.

If the first of these positions be true, both in regard to the British
West Indies in general, and the island of Jamaica in particular, then it
becomes a matter of the utmost importance to Great Britain, by reason of the
second position, to adopt the best possible system for promoting the
cultivation of the ^^cant lands and improved estates in the several islands.
Persons, who have contended with the difficulties and expenses of settling new
plantations, and who are acquainted with the management of West-Indi^ estates,
will be sensible, that cheap supplies of building materials, and other
necessary incipient articles, give the greatest facility and certainty to those
who are struggling to effect a new settlement: and keeping down the contingent
expenses of planting and raising produce, and of packing and preparing the crop
for market, is manifestly a sure mean of increasing the profits of an estate.
In this point of light, it must be immensely against the British West India
producers of 7,500,000 gallons of rum, and 2,000,000 cwt. of sugars, with
cotton, coffee, pimento and other articles, that they receive their staves,
boards, provisions, and other supplies, on terms so much higher than the
French, the Dutch, and the Danes. While the islands of France were furnished in
the last year, by French and American bottoms, with red oak hogshead staves, at
12, 14, and 16 dollars -- with hoops, at 14 to 28 dollars -- with pine boards,
at 11 to 16 dollars -- with Indian meal, at 2 to 3 and two third dollars per
barrel -- with shipbread, at 3 dollars per 108 pounds; the British planters in
Jamaica were obliged to pay for red oak hogshead staves, 24, 27, and 31
dollars; for wooden hoops, 27, 30, and 36 dollars; for pine boards 24, 27, and
30 dollars; for Indian meal 4 * to 5 dollars; for ship-bread the same; and for
rice per 100 pounds 3 to 5 dollars. Let considerate men determine, whether the
British colonial agriculture must not be depressed, and that of the French be
exceedingly elevated, under such circumstances. It is plain that the latter
will find it easy to extend their plantations into grounds now uncultivated, if
the British planters should be able to endure their disadvantages. In
conformity with this reasoning, we find that the produce of French St. Domingo,
shipped to Europe, which, before the late war, is stated by lord Sheffield to
have employed no more than 450 ships, was sufficient, in the year 1788, to load
for France 580 ships, of 370 tons on a medium, and 110 of 740 tons, (exclusive
of the numerous French and foreign vessels employed in the trade with North and
South America,) amounting in the whole to 296,435 tons, nearly equal to one
third of the private ships of Britain. The whole of the vessels loaded in 1787,
from all the British West India islands to England and Scotland, amounted to
but 132,222 tons. In 1788 the quantity was the same, and as the writer of the
observations admits that the produce of Jamaica was before the war two thirds
in value (though less in bulk) of that of St. Domingo, the British colonial
agriculture must have advanced, if at all, in a much less degree than that of
the French. This great increase of the French navigation, resulting from a
prosperous West-Indian agriculture, abundantly and cheaply supplied, is a
verification of the prediction of lord Sheffield, which was mentioned above,
and induces the most reasonable doubts, whether it would be really impolitic in
Great Britain to admit American vessels into her West India islands. As it is
of great importance to this argument, to establish the actual increase of the
French produce upon stronger ground than even the highest probability, it may
be useful to state, that the sugars exported from St. Domingo, in 1786, were
near 133 millions of pounds; in 1788, near 163 millions and an half; that the
coffee in 1786 was about 51 millions of pounds; and, on the average of 1787 and
1788, near 70 millions; and that the cotton, in 1786 was 5,200,000 pounds --
and, on the average of 1787 and 1788, above 6,500,000 pounds -- also that the
molasses, which in 1786 was 21,855 hhds. was increased in 1788, to 29,503.

The augmentation of the French vessels, employed from St. Domingo alone,
appears to be equal to 108,000 tons. If the whole of their sugar colonies have
prospered in the same degree, it is probable their acquisition of shipping may
be safely estimated at 162,000 tons, which is 47,000 tons more than lord
Sheffield supposes to have been employed, before the American revolution,
between the British sugar islands and all the American provinces, and is very
far beyond the tonnage employed at this time in the trade of those islands with
the United States. The British publications represent it to be less than 21,000
tons, making three voyages per annum, the aggregate entries of which, they
consider, as about 62,000 tons.

It is alleged, American vessels cannot be admitted without offense to other
countries: but that has not been found an objection to the admission by the
French. Nor, if the regulation were properly made, would the allies of England
have any cause of complaint; for they might participate in the trade, if they
could find advantage in so doing, which, however, would not be the case. The
ships of Russia, of Holland, of Great Britain, of Spain, of Portugal, of the
United States, and of all other foreign countries, may enter the French islands
with the same kind of goods, even American articles. The English, indeed, would
be much more protected in the island trade than the French; because by other
clauses in their laws, the goods brought by each flag must be its own national
productions.

It may be argued that the Americans would take a large proportion of the
carriage to the British islands: but this, if true, is the strongest proof,
that can be adduced, of the expediency of the measure, as calculated to promote
the colonial agriculture, and thus aid and support the navy of Great Britain.
France, it is seen, by the mode proposed, has added nearly as much to her
shipping, in the trade of a single island, as England enjoys in the monopoly of
the intercourse with all her islands, by the mode she pursues. The British
shipping, too, if ours were admitted, would certainly maintain themselves in a
considerable portion of the trade: and in proof of this, it may be observed,
that the French employ of their own vessels in their West India trade from this
country, nearly two-thirds of the tonnage that is engaged in their commerce
between these states and France. It is material to observe, that in the
intercourse between the French islands and the United States, the tonnage of
the British, Dutch, Spanish, Danes, Swedes, and Portuguese, does not amount to
two per cent. upon the whole of the vessels employed.

THAT IT WOULD BE BETTER FOR BRITAIN TO GIVE UP THE ISLANDS THAN THEIR CARRYING
TRADE.
As the arguments on this point, adduced by lord Sheffield, relate only to the
carrrying trade between the United States and the British West India islands,
the observations will proceed on the same ground. The whole freight betweeen
the two countries prior to the war, he estimates at L.245,000, rather than lose
which, he thinks it better to give up those valuable islands, the produce
whereof, according to various estimations, is worth three or four millions
sterling, and whose inhabitants are very free consumers of British and Irish
manufactures. A prudent administration should beware of a writer, who palpably
deceives himself by too ardently maintaining a favorite hypothesis. But a
relinquishment of the trade, on the part of Great Britain, is not desired; nor
can a loss of it be supposed to follow the admission of our vessels to a
participation in it. The ships always employed in the circutious voyage would
still continue to pursue it; those belonging to the West Indians themselves,
the Bahamans, the Bermudians, and the northern British colonies, would still
enjoy a large portion: the remainder would be done by the Americans, who now
suffer the British nation to employ a very large quantity of tonnage in imports
from, and exports to foreign countries, other than British, without any
reciprocation.

THAT THE SHIPPING GREAT BRITAIN GAINS, BY EXCLUDING THE AMERICANS, WILL BE AT
HAND.
Lord Sheffield undertakes to say, that the navigation of those provinces,
which are now the United States, operated as a drain of British seamen; and
conveys an idea, that the sailors employed here, were of no use to Britain. The
prompt manning of their ships on this station, the cheap and certain supply of
their West Indies, in the war of 1755 to 1762, the distress to the French and
Spanish trade by American privateers, the affair of cape Breton, the great
exportation of prize goods from this country, and other weighty facts, might be
adduced to prove this not the smallest of his errors. Assuming that we were too
remote to be of any use in time of war, he proceeds to a conclusion, that the
navigation employed in the supply of the islands, will be hereafter nearer
ho^e, inferring that it will belong to the merchants of their European
dominions. This may be in a great degree the case, as to the sugar ships, which
make the circuitous voyage from Europe to the United States, the West Indies
and Europe; and it was equally so, as to that description of trade^* before the
revolution: but the direct intercou^s^ between these states and the British
West India islands, from which we are excluded, must, from the nature of the
trade, be carried on principally in vessels owned in those islands, whose
situation is more remote than ours, and by British subjects residing in our
ports, Bermudians, and the people of the northern British colonies, all of whom
are as distant as we.

THAT AMERICA COULD NEVER BE UNITED AGAIN,
Was a settled opinion of the writer of the observations. He did not perceive
that accident, principally, had cast us into the form of thirteen states. It is
true, that the extreme injuries of disunion were not generally foreseen by many
of our own citizens. The utility -- the necessity of strengthening the national
government, had not come home, as it has since done, to the minds of the
American people. Many of their friends, however, saw with regret, and some of
those who were not their friends, perceived with a satisfaction not the most
honorable, that the prospects of individual happiness, and of national
prosperity had ceased to be fair. The most miserable ill that can afflict the
political body, the want of a fit organization, had brought on alarming
convulsions; and there were no evils which were not to be apprehended, unless a
change of system could be effected. In this moment, the friends of order came
forth. The jarring interests, on the effects of which the writer relies, were
made to harmonize. The difference of manners, of climates, and of staples, did
not intervene, according to his expectations, as insurmountable obstacles to
amity and union. That hearty cooperation, the hope of which is treated as
preposterous, has actually taken place: and the American people now universally
perceive, that whatever measures have a tendency to dissolve their union, or
contribute to violate or lessen the sovereign authority, ought to be considered
as hostile to their liberty and independency.

It remains, then, for those, who have believed in these predictions of ruinous
contentions among the people, and an enfeebling discord in the councils of the
United States, to consider, in so different a course of things, the conduct
which ought to be observed: and for us it remains steadily to proceed in the
good work of restoring and firmly securing public order, as the certain and
only means of private and public happiness.

SECTION IV.
The article, which next presents itself, is that of

NAVAL STORES.
It appears to lord Sheffield, that Russia will interfere much with the
American states, in the supply of these commodities. The quantities exported,
agreeably to his table for 1771, and our return in 1791, appear to have been,
In 1771. Barrels. worth then 156,000 dollars. of pitch, 9,144 tar, 82,075
turpentine, 17,014 rosin, 223 spirits of turpentine, 41 Total, 108,497 Barrels.
In the r^^turn for 13 1/^ (...)* worth now 217,945 dollars.
8,875 In the r^^turn for 13 1/^ (...)* worth now 217,945 dollars. 85,067 In
the r^^turn for 13 1/^ (...)* worth now 217,945 dollars. 28,326 In the r^^turn
for 13 1/^ (...)* worth now 217,945 dollars. 316 In the r^^turn for 13 1/^
(...)* worth now 217,945 dollars. 193 In the r^^turn for 13 1/^ (...)* worth
now 217,945 dollars. 122,777 In the r^^turn ffor 13 1/^ (...)* worth now
217,945 dollars.


From this increase of value, it appears, that the United States have not
suffered from the competition of Russia, or any other country; but that in this
article, like most others, we experience the advantage of being an open market,
free from the British monopoly, which existed before the revolution. In
addition to this large exportation, considerable quantities have been consumed,
in manufa^^^^es which have been introduced or extended since the year 1771: and
a very large quantity has been purchased for the repairs and stores of 770,000
tons of vessels, of various nations, employed in the foreign trade, the
coasting trade, and the fisheries, and in the building of new ships, which
greatly exceed the number built on a medium of 1769 to 1771.

POT AND PEARL ASHES.
These articles, lord Sheffield ventures to affirm, can be made to greater
advantage in Canada and Nova Scotia, than elsewhere in America, on account of
the plenty of wood, and owing to the great quantity of fuel consumed in a long
and severe winter. It is well known, that the people of this continent do not
attempt to make these salts out of any of the terebinthine woods, The barks of
hemlock, pine, fir, and larch, are said to be very productive of pot-ash.
(though it is said to be practiced in the north of Europe,) and that the
growth of trees in the remaining British colonies, is principally of those
kinds. Abundant proof that they have little oak, is derived from the small
quantity of staves, heading, oak timber, and oak planks, which they export, and
from the quantities of them, which they import from the United States. But had
they the proper kinds of fuel, that would not be sufficient; for a certain
degree of population is necessary to this manufacture. The number of people in
the whole of the northern British colonies, is perhaps 160,000 or 180,000,
while the United States have more than twenty times their number, of whom
two-thirds inhabit scenes much more abundant in wood and timber than Canada and
Nova Scotia. Their custom house books will show what pot-ash those colonies
export. Although our writer supposes, that the United States will yield less
th^^ they have heretofore done, we find, that the return of the treasury
exhibited the great quantity of 8,568 tons, though the export, on the medium of
1768, 1769, and 1770, was only 2008 tons, and 5 cwt.

In treating of pot-ash, lord Sheffield takes occasion to digress to the
article of coal, and observes, that to encourage the British collieries, and
carrying trade, they should prevent the getting of co^l on the island of Cape
Breton. It was among the disadvantages, which, it was alleged, that United
States would sustain by the separation from Great Britain, that the collieries
of Cape Breton were to be particularly barred against them. This, like many
other evils, which were apprehended, has vanished on a recurrence to the
resources of the country. The collieries of James river will not only
abundantly supply the extensive territory watered by the rivers of the
Chesapeak and by that bay itself; but they promise to afford a very valuable
nursery for seamen in the transportation of their contents to all the seaports
of the United States. They already furnish coal on terms much lower than the
minimum of the first cost and charges of importation: and as labor is
declining in price and a short water communication, between the mines and the
shipping place, is nearly completed, there is no doubt that foreign coal will
be rendered a very losing commodity, and that it must finally be excluded from
our markets. The interior country is plentifully supplied by nature with this
valuable fossil.

HORSES.
Lord Sheffield treats of this article with great ingenuity. He raises
expectations in the government and people of Great Britain, that the
West Indies may draw supplies of these useful animals from Canada, and
considers Nova Scotia as having greatly the advantage of Canada and the United
States in her capacity for the exportation of them. It is stated as certain,
that a trade in horses will be carried on by that province. The distance of
Great Britain and Ireland do not appear to restrain his sanguine hopes, that
horses may be shipped to the West Indies from those two countries. He proceeds
further, and suggests the supply of the probable deficiency of horses, with
mules, from Barbary, from whence they are to be obtained in abundance, (though
at a high price) and from Porto Rico and the Missisippi. In short, knowing the
importance of horses to the West India planters, he takes great pains to show,
that they may relinquish, without inconvenience, the cheap and certain supplies
which they formerly enjoyed, and which the French, Danes, and Dutch now enjoy
by means of deep-waisted American vessels, manned by persons accustomed to the
business.

There is perhaps, no article, in proportion to the value, in which the British
islands suffer (...) deeply by the present footing of their intercours^ with
these states, than in that of which we are (...) treating. This country is
particularly fitted (...) the raising of horses, and affords them in very
increased numbers. The exportation of them in the year 1770, which was entirely
to the West-Indi^ islands, was, by lord Sheffield's tables, 6,6^^: and the
exportation of them by the treasury retu^^, already referred to, was 8,628,
besides 237 mul^^ The last article has been added to the list of ^^ports, since
the year 1770, and promises to (...) come very considerable, though mules have
not a place in lord Sheffield's book among the supplies which may be derived
from the United States. The British West India islands are stated to have taken
off, before the revolution, two fifths of the above number, or 2,676 horses;
but it appears by (...) late return that there were shipped thither, i^
thirteen months and a half, no more than 916 horses and mules; from which it is
manifest, that the present mode of carrying on the trade deprives them of above
two-thirds of their former supply of these animals, which are admitted in the
observations, to be " essentially necessary." The price of those they do
obtain, must of course be much enhanced by an unsatisfied demand threefold
greater than the importation, and by the expense of conveying them in British
ships, which being very generally in the double decked form, are dangerous for
the transportation of horses on deck, and carry them at an immense freight in
the ^old. Here is another very injurious instance of depressing the West India
agriculture. The case with the Dutch is very different. Their sugar colonies,
though much less populous than those of Great Britain, received in the above
term, about seven hundred and sixty horse^ and mules. The French, as in regard
to the other articles of necessary supplies, not produced by their own
dominions, receive these animals, without impediment, in our vessels, and their
own, indiscriminately. The precise number, which was shipped to their islands,
before the revolution, is not ascertained: but, as lord Sheffield alleges,
that the whole number exported to the foreign sugar colonies was, in 1770*
about 4,01^, some part of which the Dutch and Danes received -- and as it
appears by the late return, that about 7,000 horses and mules were shipped to
the French sugar plantations, during its term, it is manifest, that they have
increased their importations 80, 90, or 100 per cent. It is unn^cessary to
reiterate here, tha they will receive proportionate advantages in their
colonial agriculture, (and to the ships employed in transporting its produce)
from so capital an addition to one of their most useful supplies.

THAT FRANCE WILL NOT SUFFER AMERICA TO (...) HER WITH SHIPS,
is contradicted by the fact. Immediately after the first publication of this
paper, the French regulation, confining their flag to native ships, was
received in America. What will be found under this head, which was written
before the regulation was known, may serve as a sincere comment on this new
restriction. A. D. 1791.
That kingdom by rejecting American vessels, would have so ^ar sacrificed her
carrying trade to the manufacture of ships. She wisely purchases, upon the
cheap^^^ terms, the cradles for her marine nursery. The first and great object
of the maritime powers ough^ to be, the increase of the number of their
sailors, which is best done by multiplying their chances of employment. Among
the means of doing (...), one of the most obvious and rational is, the
multiplication of vessels. The French-built ships (...) from 55 to 60 dollars
per ton, when fitted to receive a cargo. and exclusively of sea stores,
in^^rance, the charges of lading, outward pilotage, and other expenses
incidental to the employment, and not to the building and outfit of a vessel.
The American live oak and cedar ships, to which none are superior, cost in the
same situation, from 33 to 35 dollars, finished very completely. If the French
require 10,000 tons of new vessels, on any occasion, or in any term of time,
they may be procured in the United States, on a computation of the medium price
of 34 dollars per ton, for the sum of 340,000 dollars: but if bought at 55
dollars, the lowest price in France, they would cost the much greater sum of
550,000 dollars. No argument is necessary to show, that such a nation, coeteris
paribus, must produce seamen more rapidly, than those, who refuse these cheap
vessels.

It would appear much less unreasonable, that the government of the United
States should prohibit the sale of ships, (the means of obtaining naval
strength,) to foreign nations, than that any of them should reject the great
advantage of so cheap and excellent a supply. And should the French, British,
and other foreign nations continue to decline the purchase of American-built
ships, there can be no doubt, that we shall take a greater portion of the
carrying trade for ourselves and other countries, from that cause.

THAT THE NAVIGATION ACT GAVE, AND THAT AN ADHERENCE TO IT, WILL SECURE TO
GREAT BRITAIN THE COMMERCE OF THE WORLD.
There is no doubt, that Great Britain has heretofore obtained, in proportion
to the number of its people, a very great share of trade both foreign and
internal. But the value of her imports in 1774, was not ten per cent. more than
that of the imports of France. Holland Mr. Eden stated, since the American war,
that the exports of Holland, in foreign goods only, were 18,000,000l. sterling.
had, at the same time, a very great trade; as had several other countries in
Europe. It would have been beyond the truth, if lord Sheffield had said that
Bri^^^ had a fifth of the commerce of the world. (...) may appear, at first
view, of little use, and even ^^^vidious, to notice this remark; but it is
really ^f importance to a reasonable and accurate estimation of things, to
correct such extravagancies. These hyperbolical expressions tend to mislead.
They ^^^sion a people erroneously to suppose, they (...) the world at their
command, and render the (...) salutary and reasonable arrangements more (...)
than they ought to be. They also help (...) swell the popular torrent against a
clear-sigh^^^* honest, and candid m^nister, who may attempt ^^^^sures, fit in
themselves, and even necessary to (...) national interests.

But whatever may have been the degree of truth in the assertion, that
Great Britain heretofore engrossed the commerce of the world, a different
course of things has taken place, and is to be expected hereafter, with regard
to her and every other country. It is manifest, that a prodigious, and almost
universal revolution in the views of nations, with regard to the carrying
trade, has taken place. The extension of the spirit of co^merce and the
conseq^^n^ inclination and capacity for naval power, have occasioned this
change. The jealousy of trade, which gave birth to the British navigation act,
is now felt as well by the sovereigns, as by the citizens, of every country in
Europe. They have become sensible, that commerce and navigation are at once
great sources of private wealth and of national power. The general prevalence
of these views is daily producing commercial regulations, (injurious in many
particulars to the country making them) intended to secure to the citizens of
each nation those benefits, which were formerly enjoyed by the carrying and
manufacturing states. Those, who have heretofore enjoyed the trade of other
countries, and in a very extensive degree, must necessarily be the first to
feel the inconveniences of this change of measures: and they must eventually
experience them in proportion to their former advantages. The private shipping
of the Hanse towns and of the United Netherlands, have already felt severely
the consequences of these views. Those traders, indeed, might once have almost
claimed the commerce of the world. There is considerable dang^^ however, that
this anxious desire of trade may occasion some of the maritime nations to give
too free and strong operation to principles, which are not exceptionable in the
present state of things, if properly directed and restrained; for it is
manifest, that countries with a great agricultural interest, will err
exceedingly in pursuing, as far as possible, measures, which may not be found
inconvenient to nations oppositely circumstanced.

With respect to Great Britain, the particular object of her navigation act was
to expel the Dutch from her carrying trade, and thus to decrease the ability of
her rivals to maintain and suddenly to increase their navy. Situated as things
then were the British were probably right, as to the object (...) view: and
from the wonderful insensibility of (...) Europe to the nature and operation of
the English ^^rine code, they gained incidentally, and for a long time, immense
advantages in the commerce of other states* for which they originally did not
lo^^. This situation of things however is now thoroughly understood. The
shipping of Britain in consequence, will hereafter find rivals in the private
vessels of several foreign countries, and there appears the utmost
improbability, that she can continue to retain any extraordinary share of the
carrying trade for other nations. The tenure of it is manifestly in the
greatest degree precarious; because it absolutely depends on the laws of other
countries, and on the improbable continuance of inattention in their commercial
citizens.

The value of the carrying trade, it may also be observed, is very materially
altered. Instead of being, as formerly, a profitable monopoly (if we may so
speak) in the hands of two nations, it is now diffused among ten or twelve. The
great advantages, too, which accrued to Britain from cheap provisions --
superior and cheap ships -- and low wages to seamen, are now lost. Bread and
meat, from the increase of manufacturers, are imported into that island --
wages have considerably advanced, if we take into the calculation the great
fishing bounties -- the expenses of ship-building have increased -- the French
See papers of the B^it^sh society for naval architecture.
are admitted to have obtained the pre-eminence in naval architecture, and it
appears from a minute return, exhibited in Anderson's commerce, that the oak
timber of Great Britain, in forty years proceeding 1771, had decreased
nine-tenths; and that it had advanced in price above 40 per cent. in the course
of the nineteen antecedent years. It will not be forgotten, that the
expenditure of twenty years, including a naval war, in which an unparalleled
number of ships was built, has since occured further to exhaust their stock of
ship timber. Nor should it be overlooked, that vast demands were made for this
article to replace the private shipping, which were lost to the British nation
by the American revolution. The consumption of ship timber from 1774 to 1785,
appears from the papers of the British society for naval architecture, to have
been three times as great as in any equal term before.

The sudden command of seamen by mean of impressment is too strong an operation
of the executive power, too great an outrage against the rights of men, and the
sacred peace of families, long to be endured in the present course of European
affairs. Those prompt exertions of naval strength, by which Great Britain has
heretofore gained advantages, will be affected by an alteration in this
particular, at least so far as regards unprofitable, unjust, and ambitious
wars, into which all nations are occasionally led.

These remarks, it is presumed, will not be ^^^construed, as of an invidious
nature. It is a season requiring a true state of things. They are intended as
dispasionate and reasonable answers to the extravagant assertions and the
contemptuous menaces ^f the writer of the observations, whose doctrines are as
pernicious to Great Britain, as they are injurious to the United States. Should
a quarrel take place between the American states and Great Britain, some stout
frigates, he affirms, would completely command the commerce of this mighty
continent.

It would not be improper to ask, what argume^^ is this very intelligent writer
possessed of, to prove that so great a permanent disparity will exist in favor
of a nation, whose exports are now to their expenses, as 18 to 16, over a
nation whose exports to their expenses are as 18 to 3? Why, can he inform us,
should the British exports or imports, neither of which will load 650,000 tons
of vessels, afford a certain and permanent basis for a powerful navy, if those
of the United States, which will lade 650,000 tons of vessels, and are steadily
increasing, do not justify, under proper management, expectations equal to a
few stout frigates? Such miscalculations, on the part of any foreign nation,
must lead to corresponding improprieties in their deportment toward us, or
they must be heartily rejected.

THAT IT MUST ALWAYS BE THE SITUATION OF THE UNITED STATES TO COURT
GREAT BRITAIN.
To evince the fallacy of this position, nothing more is necessary than to
recollect some leading circumstances in the trade of the two countries. Great
Britain exports about L.18,000,000 sterling* per ann. of which 13,000,000
sterling are her own manufactures. It will not be pretended, that we, as the
principle customers, are to court the venders of these goods. We must court the
arts ^y which they are manufactured* as we have wisely done for the last five
or six years.
A portion of the remaining L.5,000,000 is made up of our tobaccoes, rice,
indigoes ginseng, and other productions, exported from their dominions in an
unmanufactured state. Of these, it will not be supposed we can be anxious to
make importations. The greater part of the remainder is made up of India,
Russian, German, and other articles, of foreign growth or manufacture, which
Britain cannot furnish but at second hand; for which, consequently, we are not
under the necessity to court her, and which neither we nor any other nation
should receive from her European dominions, were we to pursue her navigation
principles. The re-shipped commodities of Ireland, too, form no inconsiderable
item in the list of British exports. For these we could be under no obligation
to Great Britain, being manufactured goods, on the shipment of most of which to
these states and all the world, the Irish have long granted a very encouraging
bounty. In regard to our exports to Great Britain, they confessed principally of
the precious elements of her manufactures, shipping, and navy. These are not
only (in the language of lord Sheffield, when speaking of the Russian exports)
more precious to her than gold, but are absolute necessaries. Lumber of all
kinds, bark, cotton, flax, iron, flaxseed, wax, indigo, pot-ash, tar, pitch,
turpentine, skins, and furs, are among the articles here contemplated. To these
may be added wheat, flour, and Indian corn* taken in small quantities except
when necessity compels large importations; also tobacco and rice, which are
consumed in a small proportion in Britain, but contribute to swell her exports,
and increase her carrying trade to other countries. It Is manifest, that all
these exports are much to be desired on her part, and that it would be most
profitable to the United States, to manufacture the raw materials, and to
expend the provisions on their own manufacturers; and to furnish the rice and
tobacco, by the direct voyage, to those nations which are supplied circuitously
through British ports. In another point of view, the intercourse with
Great Britain is no^ particularly to be courted by the United States. It has
been already observed, that we imported of their manufactures, in 1784,
L.3,648,007 sterling* and in 1785 L2,308,013, which appear, on a medium of
those two years, to have been equal to above one third of the manufactures they
exported, to all other foreign nations! How immensely beneficial, how
indispensibly necessary to the British manufacturers, are such consumers? Let
it be asked, and heartily answered, if they or we are to court such business?
If any inviting measures are to be adopted by this country, it would be more
wise to court the capitalists, manufacturers, and artizans, of the several
countries of Europe, which are overcharged with private wealth and population.
It may be urged, that we are strongly induced to court Great Britain for
credit. The answer is, that she cannot venture to withhold her fabrics,
whatever may be our time of payment; for in the present state of things, a
years absence of British goods from our markets, would give an immense spring
to our own manufactures. But there is a strong symptom of the ability of the
United States to do without a very extensive credit, from any particular
nation, in the abundant supplies of China and East India goods, which are
imported from every part of those countries with which we trade, amounting
probably, to more than a fifth of our consumption of foreign commodities. This
independency on any particular nation, which is in the highest degree to be
desired, will be sensibly promoted by the establishment of our good name in
other foreign countries, by strengthening our new and wholesome guards around
the rights of property, and by the recent multiplication and extension of
banks. Though no such pecuniary institution existed ten years ago, six banks
are established now in (...) different cities; and their capitals (...) ^ime a
mo^ety of our importati^^^. The ^^c^^modations and (...) will (...) them, must
exceedingly promote the independ^^^^ of the American merchant and consumer, on
foreign credits.

THAT IT WILL NOT BE THE INTEREST OF ANY OF THE GREAT MARITIME POWERS TO
PROTECT THE AMERICAN VESSELS FROM THE BARBARY STATES.
The lust of power has seldom given rise to a less reputable sentiment in the
bosom of a^ individual than that which we are now to notice. Like the
instruction of the flagitious father to his son, to get money, it is advised,
that naval strength should be secured, per fas et nefas. But it is not
asserted, that any nation maintains this doctrine. It has been urged in answer
against us, that we import slaves, which has in a very great degree ceased; for
the vessels from Africa, in the whole returned year, were less than four
hundred tons. But let the circumstances of the case be examined and heartily
considered. When high duties on the importation of slaves were imposed before
the revolution, by some of the colonial assemblies, they were rendered of no
effect by the negative of the crown, upon the same principles, that now
determine the conduct of many of the European shipholders and manufacturers --
because the abolition of the slave trade would curtail their respective
advantages. During and since the war, most of the states have prohibited those
importations: several have abolished slavery: and we find as above hinted, that
no more than 385 tons of shipping arrived from Africa in twelve months
subsequent to August 1789, in all the states, belonging to us, and all other
nations. Whether these had on board any slaves, is not known. Great Britain
cannot press a country, thus conducting itself, on the subject of the slave
trade, seeing that her colonies continue to import tens of thousands per annum.

But it is conceived, that the reverse of lord Sheffield's position is true,
and that it is the interest of most of the great maritime powers, to pursue
measures, which might tend to free the Americans from the piracies of the
Barbary states. It may be among the means of transferring to those nations,
from Great Britain, a part of the sovereignty of the ocean and a part of the
commerce of the world, which, it is alleged, her naval power has secured to
her. The balance of power, if it be accurately defined, must be stated to
comprehend now the balance of naval power. To attain and preserve tha^, the
first step is manifestly to di^est any na^^on, which may possess it, of the
sovereignty of the ocean. That sovereignty can comport with the true interests
and dignity of no other kingdom. It will be more advantageous to the several
nations, who are not actually the first in the scale of naval power, that the
United States should acquire a portion of the marine force of a nation, too
potent by sea, than that such a nation, if it really has been the case, should
continue to give law upon the ocean* and it is manifest, that no one of those
nations can be satisfied, that any other should prescribe the law there. The
destruction of no particular kingdom is alleged to be requisite to the well
being of this, or any other country: but it certainly is not necessary, that
the other nations of the world should promote, or acquiesce in measures,
calculated to support any one kingdom in a naval dictatorship. This degree of
marine strength is not requisite for the self-defence of any nation; and it may
evidently be perverted to interrupt the commerce and to disturb the tranquillity
of Europe. Whether this has been the case, (concerning which no assertion is
here made) it remains for the nations concerned severally to determine. If it
has been, if it may be, and if it probably will be, then it also remains for
them to decide, whether it be their true interest to join in the honorable
league with the Barbarians against the honest commerce, and the personal
liberties of the citizens of the United States.

THAT THE BRITISH ISLANDS WOULD BE CROWDED WITH DUTCH, FRENCH, AND OTHER
FOREIGN VESSELS, IF THEY WERE TO BE LAID OPEN.
A direct contradiction cannot be given to this assertion: but probabilities
are strongly against it. The free ports of the French islands are thus laid
open; yet the whole tonnage, which usally passes between them and the United
States, in the course of a year, exclusively of their own ships, those of the
United States, and those of Great Britain, do not exceed two per cent. of the
whole tonnage employed in the trade; and though the British vessels have an
equal opportunity with the ships of France and of these states, yet they
carried but eight small cargoes to all the French islands, during the returned
year. From the nature of the West India trade, and of the commodities
transported, it cannot be supported, unless the vessels be owned by the
inhabitants of the islands, or those of this country. Similar facts occur, in
examining the trade with the Dutch ports in the West Indies, and on the main;
and the same observations, it is conceived, would justly apply to them. But
what could those foreign vessels carry to the English islands? By the other
British regulations, they could transport no American articles, and they cannot
ship from their own dominions, with a chance of profit, a cargo of the
commodities, which are permitted to be imported from foreign countries, into the
British West Indies.

SECTION V.
THE next errors in the observations of lord Sheffield, on which it is
necessary to animadvert, are some which are not inconsiderable, with respect to
the actual and probable

POPULATION OF THE UNITED STATES.
He is of opinion that our population is not likely to increase as it has done
on our coasts; that we had fallen off in numbers in 1784; and that the
emigration from the United States would be very considerable. The state of
Rhode Island, all of which lies near the sea, was proved by actual enumeration,
in 1783, to contain 51,896 persons. The unhappy condition of that government,
and the consequent interruption of its trade, fisheries, and manufactures, from
1786 to the beginning of 1790, occasioned great emigrations from thence into
the other states. Yet the census, which (...) completed before the first day of
May, in the pr^sent year, amounts to 68,825. Delaware, which* like
Rhode Island, has no back country, and lies upon the coast, was estimated at
35,000 persons, in a return, which lord Sheffield affirmed in 1783, to be too
high. Its population is proved, by the actual enumeration just completed, to be
59,094. Connecticut, another state upon the coast, was computed in the same
return, which he mentions in 1784, to contain 206,000 persons. It is well
known, that its population, in proportion to its territory, was then, and is
now, the greatest in the union, and that it has been incessantly sending
emigrants to Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, New York, Pennsylvania, Maryland,
Virginia, and the western territory: yet the census shows it to contain, at
this time, 237,942 inhabitants. New Jersey, another state without new or
unsettled lands, is rated in the return, which lord Sheffield questions, at
150,000, and was proved by an enumeration, which was taken at the moment he
hazarded this doubt, to contain 149,435 persons. The census shows its present
population to be 184,139. It has no unimproved counties or new lands. New York
was stated at 200,000, and now appears to be 340,120. Pennsylvania, which was
said to be estimated too high, in 1784, at 320,000, amounts to 434,373.
Massachusetts, including the district of Maine, is set down in the disputed
estimation, at 350,000, in 1784: the census in 1790, proves to be 475,327.
New Hampshire, which is found to contain 141,885, was considered as having
no more than 82,200. Maryland, which was estimated 220,000, and which has not
one county that does not lie on a navigable river, flowing into the Atlantic
ocean, appears by the census to have 318,729. Virginia, including Kentucky, was
stated in the old return to have 400,000, and is found to contain 747,610,
after the separation of Kentucky, whose population is 73,677 more: and here it
is to be remarked, that the state of Massachusetts, though thickly settled, has
manifestly gained people in the last nine years, more rapidly than Kentucky,
supposing the latter to have had 10,000 inhabitants or upwards, in 1782; and
the part of Virginia, not including Kentucky, has gained inhabitants much more
rapidly than that western district. These two facts are mentioned to prove the
error of lord Sheffield's prediction that our population was not likely to
increase, as it has done, "on the sea coast." North Carolina, which was stated
at only 200,000, is proved to contain 393,751, exclusively of the western
country ceded to congress by that state in the last year, the population of
which is found to be about 35,691 more. The population of Vermont is above
85,000. That of South Carolina which was stated at 170,000 proves to be
249,073. The population of the western territory is not yet ascertained.

The whole return above referred to, is alleged, by our author, to be too
high. Its total is 2,389,300, and it was made the basis of congressional
assessments. The best accounts, as lord Sheffield affirms* made the number of
whites 1,700,000. There seems, however, from the returns already received, to
be no doubt, that our numbers will prove more than 3,900,000, by the census
taken from August, 1790, to April, 1791, inclusive. The population of the
United States has therefore advanced 65 per centum on a return in 1782, which
lord Sheffield affirmed, in 1784, to be exaggerated. See the census of 1791 in
this volume.


The simplicity of living amongst the great body of the American people -- the
extraordinary facility of obtaining the means of subsistence -- migration to
our country -- and the nonexistence of emigrations from it, though Nova Scotia
is so near, and as lord Sheffield says, so tempting -- these circumstances have
occasioned the United States thus rapidly to increase in population, in the
last nine years, though seven of them were extremely disordered and
discouraging. But now, when agriculture is greatly improved, when laws,
religion, morals, liberal and useful science, arts, manufactures, and commerce,
are maintained, promoted and extended -- lord Sheffield himself will believe,
that our population will increase even on the sea coast. Let foreigners, who
sincerely desire information, take up the Philadelphia directory, published by
the marshal of the United States for the district of Pennsylvania, and learn by
this simple but authentic document, the ingredients of which our towns are
composed, even in a state whose territory is not one fourth settled. It will
there be seen, that while our planters' and farmers' sons are subdividing their
lands, or moving forward into less populated scenes, many of the sons of our
artificers and manufacturers, and very many persons of those occupations, from
foreign countries, are taking their stations on the vacant lots in our old
streets, or commencing new ones. The sober and industrious journeymen of
Europe, who can scarcely support the difficulties and expenses of living there,
often become successful master workmen here. It may be safely affirmed, that
the Scotch combine the advantages of sobriety, industry, frugality, and skill,
in as great a degree as any manufacturers in Europe; yet they incessantly
emigrate to us, and are remarkably successful in their various branches.

EMIGRATION.
Great pains are taken by the writer of the observations, to place the
emigrants to America in the most discouraging circumstances of distress and
contempt. "Emigration," says he, "is the natural resource of the culprit."
Those, who are acquainted with the history of Europe, since the beginning of
the seventeenth century, and of the colonies settled from thence, know, that
the emigrants hither ha^^ been, generally speaking, the enterprising, (...)
their followers, or the oppressed subjects of unj^^^ civil or religious rulers
-- the latter in the greatest degree. There is not a state in the union which
does not contain one or more sects or churches, which have fled from religious
persecution. Nothing can be more rational, than that person^ (...) sincere
piety and tender consciences, should seek a country, in which the assertion of
mere toleration is deemed as absurd, as the denial of religious liberty is
thought to be criminal. Hence Presbyteri^^^, Congregationalists, Quakers,
Baptists, and others, have fled hither from England; Seceders and Episcopalians
from Scotland; Catholics and Presbyterians from Ireland; Hugunots from France;
Protestants from the dominions of the Catholic princes of Germany; and
Catholics from those of the Protestant princes. Two centuries have not elapsed,
since all the dominions of the United States were an howling wilderness. They
now contain near four millions of people. From whence have they been derived?
In great numbers from various parts of Europe, by incessant streams of
emigration. But it may be asked, are these people happy and prosperous? Does
the soil they cultivate, yield them any return for their labor? They procure
for themselves comfortable habitations, food, raiment, and other conveniences,
and have exported in a single year, above twenty millions of dollars in value!
The exportations of the year ending on the 30th September, 1792, exceeded 21
millions of dollars. Those of the year following were 26,000,000.
How then can these people have been miserably disappointed in their
expectations of prosperity here?

But lord Sheffield assures all emigrants, that they will be distressed, nay,
ruined, by taxes; and that our public burdens are heavier than those of any
country in Europe. It appears, however, that we are now in the middle of the
third year of our general government, and notwithstanding all our late
arrearages, and the funding of our debts, neither a tax on lands, nor any
species of direct tax, is contemplated. No excise upon any article of
consumption or use is laid or proposed, except a very small one on spirituous
liquors, compared with those in Europe. Besides this, the impost, or duty on
foreign goods imported is the sole revenue, that is raised upon the people, and
it is, on a medium, less in currency, than the same articles pay in sterling,
in all the principal countries of Europe. Where, then, are these insupportable
burdens with which this writer attempts to alarm European emigrants?

Under the head of emigration, lord Sheffield has laid himself open to a more
severe measure of just remark, than it is agreeable to deal out to him. It
ought not, however, to be unnoticed, that he gravely brings forward a story, on
the authority of a nameless letter from Philadelphia, of two fine Irish youths
being purchased by a negro fruit seller, in that city, and employed in hawking
fruit about the streets, and in the meanest employments. How dangerous must be
the situation of a government, which has acted upon the information and
reasonings brought forward by a mind capable of using such means to carry his
points, admitting the letter were genuine! How unlike a dignified statesman
does lord Sheffield appear, in exclaiming, after this very little story,
Irishmen just emancipated in Europe, go to America to become slaves to a negro!
and what will be thought when it is known, that in the legislature of the very
state (Pennsylvania) in whose capital he alleges the fact took place, there
were, about the time of his publication, no less than twenty-eight Irishmen and
sons of Irishmen, though the whole body consisted of but sixty-nine members? We
are willing that the fortunes of the Irish in this country should determine the
expediency of their continuing to emigrate hither. As some pains have been
taken by him to excite the apprehensions of the Germans also, it may not be
improper to observe that there have generally been from fifteen to eighteen
members of the same legislative body, who were natives of Germany or their sons.

KENTUCKY AND THE WESTERN TERRITORY.
It was boldly asserted by lord Sheffield, in 1784, that the people of the
interior country of America, were "mere nominal subjects," and would speedily
imitate and multiply the examples of independence. The regular organization of
the government of the territory north-west of the Ohio since that time, the
arrangements made shortly after, for the erection of Kentucky into a separate
state, with the consent of Congress and Virginia, the cession of the extensive
country south of the Ohio to Congress in 1790, and its establishment as a kind
of temporary fief of the general government (with civil officers appointed by
the President) to be admitted into the union as an entire new member, when its
population should be sufficiently numerous, the adoption of the federal
constitution by a deliberate act of a special convention of Vermont, and the
formal admissions of that state and Kentucky into the American union, at their
own desire, and by an act of the legislature of the United States, have, as far
as possible, contradicted the prophecy.

Another opinion, in regard to those distant scenes, is, that they can derive
no benefit from the American states. At this moment, the arm of government is
extended, and its funds are appropriated, to protect them against the
hostilities of the Indians: and the whole regular military force, which it has
been thought necessary to support, (...) raised, and is now employed in their
defense. The Atlantic rivers, from the Missisippi to the Mohawk, which nature
has formed as the channels of their trade, can be cleared of natural and
political obstructions only by the measures of the Atlantic states; and no less
than eight several plans to that end are now in preparation or execution in as
many different places, under the auspices of the five states, within whose
territories the most favorable rivers and grounds have been placed by nature.
A great and expensive turnpike road has been commenced by Pennsylvania, leading
directly westward toward Pittsburg on the Ohio and Allegany. A. D. 1793.
Congress alone can effect the relinquishment of the posts, the keys of the
western country. The improvement and opening of the many necessary roads,
leading westward, must be done by the acts of the Atlantic states, and by their
funds. Not a year elapses without several appropriations of money to this
object. By a sincere, just, and close union between the inhabitants of the
western country and those upon the sea coasts, both parties will avoid those
expensive, bloody, and frequent struggles, which every where disgrace and
injure adjacent states.

THAT NO AMERICAN ARTICLES ARE SO NECESSARY TO GREAT-BRTIAIN, AS THE BRITISH
MANUFACTURES, etc. ARE TO THE AMERICANS.
Lord Sheffield has already admitted, that raw materials are more precious to
Britain than gold: but this was not conceded to America. Those things, which
are inestimable, when they are to be drawn from countries, other than the
United States, lose all their value in his estimation, when to be derived from
us. The British manufacturers however well know, that American raw materials
(like those of Russia, the Indies and Ireland) are precious, indeed, to them,
because, in addition to their natural value, and their indispensible need of
them, when once landed in Britain, they cannot be manufactured in America.
Timber, plank, boards, masts, tar, pitch, turpentine, and pig iron for the
support of their navy and shipping -- indigo, potash, furs, skins, flaxseed,
iron, tobacoo, staves, fine oil, etc. for the employment of their manufacturers
-- rice, wheat, and flour for their subsistence -- and a large catalogue of the
most necessary supplies for the West India islands, which really cannot be
obtained elsewhere, without an insupportable addition to their cost, will not
be deemed at this time, by a rational and well informed man, of less importance
to Great Britain, than the manufactures of that country, which they are
assiduously endeavoring to disperse through every quarter of the world, are to
us Witness the special embassy to the Chinese antipodes of Great Britain.
.

But it is not intended to waste arguments on this allegation. Every man of
information, in the affairs of the two countries, is able to decide on it at
first view. Little more appears necessary th^^ to remind the parties concerned,
that such an a^^^^tion is among the positions, which lord Sheffield has
hazarded, in order that the misleading tende^^cy of his book may be duly borne
in mind by the sincere friends of mutually beneficial arrangemen^^* It may not,
however, be amiss to observe, that although the favorable ideas which have
been su^^gested here by way of answer, were justified by facts and reason, when
that work was published, yet the American ground is not a little meliorated by
the subsequent progress and present state of ou^ manufactures -- by the
experienced inability of Canada, New-Brunswick, and Nova Scotia, to furnish the
expected supplies -- by the consequent importations from the United States of
timber and lumber into Great Britain, and of more than the former supplies into
the West Indies -- and by the necessary dependence of Europe on the United
States for the precious articles of grain and flour, which has been recently
ascertained and admitted by unquestionable English authorities.

THE QUALITY OF AMERICAN DISTILLED SPIRITS.
It is not surprising, that remarks on the bad quality of American spirituous
liquors should run through "the observations." But the business of distilling
is so simple, that great improvements might have been expected since 1783.
Geneva, in imitation of that of Holland, is now made in some of our sea ports:
the rectifying of the ordinary rums is practiced by a few with great success.
This branch is very much improved within the last two years, particularly by
the Providence and Rhode Island distilliries -- A. D. 1793.
Peach brandy is made in considerable quantities, and, when matured, is the
most exquisite spirit in the world. Should our rice decline in price, it is not
doubted, that the manufacture of arr^ck will be attempted. The ingredients,
from which this spirit is made, have till lately been unascertained in the
United States: but it is now believed, that rice, and coarse sugar, or
melasses, are really the articles. When the success of the Americans in the
manufacture of malt liquors is remembered, it will not be doubted, that they
will have equal success in that of distilled spirits. A principal impediment
has hitherto been the free and copious influx of rival foreign liquors, and the
general reception of flour, etc. in foreign ports. Every obstruction to our
vessels and sales abroad, imposed by the European nations, impels to breweries,
distilleries, and manufactures in general, amongst other modes of creating a
demand for our productions, and employment for our capitals.

IF THE AMERICAN STATES SHOULD ATTEMPT TO PAY THEIR DEBTS, THE LANDS OF THE
FARMERS MUST FOR SOMETIME LIE UNDER VERY HEAVY IMPOSITIONS.
This is among the many proofs, which our writer has given, that he did not
possess the gift of prophecy. The American debt has been considerably reduced
by the sale of state and federal land^* and a provision is made for funding it.
A (...) fund has also been provided. Yet no (...) upon lands has been
introduced among the (...) and means. The whole American debt would (...)
require a tax upon each individual, of four pounds sterling, to extinguish it
forever. That of Great Britain would require a tax of more than twen^^-four
pounds ten shillings sterling. Our population is rapidly increasing, while
theirs is comparatively stationary. There is a similar disproportion in (...)
favor in the ordinary and extraordinary expenses of government and defense.
The French debt is 250 per cent. heavier than ours, in proportion to numbers.
This brief, but very important article will not fail to receive due attention
from those (...) sincerely desire to make a just estimate of the affairs of the
United States; nor will it escape the observations of those foreigners, who may
be engaged in researches into our affairs, or in plans of emigration,
settlement, and landed purchases in this country. It will also be a source of
the most comfortable reflections to our own citizens. The people of Europe, who
have read lord Sheffield's book, will be surprised to hear that there are no
perpetual revenues, no stamp duties, no window or hearth taxes, no tithes, no
excises upon leather, beer, hops, malt, soap, candles, coal or other fuel, or
indeed on any other article in the United States, excepting only about five
pence sterling on distilled spirits.

THAT THE AMERICANS COULD NOT HAVE TRADED WITH THE FRENCH BEFORE THE REVOLUTION
TO HALF THE EXTENT THEY DID, HAD IT NOT BEEN FOR THE SPECIE THEY TOOK FROM THE
BRITISH ISLANDS.
This remark is applied by the writer to our French West India trade. To judge
of the truth of it, a comparison of the present with the former state of that
branch of our commerce will be sufficient. It will not be doubted, that during
their troubles, and (to take a recent term) for a year preceding the first day
of May last, our imports and exports from and to the French West Indies, were
greater than in any year before the war. Yet our vessels could not procure
specie in the British islands, being prohibited from entering them. Pickled and
dried fish, beef, rice, Indian corn, oats, beans, peace, onions, Indian meal,
boards, plank, scantling, shingles, handspikes, oars, square timber, staves,
heading, hoops, horses, live stock, poultry, boats, and vessels, etc. to an
amount greater than the shipments to all the West India islands, other than
British, before the war, have been exported to the French islands within the
term of one year. The course of things, in several respects, will probably
lessen our importation of melasses and the taffia, (or rum) which we have been
accustomed to draw from thence. Besides beer and cider, distilled spirits are
now made from fruit and grain, in such quantities as to constitute more than
one-third of our consumption and export of strong liquors, other than wines.
Plentiful harvests of fruit necessarily increase the manufacture from that
ingredient* because it is too perishable to export. Abundant harvests of grain,
or low markets abroad, have a similar effect on distillation from that
material. The measures of the national assembly of France, in regard to
tobacco, will add to the many objections which before existed against the usual
cultivation of it. Barley, rye, and oats, from which the grain-liquors are
principally made, as also wheat and Indian corn, will be produced in much
larger quantities, should we decline the cultivation of tobacco in any
considerable degree. If we continue, after a short time, to import choice rums,
brandies, and arrack, to the amount of five per cent. on our whole consumption,
and manufacture the remainder, which will require four millions of bushels of
barley, rye and oats, and more so far as we make beer, we shall want less funds
abroad for the purchase of molasses, and we shall confirm the ability we have
shown, to carry on a trade with the French islands, greater than formerly,
without specie taken from the British West Indies.

THAT THE UNITED STATES LOST MUCH BY THE SEPARATION FROM GREAT BRITAIN.
This is an opinion, which it was very natural for an English writer in 1783 to
adopt. It was difficult at that time to compare, with the requisite certainty
and precision, the benefits in point of pecuniary advantage, which the United
States might have reasonably expected in a colonial, and in an independent
situation. It would be more easily and better done at the present, but cannot
be attempted at large in this place. Some ideas on the subject, however, may
serve to evince the error of the assertion.

It is true, that by the separation of the two countries, the United States
incurred a debt of about L.15,000,000 sterling, which, however, was entirely
spent in the country, as was a great part of the French and British
expenditures. Great Britain increased her public debt, in the same time,
L.115,000,000. The whole burden on both sides appears then to be about
L.130,000,000 sterling. There is the strongest probability, from the rapidity
of the increase of the British debt, which, in less than a century, grew up
from nothing to L.270,000,000, and which is in the present year swelling to a
larger size, that, without the American war, the British nation would have been
burdened on this day, with at least two hundred millions. Considering the rate
in which the objects of taxation or means of revenue have increased in this
country, there is reason to believe, that by this time we should have been
thought able to endure a proportion of the ways and means requisite to support
that debt, equal to our numbers; this would have been above one-fourth of the
whole, or fifty millions sterling, and is three and one-third times our present
debt. It may be said, we paid no such contribution; and the assertion, by
reference to the former public accounts, would app^^^ on paper to be true: but
we were injuriously restrained, in regard to the sources of our supplies, and
the vents of our produce and manufactures* ^e were prohibited from the
labour-saving modes (...) manufacturing; and it is too plain that the
prohibitions would have been continued. The imp^^^ went into the British
treasury; our lands were subject to quit-rents, which, belonging to the cro^^,
have either fallen to the present government, o^ have been entirely abolished.
The effects of the commercial monopoly were prodigious. It may be strikingly
exemplified in the single article of (...)* We have already seen that we
imported above three millions of pounds in the year following August 1789. The
medium price of fine and coarse (...) was above one third of a dollar more
favorable to us in 1790, than in 1774; by which a difference of a million of
dollars, and the whole impost on the article, are saved to the country.

The facility of naturalization under our present laws, is very much in favor
of the introduction of people, and of arts, manufactures, and capital from
foreign countries. Lands may be held in almost every state, and his occupation
or trade may be pursued, immediately on the arrival of an emigrant. A term much
shorter than that prescribed by the British statute before the revolution,
entitles him to all the benefits of citizenship. It is impossible to estimate
the value of this circumstance to a country so well calculated to induce
emigration, to support an increased population, and to employ capital and
artificers, as the United States.

Lord Sheffield observes, that the British establishment in this country gave
it an advantage of L.^70,000 sterling per annum. He should not have omitted to
mention, that great part of this sum was expended on the Floridas, Canada, and
Nova Scotia: and it is to be observed, that many of the articles were imported,
and not of our production or manufacture. The mere consumption of British and
Irish goods by the British and Irish officers, soldiers, and sailors, stationed
or employed here, could not benefit the people of America. It is past a doubt,
that the sales of the lands alone, which have fallen to the states and to the
general government, have yielded annually a larger sum by the purchases of
citizens and foreigners. The customs and quit-rents must also have been a full
reimbursment. But it is unnecessary to dwell longer on this article; for what
ever may have been the former opinions of many in the two countries concerning
it, the subject is at this time so illumined, and prejudice and misconception
are so completely done away, that no persons of judgment and information now
believe, the United States have lost by the separation from Great Britain. It
is, however, true that the American states were in a train of prosperity before
the revolution, which promised greater wealth and happiness than appeared to
await the people of any other country. Lord Sheffield might reasonably estimate
their prospects very highly. To insure the expected prosperity, however, it was
deemed theoretically right, that the provincial "parliaments" (the executive
head of the empire by himself or a representative and the legislative houses of
each) should enact all laws. Though some concessions to what was considered as
"the necessity of the case," were frankly made, limiting the practical
extension of this sound theory, yet it is plain, that unless it could have been
substantially adhered to, in the administration of the American governments, no
reliance could have been placed on the continuance of that degree of
prosperity, which existed, nor on the attainment of that height, which
circumstances otherwise promised. The wonderful advancement of Great Britain in
almost every particular, except her finances, during the present century, and
the comparatively small progress of Ireland in the same term, afford a striking
example of what might have happened to this country, and furnish the best
reasons to believe, that the United States (as to mere emolument) have gained
prodigiously by commuting for the great influence and undefined power of two
legislative bodies, actually rival and then essentially foreign, the advantages
of governing themselves in all respects, according to the prudent dictates of
their own interests. As to the more important article, of a genuine free
constitution, unexaggerated by political enthusiasm, and unvitiated by any
alloying ingredients, America may with modesty affirm, that she is nearer to
that primary object of human desire, than she would have been in the possession
of the most favorable ground, which her best friends in Britain ever proposed
for her before the separation

SECTION VI.
IT was intimated, in a preceding part of these papers, that the United States
have not sustained any loss in the important article of ship building, which it
is proposed now to show, in treating of

SHIPS BUILT FOR ORDINARY COMMERCE AND FOR SALE.
This branch was of considerable value to the United States before the
revolution. Its importance appears greater now, whether it be viewed with
regard to the increased quantity (for there appears good reason to think it
considerably increased) or with respect to the enhanced value of merchant ships
to an independent and maritime country. The quantity built in these states, on
the average of 1769, 1770, and 1771, which are the latest years in lord
Sheffield's tables, was 21,726 tons. An account equally minute, for any recent
term, has not been obtained; but it is known, that in fifty-three custom-house
districts (and there are fifteen more,) 29,606 tons of shipping were built
between the fourth day of March 1790, and the fourth day of March 1791. This is
believed to be, in many instances, the tonnage paid for to the carpenters; and,
in those cases, is less than the vessels really measure; as they are a body of
workmen, who generally deal liberally. The remaining fifteen districts will not
be found to have built in proportion to the fifty three, whose actual present
building is stated; but the quantity already known, is considerably beyond the
medium of lord Sheffield's tables, for 1769 to 1771, above mentioned. In the
case of New York, the whole is known, and is two hundred and thirty-eight tons
more than the former tables. In New Jersey, the building in some districts is
unknown, and the difference is two hundred and eighty-eight tons in favor of
the late return. In Connecticut, the whole of the building is stated, and it is
five hundred and thirty-four tons in favor of the latter term. In Pennsylvania
and Delaware, the whole is also known: and the late return exceeds the former
by 3,900 tons. In North Carolina, a return of three districts (out of five)
only is obtained; and it exceeds the former average by 925 tons. In the state
of Rhode Island, the whole is ascertained, and it exceeds the former average by
about 100 tons. The port of Baltimore alone, in Maryland, exceeds all the
ship-building of that state, in the greatest of the three years, by near 100
per cent. The vessels built in Connecticut, in the returned year, are 40 per
cent. more than the medium of lord Sheffield's tables; and Massachusetts
exceeds the former medium by 3,713 tons The general increase since is very
considerable. A. D. 1793.
.

It is true, however, that this business in one of the principal building
states, has fallen off; but there many of the vessels intended for sale, were
usually built; and it is admitted by lord Sheffield; that those were our worst
vessels. It is very material to the United States, and entitles us to a larger
credit in an accurate estimation of things, that much more of our naval
military stores, cordage, twine, nails and spikes, sail cloth, plumbers' work,
rosin, spirits of turpentine, linseed oil, paints, brass and copper work, and
other less important articles expended in building and arming ships, are of the
produce and manufacture of the country, than was the case in 1771. It is also
an important truth, that much greater numbers of foreign vessels are repaired,
altered, supplied with cordage and sail cloth, painted and otherwise wrought
upon by our various workmen, the money for which, may be fairly carried to the
account of this branch.

At the time when lord Sheffield wrote, it was not known how much the oak of
Great Britain had decreased. We have already noticed this point; and it may be
further remarked, that it cannot but decrease yet more, as the supplies of oak
from the Baltic, are often intercepted by the competition of Prussia, Sweden,
Denmark, Russia, Portugal, Holland, Spain and France, all but the first of
which vigorously maintain their naval power; and Prussia has become very
considerable in private ships. Lord Sheffield thinks that the cheapness of
American shipping arose from their being ill-found and deficient in iron. There
is little doubt that the extreme cheapness of those built for sale, was
occasioned partly by the cause he mentions: but the best double-deck or
galley-built ships, with live-oak lower timbers, and red-cedar top timbers,
wi^^ white-oak plank on their bottoms, and either that timber or yellow pine
for their top-sides, can be built and fitted for taking in a cargo, at
thirty-four dollars, or L.7 13s. sterling per ton; and as good a vessel cannot
be procured in Great Britain, France or Holland, under fifty-five to sixty
dollars. The papers of the British society for naval architecture show, that
ships fit for the East India service are advanced in their cos^, since 1771,
forty shillings sterling, nearly equal to nine dollar^, per ton. -- that timber
is considerably diminished in quantity, and enhanced in value, in the last
twenty years -- that the body of working shipwrights, in 1789, were much
inferior to those of twenty years back -- and that the late acts of parliament
respecting registers of ships and other regulations intended to increase
British ship-building, had not operated in their favor. Profitable employment
for very expensive and numerous ships cannot be created and extended by a mere
legislative fiat. Beyond a certain degree it cannot be obtained unless the rest
of the world neglect those means which Great Britain pursues to increase and
maintain her navigation, foreign trade, and manufactures.


As the building of coasting and fishing vessels, boats in new forms for our
improving inland navigation, vessels on various constructions for public
service, and for a very diversified foreign trade, will not only keep the art
of ship-building at its present height, but will advance it in all respects, it
appears to be very doubtful, whether we should anxiously desire to supply
foreigners with such cheap means of rivalling us in the carrying trade and
fisheries. Our ship and boat yards are not confined to a spot, but indeed are
more diffused than formerly. There is no state whose citizens do not pursue the
business, and it is commenced upon the western waters. Before the revolution,
above half our vessels were paid for by a barter of credit goods for the labor
and skill of the artificer; instead of which he now generally receives weekly
payments in solid coin.

THAT THE IMPO^TS AND EXPORTS OF THE UNITED STATES WILL CONTINUE FOR A LONG
TIME THE SAME.
This will be found on examination very erroneous. Pot and pearl ashes are
shipped in an increased ratio of nineteen to four. The American merchants were
once great exporters of iron, hemp, raw hides, and other articles, which they
now import in large quantities. The importations of coarse linens, paper, hats,
shoes, steel, nails, carriages, malt liquors, and many other articles are
considerably reduced. Should impediments be thrown in the way of our fisheries,
shipping and foreign commerce, there can be no doubt that policy, interest and
feeling will prompt us to pursue with decision and ardour the object of
manufactures, which will give employment to our own capital, and that, which we
may derive from foreigners. It must be manifest, for example, that if we are to
receive rum in foreign bottoms, and to be refused the transportation of flour
and grain, which are wanted from us in return, we shall not long continue to
use foreign spirits. Our brewers already supply us with more beer than we
consume. No more than 70,000 gallons and 17,500 dozen bottles have been
imported in an entire year, ending in August 179^* three times which quantity
is made with ease, by a single brewery, on a very modeate scale. This branch
has increased and flourished in the last two years, and an exportation greater
than the importation above stated, has certainly taken place. The home-made
distilled spirits are already more than twice as great in quantity, as the
spirits imported. If our tobacco ships are excluded from France, they will not
bring us brandies; and the grain, that will be raised on our tobacco lands,
will yield spirituous and malt liquors to enable us to relinquish foreign
brandy. Should a considerable part of our capital be forced out of navigation
and foreign trade, the government, without imposing generally heavy protecting
duties, burdensome to the nation, may give employment for the money, by holding
out effectual encouragement to one branch of manufactures at a time. If it be
selected with judgment -- if the use of manual labor be confined within as
narrow limits as possible -- if labour-saving machines be used -- if the raw
articles it works on, be made free of impost duty -- if the growth of them be
encouraged at home -- if a convenient progressive duty be imposed, there can be
little doubt of success. The example of a well-arranged and fortunate attempt
once set, others will naturally follow; and nations, some of whose politicians
now grudgingly perceive them to take from us the food they are unable to raise,
and who treat as a savor the reception of our precious raw materials, may
discover, when it will be too late, the evils induced by an over-driven spirit
of monopoly After a very careful estimate of a number of the principal branches
of American manufacture, the writer of this paper does not hesitate to affirm,
that the shoes and boots, sadlery and other articles of leather, gunpowder,
snuff, paper and paper hangings, playing cards, pasteboards, books, linen,
cotton, and woolen cloths, hosiery, thread, hats, wool and cotton cards, set
work and watches, manufactures of gold, silver, iron, steel, brass, lead,
pewter, and copper, cordage, twine, sail-cloth, carriages of all kinds, malt
liquors, new ships and boats, leathern gloves and breeches, parchment, glue,
cabinet wares, linseed oil, soap, candles, potash, distilled spirits, drugs and
chemical preparations, and earthen ware, made in the year last past, exceed in
value the manufactured goods, which Great Britain shipped in the same term, to
all foreign nations, but the United States. It will be proper to observe in
this place, that chocolate, cheese, wafers, starch, hair powder, ivory and horn
wares, whips, millenary, stays, windsor chairs, corn fans, wheel-barrows,
spirits of turpentine, paints, brushes, glass wares, bricks, stone and marble
wares, repairs of vessels, mustard, loaf sugar, salt, the great article of
making up apparel, coopers' wares, and other things of the nature of
manufactures, were not included in the estimate above mentioned.
.

THE CAPACITY OF THE UNITED STATES TO SUPPLY EUROPE WITH GRAIN AND FLOUR.
A recent publication of lord Sheffield's, upon the subject of the British corn
trade, has lately appeared in this country. As in the observations on our
commerce, so in this pamphlet, he endeavors to show fallacy in all such ideas
as favor the importance of the United States to Great Britain. As this
examination has been necessarily made with little adherence to form or order,
and as the production and commerce of grain, constitute* without any exception,
the most valuable and most commanding of our advantages, it will not be
improper, to take some notice of this new attempt of (...) lordship's, to
disseminate erroneous information and opinions on American affairs.

According to the latest of his tables, the American provinces, in 1770,
exported but 46,000 to^^ of bread, flour, and meal, 578,349 bushels of Indian
corn, 24,859 bushels of oats, and 851,240 bushels of wheat: and he desires it
to be believed, that the United States will not be able, in this particular, to
exceed their exportations before the revolution. The return of exports See the
return of exports ending 30th September, 1792. Also that ending 30th September,
1793.
, so often mentioned, contains the following articles. -- 724,623 barrels of
flour, weighing 77,000 tons. 75,667 do. of bread, weighing 77,000 tons. 99,975
do. of meal, weighing 77,000 tons. 1,124,458 bushels of wheat, 21,765 do. of
rye, -- (of which article none was exported in 1770.) 2,102,137 do. of Indian
corn. 98,842 do. of oats, 7,562 do. of buckwheat, (of which also none was
exported in 1770.) 38,752 do. of peace and beans, (of which also none was
exported in 1770.)


It appears, then, that on comparing the acknowledged exports of bread and
flour, in 1770, with those of the present time, a difference of 50 per cent. is
shown in favor of our agriculture, and that we ship near four times the
quantity of Indian corn, and one-third more of wheat, besides the new articles
of beans, peace, buck-wheat and rye. The tobacco, exported in the above term,
was at the rate of 36 per cent. per annum more than before the revolution,
besides the difference in the quantity now manufactured. Many circumstances are
combining to turn the attention of the planters of thi^ article in the grain
states, toward wheat, barley, oats, and Indian corn. This is not a new idea in
American farming; for although wheat was much lower before the revolution than
it now is, the cultivation of tobacco in Virginia and Maryland, was actually
declining. The more southern states had not then attempted the production of
this article to any considerable extent. The lands, which produced the above
extra quantity of tobacco, would have yielded 800,000 bushels of wheat; the
labor would have produced more; and supposing that half the soil and industry,
which were applied to tobacco in 1789, should be appropriated to grain, an
addition of 1,400,000 bushels might be made to our productions of that article.
To supply the tobacco, some of the rich lands of the more southern states might
be employed in its cultivation. But lord Sheffield tells the people of Britain
with great gravity, that only the western parts of Connecticut, and the states
of New York, New Jersey, Delaware, Pennsylvania, Maryland and Virginia, are
capable of yielding wheat. He should have added, that those states contain
twice as much land as the kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland, those islands
being computed at less than 100,000 square miles by their own geographers. The
states of New Jersey, Delaware, and Maryland, together with three-fifths of
Pennsylvania, three-fifths of New York, and about one half of Virginia, all
which lie sufficiently near to naturally navigable water, to raise grain for
exportation, contain above 130,000 square miles. Kentucky, North Carolina, and
the western parts of South Carolina and Georgia, and Vermont, will also add
considerably to our exports of grain, when mills, canals, etc. shall encourage
the growth and facilitate the transportation. But the state of population is
the point to which candor and judgment ought to have led a political economist
to advert. He should have reflected, that the United States, whose territory is
about 1,000,000 of square miles, are not yet cultivated and inhabited, by more
than 4,000,000 people The actual number of the inhabitants of the United States
appears to be from 3,900,000 to 4,000,000. See appendix, paper A. A. D. 1791.
; that Great Britain and Ireland, with about a tenth of the land (or 100,000
square miles) have twice the agricultural population; and that the productive
powers of this country, (which appears to have doubled its people in 25 years,
though injured by eight years of a destructive war,) are a mean of human
sustenance, to which the more prudent nations of Europe will, and to which all,
in the time of need, must have recourse. If their governments prevent it, many
of their manufacturers and mechanics at least must flee from them. The supreme
law of necessity will have its due operation, and people, whose means are
rendered, by injudicious regulations, unequal to their wants will certainly
resort to those scenes where cheaper food and better wages insure them relief.

It is manifest that the great increase of our population has been attended
with a very considerable addition to our exports of eatables. The statement
made in the beginning of the observations, on this article, is a proof of it.
Besides this, our shipments of beef and pork, They were five times as great in
1792
are above two and a half times greater than in 1770, of butter four times, of
cheese two and a half times, of potatoes four times, and of rice nearly as
great. Add to this, that we have almost put an end to the importation of malt
liquors, (a manufacture from grain,) and that we ship as much of them as we
import -- that we have diminished our importation of distilled spirits, by
1,000,000 of gallons, since we lost the importation of British rum in our own
vessels (though our population is more numerous by 1,500,000 of persons) which
has occasioned the distillation of grain liquors to the amount probably of
4,000,000 of gallons, requiring near 2,000,000 bushels of grain, as the raw
materials.

Our continuing to export so large quantities of grain and flour,
notwithstanding this great consumption of rye, barley, oats, and even wheat in
distilling and brewing, is a strong proof of our raising much more than in
former times. But it is not to be forgotten, that considerable quantities are
consumed by our manufacturers, who are rapidly increasing. It is extremely
difficult to ascertain the proportion in which these valuable citizens
contribute to the population of our towns. Their numbers in the city of
Philadelphia may assist to furnish some ground for a reasonable estimate. The
silver-smiths, brewers, distillers, ship-carpenters, cabinet-makers,
cordwainers, tallow-chandlers, soap-boilers, white and blacksmiths,
steel-makers, turners, braziers, coachmakers, coppersmiths, hatters, tailors,
weavers, dyers, leather breeches makers, glovers, and such other persons as may
be properly classed under the head of manufacturers (exclusively of
house-carpenters, masons, painters, victuallers, bakers, barbers, and others,
who cannot be correctly denominated so) appear to be about 2,200 persons. The
city and suburbs being found to contain near 43,000 men, women, and children,
and it being generally supposed, that the adult males are about one-fifth of
the whole number, it would appear, that of the 8,600 adult males, contained in
Philadelphia, above one-fourth are manufacturers, and consequently, that of the
eatables, and home-made drinkables, consumed in that town, above one-fourth are
required for their use and that of their wives, children, journeymen,
apprentices, and servants: and an addition for the grain consumed by their
horses and cows may be fairly made. This state of things, it is believed, is
exceeded by many of the towns in the eastern states, and in some interior
situations, Several inland towns in Pennsylvania, and Winchester, in Virginia,
have been ascertained to exceed the city of Philadelphia, in the proportion of
manufacturers.
where it is manifest that fewer are employed in the learned professions, and
foreign commerce, and not so many live upon their incomes.

It will not be asserted, that the United States are able to feed all the
nations of Europe at the same time, nor that they afford any promise of so
extensive a capacity in future. Neither are such ideas conveyed by the
representation of the committee of the British privy council, on which lord
Sheffield so feelingly animadverts. They represent, as the result of a careful
and deliberate enquiry, their thorough conviction, that the countries of
Europe, taken collectively, do not produce, in ordinary years, an aggregate
quantity of grain, larger than what appears requisite for the consumption of
their inhabitants: and they proceed to observe, that in the event of a failure
of crops, a supply can only be had from America. The reasonable meaning of
their representation is, that as Europe is an extensive and populous region,
making great, constant, and inevitable demands for food, producing in ordinary
seasons, that is, usually, a mere competent supply, but no excess, and as it is
liable to partial and even general failures of crops, it must, in the event of
one of those partial or general misfortunes, look to some other quarter of the
world for relief. With the exception of Barbary, whose capacity to supply
appears to be much more limited than ours, no other country than America could
present itself to the committee. Great allowances should have been made for
those gentlemen, by lord Sheffield, admitting, for a moment, that they were
wrong, as it appears probable they may have been misled by several parts of his
treatise on our commerce, which really tend to confirm their doctrine. In that
publication, under the head of wheat and flour, he observes, that Canada,
Nova Scotia, and the American states are likely to have most of the corn trade
which England had. Our supplies to Nova Scotia have been stated; and as they
are admitted from us only when necessity requires them, the existing license of
the governor of that province to introduce American flour, grain, and live
stock through the whole of the summer (and indeed from May to November) when
the navigation of Canada is open, will answer our enquiries about the capacity
of those provinces to take away the corn trade from England. Under the same
head, and on the following page, he further says, the American states were more
than competitors with us for the wheat trade; they had for some years engrossed
nearly the whole of what we had; and it is computed, upon an average of five
years, they had received from Spain and Portugal upwards of L.320,000 sterling,
per annum, for that grain. It will surely be deemed very reasonable in the
committee to suppose that the United Sates, which were said to have supplied
the two kingdoms of Spain and Portugal, for five successive years, with wheat
alone to the amount of L.320,000 sterling, could have furnished to Great
Britain the less sum of L.291,000 sterling, in all kinds of grain and flour,
which they have paid to foreign nations for twenty years past. Under the head
of "ships built for sale," lord Sheffield again confirms the ideas of the
committee, by saying, in very handsome and forcible language, America had
robbed us, at least for a time, of a corn trade, that some time ago brought in
to us as much as almost any article of export, As his lordship considers an
honest competition of fellow citizens in the light of robbery, the
reasonableness of his other conceptions, will, no doubt, be duly examined.

Lord Sheffield leads to a material error, affecting the just estimation of our
corn trade, when he states tobacco to be the principal article of American
commerce. It appears, by the return of the treasury, that flour is the most
valuable and (exclusively of the connected articles of bread, wheat and other
grain) it exceeded tobacco by a quarter of a million of dollars. Wheat
(including the commodities made of it) is one-third more valuable than tobacco;
and as this last production appears to have been advanced in quantity, 36 per
cent. on a comparison with the exportation of the year 1770, when lord
Sheffield states it to have been our first, the increased importance of wheat
is manifested. See exports of 1792 and 1793.


If we turn our eyes from Great Britain to other countries, the American grain
trade does not appear to be less interesting to Europe and her colonies. Spain,
Portugal, the wine islands, the Bahamas, Bermuda, the sugar colonies, the
northern British colonies, and the foreign fisheries, regularly demand from us
some of the various articles, which it comprehends. The cultivation of the
vine, the advancement of their colonies, the extension of commerce, and the
increase of the manufactures of France, which two last are to be expected in
consequence of the revolution in that kingdom, render it highly probable that
they will not be able to do without supplies from other countries. It is the
opinion of one of their best writers, Necker.
that they do not ordinarily export more than one-fifteenth of their crop.
Should any accident -- (the introduction of British and Dutch manufacturers,
who are accustomed to beer, for example) -- lead them into breweries, than
which nothing is more possible, that small proportion of surplus would be
quickly engrossed. There is an highly interesting idea, on this point, which
has been recently started, and which may attract the attention of their
practical politicians: the opinion referred to is, that every country which
manufactures largely, is in a situation of considerably less danger of want, if
its people ordinarily use drinks made from grain; because the dreadful
consequences of famine may be avoided with certainty and ease, by converting to
the use of food, the grain which will be regularly procured from agriculture or
importation, to supply the demands of the brewers and distillers. The Dutch
have been always unable to raise more than a small proportion of their
bread-stuff and the modern estimates of their population countenance the
presumption of a large increase. They are, moreover, great brewers and
distillers from grain: and their sugar colonies, on the southern main, have
wonderfully advanced. These symptoms of new demand, on the part of the European
nations, together with the certain requisitions of grain arising from the
universal increase of manufactures and attention to foreign trade, are
accompanied by some important circumstances, which prevent a proportionate
production of that indispensible necessary. The growth of private wealth in
many parts of Europe, particularly in Britain, the consequent increase of
horses for equipages and other purposes of pleasure, the laying out of park
grounds, and the diversion of lands from the less profitable production of
grain to that of grass, the declension of agriculture in Poland, by reason of
the extreme badness of their internal arrangements, the probable increase of
Polish manufactures, should they become free, the continual efforts of the
European manufacturers to draw away the laborers of the farmers, the greater
prevalence of emigration to their colonies and other countries among the
cultivators, than among the manufacturers, owing to the wretched situation of
the agricultural poor in countries, where the high value of land renders it in
effect a monopoly, and the present universal attention to political
reformation, which for a time interrupts agriculture, are among the causes here
contemplated.

But it is not unfair to ask, from what source are the maritime countries of
Europe to be supplied, in the event of a failure of the crops of one or more of
them, in so great a degree as from the United States? The value of grain,
flour, meal, and bread, from the United States greatly exceeds that of the same
articles from the kingdom of Naples and its connected island of Sicily, which
have been considered as the granary of the Mediterranean. Poland, once termed
the granary of Europe, is less extensive including (Lithuania) than the country
of the United States, which furnishes grain for Europe. Its exports are not
ascertained: but there appear strong presumptions, that it does not ship
through Dantzick and Elbing, half as great a value of grain, and the articles
made of grain, as the United States. Britain, Spain, Portugal, Holland, and
lately Flanders, are obliged to import. Russia is said to have shipped in 1787,
wheat and rye to the amount of near 1,000,000 of bushels, but imports grain
liquors; and manufactures are growing, and wars are frequent in that kingdom.
Sweden imports very large quantities of rye, and ships no grain. That article
is much the first among the imports of Denmark and Norway. Prussia produces
much corn, and exports some: but manufactures are greatly advanced in that
kingdom; and the home consumption of grain will probably equal the production,
in a few years. In short, a careful and impartial survey of Europe. will
confirm the opinion of the committee of the privy council, that the productions
of grain in that quarter of the world, are not generally speaking, more than
equal to the consumption of its inhabitants. A moment's recollection will
remind us that even those countries which do not commonly import grain, are,
upon the occurrence of small disappointments, obliged to seek it from America,
and other foreign states; that some parts of Europe constantly import from us
in large quantities; that all of them steadily, or occasionally, directly, or
indirectly, supply their colonies from hence; that since the manufactures of
Great Britain have been so far extended, as to employ six elevenths of her
people, and since the extension of her manufacture of grain liquors in
particular, her dependence for a portion of her bread upon foreign nations, is
proved to be unavoidable, by the most settled maxims of her own political
economists; that her real deficiency is the irremovable want of the requisite
proportion of agriculturalists; and finally, that even in the present state of
our population, the United States actually contribute much more to the supply
of the nations of Europe and their colonies, with grain, bread, and flour, than
any two, perhaps any three countries in the world; and that their capacity to
enlarge that supply, is steadily and rapidly increasing.

This subject has been dwelt upon the longer from its high importance to the
United States, and to the general happiness of mankind; and from the new proofs
which lord Sheffield has given of a particular indisposition, that Britain
should appear to rely on the United States, even in the smallest degree, though
we give a greater support to her manufacturers and shipping than any two other
foreign nations. It is feared, that nothing beneficial can be expected between
the two countries, if the errors and prejudices of so professed a champion
against us, have not a very cautious hearing. It will not be deemed
unreasonable or improper, to consider in that light a writer, who, in his first
book, labors to show, that the production and commerce of grain are bad
objects of attention to the American states, because (as he alleges) Europe
seldom wants it; and who, in his second book, takes equal pains to prove, that
America cannot raise grain for the wants even of Great Britain itself, when he
finds it established on the highest British authority, that their own kingdom
and those of other nations in Europe, can only look to America for the
deficiency of supply, which the increase of manufactures, of people, of grass
and pasturage, of grain liquors, and the uncertainty of seasons, in one or
another of them, is constantly producing. He will prove a bad politician, and a
very bad British patriot, who shall animate against the manufactures of
Great Britain, the body of the American planters and farmers, by promoting a
severe system, which shall debar them of a chance of making returns for an
immense demand of British fabrics, in the unmanufactured productions of their
soil and labor. But independent of the danger to Britain, from listening at
this time, to so professed an anti-American, a wise nation will not give too
much attention to a writer, whose ardent spirit of monopoly leads him to
attempt to circumvent the same foreign nation, in her pursuits of commerce --
of manufactures -- and even of her great, best business, the tillage of a
various and productive soil. If the policy of England ought to be a dereliction
of some parts of her system of internal or external commerce in favor of
agriculture, let her politicians firmly maintain the doctrine. America will
approve their patriotism. But in doing this, it surely is not necessary to
depreciate the largest purchasers of those manufactures, on which the existence
of more than half their people depends. It may be well to reflect too that the
industry and soil, which foreign corn laws may tend to deprive of their
accustomed object, can be applied to the production of hemp, flax, wool,
cotton, leather, and iron, or their preparation in the form of fabrics to
substitute for theirs. It is happy for the United States, that whenever they
are injured in the loss of a vent for any portion of a particular production,
they can create a market for it by checking the introduction of some connected
foreign commodity, and making a succedaneum for it at home. See paper S.

Though it would not be difficult, in pursuing, the examination of lord
Sheffield's observations, to adduce many more proofs, that his facts are often
erroneous, and his observations frequently unjust; and that his predictions
have not been verified, but often contradicted by experience, the subject will
not be further pursued. It is consided, that enough has been said, to induce an
attentive revision of his book. This, it is believed, will be sufficient to
lead the British ^ation to look in future to other sources of information. It
may be observed, in extenuation of his lordship's errors, that the
circumstances of the United States are considerably altered since he wrote: but
this will not just^y the confidence of his predictions, nor apologize for the
wild errors of them; and it may not improperly be again remarked to those, who
are convinced of this great and happy change in our situation, since the year
1784, that a conduct on the part of foreigners, which might have been deemed
prudent when our political horizon was darkly clouded, would be unwise now, and
might be dangerous to some of their interests hereafter. Of this lord
Sheffield's late book proves him to be not duly sensible.

The United States have many features of natural strength, and many advantages
from their local position. The friends of other forms of government will admit,
that they have exhibited a highly improved example of a republic, and that they
have practiced upon the plan, since it was formed, though not a very long time,
with extraordinary success. They have no occasion to make war for territory;
and they are considerably removed from the danger of foreign enterprises aginst
them. Their productions are remarkably diversified, and consequently adapted to
various purposes and uses, and are, with a few exceptions, either necessaries
of life, or articles of such general demand and consumption, as to be nearly as
much sought. Having been recently a part of an intelligent and enterprising
commercial nation, and having a very extensive seacoast, the citizens of
America have been insensibly led to survey all the regions of foreign commerce,
and in passing through most of them, have manifested, since the reformation of
their political system, every talent requisite for the honorable and lucrative
pursuit of trade. The redundant state of private wealth in several foreign
nations, promises every addition to our active capital, that occasion can
require, if we preserve the honest spirit with which the reforms of the general
and state governments have been lately made, and the wisdom with which they
have been administered. The fullness of the European population, and the degree
in which every walk, commercial, manufacturing, and agricultural, is crowded
there, afford reason to expect the steady increase of our people. Almost every
comfortable country in Europe, as to the state of its population, is arrived at
an absolute plethora.
Civil and religious liberty, now settled on rational and tried principles,
certify an exemption from all real oppression.

Being disposed to promote the freedom of commerce, the United States would
probably have made no regulations, but with a view to revenue, had they not met
in almost every country, duties and restrictions in their home trade, and
charges, prohibitions and exclusions, in their colonial trade. But although
some nations will not permit us to ship them certain of our articles, others
withhold from us certain of theirs, and others impede, absolutely or in effect,
the introduction of our own goods in our own bottoms, yet we have hitherto
contented ourselves with a small addition to the rates of our tariff, and to
the tonnage on ships, both together not exceeding L.87,000, sterling, on all
foreign nations taken together. It will not be alleged, that this sum will bear
a serious comparison with the injuries our agriculture, manufactures and
commerce sustain from several of the principal European powers.

To obtain relief by arrangements as beneficial to foreign states as to
ourselves, will probably be the liberal aim of our government. It is
confidently expected, that mutual benefits will create and cement a strong and
lasting friendship in the case of those nations with which such arrangements
shall be formed; and with regard to others, the wisdom of the legislature, no
doubt, will be sedulously exercised either temperately to meet them with the
requisite policy and firmness, or to transfer from their hands, to those of
more equitable nations, the unrequited benefits they receive from us -- or to
derive from our own skill, capital, credit, and industry, the accomodations and
supplies which they have heretofore furnished upon terms of great advantage to
themselves, but which have been inadequately reciprocated to the United States.

SECTION VII. CONTAINING A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL RESTRICTIONS, IMPOSITIONS AND
PROHIBITIONS SUSTAINED BY THE UNITED STATES, IN THEIR TRADE WITH THE BRITISH
DOMINIONS, AND OF THOSE SUSTAINED BY GREAT BRITAIN IN HER TRADE WITH THE
DOMINIONS OF THE UNITED STATES: ALSO SOME REMARKS ON CERTAIN PREVALENT TOPICS,
RELATIVE TO THE GENERAL BUSINESS BETWEEN THE TWO COUNTRIES.
THE intention of the foregoing examination being solely the correction of
error in the statement of facts, and in the opinions or conclusions deduced
from them, it has appeared on consideration, not to be improper to pursue the
subject with the same views, a little further. An idea, that the balance of
favor or indulgence is received by the United States, frequently appears in
the publications, and is said to prevail in the minds of persons of weight and
influence in Great Britain. It may not therefore be useless to bring up to view
the principal facts, relative to the question of reciprocity of commercial
regulation. An attempt will be made to throw this statement into the form of a
table, as it will be the more clear and impressive.

GREAT BRITAIN THE UNITED STATES Prohibits American vessels from entering into
the ports of several parts of her dominions, viz. the West Indies, Canada,
Nova Scotia, New-Brunswick, Newfoundland, Cape Breton, Hudson's Bay, Honduras
Bay, and her East India spice market. Admit British vessels into all their
ports, subject to a tonnage duty of 44 cents, or 24 sterling pence, more than
American vessels, and an addition of one tenth to the amount of the impost
accruing on their cargoes. She imposes double light money on American vessels
in most of her ports. They do not impose extra light money on British vessels
in any of their ports. She prohibits the navigating, ad libitum, of American
vessels, by native or other seamen. They admit the navigating of British
vessels by native or other seamen, ad libitum. She prohibits the employment of
American-built ships by her own citizens, in many branches of trade, upon any
terms. They admit the employment of British-built ships by their own citizens,
in every branch of trade upon the terms of 44 cents extra per ton, and one
tenth extra on the impost arising from their cargoes. She charges a duty on
American sail-cloth, made up in the United States for British ships. They do
not charge a duty on British sail-cloth, made up in Great Britain for American
ships. She prohibits the importation of goods from several parts of her
dominions into others, in American vessels, upon any terms. They admit the
importation of goods from any part of their dominions into another, in British
vessels, on the terms of 44 cents per ton extra on the vessel. She prohibits
the importation of goods into Great Britain, by American vessels from any other
country than the U. S. They admit the importation of goods into the United
States, in British vessels, from every country whatever. She prohibits the
importation into Great Britain from the United States, by American vessels, of
all goods not produced by the United States. They do not prohibit the
importation into the United States from Great Britain, by British vessels, of
any goods not produced by Great Britain. She prohibits the importation of any
goods previously brought into the United States, from the said states into
Great Britain, even in British vessels. They do not prohibit the importation of
any goods previously brought into Great Britain, from that kingdom into the
United States, in either British or American bottoms. She prohibits the
exportation of several articles from Great Britain to the United States. They
do not prohibit the exportation of any article from the United States to
Great Britain. She lays duties of various rates upon the exportation of many
articles to the United States. They do not lay a duty on the exportation of any
article whatever to Great Britain. She prohibits the importation of all
manufactures from the United States, into her European dominions, and her
colonies, unless it be some very simple preparations, and decoctions, requisite
to her navy, shipping and manufactures. They do not prohibit the importation of
any manufacture whatever from Great Britain. She imposes very considerable
duties upon some of the agricultural productions of the United States, and
excludes others by duties equal to their value. They impose moderate duties
(lower than any other foreign nation by 2 3, and 4 for one) on the produce and
manufactures of Great Britain, except in a very few instances, and exclude
scarcely any articles by duties equal to their value. She prohibits for
considerable terms of time, some of the principal agricultural productions of
the United States, and others at all times. They prohibit none of the
agricultural productions of Great Britain or her dominions. It is understood
that by treaty she grants some favors, which are not extended to the United
States. They treat Great Britain as favorably as any nation whatever, as to
ships, imports, and exports, and in all other respects. She prohibits the
importation of some American articles, in American ships, or any but British
ships, into her European dominions. They do not prohibit the importation of any
British article in British vessels or any but American vessels. She does not
permit an American citizen to import goods into some of her dominions, and to
sell them there even in British vessels. In other parts of her dominions, she
lays an extra tax on him, or his sales. They permit a British citizen to import
goods into all their ports, in any vessels, and to sell them there without any
extra tax on him, or his sales. She imposes heavy duties on certain articles of
the produce of the American fisheries, and insupportable duties on others, in
some parts of her dominions: and in other parts, she prohibits their
importation. They impose only five per cent. on the produce of the British
fisheries (which duty is drawn back on exportation) and admit every article
derived from them. She prohibits the consumption of some American articles, of
which she permits the importation. They do not prohibit the consumption of any
British article whatever. She prohibits the importation of American articles
from foreign countries into the British dominions, even in her own ships. They
do not prohibit the importation of British articles from foreign countries in
any ships.

In detailing the regulations of foreign nations, so various and complex as
those of Great Britain, it is not easy to be correct. The above statement,
however, is sincerely believed to contain the substance of the existing British
restrictions, prohibitions and impositions, upon commerce, so far as they have
any relation to the possible or actual intercourse with the United States.
Those which are to be found in the acts of Congress, or which result from them,
are few, and are also intended to be correctly given in the table. On a review
of the whole of these regulations, it will be perceived, that those of the
United States are considerably more favorable to the subjects of the British
crown, and their manufactures, produce and navigation, than those of
Great Britain are to the corresponding interests of the citizens of the United
States. It has appeared necessary to make a statement in detail and by a
comparative contrast, in order that we might render manifest the absolute and
important truth, that the commercial impediments to Great Britain in the laws
of the United States, are much less considerable than those in the acts of the
British parliament are to the United States. Had this statement been confined
to the island of Great Britain alone, on the one part, and our dominions at
large, on the other, it would have been found, that our obstructions to British
commerce are far less than those which Britain throws in the way of the
commerce of the United States. But it is just and natural for us, in
considering a national subject, to take into our estimation the whole of the
territories of the British crown, and the whole population, trade,
manufactures, and productions thereof, more especially as it is plain, that all
considerations, relative to the American side, are extended to our whole
territory and all its appertenances and relative circumstances. Should
Great Britain prove, that exceptions respecting colonies are as reasonable on
her part, as they are fashionable, still it remains to be counterbalanced, that
no such exceptions are made by us; for we treat the vessels, produce and
citizens of the colonies, as we treat those of Britain. If it is politic and
right, that the parliament of Great Britain should exclude us from their
colonial trade, then Great Britain ought not to complain of any countervailing
regulations, which may exclude her from some equivalent advantage in our trade:
and so in regard to any other country. Should it be proved, that all nations
have interdicted their colonial trade to foreigners, it will be no less easy to
show, that the withholding of any kind of advantage from a foreign nation, by
reason of the particular circumstances of the restricting party, has always
been deemed a justification for some corresponding restriction on the part of
the country suffering. But it cannot be proved, that all nations prohibit the
participation in their colonial trade to foreigners. The French, the Swedes,
the Danes, and the Dutch govern themselves differently from Britain, and from
one another. The interdicting rule is not universal. It cannot be rendered
permanent, uniform, or precise. It must, therefore, be liable, like other
commercial objects, to legislative discretion and treaty, and must be involved
in the general question of reciprocity. Were this not the case, the greatest
political absurdities would be induced. Let it be supposed for a moment, that
two European nations possess transmarine colonies of equal value, and that one
of them grants a perfect freedom of the trade of her colonies to the United
States, while the other absolutely refuses that advantage to us. It will not be
alleged, that the last of these nations has claims to a participation in the
commerce of the United States, equal to those of the former. Further -- the
distinction taken, with regard to colonies, does not apply to all the
transmarine dominions of the British crown. Canada, Nova Scotia, New-Brunswic,
Jamaica, and a part of the island of St. Christophers, for example, are
conquered countries, to whose commerce, considerations other than colonial,
apply. And were the idea of colonies strictly adhered to, (viz. the
establishment of bodies of natives, who have emigrated from a state, and
settled in a new country, politically connected with the old one,) it would be
found, that several of the new states of America are more truly colonies of the
older states, than several of the islands and provinces, which bear the
appellation, are colonies of Great Britain.

As it has been an uniform opinion of lord Sheffield and other persons in
England, that ship-building would be annihilated in the United States, the
present state of that business, it is hoped, will destroy some material
miscalculations, and will prove, that we do not labor under an inability to
carry our own productions without the aid of any one foreign nation. If we have
not yet encountered the expense of a navy, let it be remembered, that Prussia,
which has many more private vessels than Russia, has acted the same part;
although the empress, of the latter country with fewer merchantships, than any
maritime power in Europe, and much fewer than the United States, has
nevertheless a very formidable navy.

Nations, which at present enjoy any considerable portion of the American
trade, must sustain very unfavourable consequences from the continuance of
impediments or burdens on our future intercourse with their dominions. Our
exports, being transported in our own ships and those of any less unkind
country, will advance the manufactures and trade of a nation adjacent and rival
to them -- or, sent to the colonies of more favorable nations, will greatly
increase the growth of interfering colonial productions. It is with the utmost
difficulty that any nation now accomplishes circuit^^^ supplies of other
European countries with our produce; and it has become our duty to make foreign
nations sensible of the disadvantages of double freights and charges, under
which they receive our productions, the loss arising from which, falls in part,
upon our farmers, and, in part, upon their citizens, who are the consumers.
Aggravating impediments to our trade, are now deeply and constantly wounding
the manufacturers in Europe, who work up American raw materials, or who supply
us with their fabrics. Duties on our iron, for example, reduced the price, and
thus occasioned it to be bought at home to manufacture: and so of other native
raw materials. The refusal of cotton, and other raw articles, not of our
growth, in any bottoms, from America, makes them cheaper to our manufacturers,
or to the exporters of them for the use of those European manufacturers, whose
laws will permit them to be received from hence. Impediments in the way of our
shipping, or heavy duties on merchandise from hence, occasion the merchants, as
before observed, in regard to our produce, to send foreign raw materials to
countries, that will admit the vessels and goods upon more easy terms. Nations,
in this enlightened age, will more and more avail themselves of the mistakes
that obtain in the commercial regulations of their neighbors and rivals: and
the errors of restrictions and duties, so far as they shall be really
impolitic, will thus induce a certain and consequent suffering by those who
impose them on us. So, as one country drives our vessels and produce from her
ports, others may be thereby induced to (...) their markets to them. The
currents of commer^^^ like those of the rivers, will certainly be (...) from
that side where obstructions are created.

The United States have been led to serious and beneficial reflection on their
affairs, by the (...) disposition to restrict their intercourse (...) Europe,
and the severer regulations of several (...) in regard to the commerce of their
trans^^^rine dominions. They are prompted to decide, (...) the immense savings
and the extensive advantages they can derive from manufactures, protected by
their own laws, render them no less worthy of a share of their capital and
industry, than commerce* The importance of this object has been forced upon the
minds of many, by European restriction^ and a continuance of those
restrictions, will, though gradually, yet infallibly, make converts of the
whole nation. So weighty are the considerations relative to manufactures, in
the opinions of ma^^, that it begins to be seriously questioned, whether the
employment of a share of 20 or 25,000 tons of vessels in the British West India
trade, and of less than half that quantity in the trade to their remaining
colonies, ought to induce our consent materially to keep down or diminish any
salutary duties on foreign manufactures. The American impost is now very
moderate, compared with that of other nations; unquestionably the most so of
any which British goods encounter in foreign countries. It does not exceed, on
a medium, 8 or 9 per cent. Were it to be increased to 14, 20, 25, 28, and even
33 per cent. as in France, Spain and Portugal -- were prohibitions to be added
on some articles, as in those countries, and on all articles, as i^ one or two
others, (with a judicious postponement of the time, for the strongest
regulations to take place) what would be the consequences, what the effects
upon the transplanting of foreign capital and manufactures to the United
States? It may be urged, that we should be injured by such prohibition, or even
by the higher rates of duty above mentioned. So far as we did not get
manufactures established, in the mean time, that might be the case; but the
same might be observed, in regard to the commercial regulations of
Great Britain, some of which really injure her; and many of which deeply injure
Ireland, the West Indies, and the remaining colonies.

If it is in the power of Great Britain to draw from other countries, the
articles she obtains from us of better quality, and upon lower terms, which is
often asserted to be possible, it is not to be forgotten, that by ceasing to
receive any goods from the United States, the benefit of employing her ships
will be so far lost. The articles rejected may be somewhat more difficult for
us to sell, and therefore will be necessarily converted, in a greater degree
than at present, into manufactures, or they may go to supply other nations, who
now purchase those foreign articles, which it is alleged Britain can procure
with more advantage. Among the objections Great Britain ought to have to this,
the foreign connections we shall be thereby led to form, and the cement it will
give to old ones, will not be found the least. But the assertion really is not
true. The furs and skins, the oak timber, oak boards, oak planks, staves,
potash, pearlash, ginseng the same qualities of rice, some qualities of
tobacco, the grain, in case of short European crops, and some of the naval
stores cannot be obtained in quantity and quality from other countries.

We are not infrequently reminded, when the loss of the American market and our
consumption of British manufactures are spoken of, that, notwithstanding our
former non-importation agreements, and the interruptions of the war, the
British manufactories were more flourishing, than during the previous peace,
when our demand was the greatest. There appear to be some reasons, however, for
doubting the truth of this assertion. The tables in Anderson's commerce,
already mentioned, state the exports of the year 1774 at L.17,607,447, and
those of 1781, at L.11,470,388. This declension was regular, almost every
year's exports being less than those of the preceding. These facts are the more
remarkable, as the imports of Great Britain in 1781, were greater than those in
1776, or in any intermediate year, and the prices of raw articles and
provisions exported, were higher. It is to be observed, also, that large
exports for the British merchants and dealers, who sold extra supplies to their
armies and navies in America, the West and East Indies, Gibraltar, etc. were
made, for the use of the great number of officers, soldiers, and seamen,
employed in those places. The extra public purchases of clothing, tents, arms,
cordage, sail cloth, porter, and other manufactured articles, for their sea and
land forces, must have been immense, when we reflect, that about L.14,000,000
per annum, on an average of the term of the war, was added to their debt,
besides the great sums of money collected and paid within the year; and that
the supplies granted for 1781, exceed those of 1774 by L.19,300,000, a larger
sum by 100 per cent. than Great Britain usually exported in manufactures prior
to the late treaty of peace. The expenditures of such a war, must, indeed,
occasion the woolen, linen, leathern and metal branches, and several others, to
flourish exceedingly: but the consequences in regard to the increase of burdens
on the people, and to the national prosperity, must be viewed in the most
serious light. In the time of the war, too, foreign manufactures could be less
easily introduced into their own markets, which left the demand for consumption
and importation to be supplied by their own people. It is to be observed
further, that the eight years which followed 1774, were those in which
machinery was first rendered considerably profitable in Great Britain. Before
the American war, the cotton branch was very inconsiderable in that country;
but though it has increased wonderfully since the peace, it must have felt a
very large advancement during the term in which our regular importations from
thence were cut off. Other branches were aided during those years, by the
introduction of machinery, manual slight and (...) processes, so as to diminish
the effects of the interruption of the American demand. It is in the highest
degree probable, that the loss of our consumption would be sensibly felt at
this time. In ^ season of peace, the enormous extra demand for the use of their
armies and navy does not exist. Ireland now menaces Great Britain with the
diminution of her importations. Such extraordinary (...) inventions of
mechanical and chemical aid are not to be expected again -- and the United
States might derive a very considerable degree of independency on British
manufactures, by the adoption of labour-saving machines, (the peculiar value of
which, to them, they are beginning to perceive) in the cotton, flaxen, hempen,
metal, and part of the woolen and silken branches, to all of which (...)
materials they apply. The capacities of the United States for establishing
these mills, and manufactures in general will be exemplified in the case of
New Jersey, which by a return in 1784, is ascertained to have had then 41
fulling-mills, 8 furnaces, 79 forges, 366 saw-mills, 508 grist-mills, and 192
tan-yards, though her population appears to be about one part in twenty-one of
that of the United States. Were the United Netherlands to seize a moment of
uneasiness between us and Great Britain, and were they to devote their shipping
and immense private capital to the supply and promotion of machine
manufactures, they would prove dangerous rivals to England in all foreign
markets: and the same may be said in regard to the efforts of other countries,
if they were seriously to undertake manufactures by labour-saving machinery.

It may be fairly asked, what country supports the navy of Great Britain, in so
great a degree as the United States, by the employment they give to her ships?
The Russian trade furnishes cargoes for much less than 230,000 tons, which is
the exact quantity of British vessels that cleared from these states, in the
year following August 1789. The whole Bal^ic trade of Great Britain, with all
the countries of the various powers that lie within the sound, important as it
is to her, does not fill more. Their trade with Holland, France, Spain, and
Portugal, does not all together employ as many vessels. Their whole fisheries,
American colonial trade, and West India trade, do not employ and load more. It
appears from a British statement of their trade with all the world, and
authentic documents published by Congress, that their vessels, cleared out from
the United States in 1791 and 1792, were about equal in tonnage to all the
British vessels cleared out of Great Britain for Russia, Denmark and Norway,
Sweden, Prussia, Poland, Hamburg, ^^etnen, and Germany in general. A. D. 1793.
And how, it may be further asked, are the United States requited for thus
strengthening the acknowledged bulwark of Great Britain, by annually giving a
complete lading to the unequalled quantity of 230,000 tons of her private
vessels? The whole of the American vessels, which have arrived in our ports, in
the same year, from all the countries and places subject to the British crown,
amount to no more than 43,580 tons. Yet there are not wanting persons, who will
affirm, that the balance of favor is given to the United States: and, that
Great Britain is so far injured by our deportment, as to justify a retaliation
upon us!

There are some considerations drawn from the state of things in Europe, which
ought to render the British commerce with the United States and the consumption
of British manufactures by the citizens of this country, matters of greater
than former importance. The infusion of republican qualities into the
governments of that quarter of the world, will be followed by the extension of
trade, internal and external. The character of the merchant and manufacturer
will be duly esteemed, and large portions of dormant capital, and numerous
classes of inactive men, will be turned by circumstances to employments, which
will have lost their ancient imaginary disrepute. The tendency of such events,
in regard to the supply of raw materials, and in regard to manufactures which
America now draws from Great Britain, will not be difficult to discover.

A reliance is sometimes placed upon the disposition of the southern parts of
the United States of America, in favor of such regulations of commerce, as
would be agreeable to Great Britain -- that is, the easy and unincumbered
admission of her ships and manufactures into our ports. Whatever truth there
may be in regard to some of those states, it is known they are far from
unanimous, on that subject. It may be questioned, too, whether measures, which
would create disputes, and interrupt the British trade with America, would not
be disagreeable and inconvenient to the merchants and manufacturers of
Great Britain, as was manifestly the case on the occasion of the late
difference with Russia. Ports circumstanced as Liverpool and Lancaster, which
have large concerns in ships and comparatively little other trade but as
carriers and shipholders, may be disposed to promote any measures, that will
advance navigation, at the expense of general commerce, manufactures, and
agriculture; but the great capitalists and merchants of London, Bristol, and
Glasgow, etc. and the manufacturers of Manchester, Sheffield, Birmingham,
Norwich, Yorkshire, etc. will view with due seriousness, the probability of
diverting our trade into other channels, and the deliberate and decided
measures to promote American manufactures, which the restraints upon our
navigation and commerce may hereafter produce. The objections of those parts of
the southern states, which may be averse to further impositions on foreign
merchandise, will be moderated by their convictions, that American
manufacturers may be brought to consume and work up their productions at home,
and to furnish them in return by not very slow degrees, with the supplies they
now derive from abroad.

At the time when this examination was commenced, it was believed, from many
symptoms, that the true state of things in this country was little known or
understood in Great Britain. The prejudices naturally arising from so warm a
contest as that of 1775, the disorders which grew out of a lax and ill digested
government, and the errors incidental to an inexperienced country, suddenly
elevated from a colony to an empire -- all contributed to deceive and mislead
Great Britain, in her estimation of the United States. The volume of lord
Sheffield was supposed to increase the public misconceptions. His work upon the
Irish commerce in 1785, represented the American states in the same
unfavourable manner in several passages. Symptoms of error in the opinions of
other persons of respectable standing in the British community, were,
unfortunately, observable. It appeared, therefore, to be a matter of great
importance to both nations, that an attempt should be made to point out past
and to correct existing mistakes. While it has been desired in doing this, to
excite no painful sensations in the minds of those who are connected with the
interests of Great Britain, it has not been deemed necessary or fit to suppress
any truths, because they might prove unacceptable to persons, if any such there
be, who may want magnanimity enough to receive them with moderation, and to
examine them with candor. The facts adduced on this occasion, are certainly
not the more true, because they have been asserted in this publication, nor
will it be denied, that coming from an American press they should be examined,
on the other side carefully and thoroughly. Such an examination should be
desired by the United States, for it was sincerely treated in the beginning as
genuine policy in nations, to avoid short lived deceptions, and rather to
search diligently for the ground of common interest, which can never be
ascertained by misrepresentation, or by erroneous or disingenuous
investigation. If arrangements beneficial to the two countries can be effected
it must be through means very different from those. The minds of well
intentioned and able men on both sides should be dispationately applied to the
necessary enquiries and discussions; the subject should be thoroughly examined
and understood; and frank admissions of the advantages derived by either nation
from the other, ought to be made. With the lights, which might be thus
obtained, it would not be difficult to determine whether the nature of things
in the United States and Great Britain, requires or admits of a treaty of
friendship or commerce.

SECTION VIII. A SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE, CONCERNING THE PROGRESS AND PRESENT STATE
OF AMERICAN DOMESTIC, OR HOUSEHOLD MANUFACTURES.
IN the passage of the observations, which forms the head of SECTION III. to
which this note belongs, the writer predicts, that we shall give a preference
to British manufactures; that we shall not manufacture for ourselves; and that
our demand for British goods will increase, in proportion to our population.
The facts, in opposition to these ideas, which relate to the supplies drawn
from foreign nations, have already been stated; as have most of those which
regard American manufactures, fabricated by those who pursue them as a separate
occupation or calling. But lord Sheffield does not appear to have foreseen the
present state of our family or household manufactures.

The progress and present state of this invaluable branch of the national
industry, exceeds every idea, it is believed, that has been formed of it,
either in this country or in Europe. In all the states inhabited almost
entirely by white people, domestic manufactures are known to be very
considerable, yielding a considerable surplus for the use of the other parts of
the union. But it is generally supposed, that in the states where the black
people are numerous, (and especially near their seacoasts, where imported goods
can be constantly and easily obtained) little or no manufactures are made. The
following abstract from a minute statement of the household manufactures, in
one neighborhood, of twenty families (rich and poor) indiscriminately taken,
and in a part of Virginia, on a navigable river emptying into the Atlantic
ocean, where the whites are, to the blacks, as one two, will show, that much
more is probably made, than is generally believed to be the case.

(1)
Male and female housekeepers, 20 Total number of white and black persons, 301
Fine table linen, sheeting, shirting, etc. yards, 1,907 Negro clothing,
blanketing etc. yards, 1,007 Value of fine cloth etc. per. yard, cents 60 Value
of coarse do. per do. 42 Pairs of fine stockings, 152 Pairs of coarse do. 108
Highest value made in one family, dolls. 267 Lowest do. 21 Total value of the
manufactures of the 20 families 1,670 Families which did not manufacture 1 Term
the year 1790.
The following table obtained in the like indiscriminate and impartial way, has
also been exhibited from another county of the same state, the situation of
which is interior.

(2)
Families, rich and poor, 20 Yards of linen 1,095 Yards of woolen, 344 Yards of
cotton 1,681 Pairs of stockings 174 Pairs of shoes made on the estates 237
Total value dolls. 1,791 Term the year 1790
A person of reputation, who furnished the latter statement, accompanied it
with an assurance, that it might be considered as a fair average of the family
manufactures throughout the adjacent counties.

These papers have been obtained under circumstances that justify a reliance on
their truth, and are believed to be very little variant from the medium of the
state of Viginia. Though they cannot be made the basis of a satisfactory
estimate, the following brief one is hazarded merely to show the result. In
Virginia (exclusive of Kentucky) 70,825 families appear on the late census. The
lowest of the above returns (1,670 dollars) is at the rate of 83 dollars to
each family for home-made hosiery and cloths of wool, flax, hemp and cotton
only. Two-thirds of this rate upon the whole number of families (cutting off a
third, to make a moderate calculation, and omitting odd numbers) gives the
prodigious sum of 3,900,000 dollars for those articles of mere domestic
manufacture (exclusively of the work of regular tanners, shoemakers,
blacksmiths, weavers and other tradesmen) in Virginia, and taking the United
States at 3,900,000 persons, would appear to justify a computation of above
20,000,000 dollars for the whole.

Through similar means, but on the examination of other persons, in the
counties of Accomack and Northampton lying on the bay of Chesapeak and the
Atlantic ocean, it appears, that 315,000 yards of flaxen cloth are made in a
district containing 2,729 families: also 45,000 yards of woolen, 30,000 yards
of cotton, and 45,000 yards of linen and woolen cloth, and a quantity of coarse
stockings nearly equal to the demand. It is added, that all the shoes, and
three-fourths of the clothing of that country, are made by the tradesmen, or
within the families, who reside in it. The raw materials, including the cotton,
are the growth of their farms.

Another communication through the same channel states the manufactures of iron
to exceed all others in Virginia (which must be erroneous, if household
manufactures, as well as trades be taken into the calculation) and that the
greater part of the farmers and planters tan the hides of the cattle they
consume.

Two other communications from the same state inform, that the families in
certain vicinities mentioned in them, make on a medium near 200 yards each of
cotton, woolen, and linen goods -- and that five-sixths of the shoes, cloth,
and stockings, which are used in that country, are made in the household way.
These two last statements contemplate four counties.

Similar information from the interior parts of South Carolina (though less
strong and extensive) has also been obtained, accompanied with a variety of
specimens of substantial midling and coarse cotton, woolen, and linen goods, of
which it is stated, that the inhabitants of that country manufacture, entirely
in the family way, as much as they have occasion for, cotton, flax, and hemp,
being plentiful, and there being a considerable stock of good sheep; that there
is a great deal done in the household way, and that the greatest exertions are
made; that they have been long in the habit of doing something in family
manufactures, but have improved much in the last two years; and that the
weaving is done by the females, which leaves the industry of the males to be
applied to agriculture.

It is well established, that similar habits prevail in the interior country of
Georgia; and in the midland and western counties of North Carolina, they are as
attentive to domestic manufactures as the people of Virginia.

Such is the state of domestic or household manufactures in the southern
states, where abundance of very fertile and cheap lands, and a large portion of
black population, are supposed, in Europe, and even in our own country, to have
prevented any considerable attention to that frugal and industrious pursuit.

Let us now turn to the northern scenes, where a more replete population, and a
less productive soil have led to the prosecution of many branches of
manufactures as regular trades.

The result of a careful enquiry, in every county of the state of Connecticut,
has been uniform information from twenty-four vicinities, that domestic
manufactures are carried to a very great extent. The articles, made in the
family way, and by persons engaged ordinarily in the cultivation of the earth,
are woolen and linen cloths including ing sail-cloth; bed-ticks, some cotton
goods, hosiery, nails, and spikes, some silk buttons, handkerchiefs, ribands
and stuffs, sewing silk, threads, fringe, and pot and pearl ashes. It is
observed, that there is sarcely a family in the state of Connecticut, so rich
or so poor, as not assiduously to attend to domestic manufactures; that they
are extending and improving very fast in quantity, variety, and quality; -- and
that considerable parcels of household linens, etc. are transported out by land
and exported by water to the middle and southern states. Here then is a surplus
of household manufactures sold out of the state. It as an acknowledged fact,
that New England linens have affected the price and importation of that article
from New York to Georgia. The foregoing statement is not intended to comprehend
the manufactories of woolen cloths, hats, cotton goods, sail-cloth, checked and
plain linens, shoes and boots, bell metal, buttons, wool and cotton cards,
flaxseed oil, soap, candles, nails, anchors, axes, spades, shovels, cabinet
work, carriages, saddles, books, etc. etc. conducted as regular and separate
trades by individuals, companies, and associations, which are very considerable.

An enquiry has also been made, by a person of judgment, in the state of
Massachusetts, who aleges, that the importations of foreign manufactures into
that state, are less by one half, at this time, than they were twenty years
ago, though there has been a prodigious increase of population, and though
considerable quantities of home made articles, are transported by land and
water, to other parts. This is ascribed, in a very great degree, to the
domestic manufactures, which are observable in the dresses and furniture of the
people, and in the outward cargoes of the coasting and other trading vessels.
The informant here contemplated, produced documents to show the magnitude of
some of the regular trades, among which were 10,000 dozen pair of cotton and
wool cards, much the greater part of which are applied to domestic manufactures
throughout the United States, 2,400 pieces of sail-cloth per annum, at a single
factory, 100 tons of nails per annum, at the Taunton factory alone, and 150,000
pair of stuff and silk shoes in the single town of Lynn, of which 10,355 pair
had been shipped by one family to the Philadelphia market in a single year,
although the manufacturers of that city, in the same line, are very expert and
numerous.

Another informant has furnished a return, from which it appears, that in the
last year thread and silk laces, and edgings, black and white, amounting to
41,979 yards, were manufactured in the family way, and not in regular
factories, in the town of Ipswich in Massachusetts, which contains, by the late
census, 4,562 men, women, and children. Pattern cards, containing thirty-six
specimens of these hitherto unnoticed manufactures, have been exhibited. This
township comprehending a small seaport, and consequently being open to foreign
goods, and the freight of so compact an article as lace, being very small, it
will be considered as a curious fact, that this manufacture should have grown
up there to so great a height. It is added in the information, that laces are
made in various parts of Massachusetts, though no where in so great a degree.
It is also understood to be a domestic manufacture in several parts of
Connecticut.

The existence and continual increase of domestic manufactures in Rhode Island
and New Hampshire, are established on similar authority: -- and the growth of
regular trades is very great in the former, in proportion to its population. It
is supposed to have succeeded as well as any scene, in its attempts in the
cotton branch, by labour-saving machines. The following parcels of goods were
manufactured, in the family way, in the first nine months of 1791, in the town
of Providence, though it is a seaport, and has a number of regular shops and
factories, for making several of the same species of goods.

Linen cloth, 25,265 yards Cotton do. 5,858 do. Woolen do. 3,165 do. Carpeting,
512 do. Stockings, 4,093 pairs. Gloves and mitts, 859 do. Fringe, 260 yards
Three millions of nails (by tale) and 30,000 yards of woolen cloth were made,
in 1790, in the town and vicinity of Providence. The industry of farmers and
house-wives contributed materially to the manufacture of these articles.

The extent of the woolen branch of domestic manufactures, in New Hampshire, is
evinced by the great number of its fulling mills; for they have no considerable
factory employed on that raw material. The same may be observed in regard to
the general knowledge of the art of weaving, among the wives and daughters of
the farmers in that state. This fact is very frequently observable throughout
New England, and some other parts of the United States. The number of fulling
mills in New Jersey, which has already been stated to be forty-one, is a proof
of their domestic manufactures; as they have not any woolen factories. In the
vicinity of the town of Reading, in Pennsylvania, are ten fulling mills, which
induces the same conclusion there; and they are very numerous throughout the
state. The export of flaxseed is equal to that of former times; the manufacture
of oil consumes a far greater quantity than heretofore: wherefore a large
growth of flax is to be inferred; and as we have very few linen factories, and
the exportation of flax has ceased, a great domestic manufacture of linens must
exist. The sale of spinning-wheel irons, in one shop in the city of
Philadelphia, in the course of the last year, has amounted to 1,500 sets,
which, though a small fact, is strongly indicative of the extent of domestic
manufactures, as spinning wheels are rarely, if ever, exported, or used in
regular factories. The quantity sold is 29 per cent. greater than in any former
year. Nail-making is frequently a household business in New England, a small
anvil being found no inconvenience in the corner of a farmer's chimney. Bad
weather, hours of disengagement from the occupations of the farm, and evenings,
are thus rendered seasons of steady and profitable industry. Public estimates
of the grain and fruit distilleries of the United States, have been made at
3,500,000 gallons; much the greater part of which is made by farmers and
planters. The importation of cheese from all countries into the United States,
was only forty tons, in the year ending in August 1790: and we exported a much
larger quantity in the same term, from which a great manufacture of that
article (in the domestic way, of course) is to be inferred. In short, domestic
manufactures are great, various, and almost universal in this country.

The implements hitherto used in household manufactures, have been of the most
ancient kinds. The art of dying has been advanced in families little further
than what was communicated by a receipt as brief as those in a book of culinary
instructions; the coloring ingredients have generally been such as nature
handed to the thrifty housewife. The operations, from the raw to the
manufactured state, have often been the simplest that can be conceived. Under
circumstances like these, it will not be too sanguine to expect that the
dissemination of useful instruction in the practice of dying, in the nature of
colors, and concerning other parts of the business, the introduction of the
new improvements in the preparing and spinning machinery, on a scale as
convenient as the common weaving apparatus, and the general use of the flying
shuttle, and the double loom, may give a twofold value to this most precious
branch of the national industry. It will not be deemed one of the least
favorable circumstances in the affairs of a country so eminently capacitated
for agriculture as the United States, that the prosperous course of that great
employment of their citizens, is accompanied with an assiduous prosecution of
this economical domestic occupation, by persons of all ages and sexes, in hours
and seasons, which cannot be employed in agricultural labor or in their
ordinary family duties.

SECTION IX. AN ADDITIONAL NOTE. CONCERNING AMERICAN MANUFACTURES IN GENERAL.
THE following representations of the manufactures at present existing in the
United States, will tend to exhibit the ground of reliance which they afford at
this time; and presents the most encouraging assurances of their steady
progress to permanent establishment.

I.
Tanned and tawed leather, dressed skins, with and without the hair or fur, and
manufactures thereof, form one of the best established and most important
branches. The consumption and exportation of the following articles made
wholly, or in part of leather or skins are great, and, in several instances,
general, and the importation of them, excepting the articles of gloves and fur
trimmings, is very inconsiderable. Rigging hides, parchment, shoes, boots, and
slippers, common harness of all kinds, harness and leathern materials for
pleasurable carriages, saddles and bridles, housings, holsters, saddlebags,
portmantuas, boot straps, leathern and hair trunks, fire-buckets, military
articles, such as slings, belts, cartouch boxes and scabbards; leathern
breeches and some vests and drawers; mens', youths', and some womens' gloves,
fur muffs and tippets, linings and trimmings of fur for womens' and mens'
apparel, some chair bottoms, the coatings of wool and cotton cards, and the
leathern materials of other manufacturing implements and utensils; to which may
be added glue, being an economical manufacture from the otherwise useless parts
of raw and dressed skins and from old leathern articles.

II.
Manufactures from hemp and flax form another very important and well
established branch. These are made as well in regular factories and workshops,
as in the household way. Cables, cordage, tarred and untarred; seins and nets
of various kinds, twine and pack-thread, sail cloth, tow cloth, white and
checked shirtings, sheetings, toweling, table linen, bed ticks, hosiery, sewing
thread, and some thread lace, are the articles manufactured of these raw
materials. Nearly the whole of the hemp and flax are now of native growth; and
as they are productions of every state, the fabrics made of them are peculiarly
interesting. This circumstance gives breadth and solidity to the foundation of
the linen branch, and to all others to which it is common.

III.
Manufactures of iron form a very increasing and useful branch. Under this
head, the article of nails deserves particular notice, being brought to the
footing of a domestic manufacture in several of the states. The other fabrics,
made of this raw material, are steel, sheet iron, nail rods, wheel tire, hoops,
weights, stoves, pots and other castings, scale beams, plough irons, hoes, and
other farming utensils, the iron and steel work for pleasurable and working
carriages, and for ship-building, anchors, household utensils of various kinds,
screw presses, some saws and planes, axes and other utensils for artizans and
manufacturers, and arms of various kinds. It is reasonable to conclude that the
manufacture of military articles has become inconsiderable during the existing
peace. The abundance of mill seats, ore and fuel in the United States, a most
extensive demand, and the heavy charges of importation, are among the
circumstances which have given a respectable establishment to the iron
manufactories. The Indian war and the renewal of our militia system has greatly
revived the manufacture of arms. A. D. 1793.


IV.
Manufactures of wool and mixtures thereof with cotton and flax, form another
branch of peculiar importance, from their being principally the productions of
domestic industry, at times and seasons which can be spared from other
occupations. These are broad and narrow cloths, chiefly common or coarse;
coatings, casimers, serges, flannels, hosiery, some blankets, linsey woolsey,
and negro cloth in very large quantities, coverlets and counterpanes, mens' and
boys' hats, a few carpets, fringe, cord and tassels. This raw material will
eventually prove universal in the United States, and is already found in every
state.

The four preceding branches may be thrown into the first class, in regard to
present importance, and are established in a considerable degree. They are
increasing rapidly, and particularly the three first, from the facility of
procuring very large quantities of the requisite raw materials, the
introduction of various new implements and machinery, the abundance of fuel,
lime, bark, and other articles employed in their manufacture. The latter is
steadily progressive in quantity, and has improved rapidly within the last two
years.

V.
Manufactures of cotton, and mixtures thereof with flax and hemp, as as also
with wool, constitute a growing and very promising branch. In several of the
states, factories of this raw material have been commenced. Very considerable
quantities of goods are made of it, in the household way, and particularly in
the southern states of all of which it is a production. The articles usually
made are corduroys, velverets, jeans, fustians and plain and striped cloths,
for womens' use, hosiery, thread, fringe, cord and tassels, counterpanes and
coverlets, candlewick, and, when mixed with wool, very large quantities of
negro cloth. Connected with this branch is the business of callico printing, in
which some promising attempts have been made.

VI.
Ships and boats, with their numerous and requisite appertenances, constitute a
branch much less valuable in money than the preceding; but considering how
necessary they are to agriculture and manufactures, as well as to commerce and
the fisheries, they appear to be of primary importance. These are constructed
upon the most favorable terms, and with great perfection.

VII.
Papers of all kinds, form a very beneficial branch, of considerable and
increasing extent. The species made are paper hangings, playing cards,
pasteboards, fullers or press papers, sheathing and wrapping paper, writing and
printing paper of various kinds and qualities, except the largest and most
costly. Appertenant to this branch is the very increasing and highly useful
business of book printing. From the abundance of mill-seats, and the
respectable establishment of the paper manufactory in some of the states, it is
manifest, that a much more considerable saving or gain might be derived to the
country, with the requisite attention to the preservation of the old and
otherwise useless materials.

VIII.
Sugars refined in various degrees, form a branch so perfectly established as
to require little attention, but to the acquisition of the raw material.

IX.
Cabinet wares and turnery, both of the simplest and most elegant kinds, are
made in quantities commensurate with the demand, as well of native as foreign
materials. Connected with these in some degree, is the manufacture of many
kinds of musical instruments, which has gained a footing within a few years,
that promises an establishment adequate to the occasions of the United States.
Other manufactures of wood are made in great quantities, such as coopers'
wares, corn fans, and other implements of husbandry, almost every species of
mill work, and lately the most valuable and curious manufacturing machinery in
various branches.

X.
Wares of the precious metals, (gold and silver) including set work, and
jewelry, are made in great variety and extent. The latest addition to this
branch is the manufacturing of plated ware, which, however, is not yet
considerable or established.

XI.
Manufactures of the mixed metals and of lead and copper, have obtained various
degrees of establishment. Those of brass are the most extensive, and, combined
with iron and wood, there is a considerable variety. Household utensils,
technical and philosophical instruments and apparatus, furniture and materials
for houses and carriages, and for the building and furnishing of ships, a few
barrels and some furniture of fire arms, are manufactured of brass. Pewter and
hard metal are very much confined to family utensils, distillers worms,
printing types, and buttons. The last article is made with great neatness and
variety in a few shops. Lead is worked into ball, sheets, and every form
requisite for the building and finishing of houses and vessels, and for the
linings and coverings of wood, which is exposed to water. Successful attempts
to manufacture leaden shot of various sizes, have been made.

Copper wares of various kinds, are made in the United States. These are
utensils for distillers, sugar refiners, brewers, and other manufacturers, and
for domestic and ship use, articles to be applied in the building of vessels,
and in short, all those things which are requisite to useful and ordinary
purposes.

Tin wares, for military and all other useful purposes, are well manufactured.

XII.
Manufactures from fruits, grain and seeds, are very considerable. Of the
first, distilled spirits are the whole. Of such liquors from apples, the
quantity is large; of those from peaches, it is much less, but the quality,
when the liquor is matured, is exquisite: both are increasing. Of the
manufactures from grain and seeds (exclusive of meal of all kinds and biscuit)
there is a greater value. These are distilled spirits, malt liquors, starch,
hair powder, wafers and oil. These articles could be made in quantities
commensurate with the demand; and the several branches are well understood.

XIII.
The manufacture of gunpowder, has advanced with the greatest rapidity to the
point of desire in regard both to quantity and quality. The hazards and
expenses of importation, the cheapness of charcoal, of the requisite packages,
and of mill seats and mill works, in the United States, are among the principal
causes, which have produced so accelerated a progress.

XIV.
Manufactures of glass, of earthen ware, and of stone, mixed with clay, are all
in an infant state. From the quantity and variety of the materials which must
have been deposited by nature in so extensive a region as the United States,
from the abundance of fuel which they contain, from the expense of importation,
and loss by fracture, which falls on on glass and earthen wares, from the
simplicity of many of these manufactures, and from the great consumption of
them, impressions of surprise at this state of them, and a firm persuasion that
they will receive the early attention of foreign or American capitalists, are
at once produced. Coarse tiles, and bricks of an excellent quality, potters'
wares, all in quantities beyond the home consumption, a few ordinary vessels
and utensils of stone mixed with clay, some mustard and snuff bottles, a few
flasks or flaggons, a small quantity of sheet glass and of vessels for family
use, generally of the inferior kinds, are all that are yet made.

XV.
Manufactures from the fat and bones of sea and land animals, form a class of
considerable importance. These are the several kinds of oil, soap, spermaceti
and tallow candles, articles made of whalebone, sal ammoniac, and volatile salt.

In addition to the above branches or classes, there are manufactured, (besides
the quantities requisite for the home demand) a considerable value for
exportation, of the following miscellaneous articles -- pot ashes and pearl
ashes, chewing and smoking tobacco and snuff, cheese, working and pleasureable
carriages, Windsor and varnished chairs, oil of turpentine and rosin, wool and
cotton cards, and other implements and utensils for manufacturing; and a large
value for home consumption of fur hats, brushes for domestic and technical
purposes, whips and canes, manufactures of horn, mill stones and hewn stone,
lampblack, ochres and other painters' colors, some galenical and chemical
preparations, clocks and watches, wearing apparel, and a few manufactures of
silk.

[PAPER A.] Schedule of the whole number of persons within the several
districts of the United States, according to an act providing for the
enumeration of the inbabitants of the United States, passed March the 1st, 1790.
DISTRICTS. Free white males of sixteen years and upwards, including heads of
families. Free white males under sixteen years. Free white females, including
heads of families. All other free persons. Slaves. Total. This return was not
signed by the marshal, but was enclosed and referred to in a letter written and
signed by him.
Vermont, 22,435 22,328 40,505 252 16 85,539 New Hampshire, 36,086 34,851 70,160
630 158 141,185 Maine, 24,384 24,748 46,870 538 none. 96,540 Massachusetts,
95,453 87,289 190,582 5,463 none. 378,787 Rhode Island, 16,019 15,799 32,652
3,407 948 68,825 Connecticut, 60,5^3 54,403 117,448 2,808 2,764 237,946
New York, 83,700 78,122 152,320 4,654 21,324 ^40,120 New Jersey, 45,251 4^,416
83,287 2,7^2 11,453 184,139 Pennsylvania, 110,788 106,948 206,363 6,537 3,73^
434,373 Delaware, 11,783 12,143 22,384 3,809 8,887 59,094 Maryland, 55,915
51,339 101,395 8,043 103,036 319,721 Virginia, 110,936 116,13^ 215,046 12,866
292,627 747,610 Kentucky, 15,154 17,057 28,922 114 12,430 73,677
North Carolina, 69,988 77,506 140,710 4,975 100,572 393,751 South Carolina,
249,073 Georgia, 13,103 14,044 25,739 398 29,264 82,54^ Free white males of
twenty years and upwards, including heads of families. Free males under
twentyone years of age. Free white females, including heads of families. All
other free persons. Slaves. Total. S. W. Territory, 6,271 10,277 15,365 361
3,417 35,691 N. W. Territory The population of the north western government is
supposed to be a few thousands, exclusively of the military. (Note by Editor.)
.

Truly stated from the original returns deposited in the office of the
Secretary of State.

October 24, 1791. TH: JEFFERSON.

[PAPER B.] Abstract of the exports of the United States, from the commencement
of the custom-houses in the several states, which was at different times in
August, 1789, to the 30th day of September, 1790. EXPORTED.
Quantity. Value. ASHES, pot, 7,050 ^0/100 tons, dolls. 661,634 Ashes, pearl,
1,548 55/100 do. 177,459. 50 Apples, 5,898 barrels, 6,318 Boats, 8 372
Bombshells, 10 tons, 100 Bricks, 870,550 2,617. 50 Beer and porter, 472 casks,
4,612 Brandy 97 do. 3,016 Cordials, 236 boxes, 637 Cordage 5,739 Carriages, 220
28,017 Candles, tallow, 149,680 lbs. 14,876 Candles wax 5,274 do. 2,461
Candles, myrtle, 249 do. 52 Cider, 442 barrels, 849 Cotton, 2,027 bales, 58,408
Coffee, 254,752 lbs. 45,753 Chocolate, 29,882 do. 3,537 Cocoa, 10,632 do. 950
Cassia and cinnamon, 9,392 do. 9,715 Deer Skins, 33,009 Duck, American, 77
bolts, 777 Duck, Russia, 220 do. 2,200 Earthen and glass ware, 1,990 Essence
spruce, 115 boxes, 600 Flaxseed, 40,019 casks, 236,072 Flax 21,970 lbs. 1,468
Furs, 60,515 Furniture, 8,315 Fishery.
Fish, dried, Fish, pickled, Oil, whale, Oil, spermaceti, Candles, do.
Whalebone,
378,721 quintals, 828,531 36,840 barrels, 113,165 15,765 do. 124,908 5,431 do.
79,542 70,397 lbs. 27,724 121,281 do. 20,417 Grain.
Buckwheat, Corn, Oats, Rye, Wheat,
7,562 bushels, 2,572 2,102,137 do. 1,083,581 98,842 do. 20,900 21,765 do.
13,181 1,124,458 do. 1,398,998 Ginseng, 813 casks, 47,024 Gunpowder, 5,800 lbs.
861 Gin, 18,025 galls. 16,989 Grindstones, 203 450 Hairpowder, 12,534 lbs.
1,687 Hats, 668 1,392 Hay 2,126 tons, 12,851 Horns, 1,052 Ironmongery, 7,878
Iron, pig, 3,555 tons, 91,379 Iron, bar, 200 do. 16,723 Indigo, 612,119 lbs.
537,379 Live stock.
Horned cattle, Horses, Mules, Sheep, Hogs, Poultry,
5,406 99,960 8,628 339,516 237 8,846 10,058 17,039 5,304 14,481 3,704 doz.
6,263 Lumber.
Staves and heading, Shingles, Shook hogsheads, Hoops, Boards, Handspikes,
Casks, Scantling, Lumber difft. kinds. Timber do.
36,402,301 463,229 67,331,115 120,151 52,558 32,002 1,908,310 19,598
46,747,730 260,213 2,361 doz. 1,505 2,423 3,697 8,719,638 feet, 95,308 feet,
128,503 do. 139,328 Leather, 22,698 lbs. 5,302 Logwood, 264 tons, 3,911 Lignum
vitae, 176 do. 1,760 Lead and shot, 6 do. 810 Mahogany, 18,531 Medicines and
drugs, 1,735 Merchandise, 28,156 Molasses, 15,537 gallons, 3,904 Muskets, 100
500 Nankeens, 11 bales, 2,315 Oil, linseed, 119 barrels, 1,962 Provisions.
Flour, Bread, Meal, Peace and beans, Beef, Pork, Hams and bacon, Butter,
Cheese, Potatoes, Tongues, Onions, vegetables, Hogs lard, Honey, Oysters,
pickled,
724,623 barrels, 4,591,293 75,667 do. 209,674 99,973 do. 302,694 38,752 bush*
25,746 44,662 barrels, 279,551 24,462 do. 208,099 253,555 lbs. 19,728 8,379
firkins, 48,587 144,734 lbs. 8,830 5,318 barrels, 6,009 641 do. 1,598 22,936
6,355 firkins, 31,475 165 do. 990 272 kegs, 272 Pimento, 715 bags, 4,928
Pepper, 6,100 lbs. 1,440 Paper, 169 reams, 381 Paint, 4,650 lbs. 963 Pitch,
8,175 barrels, 17,488 Raw hides, 230 485 Raw silk, 177 lbs. 489 Rosin, 361
barrels, 778 Rice, 100,845 tierces, 1,753,796 Rum, American, 370,331 galls.
135,403 Rum, West India, 12,623 do. 5,795 Raisins, 213 casks, 1,205 Salt,
31,935 bushels, 8,236 Sago, 2,^19 lbs. 455 Soap, 597 boxes, 3,967 Snuff, 15,350
lbs. 5,609 Seeds and roots, 2,135 Shoes and boots, 5,862 pairs, 5,741 Sadlery,
5,541 Starch, 1,125 Sugar, loaf, 16,429 lbs. 3,432 Sugar, brown, 33,358 do.
2,237 Sassafras, 49,504 do. 555 Steel, 163 bundles, 978 Stones, sawed, 170 550
Tallow, 200,020 lbs. 20,722 Tobacco, 118,460 hhds. 4,349,567 Tea, 1,672 chests,
121,582 Tar, 85,067 barrels, 126,116 Turpentine, 28,326 do. 72,541 Do. spirits,
193 do. 1,032 Tow cloth, 67 pieces, 1,274 Vinegar, 24 casks, 106 Wines, 1,074
pipes, 83,249 Wax, 231,158 lbs. 57,597 20,194,794 To the North-West coast of
America, 10,362 Amount of several returns received since the 15th February
1791. 210,810 84 Total, Quarterly returns, from several small districts, are
deficient*
20,415,966.84

A summary of the value and destination of the exports of the United States,
agreeably to the foregoing abstract.
To the dominions of France, 4,698,735.48 Dollars. To the dominions of
Great Britain, 9,363,416.47 Dollars. To the dominions of Spain, 2,005,907.16
Dollars. To the dominions of Portugal, 1,283,462 Dollars. To the dominions of
the United Netherlands, 1,963,880.9 Dollars. To the dominions of Denmark,
224,415.50 Dollars. To the dominions of Sweden, 47,240 Dollars. To Flanders,
14,298 Dollars. To Germany, 487,787.14 Dollars. To the Mediterranean, 41,298
Dollars. To the African islands and coast of Africa, 139,984 Dollars. To the
East Indies, 135,181 Dollars. To the North-West coast of America, 10,392
Dollars. Dollars, 20,415,966.84 Dollars.
In addition to the foregoing, a considerable number of packages have been
exported from the United States, the value of which being omitted in the
returns from the custom-houses, could not be introduced into this abstract.

TENCH COXE, Assistant Secretary.
Treasury department, Feb. 18 th, 1791.
CHAPTER IX. REFLECTIONS ON THE STATE OF THE AMERICAN UNION IN THE YEAR
M,DCC,XCII.
THE apparent prosperity of the United States, in the beginning of the year
1792, was attended with serious doubts in the minds of many respectable
citizens, about particular matters, some of which are always of importance to
the happiness of a people, and others of which are considered as peculiarly
interesting to this country. A concise examination into the general state of
the union appeared to promise satisfactory explanations of many of these
doubts. The reflections, which enter into the composition of this chapter, were
sincerely intended to answer that desirable end. They may contain some errors
of fact, and more of opinion and judgment. Yet as there are comprised in them
many truths, drawn from sources, which cannot be materially erroneous, and as
the opinions have been tested in some degree by subsequent experience and
reflection, it is presumed that a republication of them may tend to inform, at
least the foreign world. It is certain, that we do not exhibit any obvious
symptoms of a wrong balance of trade, that the expediency of manufactures is
rising in the estimation of the cultivators, that our exports and ship-building
are increasing, that the property of emigrators contributes to swell and fully
to counter-balance any apparent excess of our imports, tha^ our aggregate
revenue continues to exceed the estimates, that every good plan requiring
capital, which is set on foot derives it quickly from the confidence of our
monied citizens or from foreigners, and in short, that the United States are in
reality the comfortable original, which is depicted in the following section.

Reflections on the State of the Union Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti; si non his utere mecum.
SECTION I.
DISPASSIONATE enquiries concerning the public interests, are attended with
salutary effects, in every time and in every nation. In a country like that,
which we inhabit, such examinations are unusually interesting, and may be
rendered, it is believed, peculiarly beneficial.

To create the disposition requisite to the proper acceptance of such
disquisitions, it is necessary to call to the public mind the variant
characters of the several states, when they where provinces of a more extended
empire -- the causes which produced that difference of character -- the means
which were devised to increase and perpetuate that variation and the ends to
which those characteristic differences were intended to be instrumental.
Reflections, duly serious, upon these circumstances will remind the people of
the several states, that they are naturally friends, whose amity and union have
been too often viewed with jealousy by rival eyes. They will perceive the
wisdom and the high duty of cultivating a spirit of mutual allowance and
concession; and a careful examination of their actual situation will convince
them, that greater blessings will result from a perfect understanding, and
sedulous cultivation of their interests at home, than from almost any
arrangements, which the conceptions of foreign nations will probably lead them
to propose, or adopt.

The consideration of our present situation and of some interesting
circumstances which have grown out of it, are the object of this investigation,
in which the benefits to be derived from a liberal intercourse with foreign
nations will not be undervalued. As no apology is necessary for such an
endeavor, a miscellaneous enquiry into several matters, which are always
deeply interesting to nations, and into others which have resulted from our
public operations, will be prosecuted without further introduction.

CONCERNING THE EXPORTS OF THE UNITED STATES.
It has been apprehended by persons of observation, at home, and the idea has
prevailed in the councils of a foreign nation, See the report of a committee of
the lords of the British privy council, published in the gazettes (of March) in
Charleston, South Carolina. -- American grain has progressively advanced by
equable and considerable steps, in the last fifty years. The causes of this
rise are the increase of shipping, particularly American; the introduction of
foreign shipping, the increase of manufacturers in Europe and America, the
increase of mills, particularly in America, the increase of distillation and
brewing in America, the accumulation of mercantile capital in America, the
increase of commerce among all nations, the fullness of population in the
European states, which formerly exported grain, and the increase of the
circulating medium of the world by mines, banks and bills of exchange. In 1737
wheat was sold for one-third of a dollar in the principal grain ports of the
United States: in 1771, 1772, 1773, and 1774, it sold on a medium for near
three quarters of a dollar; and in the years 1792, 1793, and 1794, it has sold
on a medium for more than a dollar.
that the exports of the United States for the year preceding October, 1790,
were greater in value than could be expected again, by reason of the prices for
grain which were consequent on the scarcity in France. The exports of the
subsequent year will aid us in testing this opinion, which attracts the more
attention, because it is sometimes suggested that agriculture and trade have
been injured by the measures of the general government in regard to the public
debt. The first return of exports, on which this conjecture was founded,
includes a term of thirteen months and a half, and amounts to 20,415,966
dollars. From this aggregate value a ninth part is to be deducted, to equalize
it with one years exportation, which reduces the sum to 18,147,526 dollars. It
is very well known, that the prices of our produce through the year lately
returned, and which ended with September 1791, had fallen to their antecedent
rates, and it will be perceived on a comparison, that our exports exceeded in
their aggregate value those of the former year. The last return, exclusively of
two quarters of Charleston was dollars 17,571,551 Those two quarters, at the
rate of the corresponding term in the preceding year, would be about 700,000
dollars 18,271,551 The exports of the year ending on the 30th September, 1792,
are 21,000,000 of dollars. See return thereof in chapter 12. Those of the
following year exceeded 26,000,000.



There remains not, therefore, the least cause to doubt, that our total
exportations were eighteen millions and a quarter, and consequently more than
in the antecedent year. It is to be observed too that the high prices which
were current through the time of the first return, must have produced an
exportation of all the grain that could be carried to market, and none of the
old crop could have been left as usual, to sell with the new. The obvious
effect of this must have been an unusual deduction from the exports in the
following year. The valuation of the exports of these states immediately before
the revolution is not precisely ascertained: but the whole exportations from
North America, including the remaining colonies, and Newfoundland, Bermuda, and
the Bahamas, were computed to have been in 1771, 15,280,000 dollars. In these
were comprised the shipments between those islands and the main, and from
province to province as every vessel, which departed from one American port, to
another, was obliged to clear out her cargo, as if destined for a foreign
country. It will appear to be safe to subtract for the difference produced by
these two circumstances, one half of the former exports, when it is remembered
that nearly two-thirds of the quantity of tonnage is probably employed in the
intercourse between the various parts of the present union, which is engaged in
that with foreign nations; and that the British Newfoundland fishery alone, was
estimated at more than 2,200,000 dollars in 1775. The increase of the tonnage
employed in the foreign trade affords another proof of the increment of our
exports. About 330,000 tons were laden in the present United States in the year
1770* part of which were destined for ports now within the union. About 600,000
tons have been loaded in each of the two last years for foreign ports, though
our exports being in a much greater degree manufactured, are now contained in a
smaller proportionate compass: and boards, scantling and staves, which are our
most bulky commodities, have not increased in half the ratio of the tonnage
employed.

An addition may be also made to the amount of the return for the increased
supplies in provisions, cordage, and other materials, for the use and outfit of
foreign ships, both of war and trade. Since the prices of salt provisions have
been reduced below those of Ireland, and many articles applicable to ships use,
have been manufactured here, this item has become very considerable; and so far
a^ the articles are sold to foreigners, they are essentially exports.

Under this head, the increased number of ships sold to foreign nations, may be
fairly mentioned, and though much has been said of the number formerly disposed
of abroad, it is not doubted that a greater value was sold in that way in the
time of the last return. Of this fact some further illustration will probably
be given in the sequel. It will be sufficient to observe here, that the whole
quantity of tonnage built and native vessels repaired during the last year,
exceeds in value one million of dollars.

The enlarged consumption made within our country by foreign persons of every
description, who are certainly much more numerous than they formerly were, is
as profitable to the country, as the same value in exports would have been.
This item will appear to be very considerable, when the expenditures of foreign
ministers, consuls, transient and resident foreigners, fleets and seamen, are
called to mind.

The export trade of the United States and the great increase of home
consumption have placed the American producers in general on a very
advantageous footing. The competition which exists in our markets, between the
purchasers for the account of foreigners of various nations, for our own
merchants, for the great consumption in the seaports and the parts adjac^nt to
the coasts, and for the use of the manufacturers, together with the occasional
shipments made on their own accounts by the southern planters, by the millers
of the middle states, and by the owners of the eastern fishing vessels, afford
the cultivators and fishermen so many alternatives, that they can always obtain
the best prices, which circumstances will justify. In short, these several
demands, at once steady, extensive and various, efficiently support our
agriculture: and though peculiar enterprise and faculties in commerce and
manufactures, the power of capital, and an intimate knowledge of our trade and
interior system, enable a particular nation to participate largely in the
exports of the United States, the remainder of the world receives from us a
very considerable value, and the variety of demand, which the destination of
our exports proves to exist, affords us certain relief from the consequences of
the commercial errors of any of those countries, whose citizens are our
consumers. Whenever such errors shall occur -- or so far as they may have
already taken place, to diffuse a knowledge of our resources among all nations,
to inspire them with confidence in our laws and modes of dealing, and to
convert our commodities by manufactures, into every shape, which there
occasions and our own may require, will prove a competent and efficacious
corrective.

It is satisfactory to observe the regular increase of manufactured goods in
our returns of exported commodities. The number in each of the two last years
is upwards of one third, in a list which amounts to near three hundred
articles. Hence we may infer, that the time is really arrived, when foreign
trade is increased and enlivened by home manufactures. This idea, together with
the domestic commerce produced by them, will be more particularly noticed in
another place.

CONCERNING THE MANUFACTURES OF THE UNITED STATES.
In considering this subject it will be unnecessary to adduce many arguments to
influence the judgment of the eastern parts of the union. Many of our citizens
near the seacoast of the middle states are equally convinced of the beneficial
effects of manufactures. The cultivators in the southern and western country,
and a respectable proportion of our mercantile citizens are apprehensive of
injury to themselves and to their country from the pursuit of this object.
These are two descriptions of persons, whom it is in every view our duty to
satisfy, if the truth and reason will permit; and it is principally from a due
attention to them, that the subject is proposed to be examined here.

An opinion has prevailed that the southern states will be sacrificed to the
eastern, and in some degree to the middle states, by the plan of manufactures.
It is plain, however, that as the soil of the eastern states is not equal to
the production of a sufficiency of provisions and raw materials for their own
use, they must resort to the middle and southern states for several raw
materials and for new supplies of provisions. It is known, too, that some
valuable articles for manufactures cannot be produced but in the southern
states, such as cotton, indigo, and rice Rice is the raw material for the
East-Indian spirit arrack, and it is necessary for a particular quality of
starch used by the European manufacturers.
, and that tobacco is almost confined to them. The southern states and western
country will have considerable advantages in the support, which the home market
of the manufacturers will give at all times, and especially in time of war,
(when freights will be high, and shipping scarce) to their agricultural and
landed productions. Even now, in profound peace, it is the case. Hemp was
delivered in the ports of the middle states, from the lands of the southern
states, at less than five cents per lb. in 1791. Nothing would have kept it up
to that rate, but the rope and twine manufactories of the middle and eastern
states, and those which are growing up among themselves. The brewers of
Philadelphia draw nearly as much of their barley from the Chesapeak as they
derive from the lands of Pennsylvania. These and other facts show the
beneficial beginning of things. The manufactures of ships and cordage
throughout the Union, procure from the southern nearly states all their tar,
pitch, turpentine, oil of turpentine, and rosin. The ports of Philadelphia and
New York, take three-fourths of their ship timber from them, justly preferring
vessels of live oak and red cedar to all others. The owners of the coal mines
of Virginia, enjoy the monoply of all the supplies for the manufacturers of the
more northern states, who live in the sea ports: a demand which is increasing
rapidly. No lead mine of any consequence is yet worked, except one near the
superior waters of James river. The southern states abound with iron, and have
much more fuel of all kinds than the northern states, and they have streams for
the most powerful water works. Few or no very abundant deposits of coal have
been yet discovered further north or east than the waters of the Ohio and the
Chesapeak, even in internal situations. The iron manufactures of the United
States are already important in value, and immensely so in point of utility, or
rather of necessity. Buildings, farms, manufactories, shipping, fisheries,
fleets, and armies, all demand them. In short the all-important landed interest
would languish, and its progress in prosperity would be retarded in the
counties of the southern states, even near the sea, if our present manufactures
were to be abolished, and all future establishments of that kind were to be
given up. But their inland and western counties cannot flourish unless
manufactures shall be promoted and introduced among them. In the counties of
Pennsylvania beyond the Allegany mountain, are 63,000 inhabitants, and probably
10,000 of these are farmers. The wool of that country is yet very
inconsiderable -- their furs are more abundant. From these two raw materials,
no less than 10,140 wool hats, and 2,200 fur hats are manufactured yearly in
thirty three hatters' shops. Sail cloth (which, when manufactured, would be
worth 30 cents per lb.) could be made at Pittsburg, Winchester in Virginia,
Hillsborough, and Salisbury, in North Carolina, Camden, in South Carolina, and
Lewisville, in Georgia, out of hemp, the value of which, there, does not exceed
4 or 5 cents. To bring a ton of hemp to the seaports from those towns, except
Lewisville, costs from 35 to 40 per cent. of its value. To bring a ton weight
of sail cloth from the same places to the same ports would not cost above 6 or
8 per cent. and the manufacturers' provisions and fuel are attended with
similar savings. Deduct for a moment the demand of foreign commerce from
Alexandria and Winchester, and the latter would appear to be most vigorous and
flourishing; because it manufactures more, having not so high a market for its
provisions and raw materials. These observations apply with equal force to the
whole state of Vermont and to all our interior counties. The nation that
supplies us with hempen, flaxen, and iron manufactures, takes immense
quantities of hemp, flax, and iron from Russia. These Russian raw materials are
purchased at the eastern extremity of the Baltic, are transported to another
foreign country and manufactured there, are brought hither, and hawled through
bad roads, 50, 100, 200, and 300 miles into our most productive counties, which
yield the requisite raw materials. These facts powerfully incite us to foster
manufactures of the same kinds, there and elsewhere. Till that shall be the
case, we shall continue to drag those raw materials through the same bad roads,
and ship them under charges of carting and freight equal to a third, an half,
and two thirds of their value, according to the distance. Neglecting and
repelling the establishment of manufactures, would occasion immense deductions
from the profits of our lands; and due consideration* it is believed, would
convince us, that the best interests, nay the necessities of our landholders
require the introduction of some kind of manufactory in almost every vicinity.

The countries south of Pennsylvania are remarkably rich in fossils. Coal,
copper, iron, lead, and other minerals are found in either Maryland, Virginia,
North or South Carolina, or Georgia, or all of them. Mineral appearances occur
every where. The promotion of manufactures is necessary to draw these forth;
and as they have immense forests of wood, and the most powerful mill-streams,
there can be no doubt, that they will be brought into use, as soon as those
means shall be adopted.

The family manufactures of the middle and interior counties of Virginia,
North Carolina, and the interior counties of Georgia, South Carolina, and
Maryland, are said to be greater in value, than the articles of foreign
manufactures, which they use; and were they universally awake to the facility,
profits, and national importance of this mode of manufacturing, they might
extend it much further, without impeding their farming operations, while, at
the same time, they would provide a new use for their agricultural productions.

A single state, Pennsylvania, has upwards of fifty paper mills, which work up
materials of no value. The manufactures from those mills are computed at two
hundred and fifty thousand dollars -- the persons employed in them do not
exceed one hundred and fifty, or two hundred. That state contains about one
ninth of the people of the United States, and their contributions to the
expenses of the government and the interest of the public debt, are
consequently about 400,000 dollars. Their paper mills, therefore, indemnify
them for five-eights of their quota! It appears to be the duty of government to
encourage the people in all the states to do the same, especially as it can be
done by water-means, and not by men diverted from their farms. The southern
states do not want a capacity They wear cotton and linen more than the northern
states, whose climate requires more woolens. Out of the rags of the former
paper is made. Out of woolen rags it has not yet been found practicable.
for this manufacture, which has acquired an establishment in Maryland, and has
appeared as far to the southward as North Carolina.

It may be safely affirmed, that the manufactures of leather in the United
States exceed in value all our annual burdens. We import few or no shoes. In
each of the two last years we have procured from abroad no more than 70,000
pair of shoes and boots, for 4,000,000 of people. If we use only one pair and a
half per annum per person, at seventy-five cents, they will amount to 4,500,000
dollars, which exceeds every demand of the general and state governments. A. D.
1791 -- 2.
The hides, skins, bark, lime, thread, bristles, and wax, nay, the very
heel-pegs, are all drawn from our lands and farms. Recollecting this, and
similar facts, we cannot question the utility of even handicraft manufactures
to the farmers, planters, and landed interest. If the manufacture of shoes in
this country, were abolished, our annual debt to foreign countries would be
increased to an amount equal to all our public contributions. Similar
observations might be made on several other articles, and to a much greater
extent on linen, cotton, and woolen fabrics. Cattle thrive with little
attention in the mild winters of the south. That regin being more woody, they
have a greater quantity of bark than most of the other states.

The manufactures of wool in Great Britain have been stated by their ministers
at L.16,800,000 sterling -- and the simple manufactures of liquors in that
country are said to consume twenty-five millions of bushels of grain. Were
there no other proofs, we could not doubt the importance of manufactures to the
agriculture of that country. They nourish and support it. We make up all our
wool -- our lands produce cotton with great facility, and we manufacture
liquors as easily as Britain. There is no doubt, that the latter branch already
affords to our farmers an annual market for 1,500,000 bushels of grain. This
manu^^^ture is well understood and carried on in all the southern states.

The objection, that manufactures take the people from agriculture, is not
solid as elsewhere observed; since women, children, horses, water, and fire,
all work at manufactures, and perform four-fifths of the labor; and as many
manufacturers migrate to the United States, it may be fairly asserted that the
quantity of agricultural industry is increased by the impulse and demand
arising from manufactures. It may be reasonably asked, whether a farmer does
not raise the more cotton, flax, hemp, and wool, because his wife and daughters
spin and weave them, or because a water-work spins for them?

The employment of the new medium, the public certificates (which may be taken
at L.15,000,000 sterling) in a country that formerly had not L.3,000,000
sterling of medium, renders manufactures necessary at this time. It may be
said, lands will employ it. But farms sold well at the time when L.3,000,000
sterling was probably the utmost extent of our medium, and cannot therefore
give employment to the additional twelve millions, though they might to a part
of it. The first application of this capital is intended to be made to the
manufacturing of cotton, which is peculiar to the southern states. This is one
method by which those states will be benefited by even that part of the public
debt, which they do not own. On this important point more will be said
hereafter. It merits the most close attention and the most temperate
consideration.

More money is employed in manufactures, than in foreign commerce, because the
gross value of exported articles is much less than the gross value of
manufactured articles. This will not be doubted, when it is remembered, that
shoes alone amount to several millions of dollars. These manufactures cannot
therefore be deemed less important to the southern landholders than foreign
commerce; and those proprietors will not be disposed to neglect foreign
commerce, nor will they consider it as irrelative to their particular or local
interests.

SECTION II. CONCERNING THE MANUFACTURES OF THE UNITED STATES.
IN pursuing the consideration of American manufactures as beneficial and
necessary to the southern states, it will be useful to take a cursory view of
the indications of attachment and disposition to them, which are discoverable
in that quarter.

Virginia appears to be making a greater progress in merchant mills than any
state in the union, though some are yet far before her in those beneficial
works. Maryland and Delaware which are in the southern moiety, are second only
to Pennsylvania in this branch. New York it is conceived, ought to pay more
attention to the milling business.
There is little doubt that more pig and bar iron is made to the southward of
Pennsylvania, than to the northward of it. A lead mine has been opened in
Virginia, which is extending its supplies through the union, and promises fair
to be commensurate with the present demand: and there is one which is now
worked, in the territory south of the Ohio. But no lead mines are in
considerable operation in the states north or east of Virginia, though a small
beginning upon one in the western parts of Pennsylvania is made. An association
in Virginia, another in the territory south of the Ohio, and a company in the
western district of South Carolina, have provided themselves with carding and
spinning machinery on the British plans to manufacture their native cotton. The
planters, in the southern states raise quantities of this raw material,
unthought of before the war, and until the discussions of the subject of
manufactures, which took place some time after the treaty of peace. The family
manufactures in cotton are much greater in the four southernmost states, than
in the four eastern states. There are not wanting considerable numbers of sheep
in the five southern states, yet by the two returns of exports, it appears that
no wool has been sent from thence to foreign markets. It has been common to
receive wool in Pennsylvania from the eastern states, though they manufacture
so much, but it is not known that any is ever received there for sale from the
southern states. Wool has been transported to Salem, in North Carolina, and to
Winchester, in Virginia, from the city of Philadelphia, for the hat manufactory.

There has been full as great a current of emigration of flour millers,
blacksmiths, tanners, hatters, cabinet-makers, distillers, coopers, etc. to the
southern states from those north of them, in proportion to numbers, as of
farmers; so that the workshops of the middle and northern states yield a double
benefit to their fellow-citizens in the south, in supplying them with
manufactures, and artizans.

There is greater variety in distillation in the four southern states than in
the four eastern -- that is, the manufactory is established on a broader basis.
It is also more certain in the south than in the north. In the latter, molasses
is the principal ingredient and being from an external source, may be lost to
the eastern distillers. Their manufactory is even now at hazard, unless they
resort to the grain of the country to the southward of them. But in the
southern states they manufacture spirits from molasses, peaches, apples,
several kinds of grain, and probably will, as their country is cleared, extend
it to the grape. This has been tried with success in the experimental way, at
Galliopolis, near the Scioto. The distillation of arack from rice will probably
be commenced if that grain should ever fall in price.

The legislature of North Carolina made a loan of money since the late war to
assist the introduction of the paper manufactory.

An association containing forty of the most respectable planters and farmers,
in the western district of South Carolina, has been established within a few
years for the promoting of manufactures, and agriculture. A subscription to the
amount of about 25,000 dollars, has been made in the territory south of the
Ohio for the purpose of carrying on the cotton manufactory. -- An indication of
zeal not equalled in any middle or northern state, considering that the whole
population of the government is 30,000 whites, and 5,000 blacks.

The preparation of tar, pitch, turpentine, spirits of turpentine, and rosin,
in North Carolina and its vicinity, may be deemed a manufacture as justly as
the making of linseed oil, pot ash, or ordinary tanning. A very small quantity
indeed, of these articles, will, be made in the states north of Virginia
because nature forbids; but they will, from obvious reasons, increase in the
south.

During the existence of the state impost laws, two of the southern states
(Maryland and Virginia) imposed an extra tonnage, not only upon foreign ships
but upon those of the other states, by which they evinced a strong disposition
to encourage the manufacture of ships. The same two states laid duties on the
importation of spirits manufactured in the other parts of the union.

The state of Maryland imposed considerable protecting duties to encourage
their own manufactures. The legislature of Maryland have encouraged the glass
manufactory in that state by a considerable loan. That of Virginia passed a
special act since the peace, to encourage the manufactory of snuff and tobacco.

There are more factories of cordage and cables in two of the southern states,
(Maryland and Virginia) than in any two of the states of New Jersey, New York,
Connecticut, and New Hampshire. Virginia laid a duty of two-thirds of a dollar
on cordage by her state impost law.

The important manufactory of ships has become greater in each of the three
states of Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina, than it now is in
New Hampshire. The southern state of Maryland manufactured in 1790, as many
vessels as any two of the northern states of New York, Connecticut, and
Rhode Island.

The paper-mill in the United States, which is most remote from the sea, is to
be found in the town of Salem, in North Carolina, three hundred miles from the
ocean. No such manufactures as those of that village (a Moravian settlement) in
the southern state of North Carolina, exist in any part of the union north of
Maryland, equally remote from the sea.

There are but two scenes in the Atlantic counties, in which coal, iron and
waterfalls are yet found together in abundance. These scenes are therefore,
peculiarly qualified for the iron branch of manufactures. The city of Richmond
on the bank of James' river, in Virginia, which is one of the places
contemplated, may be considered in a permanent view as having an incontestable
natural advantage over any more northern seaport, in this interesting branch.
How profitable would it be to Virginia, were all her pig and bar iron passed
under the tilt hammers, or through the rolling and slitting mills, which might
be erected at that place. The existence of coal on the eastern boundary of
Luzerne county, in Pennsylvania, and in the near parts of Northumberland, and
in the westernmost parts of Northampton was not ascertained in 1791.


Some of the produce of the fisheries, as before observed, are to be deemed
manufactures. The herring and shad (or river and bay) fisheries, south of
Pennsylvania are very considerable. A barrel of herrings is worth, on a medium
at the fishing places, 250 cents. The manufacture of the cask, the packing,
curing, making pickle, and trimming, amount to more than one fourth of the sum
or twenty five per cent. The cask and manufacturing of spirits distilled from
molasses, does not amount to more than one sixth of the value of the commodity,
or 16 2-3 per cent. A barrel of pickled fish of the southern states may be
therefore as justly deemed a manufacture, as a cask of country rum. A similar
comparison might be made between this article and several other simple
manufactures of the middle and eastern parts of the union. It is not intended
to discuss, at this time, the propriety of granting bounties, but if they were
deemed proper grants, there are points of view in which the southern states
would appear to have a much greater interest in them, than the eastern states.

1st. As the southern states cultivate a greater variety of raw articles -- and
are capable of producing a much larger quantity of them, all that extensive
class of bounties, which are resolvable into an encouragement to the growth of
the raw material, will be much more beneficial to them, than to the eastern
states, which are more limited both in the kinds and quantities they can bring
forward for the bounty.

2dly. The southern states having extensive and very rich interior and western
counties, far from navigable rivers, (which the eastern have not) and the
productions of those scenes being liable to a long and expensive land carriage,
the bounty would soon be found to enable them to bring the simple manufactures
and raw materials to the markets on the sea coasts, which they would not,
without the bounty, attempt to transport thither. This will not be deemed a
mere suggestion of ingenuity, when it is remembered that the British and Irish
give bounties on their fabrics, and even on the bulky articles of flour, grain,
and biscuit, to enable the exporter to deliver them with advantage in foreign
markets.

It is an obvious truth, that every thing is more valuable in proportion to the
number and extent of its uses, or the purposes to which it can be
advantageously applied. Flax, hemp, wool, silk, cotton, indigo, tobacco, hides,
iron, wood, grain, and cattle, are valuable, where they are wanted merely as
exports; but they manifestly acquire a new or second value, when wanted to
employ, accomodate, or nourish manufacturers. In places from whence those
articles cannot be exported, without a great expense of transportation, it is
very desirable to give them this second use; but in situations too interior to
be affected by the demand for exportation, and where of course they are not
required for the purposes of external commerce, this new use must be created
for them, or they will not be produced, and agriculture will consequently
languish. This view of the subject evinces the indispensable necessity of
manufactures to the prosperity of the interior and western country as before
intimated. Nor will these ideas appear, on examination, to be merely plausible
conjectures. They are no less supported by the actual state of things, than by
probability and reason. The towns of Washington, Pittsburg, Bedford, and
Huntingdon, in Pennsylvania, (the nearest of which is 150 miles from a
seaport, exhibit the strongest proofs, that manufactures are the natural and
best support of the interior landed interest, and are necessary at once to the
accommodation, the comfort, and the prosperity of the cultivators of the middle
and western country. The following table contains an account of the population
of those villages, which is not exaggerated.

Washington. Pittsburg. Bedford. Huntingdon. Clock and watchmakers, 1 1
Silversmiths, 1 1 Coopers, 1 2 1 Skin-dressers and breeches makers, 1 1 Tanners
and curriers, 1 2 1 Tailors, 2 2 3 Cabinet makers, 2 4 2 Blacksmiths, 2 5 3 4
Shoemakers, 2 5 2 4 Hatters, 2 2 1 2 Dyers, 1 Weavers, 2 2 2 Reedmakers, 1
Saddlers, 1 3 2 2 Saddletree-makers, 1 Spinningwheel-makers, 1 Nailo^s, 1 1
Malsters and Brewers, 1 1 Potters, 1 Tinners, 1 2 Distillers, 3 1 Wheelrights,
3 1 2 Stocking-weavers, 1 1 Gunsmiths, 3 Ropemakers, 1 Whitesmiths, 2 Total of
manufacturers, 32 40 15 23 Total families, The population of Washington is
unknown but it is less than that of Pittsburg.
130 40 85

It appears from this table, that in those county-towns (or seats of justice)
in the interior and western parts of Pennsylvania, the necessity for
manufactures has occasioned a little congregation of artizans, in the
proportion of twenty-seven parts in one hundred, of the whole village in the
smallest instance, and in the proportion of thirty-seven parts in one hundred,
in the largest. The town of Washington, which is the most remote, and is near
to the Ohio, has been created since the late war. Its distance is about 300
miles west of Philadelphia. The variety of its manufactures is striking, and it
may be safely affirmed, that at the seats of justice, in the counties of
Delaware, Bucks, Chester, and Montgomery, which are nearest to Philadelphia, as
great a number of manufactures, in propotion to their respective population,
does not exist, though the family manufactures are much more considerable in
these counties, and though they have very numerous tanneries, iron works,
powder-mills, paper-mills, blacksmiths, hatters, shoemakers, weavers, and other
valuable workmen, in their villages and scattered throughout their populous
townships. This, however, is the case, in some degree, likewise in the
townships of the western scene above described.

In the midland counties of Pennsylvania, many precious manufactures have
resulted from a flourishing agriculture, and, immediately on their birth, have
contributed to the prosperity of the cultivators. The borough of Lancaster,
which is the largest inland town in the United States, is sixty-six miles from
a seaport, and ten from any practiced boat navigation. The number of families
was in 1786, about 700, of whom 234 were manufacturers. The following is the
list of them. Fourteen hatters, thirty-six shoemakers, four tanners, seventeen
saddlers, twenty-five tailors, twenty-five weavers of woolen, linen, and cotton
cloth, three stocking weavers, twenty-five white and black smiths, six wheel
wrights, eleven coopers, six clock and watchmakers, six tobacco and snuff
manufacturers, four dyers, seven gun smiths, five rope makers, four tinners,
two brass founders, three skin dressers, one brush maker, seven turners, seven
nail makers, five silver smiths, three potters, three brewers, three copper
smiths, and two printers in English and German. There were in 1786 also, within
thirty-nine miles of the town, seventeen furnaces, forges, rolling mills and
slitting mills, and within ten miles of it eighteen grain mills, sixteen saw
mills, one fulling mill, four oil mills, five hemp mills, two boreing and
grinding mills for gun barrels, and eight tanneries. The increase since 1786,
must have been very considerable; for the attention of the United States has
been very much turned to manufactures since the year 1787. It may be safely
affirmed, that the counties of Lancaster (in which the borough is) York and
Berks are among the most vigorous in Pennsylvania, perhaps in the union, and
that there are none in the state in which there are more manufactures, is
beyond all question. They are all fifty miles or more, from the nearest
seaport.

Information through several channels, affords the greatest reason to believe,
that the interior of Frederick and Elizabeth towns, in Maryland, Stanton, in
Virginia, Lexington, in Kentucky, and other towns in the southern states, would
prove on examination, similar to those of Pennsylvania, and that the
improvements in necessary manufactures are as visible and as rapid, as those in
agriculture The following account of the size and of the manufactures of
Winchester, in Virginia, is furnished by a person lately a resident in that
place It appears to exceed even the towns of Pennsylvania in the proportion of
manufacturers.

There are about two hundred houses in Winchester. Provisions and wood are low.

There are four or five tan yards. The demand for leather is so great, that it
is generally sold unfit for use.

One rope yard carried on extensively.

One or two coachmakers. Few carriages are used, the roads being yet rough.

The bakers and distillers brew occasionally.

There are three or four distilleries in the town. In the neighborhood there
are many.

There are also several oil mills in the neighborhood. The price of flaxseed
is 2 s. and 2 s6 per bushel, Virginia money.

Grist mills are numerous in the neighborhood; and teams are constantly
employed in the transportation of flour to Alexandria: distance eighty miles:
carriage 1 dollar per barrel.

One coppersmith, who carries on his business very extensively.

Three tin plate workers.

Eight or ten hatters. Wool hats, of Winchester make are in much repute, and
are vended in large quantities. Price eleven dollars per dozen. Single hat, one
dollar.

Note. Wool is one third of a dollar per lb. and is often ordered up from
Philadelphia by the Winchester hatters.

Twelve or fifteen saddlers.

Note. This manufacture, as well as the hatting, is in a flourishing condition,
and carried on very extensively.

Five or six blacksmiths -- one employed in plating saddle trees.

Three or four wheelrights.

Eight or ten tailors.

Eight or nine shoemakers.

Four or five weavers. Two spinning wheel makers.

Three or four saddle tree makers.


.

The reflections arising from these facts are highly satisfactory, and as they
open new and extended views of the resources and capacities of the United
States, they must increase the prevalent disposition of the people to improve
the interior economy of our country. It is devoutly hoped, that they may also
contribute to remove the apprehensions of our southern and western fellow
citizens, in regard to unjust sacrifices of their interests to those of their
brethren in other quarters, and that they may lead to such further examinations
as will finally evince those immense direct and indirect benefits from American
manufactures, which are sincerely believed to pervade the whole union.

CONCERNING THE MANUFACTURES OF THE UNITED STATES, AS THEY AFFECT THE
MERCANTILE INTEREST.
Many of the shipholders and merchants trading with foreign countries, suppose,
but it is believed erroneously, that they have no interest in the promotion of
manufactures. It is known that Great Britain with seventy millions of acres of
populated land, ships fourteen millions (her whole exports being near twenty
millions) in her own manufactures. The foreign trade of that kingdom, without
manufactures would manifestly be neither so great nor so various -- for the
value of the produce manufactured is increased from one hundred to ten hundred
per cent. and more; as is also that of the imported raw materials, which
constitute a great portion of their trade. The foreign commerce of the United
States, is already enlivened by manufactures. Ships, boats, oars, and
handspikes, bar iron, steel, nail rods, carriages of all kinds, hats, shoes,
cordage, candles, soap, oils of several kinds, starch, hair-powder, distilled
spirits, malt liquors, cabinet wares, plate, puncheon packs, gunpowder,
potashes, bricks, chocolate, mustard, tow linens, sail-cloth, potter's ware,
sadlery and harness, wool and cotton cards, paper and paper hangings, tanned
leather, books, snuff, manufactured tobacco, and iron manufactures are now
frequently exported to foreign countries. Coastwise there is also a great trade
in these and many other manufactured articles, and in raw materials and
provisions for the manufacturers within the United States.

An argument of great importance to the shipholders, exporters, and
underwriters, and indeed to the cultivators of the earth, in support of
manufactures is to be drawn from their tendency to promote in an easy, certain,
safe and cheap way, the naval capacities and strength of the United States. The
transportation of provisions, coal, raw materials, and other articles from the
southern and middle states to the northern, and the diffusion of the
manufactures, of the towns on the coast, throughout the union, already employs
many vessels. The rice, indigo, cotton, hemp, flax, iron, hides, furs, tar,
pitch, turpentine, rosin, wax, tobacco, wood and timber, flour and grain,
shipped from the states on, and to the southward of the Chesapeak, for the
manufacturers in the middle and northern states, give employment at this time
to a very considerable portion of our tonnage. This cannot be doubted, when it
is remembered, that our coasters are 110,000 tons, though our vessels in all the
foreign trades probably do not much exceed 150,000; A. D. 1791, and of course
exclusive of fishing vessels.
and the former are entirely out of the reach of foreign restriction,
consequently (with the fishing vessels) are our most certain dependence. The
weight of this circumstance, will be not a little increased by the
recollection, that the coasting trade it uncommonly interesting to a nation
without transmarine colonies or dominions.

When we consider the fisheries as one of the most efficacious modes of
creating the powers of offense and defense at sea, and that our agriculture and
commerce, must therefore be supported and defended by our fishermen, and
fishing vessels, among other means, it will be satisfactory to the cultivators,
and merchants, that they will be promoted by the success of our manufactures.
Skins and furs of sea animals, whalebone, and the head matter of the whale, are
used by various manufacturers for leather, hats, whips, candles, etc. The oils
are used by leather dressers, shipbuilders; etc. and instead of candles.

It will be unnecessary to adduce to our mercantile citizens any arguments to
prove, that the United States generally pay a premium on the bills purchased
for their remittances for European manufactures. The exports, sales of vessels,
their outward freights and sales of lands, to foreigners, are the ordinary
means applied to the payments for our imports, after deducting that part of
them, which belonging to emigrators, is not to be remitted or paid for. It is
interesting to ascertain the reasons for our continuing to lose by the course
of exchange. The principal cause probably is, that we draw so very large a
proportion of our manufactures from one nation, that there is constantly a
trebled demand for bills on that country. It is of importance to discover how
this is to be remedied. The other European nations have had the eight years of
the war almost exclusively, and the nine years of the peace, in a fair
competition and do not supply us with manufactures equivalent to half of the
stated value of the shoes made by ourselves! It appears then, that our own
exertions only, can relieve our merchants from this annual loss on their
remittances for several million of dollars.

It may not be improper to take a view of the article of distilled spirits as a
commodity, which we are capable of manufacturing to any extent, and which while
it will be an aid to agriculture, will also be an object of coasting and
foreign trade. We have imported, in a single year, above eleven millions of
gallons of foreign spirits and molasses. If one million of gallons of the
latter were used in substance then our imports of spirits and ingredients made
into spirits, would stand at ten millions of gallons. The value of these, as
they cost the country may be fairly taken at one third of a dollar on a medium,
and will give 3,333,333 dollars, which is above one-sixth part of the annual
value of our exports A. D. 1791.
. As five millions of bushels of grain would be consumed in the manufactory of
a quantity of spirits equal to what was imported, in the form of spirits or
ingredients employed to make them, there is no occasion for argument to prove,
that the landed interest would be greatly benefited by the manufacture of grain
liquors (or fruit liquors) in lieu of the ten millions of gallons drawn from
foreign sources. And in regard to the mercantile interest, it may be observed,
that the supply of a foreign commodity is always precarious, and accordingly
the disturbances in the several parts of the French empire, and the loss of
their vintage, have deprived us of the usual importation of their brandies
since the last autumn, and of the accustomed supply of molasses from the crop
of 1792 of their principal colony. These two defalcations will probably amount
to some millions of gallons, and must produce a void in a considerable branch
of our foreign trade, for we shall not have it in our power to import the
brandies and molasses, nor to export the returns for them, which have employed
many thousand tons of shipping, and a considerable part of our mercantile
capital and industry; nor shall we be able to export distilled spirits,
manufactured from molasses, which has also employed our vessels, private funds
and industry. How are the merchant and shipholder to be relieved under these
injuries to their business? Manufacturing distilled spirits and malt liquors
See paper T. in the second book.
from native materials will afford considerable relief. Their capital and
vessels may be employed in purchasing and transporting, from the rivers and
bays of the United States to the distilleries and breweries, a part at least of
the requisite quantities of grain, hops, fuel, and lumber, and of the
manufactured liquors, to domestic or foreign markets. Nor is this a mere
probability. It is already an existing fact. The manufacture of grain liquors
in the town of Providence (in Rhode Island) alone, in the first three months of
the present year, was equivalent to 12056 cases of geneva per ann. If the Dutch
import grain enough from the north of Europe, to make and distribute gin
throughout the world, from Archangel to Canton, which is really the case, it
cannot be doubted that the United States, which have the greatest surplus of
grain of any country upon earth, which are rapidly increasing it, which are
further from their consumers than any nation exporting grain, which have the
wood to make the casks for it, and the shipping to transport it, and are
themselves great consumers of malt liquors and distilled spirits, it cannot be
doubted that a nation thus circumstanced, must be able to manufacture those
articles with facility and advantage to any extent of the demand. The benefits
to foreign trade from the manufacture of ships, cordage, sail-cloth, and
anchors, as necessary instruments of commerce, and from those articles and
pot-ash, soap, candles, steel, carriages and other articles, for sale to
foreigners here, or as payments or remittances to them abroad are already too
obvious to need more than to be enumerated: but too much attention cannot be
given to our situation, qualifications, and prospects in regard to the home
manufacture of liquors, considering the disturbed state of the sugar islands,
the increased consumption and prices of all the productions of the cane, the
impediments to the ordinary importation of slaves, the objections to the slave
trade which are appearing in different quarters, the imm^nse population of the
manufacturing countries of Europe, and their consequent necessity to employ in
the culture of grain the lands they recently appropriated to the vine, as well
as the impossibility of their sparing for the making of liquors all the barley,
rye, and oats, which were formerly consumed in that manufacture.

There is also a considerable portion of foreign trade, created by the
importation of raw materials and other necessaries for the employment and
consumption of the manufacturers: the articles contemplated are cotton, hemp,
bar iron, sheet iron, copper and brass in pigs and sheets, lapis calaminaris,
lead, pewter, wire of every metal, woolen, cotton, and linen yarns, hempen
yarn, hides, skins, and furs, wool, paper for books and hangings, dyers
colors, and some others, varnish, printing types, bullion for gold and
silversmiths, gold and silver leaf, glue, mahogany, and other cabinet woods,
molasses, and crude sugars for distillers and refiners, manufacturers tools and
implements, such as vizes, screwplates, anvils, hammers, axes, hatchets,
knives, awls, pincers, grindstones, hatters bowstrings, etc. glass plates for
looking glass makers and coach makers, callicoe and linens for printing,
morocco skins, and many other commodities, which are expended in the workshops
or families of our manufacturers, including foreign articles of apparel,
furniture, food and drink.

SECTION III. A CONTINUATION OF THE REFLECTIONS ON THE MANUFACTURES OF THE
UNITED STATES AS THEY AFFECT THE MERCANTILE INTEREST.
SOME of the benefits to the coasting trade and other parts of the domestic
commerce resulting from manufactures, have already been intimated in treating
of the manufacture of liquors. Besides these, bark and hides for the tanneries,
iron, lead, steel, copper, hemp, flax, wool, cotton, silk, wood, timber, furs,
tobacco, flaxseed, and grain, for the manufacturers of those articles, and
provisions, fuel, indigo, and other objects of their consumption and use,
together with the goods made by them, are, and constantly will be purchased,
transported from place to place, and sold; creating a great part of the
employment for 110,000 tons of coasting vessels, exercising a large portion of
commercial industry and skill, and affording a return of profits, on a very
considerable sum of mercantile capital, employed in the business. This branch
of our trade is of peculiar importance; because we have no transmarine
colonies, and while the redundancy of shipping owned by most nations, will
leave us but little chance of materially increasing our vessels in the foreign
trades, the extension we may give by it, in the course of ten years, to our
home trade and navigation, will probably be very great. We have brought cotton,
sugar, and saltpetre to be manufactured, from India, sulphur from the Adriatic,
hemp, flax, and iron, from Russia, copper from Sweden, furs, indigo, and
mahogany, from the gulf of Mexico, and coal for our workmen from England: and
we cannot doubt, therefore, that we shall transport those commodities and
others, from such of the states as produce them, to those which shall create,
or have already established, a manufacturing demand.

Foreign commerce being limited by the combined value of our imports, and
exports, The negociations and insurances for foreigners are considerable* but
these operations require little use of capital.
any mercantile capital, which might accumulate beyond the sum requisite for
those purposes, would want employment of a commercial nature, if the merchant
were not able to have recourse to manufactures. This is not a mere speculation
in possible events; for considerable trading houses, and others of respectable
standing, have actually entered into such pursuits. Glass-houses, rope-walks,
powder-mills, iron-works, steel-works, slitting and rolling mills, grist-mills,
naileries, sugar refineries, breweries and distilleries, the manufactory of
sail-cloth, and of woolen, cotton and linen goods, exhibit at this moment
numerous proofs of the fact. The commercial states, which do not produce much,
will yearly confirm this truth.

It is too well know to need more than a bare allegation of the truth, that our
outward bound vessels are always completely laden, and that they do not on a
medium return half full. It will therefore, increase the profits of the owners
of ships, if the outward cargo can be rendered more valuable by manufacturing
the goods to be exported. This may be exemplified in regard to wheat and the
simple manufacture of superfine flour. A vessel, which will carry ten thousand
bushels of the former, at the price of a dollar per bushel, will be laden for
10,000 dollars; but the quantity of superfine flour (3,000 barrels) which the
same vessel would receive, will amount at a proportionate price, to the sum of
15,000 dollars. The same quantity of tonnage, filled with our bottled porter,
distilled spirits, steel, cordage, starch, pearl ashes, carriages, cabinet
wares, plate, candles, soap, linseed oil, paper, hats, shoes, etc. would rise
to a much greater value; and of consequence, the owners of the vessel would be
able to purchase more goods for the return cargo, by which the ship being
fuller would make a greater sum in freight back. This circumstance is rendered
of the more consequence, by reason of our distance from the greater part of the
consumers of our surplus produce: and it is obvious, that ships will be most
profitable in those trades, wherein the mea^urement of all our imports, shall
be equal to the measurement of all our exports. Vessels, which depart and
return fully laden, cannot fail to enrich their owners.

No arguments will be necessary to convince the judicious and reflecting mind,
that the employment of large capitals and of many merchants and traders is most
certain and easy, where there are the greatest number and variety of objects to
be bought and sold. As our commercial towns, therefore, have offered
manufactured commodities to those, who come thither to trade, they have
increased in business. Pot ash, pearl ash, country rum, and other domestic
liquors, loaf sugar, etc. have already contributed to swell their exports, by
attracting foreign demand, or increasing the number of profitable objects of
shipment. These will naturally multiply under the hands of our manufacturers,
and instead of markets, in which nothing but lumber, tobacco, live-stock,
provisions, and raw materials were formerly to be obtained, our seaports will
be converted into magazines, in which not only all those articles will still be
procurable but the various commodities manufactured from them. For these goods
in whatever shape, purchasers will never be wanting: cheap merchandise as
certainly attracts buyers, as water finds its level. Nor is this mere sanguine
hope, or ingenious suggestion; for it is an obvious truth, that the greatest
manufacturing nations in the old world, are the greatest traders to foreign
parts. Holland, when most remarkable for manufactures, trad^^ to the amount of
eighty millions of dolars per annum in the commodities of other countries.

A FEW GENERAL REFLECTIONS ON AMERICAN MANUFACTURES.
The political concord and attachments, which grow out of mutual benefits, are
the most rational and permanent. To encourage these is the piety of American
patriotism. In this view, the cement, which will be given to the national
union, by the interchanges of raw materials, provisions, fuel, and manufactures
among the several states, is of inestimable value. If European nations have
shown dispositions of amity and mutual forbearance, on these considerations, it
cannot be doubted that sister states will evince equal wisdom and virtue. If
many parts of our union, from policy or a temporary necessity for manufactured
supplies, have been willing to exhibit the greatest liberality toward those
foreigners, with whom they have been recently at the widest varience, and whom
they still consider as little less than hostile, it must appear very
desirable, that the capacity at once to accommodate those states and engage
their regard, should be transferred from distant strangers, to our own
continent, and our own kindred. If the merchants and manufacturers of the
opulent nation with whom the United States so long waged war, influenced by the
hope of our consumption, cried aloud for peace, and, on the momen^ of its
return, pressed with all the courtesies of commerce to our shores, the existing
friendship of the several parts of the union for each other must be
strengthened by similar influences, as they shall be progressively created.

The animated prosecution and liberal encouragement of manufactures, is at this
moment a great political duty. The national legislature has increased the
impost on foreign merchandise, to defray the expenses of the Indian war. The
continuance of a great part of the duties is to be no longer than that of the
hostilities, which occasioned them to be laid. If the interval should be
diligently employed in the promotion of manufactures, which these duties are
calculated to create and to protect, the temporary injuries of the Indian war
will be accompanied and followed by great, solid, and permanent benefits. The
military expense is rendered less burdensome by the employment given to our own
workmen. The shoes, boots, horsemen's caps, hats, buckles, buttons, sadlery,
spears, rifles, gunpowder, and other articles for the use of the army, are made
by American manufacturers. It is perceived, that war, which often interrupts
foreign commerce and generally dimnishes the prices of agricultural productions
for exportation, has in this instance no effects of that nature; but by
judicious arrangements, may be rendered instrumental to the greatest support of
the landed interest -- the manufactures of the United States. The lamentable
havoc of the field must inevitably diminish the number of our citizens; but
there is every reason to believe, that those, who, in the course of the present
Indian war, may fall under the banners of their country, (...) prove inferior
in number to those who will be drawn, by the influence of the new duties, from
foreign countries, to the standard of American manufactures: and although the
most useful arts are no compensation for the lives of our compatriots, the
acquisition of a greater number of new citizens will counterbalance the
political evil resulting from such a loss, so far as it may unhappily occur It
is conceived that the observations in the preceding paragraph apply to the
duties laid on account of the Algerine depredations.
.

It is detrimental to the United States, that the manufactures they consume are
drawn from nations, whose citizens pay much greater contributions to their
governments than our manufacturers, and consequently, that we, so far forth,
are subject to their taxes, imposts, and excises. In Great Britain for example,
their national taxes are seven times as large as ours, in proportion to the
numbers of people in the two countries; and their poor rates and church rates
are each more than double our whole national contributions. The monopolies of
those countries fall heavily upon the consumers, among their citizens; and
those, who purchase their fabrics, bear a part of this burden, which lies on
their manufacturers. The commercial charges paid by the English East India
company abroad, amount to one million of dollars per annum: the freight and the
charges in England are about two millions and two-thirds more, exclusively of
duties. The company's civil and military charges would, in two years like the
present, pay all the expenses of our government, and discharge our national
debt A. D. 1791.
. The restrictions on navigation and trade in the European nations also enhance
the price of raw materials and articles of consumption required by their
manufacturers, all which fall ultimately upon the people of the United States,
so far as their fabrics are consumed here. These considerations should induce
our most strenuous exertions, to diminish those indirect burdens, and at the
same time they hold out an absolute certainty of a successful issue to our
efforts.

In taking a view of the affairs of the United States, and comparing them with
the situation of most of the great commercial nations of Europe, the mind is
immediately impressed with the peculiarity of their being without transmarine
colonies. Though speculative politicians have entertained doubts in regard to
favorable effects from such possessions, taking into view the expenses of
their improvement, defense and government, no question has been made but that
the monopoly of their trade greatly increases the commerce of the nations to
which they are appertenant. Of such an advantage the United States do not enjoy
the benefit; and considering this circumstance, and the prevailing disposition
to restrict commerce, our fisheries, coasting trade, and manufactures appear to
merit extraordinary attention.

The consideration of manufactures, upon general principles, has been, for
several years, before the legislatures as well of the states, as of the union.
The estimation of their importance to the landed and national interests appears
to have been greatly heightened by discussion and enquiries into facts.
Household manufactures, have acquired universal and decided approbation. To
those which are conducted by labour-saving machinery and processes, by horses
and oxen, and which consequently do not require manual operations, no objection
has been made. Such of them as can be carried on by the manufacturers now among
us, by those who may migrate hither, by the wives and children of our citizens,
and by black women, old men and children, have not been considered as
diminishing the mass of agricultural industry, but as manifestly promoting it
by new and extensive demands.

The present discussion of the subject will be terminated by remarking, that
although this great subdivision of our political economy has been copiously and
freely treated in every mode, it has not only preserved its original importance
in the public judgment, but has risen in the estimation of the people in every
part of the union -- a fate that rarely attends unimportant truths or dangerous
errors in an enlightened country. (See table of duties on foreign manufactures,
etc. paper Z.)

CONCERNING THE IMPORTS OF THE UNITED STATES.
This part of the national business has given rise to doubts, whether the
United States are really in a prosperous situation. The apprehension is
believed, however, to have proceeded from several errors. The estimation of the
imports has probably been made from the prices current in America, which are
more than the United States pay for them, by the total value of the following
particulars. 1st. Such part of the shipping charges abroad, as accrue to the
benefit of the citizens of the United States, who may be on the spot to make
the shipment: 2dly, that part of the freight upon them, which is earned by our
own vessels: 3dly, that part of the premium of insurance upon them, which is
paid to American underwriters or insurers: 4thly, the whole amount of the
duties, and custom house fees, on the goods, which amount to several millions
of dollars: 5thly, the amount of the tonnage and fees on foreign vessels, which
are deductions in favor of the country from the value of the goods imported in
them: 6thly, the porterage, storeage, cooperage, weighing, guaging, measuring,
commissions on sales here and other incidental expenses on that part of the
imports which belongs to foreigners: 7thly, the profits of our merchants on
that part of the imports which belongs to them: 8thly, the wasteage of goods
belonging to foreigners between their arrival or time of valuation and the time
of sale: 9thly, the benefit of credit which is not less than two and an half
per cent. on the whole value of our imports: and 10thly, the value of those
imported goods which remain in the country, being the property of persons
intending to become, or who will ultimately become citizens of the United
States. But the apparent or conjectural disproportion between the exports and
imports of the United States, will be considerably diminished by the sales of
vessels to foreigners at home and abroad -- the sales of lands to them -- the
expenses of foreigners here -- the expenses of foreign vessels here, and the
cost of their sea-stores -- the commissions on the shipments of their cargoes,
and on the disbursements of their vessels, as already observed in treating of
our exports. Besides these, the freight of goods shipped to foreign countries
in our own vessels, (not less probably than three millions of dollars) and the
profits upon all the goods exported on the account of our own citizens,
contribute very much to increase the fund, wherewith our imports are purchased
or paid for. An estimate, which shall comprehend all these items at their true
value, is necessary to form a satisfactory opinion of the balance on our trade.
From such an estimation (which has been made) there would result no reason to
doubt our prosperity: nor will this appear questionable, when it is remembered,
that the outward freights in our vessels, and the duties on goods imported,
amount together to 6,400,000 dollars, which is more than one third of our
exports. The balance of trade has been aptly denominated the metaphysics of
commerce. To determine it with indisputable certainty requires as accurate and
elaborate an investigation as a great metaphysical question: and though this
assertion proves nothing, it will inspire us with due caution against hastily
adopting unfavourable conclusions.

An opinion somewhat singular and of considerable importance will be hazarded
upon this subject. The United States, to make the utmost advantage of things in
their present improvable situation, should have little or no balance in their
favor on their general commerce. If their exports, outward freights, sales of
vessels and lands, etc. amount to twenty-four millions of dollars per annum,
they will find their true interest in importing the whole value in well
selected commodities. It is better for example, that they import molasses,
hemp, cotton, wool, bar iron, hides, skins, furs, saltpeter, sulphur, copper,
tin, brass, paper, mahogany, etc. to manufacture; tools for artizans, and
materials and utensils for constructing works, improving waste lands, and
cultivating farms, and breeding cattle, horses, and sheep; than that they
should bring back the equivalent in gold or silver. The sum we annually import
in articles of that nature, more precious to us than the most precious metals,
would constitute an immense balance in our favor: such, indeed, as would, in a
few years, oppress our country with too copious a circulating medium, or compel
us to export it.

That the exports and other means of paying for our imports are much more
adequate to the occasion, than they were during several years subsequent to the
peace, is manifest from the state of our private credit in Europe.

A distinction, and it is conceived, a very important one, has been already
intimated in favor of such of our imports as are of a nature adapted to
enhance the value of our lands, or to employ or assist our citizens: and in
regard to those which are for immediate consumption, the quantity cannot be in
proportion to our former imports, considering the increase of population. We
have actually almost ceased to import shoes, boots, sadlery, coarse hats,
plate, snuff, manufactured tobacco, cabinet wares, carriages, wool and cotton
cards, hanging paper, gunpowder, and other articles; and we have exceedingly
diminished our importation of coarse linen and woolen goods, cordage, copper
utensils, tin utensils, malt liquors, loaf sugar, steel, paper, playing cards,
glue, wafers, fine hats, braziery, watches and clocks, cheese, etc: and we
either make these articles from native productions, by which the whole value is
struck off from our imports, or we manufacture them of foreign raw materials,
which cost less than the goods used to do, especially as they often yield a
great freight to our own vessels. Thus the freight of the molasses to make rum,
imported in one year, at two dollars per hhd. was not less than 140,000
dollars. The same observation occurs as to hemp, cotton, iron, copper, brass,
tin, saltpetre, sulphur, mahogany, hides, dye woods, and other raw materials.

From these circumstantial evidences, there would appear to be little danger of
mistake, in concluding, that our imports, on a medium of two or three years,
have not been disproportinate to our exports, and other safe and regular means
of balancing the amount of our supplies. But though the documents for a
comparison between the present imports, and those antecedent to the revolution,
are less perfect than is to be desired, some which offer are worthy of
attention. Our imports from Great Britain in 1770, making some addition for
those from Ireland and adding 20 per cent. ^o bring them to their market value,
were worth here above L.2,400,000 sterling. In this item, the information
obtained from a report of the lords of the British privy council, is
principally relied on, though a part of it is supplementary estimation. To this
sum is to be added, a proportion of the imports into all the American colonies
in 1770, from all the rest of the world, but Great Britain, which, after
deducting therefrom L.73,000 sterling for the value imported into Bermuda, the
Bahamas, the northern British colonies, and Newfoundland, leaves L1,050,000
ster. for the value here of this part of our former imports. The total value of
our imports in 1770, would then appear to have been more than L.3,450,000 or
about 15,000,000 dollars, as they would have sold in the American market,
exclusive of the contraband trade, which was considerable. This will be seen by
a reference to the first number of these reflections, to be full seven millions
of dollars more than our exports at the same time. If then our imports were to
bear the same proportion to 18,250,000 dollars (our present exports) the former
might be above 34,000,000 dollars, without creating more alarm than we had then
reason to feel. This view of the subject may convince us, that our imports were
too copious, at least in some quarters, for several years before the war; and
hence we find a heavy load of private debt was created and remains upon the
citizens of some of the states at this day. Happily for the United States, the
reduction of the prices of supplies, by the present freedom of their commerce,
by the agency of merchants of credit instead of planters inexperienced in
trade, by the introduction of machinery in Europe, and by their own
manufacturing industry, has kept down their imports many millions of dollars
below that sum, although the impost and tonnage have directly or indirectly
contributed to enhance the nominal amount without increasing the sum to be paid
for them abroad There is a fact, which affects our imports in a manner
peculiarly favorable to the United States. Many of the imported articles are
not requisite for daily or annual personal consumption, but for permanent
landed improvement, and are added in the course of our internal operations to
the fixed real propriety of the country. Landed estates in the towns and in the
country being no where improved to the utmost point, and being in many places
yet in a state of nature, a large proportion of the articles of importation not
only become at the instant of use, a permanent property, but indeed give life
and productiveness to other property, which the moment before, was an inactive
and fruitless possession.

For instance -- In 1786 several millions of acres, ceded by New York to
Massachusetts, yielded not one hundred dollars, nor were there one hundred
citizens of these states resident on them. Since that time a very large value
in nails, spikes, hinges, locks, glass, paints and other imported articles have
been converted (with the aid of our own timber, stone, and lime,) into houses,
barns, mills, workshops, places of public business, and of worship, etc. and
now constitute real, fixed, permanent and productive property, while the teas
and sugars, the linens, woolens, and cottons, etc. imported with them have been
consumed or worn out. This is yet more strongly exemplified in other parts of
New York and Pennsylvania.


.

A SKETCH OF THE GENERAL TRADE OF THE UNITED STATES.
In taking a survey of the American commerce, the attention is pleasingly
attracted to the increase of ship-building, to the new manufactories of
articles necessary to the equipment of vessels, and to the improvement in the
art of ship-building, as well as the superior quality of the materials now used
in their construction. The largest number of vessels built in any one year
before the late war, as far as it can be ascertained, was equal to 24,358 tons;
and at least 32,000 tons of superior quality were built in 1791. The timber and
plank are more chosen, and iron is more copiously used at this time, because
the vessels are not intended for sale, and the practice of salting them, is
becoming very frequent. It is important, too, that the art of ship-building is
diffused more generally than any other equally important one, which is carried
on within the United States. The several capacities of the Baltic powers, as to
the building of ships form an interesting object to Europe and America, and are
conceived to be as follow. The Swedes have plenty of f^r, which quickly decays,
and is weak. Yet it is commonly used in their trading vessels. Ships of war
cannot be relied on, if built of any thing but oak. Of the latter timber the
Swedes have some in Skone and Blekinge, but not enough for their navy. They are
said to have purchased of the King of Prussia twice within a dozen years, a
great quantity of German oak: at one time 400,000 cubic feet, and at another
200,000 feet at the immense price of 5 s10 sterling per cubic foot delivered at
Carlescroon. American live-oak is sold in Philadelphia, A. D. 178^.
after paying a freight from the Carolinas and Georgia as 15d to 18d sterling
per foot, and southern red cedar at the same prices: our common white-oak is 9d
sterling per foot. The Swedes raise flax but very little hemp, their supply of
which they import from Riga, to make their cordage and sail-cloth. This bulky
article in time of war must cost them high. They have plenty of iron within
themselves.

The Danes import the masts for their navy, flax and hemp from Russia. They
make only a part of their sail-cloth, and import that article both from Russia
and Holland. They have little oak except in Holstein, which is reserved for
emergencies. The greatest part of the oak timber for their navy, is purchased
by contract from the king of Prussia. Their merchant ships, it is presumed,
must therefore be of fir, which with their iron they have from Norway.

The Russians have abundance of naval stores, flax, hemp, sail-cloth, iron,
masts, fir timber and plank for home consumption and exportation. Oak timber is
not plenty in the vicinity of their Baltic ports. At Archangel they have none.
The oak timber for their navy is said to be brought by their canals and rivers
1200 miles from their Tartarian kingdom of Casan. A few ships of war have been
built of fir and larch. The Russians have very few merchant ships. Out of every
hundred entries in the several ports of St. Petersburg, Archangel, Wibourg,
Revel, Narva, and Riga not more than two are of their national flag. The
British and Dutch are their carriers as far as two-thirds or three-fourth^ of
the tonnage employed. A. D. 1789.


The dominions of the king of Prussia are the best magazine of oak timber on
the Baltic. Having, flax, hemp, timber and iron and considerable manufactures
of them, grain, cattle, coal, a seacoast more extensive than the United
Netherlands or Russia (excepting the frozen coasts of Archangel) and being much
nearer to the European fisheries than the French and British are to those on
our coasts, it will not be difficult for the Prussian king to advance his
navigation and trade. Indeed his port and territory of Emden would enable him
to prosecute the fisheries to advantage, as also the East India trade. It is
difficult however to judge of things at such a distance. The monopoly of
European oak is thrown in a greater degree into the hands of the king of
Prussia, by the last partition of the devoted territory of Poland.




The export trade in our produce is more beneficial than heretofore to the
landed interest, because the cultivators do not, as formerly, anticipate upon
their crops abroad, by ordering out supplies at the discretion of the European
merchant, to be paid for in shipments of their crops upon their own account and
risque. The planters in Maryland and Virginia, particularly the tobacco
planters, suffered extremely from an inconsiderate pursuit of that practice
before the revolution. The American merchant is now more frequently their
importer; and as he understands the mode of procuring goods cheap, the real
profits of the import and export trade of the country, are in a greater degree
divided between the planter and the trader.

The reduction of the prices of East India and China goods, of every species of
manufactures in which labor saving machinery and slight apply, and of wines,
occasion our imports to be obtained on more favorable terms. This beneficial
effect is increased by the freedom of our import trade, which lets in the
productions and manufactures of all countries by a direct intercourse with
them, which was formerly either circuitous or forbidden. From the same cause,
superior prices for our produce and manufactured articles have been obtained.
If tobacco is becoming an exception, it is to be remembered, that great prices
were obtained for it till lately, and that the extraordinary quantity raised is
sufficient to account for its fall.

The coasting trade has become very great, and the derangement of the
West India trade must extend it exceedingly, during the current year, from the
failure of molasses. The increase of manufactures, and foreign restrictions on
other branches of trade have contributed to elevate this valuable part of our
commerce; and the former (manufactures) will continue steadily to increase the
importance of the coasting business. The vessels, which take supplies of flour,
and many other articles from the middle and northern states to South Carolina
and Georgia, make very frequent voyages, and they return less than half laden:
but if the planters should pursue the cultivation of hemp, flax, hops, and
cotton, they may come back with full cargoes. A similar remark may be justly
made in regard to the other states.

The fisheries would appear not to have recovered their former value; but it is
plain, they have increased yearly since 1789: and they are even now more
valuable than they appear to be. The consumption of oil, whale-bone, skins of
sea animals, spermaceti, and pickled and dried fish, is much greater in the
United States at this time, than it was twenty years ago. The outfits of the
fishing vessels, too, are more from the industry and resources of the country,
than was formerly the case. Wherefore the general benefits resulting from the
fisheries, are probably not less than before the revolution.

Remote as the United States are from all foreign nations, totally unconnected
with their politics, and having no temptation to wage war for territory, they
cannot but advance in commercial and agricultural prosperity, if they preserve
order and justice at home. Foreign restrictions will be necessarily less rigid,
as occasions for supplies and pacific services from the United States shall
arise: and these occasions must inevitably exist in every maritime nation,
which shall engage in war, even with a country, which is not itself maritime.

The prosecution of manufactures has created some increase of our foreign
trade, and will extend it. If we did not pursue that branch of industry, we
should not import copper, iron, and hemp, from the Baltic; cotton, saltpetre,
raw silk, and white callicoes from India; and cocoa, dye-woods, mahogany,
cotton, and hides from the West Indies, and the southern parts of the American
continent. Some of these importations are regularly and extensively made;
others are increasing. Without them we should have no intercourse with some of
these countries, and much less than we now have with others. In like manner*
our intercourse with several countries is increased by manufactured exports.
The demand for our potash, distilled spirits, ships and boats, malt liquors,
cheese, bar iron, slit iron, steel, gunpowder, carriages, and other articles,
occasions a greater and more beneficial trade with many foreign ports. It is
impossible to say how rapid and how considerable the progress of this part of
our commerce will be. The exported manufactures of Great Britain, in 1791, were
greater than those of fifty years ago, by twice the value of our present
exports.

It is extremely favorable to American commerce, internal and foreign, that a
variety of changes have taken place in the affairs of the world, which have
opened branches of trade formerly withheld from us by monopoly, or other
circumstances. The act of separation from Great Britain enabled us to trade to
China, and other countries beyond the cape of Good Hope, and the enterprise of
our citizens soon discovered the way. The curious perfection of manufacturing
machinery in Europe has made it the interest of the foreign India companies to
sell us their piece goods in the markets of the east, without taking them at
second hand. It is understood that the British East India company are likely to
be restrained from importing into Britain several kinds of piece goods.
The misfortunes of St. Domingo have greatly increased our commerce in indigo,
and will have the same effect upon cotton, and they are impelling us rapidly
into an internal trade in native spirits, which will of course lead to external
commerce of the same kind. This will appear to be a matter of great importance,
when it is remembered, that since the late peace, the foreign spirits imported
have in some years been equal in value to one-fifth of our exports! The failure
of ship-timber, which begins to appear every where in Europe, is enabling the
United States to carry on ship-building upon very advantageous terms. The
profitable establishment of several banks of perfect credit with the most wary
and judicious citizens and foreigners, is at once a proof, and a great mean of
commercial prosperity. The growth of cities, towns, and manufactures, has given
to the fisheries a more substantial basis in a considerable home demand, than
they formerly had in a foreign one. The banishment of paper tenders, and ex
post facto laws, and the interdiction of laws impairing the obligations of
contracts, have placed our commerce upon a more honorable and solid footing,
than it ever was before. The mint, the laws regulating seamen and the
fisheries, the appreciation of the public debt, the spirit of improvement One
million and one hundred thousand dollars were subscribed in a single season to
objects of this nature in Pennsylvania alone.
on roads, rivers, and canals, the discovery of coal near navigable water, the
continual extensions of the post office, the constant increase of light houses
on the coasts, the introduction of auxiliary arts, and above all, the progress
of agriculture, have given facilities, stability, and extension to our trade,
which, were unknown before the revolution, and which in the distressful
derangements of 1786 and 1787, appeared beyond the bounds of reasonable
expectation.

THE IMPORTANCE OF THE AMERICAN FISHERIES CONSIDERED AS A PART OF THE
INSTRUMENTS OF NATIONAL DEFENSE.
The accurate estimation of every subdivision of the industry and wealth of
nations should occupy the unremitted attention of the political observer. A
diligent enquiry after the facts, which appeartain to a subject, never fails to
administer the most useful aid to the candid investigator: and it sometimes
happens, that the simple adduction of these, affords unquestionable proofs of
great benefits or injury, in cases, wherein the general assertions and
reasonings offered, are supposed to be mere suggestions of self-interest or
local prejudice. The fisheries, it is believed, would prove, on a thorough
examination, to be an instance of this nature. The following statement of some
recorded facts, will be found to warrant strong presumptions, that their
intrinsic value has been hitherto unknown.

It is generally understood, that the fisheries of the late American provinces
were principally carried on by the people of Massachusetts and that such is the
case now, is well ascertained by the returns and reports which have been
promulgated by the federal government. It is also generally known, that the
fisheries constituted by much the greatest part of the external commerce of
that state, and it will be readily admitted, that whatever was done by its
vessels and seamen should be principally ascribed to its fishing vessels and
fishing men. By an examination of the records of the three counties of Suffolk,
Essex, and Middlesex, (which comprise the ports of Boston, Salem, Beverly,
Newbury-port, Marble-head, Gloucester, Haverhill and Ipswich) it appears that
there were taken* brought in, and libelled in the maritime court of those three
counties, during the last wa^, 1095 vessels with their cargoes, and thirteen
cargoes, (which had been taken from vessels probably unloaded at sea, and
abandoned after capture) making in the whole 1108. It has been stated by a
British premier in his place in their parliament, that the number of vessels
belonging to Great Britain in 1774, was 6219 sail, of which 3908 were British
built, and 2311 American built. What havoc then does it appear, that these
fishermen made among the British merchantmen? above a sixth of all their
vessels were brought by these people, as prizes into the markets of the United
States, with cagoes to an immense amount, composed of every speices of military
and domestic supply in a season of the utmost emergency. It appears too, that
these prizes were no less than two sevenths of all the British built ships of
that nation. But the enquiry goes further. The opinions of the most candid and
best informed estimators, founded on careful enquiry, countenance the
presumption, that fifty-five per cent. of all the vessels captured by the
people of Massachusetts, during the war, were retaken before arrival; so that
there is the utmost probability, that the whole number of vessels, which were
captured by the shipping of these three counties, was 2450 sail. How great a
derangement was this to the British commerce and how heavy must have been the
expense of the salvage paid to the re-captors? How great the number of marine
prisoners? How serious the interruption to the manning of their navy?

The operations, here spoken of, were confined to what is termed in
Massachusetts the middle district. The captures in the eastern and southern
districts were much less considerable, but they are not ascertained at this
time. It is computed that they amounted to at least five hundred and fifty
sail, so that it should appear, that the armed vessels of our principal fishing
state, captured in the course of the late war, near one half of the merchant
ships, ordinarily belonging to Great Britain, and above three-fourths of the
number of her native built vessels. The subject admits of one more suggestion.
It is highly probable, that many captured vessels, and cargoes of vessels taken
and abandoned at sea, were carried into the ports of powers, who were in
alliance with the United States, which did not appear on the records of the
Massachusetts courts. The vessels of the other fishing states were remarkably
successful in their operations against the British merchant ships; and in
short, the American fishermen, wherever bred, operated in their own element,
against the commerce of Great Britain, with a destructive activity, vigilance,
and efficiency.

There exists a proof of the extraordinary impression made by the vessels of
the United States on the British navigation at that time, which cannot be
mistaken. This is to be drawn from the rates of insurance on unarmed vessels,
which were more excessive, than in any war of Great Britain for fifty years
past, although no other maritime nation, with whom they have contended during
that time, has been so deficient in public ships.

The fishing trade of the United States, is rendered peculiarly important, as a
means of defense or of annoying the commerce of hostile nations, from the
circumstance of our not having yet adopted a naval establishment. The
fishermen, while that continues to be the case, must be transmuted by war, as
quickly as by a charm, into a corpse of privateers-men and their ships into
private vessels of war; because, the navy of any hostile foreign nation will
suspend the fisheries as long as we remain without a naval force. They are
therefore, not only a means of offense and defense, prepared to our hands, like
the fishermen of other nations, but in our peculiar situation, they will be
driven, by imperious necessity, to live on the spoils of the commerce of our
enemies.

SECTION IV. CONCERNING THE BANKS ESTABLISHED IN THE UNITED STATES
THESE valuable institutions were unknown to us before the revolution, being
added to the political economy in the latter part of the war. The paper
emissions in the times of the provinces, had yielded some of the advantages of
bank notes, though with less safety to those who received them. But the degree
in which they were unavoidably recurred to, in the course of the war, had
completely destroyed the utility of paper money in 1781. The state of public
credit, and indeed of the public affairs in general, as well as the exigencies
of the cultivators, merchants and manufacturers, required an efficient
substitute for an instrument of negotiation and dealing, of so great compass.
The scheme of a bank was presented in the manner, which is universally known,
as the most probable mean of accommodating the general necessities, political,
agricultural, and commercial. The promises which the plan made were abundantly
fulfilled; and at the same time a standard of public conduct and action in
regard to the rights of property, was unobservedly erected, at a moment when
the recent course of events had rendered it very desirable, as well from
political as moral considerations. It has been found, accordingly, that the
laws which concern property, in the places where banks have been established,
have quickly acquired a stability, if they were good, and have meliorated, if
they were before exceptionable, notwithstanding any supposed or real errors in
the plans or administration of the institutions.

In reflecting upon these establishments, one cannot but call to mind a
suggestion, which frequently occurs, that too large a portion of the capital of
the United States, has been applied to them. Few pecuniary operations are of as
much importance. In estimating the extent to which we might have gone with
prudence, an examination of the state of that business in a successful and at
the same time the best known scene of trade in Europe, may be of some use. In
the city of London, the bank of England (exclusively of that of Scotland) has
operated with a capital of more than fifty millions of dollars about forty-six
years. The population of England, on a medium, during that term, has been less
than double that of the United States at present, yet the capital of its bank
has been above five times the capital of our national bank, and near five times
the amount of all the subscriptions which are yet A. D. 1791.
paid into all the banks in the United States. There, are, moreover a great
number of private banks in the same city, probably not less than sixty in
number, some of which have more capital stock, than any bank in this country,
except that of the United States. The aggregate amount of their capitals is
probably equal to that of the bank of England. Besides these, there are very
many considerable private banks scattered through the kingdom. In addition to
those, there are the public and the private banks of Scotland. If the banks of
England and Scotland, public and private, out of London, be equal to the
private banks of London alone, then the capital of those institutions in
Great Britain will be 150,000,000 dollars, or above fourteen times as many
dollars as there are persons in that kingdom, though the whole of the stocks of
the bank of the United States, which is paid in, is not equal to three times
the number of their inhabitants. Again: if the banks of Great Britain be
measured by the exports of that island, it will be found, that the latter, at
their highest value (90,000,000 of dollars) are only three-fifths of their
aggregate bank capital, and that our exports, at 18,250,000 dollars, are above
two-thirds more than all our bank capital, which is actually paid in. Taking
the British imports at 80,000,000 of dollars, and those of the United States at
24,000,000, the comparison will be still more in favor of the discretion,
which has been observed in the United States. But a very important measure of
these institutions yet remains to be applied, by which prudent men will be most
disposed to test the subject -- the ordinary quantity of specie. The bank
capital of Great Britain being, as above stated, about 150,000,000 of dollars,
and the quantum of specie being never estimated at more than 22,000,000l.
sterling, or 97,700,000 dollars, the aggregate bank capitals of the United
States, as now paid in (ten and one half millions of dollars) would be as
prudently, and solidly founded on a quantity of specie a little less than
7,000,000 of dollars. Although it would be impossible to ascertain the precise
amount of the specie of the United States, estimates carefully made, appear to
warrant a belief, that it is equal to that sum. But while examinations like
these seem to abate and even entirely to destroy, the apprehension, that we may
have pursued the business of banking to the injury of agriculture,
manufactures, and commerce, some circumstances of a prudential nature are not
to be overlooked. When forming these establishments, we may commit errors,
perhaps, in carrying into one scene too great a proportion of the capital
appropriated to their creation. Hence the sound policy of subtracting from the
mass of the bank of the United States, to establish branches at New York,
Boston, Baltimore, Charleston and (as is said to be intended) in Virginia,
ministering to the convenience, the necessities, and the interests of
government, the planter, the farmer, the merchant, the navigator, the
fisherman, the ship-builder, the manufacturer, and the mechanic, in six several
and variant scenes, instead of accumulating in one great mass a superabundant
capital It ought to diminish the political jealousies in regard to the national
bank, that several state banks were established before it, and several since,
which are aggregately of greater force of capital than the bank of the United
States.
.

It is possible to err, too, in the disposition of banking establishments, by
superadding to those which already accommodate any particular scene, rather
than introducing the new instiutions into places hitherto without them. The
United States contain five or six great local subdivisions of trade, resulting
principally from the imperious dictates of the nature of things. In most of
those great spheres, there is more than one considerable and flourishing
trading town, though there is in each, one which has an acknowledged
pre-eminence. When a reasonable portion of bank capital has been introduced
into one of these commercial metropolies, the establishment of a new bank would
seem to be most expedient in the trading town of the next degree of
consideration. It is true, that so far as the operation is an employment, or
application of the property of individuals, it must be left, (within the laws)
to their own will; but as the act of incorporation place the subject within the
power of the legislatures, and within the bounds of their cares and duties, so
it is highly important that these institutions should be modified in their
original formation, upon principles of distributive justice in regard to the
reasonable accommodation of the marts of commerce, within their spheres of
legislation, and of all the landed citizens, who resort to them for the sales
of their surplus produce, or the purchase of their supplies.

A pleasing consequence has resulted from the distribution of banks through
different parts of the United States. Like all great objects, these
institutions, while operating very beneficially in regard to the business of a
coutry, are liable to be rendered instrumental to local party views. Being
committed, as in the United States, to many separate boards of directors,
selected for the service on account of their property, integrity, talents, and
attention to business, and whose primary duties are the legal, discreet, and
beneficial execution of their trust, it is not very probable, that they will
deviate, in a dangerous degree, from their proper walk, into the ground of
political combination and intrigue.

A circumstance observable in the bank of the United States, Also in the Bank
of Pennsylvania. A. D. 1793.
will not fail to attract the attention of cautious men. The portion of public
debt, which enters into the composition of their stock, is the particular
contemplated. In this respect, the bank of England, and the bank of Ireland
(which are among the best accredited of those institutions in Europe) exceed
that of the United States in the proportion of one third. It is very favorable
to our institution, that the national debt, and ordinary and extraordinary
expenses of the United States are much less in proportion to wealth and numbers
than those of Great Britain and Ireland, and that our government is not less
free from error, nor more like to be disturbed than theirs. It cannot,
therefore, be more unsafe to confide in our institution, which contains
three-fourths, than in theirs which is wholly composed of public debt. It is,
moreover, true, and worthy of observation, that most of the other banks in the
United States (and particularly the three largest) have, voluntarily and by
their own operations, placed considerable portions of their stock upon the
credit of the United States, by purchasing largely of the public debt, and by
giving at this time extensive credits founded upon its security. The market
value of the public debt, which if Europe were at peace would be generally
greater in specie than its nominal amount, renders that part of the bank stock,
which is composed of it, intrinsically more valuable than that, which is in
coin.

CONCERNING THE NATIONAL INDUSTRY.
An enquiry into the knowledge or skill, assiduity, economy, or frugality, and
good management, with which the several descriptions of citizens in the United
States pursue their employments, has never yet been made. The subject is
copious, and would require much previous enquiry and detail. It is not
intended, therefore, in this place to attempt a developement of it; yet it may
be serviceable to bestow upon it a few brief reflections. The learned
professions will not be brought into view, as they are not strictly of the
nature of the object contemplated. The planters, the farmers, the merchants,
the navigators, the fishermen, the shipbuilders, the manufacturers and the
mechanics, with the persons immediately employed by them, are all which are
conceived to be comprehended in the subject. The body of the planters, that is,
those who cultivate tobacco, rice, indigo, and cotton, are, as a description of
cultivators, the best informed perhaps in regard to the objects of their
particular pursuit, though it is manifest, that they have abundant matter for
increased attention in perfecting their cultivation, in ascertaining those
species of their valuable plants, which are most excellent, most certain, and
most productive, in the improvement of their implements of husbandry, in the
acquisition of auxiliary implements and machinery, in perfecting the modes of
curing their produce, and preparing it for market, and particularly in the
attainment of adequate substitutes for the ordinary species of laborers, a
supply of which has become improbable. It appears to be worth their
considering, too, as well with an eye to profit, as humanity, whether an
advantageous variation in the employment of some of the blacks might not be
made, by introducing upon every estate some of the simpler manufactures to
employ children, old and invalid persons of both sexes, and particularly the
females during those frequent terms, when two lives depend upon their health.

The merchants, navigators, fishermen, and shipbuilders of the United States
may be safely affirmed to be four descriptions of our citizens, whose industry
is as uniformly energetic and well directed, as those of any country in the
world, though it is certain, that a much stricter economy prevails among
persons of some foreign nations engaged in those pursuits -- an example
deserving the most serious attention.

The manufacturers, in some branches, pursue their occupations under the
disadvantages of very few errors; yet those citizens would be sensibly
benefited, were they able to relieve themselves of certain parts of their
labor by the attainment of the auxiliary machinery, which is the purchase of
larger capitals, than are yet engaged in their line. Circumstances, however, of
various kinds are daily contributing to remove this inconvenience. The bulk of
the manufacturers do not want industry, nor skill enough to succeed in those
simple manufactures, to which it is most their interest to apply themselves. It
may be rather said, that they manufacture ordinary kinds of fabrics, from the
nature of the demand, than that they manufacture badly. Their business is,
moreover, progressively advancing, and has felt, on several occasions, some of
them recent, the fostering hand of government.

The mechanic branches have been, till this time, on nearly as good a footing;
but those emp^oyed in the erection of buildings ought now to seek the aid of
such parts of science as have relation to their calling. Rural and city
architecture has been too little studied. It ought not to be forgotten, that a
competent knowledge of it is no less conducive to economy and convenience, than
to elegance and splendour.

The most important of all the employments of our citizens, that of the farmer,
remains to be noticed. It is very much to be feared, that in point of
execution, a candid examination would prove that this best of pursuits is most
imperfectly conducted. The proofs are, innumerable instances of impoverished
lands, precious bodies of meadow lands, in the old settlements of some of the
states, which remain in a state of nature, a frequent inattention to the making
or preserving of manure, as frequent inattention to the condition of the seed
grain, evidenced by the growth of inferior grain in fields of wheat, and by the
complexion of the ^lour in some quarters, the bad condition of barns, stables
and fences, and in some places the total want of the former, the deficiency of
spring-houses or other cool dairies in extensive tracts of country, the want of
a trifling stock of bees, the frequent want of orchards, and the neglect of
those which have been planted by preceding occupants, the neglect of the sugar
tree, the neglect of fallen timber and fuel, accompanied with the extravagant
felling of timber trees for fuel, the neglect of household manufactures in many
families, the neglect of making pot-ash, the non-use of oxen, and above all,
the growth in substance, of large bodies of farmers on lands of an ordinary
quaty, while the inhabitants of extensive scenes, hardly extract from much
superior lands, sustenance and clothing.

It is a fact very painful to observe, and unpleasant to represent, but it is
indubitably true, that farming in the grain states, their great best business,
the employment most precious in free governments, is, too generally speaking,
the least understood, or the least economically and attentively pursued, of any
of the occupations which engage the citizens of the United States. It is
acknowledged, however with satisfaction, that great changes have been lately
made, and that the energy, spirit of improvement, and economy, which have been
recently displayed, promise the regular and rapid melioration of the
agricultural system. All other things have taken a course of great improvement
-- and it cannot be apprehended that the yeomanry of the United States will
permit themselves to be exceeded by any of their brethren, in the most valuable
characteristic of good citizens -- usefulness in their proper sphere.

CONCERNING THE LAWS WHICH ENTRENCH UPON THE RIGHTS OF PROPERTY.
It is not remembered, that the acts of the national legislature have been
deemed by any of the possessors of any description of property, unfavourable to
their rights, except the proceedings in regard to the public debt. It is not
less curious than true, that a part of the community affirm, that the
government have injured the country by too much liberality, while another part
charge the legislature with impairing the contract.

In taking a view of this subject, it should be remembered, that the state of
things, when it was taken up, was in every respect critical and uncertain. It
was difficult to say what the country could perform, and more so to tell what
they would comply with. It was perceived, on the one hand, that as such a state
of public credit as preceded the year 1789, would ruin a government more
energetic than that of the United States, so its immediate melioration was a
matter of the most imperious necessity. On the other hand, the nonexistence of
one single efficient system, yielding an equitable specie interest, in any one
state, and a number of painful facts in the financial operations of some of the
legislatures, created a conviction, that there was either an inability or
disinclination in all to render a specie payment in the full extent of the
explicit contracts. Some of the contracts were ^ound not to be explicit,
containing promises of large sums under the name specie, which it could not
have been the expectation of the government, at their date, to discharge, or of
the creditor to recieve, in coin; because they promised to pay as specie, what
was notoriously much less valuable, than contracts previously liquidated at
forty nominal dollars for one in real money. The interesting claims of the
original creditors also, were strongly represented, while the conduct of every
state in the union, in its particular finances, had discountenanced a
discrimination in their favor; and the existing laws of property were urged
against a reduction of the last owner's principal: questions were also raised
about the original intrinsic value of the money and property received in many
cases by the United States, leading to the ordaining of a new scale of
depreciation. By infusing into the proposition for a settlement of the debt,
two qualities -- a reduction of the interest and a temporary irredeemability of
the principal, which have cost the debtor nothing, and the creditor very
little; by vigorous and well devised efforts to recover credit at home and
abroad, an arrangement was formed, and executed, which has given better payment
to the creditor than could reasonably have been hoped. It is plain to every
observer, that, but for the indiscretions of some of the public creditors, who
superadded to the trials and fluctuations of a convalescent state of credit the
late unparalleled difficulties of the holders of the stock, the three species
of the public paper, taken at a medium, would have been worth the nominal value
in the market. Hitherto that has never been the case.

There yet remain, however, in the United States some laws which affect the
rights of property. The operation of instalment A. D. 1792.
and valuation laws is not terminated in one or two of the states. In one or
two others, paper money is a tender for old debts. In one quarter, real estate
is protected as in Great^Britain from execution for debt; and in others, the
judgments of the courts are suspended, if the income of the estate bears a
certain proportion to the creditors' demand. The mortgage law of Pennsylvania,
and some other states, which exclude "the equity of redemption" create, on the
whole, a more favorable ground for the rights of property in those places,
than in Great Britain. Those States are the most flourishing in the union.
In some of the states, preferences are given to the claims of citizens, before
those of citizens of the other states, or of foreigners; and ills exist in the
form of insolvent laws. The federal constitution, and those of several of the
states, have barred the introduction of these evils in regard to new
transactions; and the states which are not chargeable with them, in regard to
past affairs, have reaped, in the last three years an ample reward for their
wisdom and virtue. Property may almost be called the palladium of communities.
Their moral safety at least is always at hazard, when that is unwarrantably
invaded. In every case wherein difficulties to obtain his own are interposed in
the way of the honest and industrious citizen, his loss is not all the public
injury. A fellow citizen -- perhaps a member of a legislature (and through him
a legislature itself) is fatally corrupted.

CONCERNING THE PUBLIC DEBTS.
When it is remembered, that the terms upon which the debts of the states were
assumed by congress, are not more favorable than those on which the federal
debt was funded, and when it is called to mind, that the unassumed debts of all
the states are less valuable in the market than those, which were assumed, it
will appear, that the public creditors of the union have little reason to
complain. When the advantages of the temporary iredeemability, and of the
opportunity of investment in the bank are recollected, that little reason, if
any existed, appears to be dissipated. On the other hand, when it is
remembered, that long after the promulgation of the funding system and of the
bank, the possessors of specie might have procured certificates upon very
advantageous terms, and that many, who sold after those promulgations wanted
confidence enough to hold, that United States draw a share of the profits of
the the bank without furnishing any of the capital, that the grant of
irredeemability is temporary, and so perfectly nominal, that we have now a
right to pay off more than we have money to discharge; when it is also borne in
mind, that the terms given by congress to the public creditors, were exceeded
(by law at least) in several of the states, and that two of them have added to
the benefits of their citizens from the funding system, without discriminating
in favor of the original creditor, or against the present holder, the
arrangements of the general government appear to be consistent with the public
interests and with the wisdom of the state legislatures themselves. If the
funding system of congress has been thus equally just and beneficial with those
of the states, it has been accompanied with many advantages which cannot be
questioned. Public credit is restored -- in consequence of that, the contracts
for all public supplies are made for cash on the deliveries or performance --
the money, thus early promised, is paid by anticipation on the proffer of
indubitable security by the various contractors; and interest in favor of the
United States has been allowed for the promtitude of her treasury -- 500,000
dollars of specie claims have been discharged; and purchases of the public
debt, which bring the extinguished sum to about 2,400,000 dollars, A. D. 1^91.
have been made, or provided for -- a series of payments since the month of
September (required by the most distinguished ally of the United States, in the
late war) has been made to serve the occasions of their unhappy colonists.
Loans upon five per cent. upon four and a half per cent. and upon four per
cent. interest, have been effected in two opulent cities of Europe, solely by
means of our restored credit, to repay in the hour of need, to that ally, the
moneys lent to the United States in a like season. All that is due has been
paid, part of that which is not yet due has been anticipated. Moneys anxiously
desired by France, have been discharged by mean of loans at a lower interest.
Both nations are benefited and pleased; but our country is honored by the
transaction. To have neglected our public credit, would have been to lose these
advantages.

It will not be questioned, that there is in every walk of life or business a
greater proportion of money than was observable two years ago. Public works and
buildings of every kind, and of species and values unknown among us till the
present time, are undertaking every where. Private buildings, of equal variety,
and comparative value, are springing up. The price of lands is greatly
advanced. The raw materials, though raised in much greater abundance, sell for
larger prices. To what pecuniary cause so powerful, so adequate, can these
things be ascribed, as to the sales of part and reanimation of the whole, of a
public debt, ten times larger than the amount of all the specie ordinarily
circulating in the country? It ought to be admitted however that the sound
stamina of this country, and our voluntarily imposing upon ourselves the
wholesome restraints of just government have most powerfully co-operated.

The relief of some of the states from all their burdens, has been another
beneficial consequence of the funding of the debt. It is but a few years since
one of the most frugal, vigorous, and productive counties in Pennsylvania rose
against the collectors of the taxes. The appreciation and sale of the immense
mass of federal securities, owned by that state, with the proceeds of her funds
have enabled her to discharge all her obligations, though she has abolished her
general land tax, and discontinued her excise, both of which she has collected
for forty years.

Some anxiety has been created by the share of our debt, which foreigners have
obtained. But this was a powerful means of bringing the whole into its present
beneficial action, by elevating its actual to its nominal value. It is not at
all probable, that it will be drawn from the country. It has been observed, in
the most tranquil and prosperous condition of Europe, that a great proportion
of the families of those foreigners, who have made large investments in the
United States, either in the times of the provinces, or since the revolution,
have become inhabitants of this country, even when in its unproductive insant
state. At this serious moment, when almost every transatlantic country feels or
apprehends disorders, our chances are infinitely increased. The United States,
advanced in the means of subsistence, of comfort, and of elegance, now present
to them an object of greater desire in a tranquil liberty, which they are
struggling to obtain, a teeming agriculture, and a prosperous commerce, both
foreign and internal. Conformable with these reflections, we may affirm, that
no great object in our affairs has failed to attract the notice of the
foreigners, who have engaged in our funds. The internal navigation of
South Carolina, North Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, New Jersey,
and New York, are among the witnesses of this truth. The banks both national
and state, the turnpike roads, and toll bridges, the sales of city estates, of
cultivated farms, and particularly of unimproved lands, commerce,
ship-building, manufactures, confirm the fact. Let us continue to exhibit a
strictly honest spirit in our laws and constitutions, an efficient execution of
them and an abstinence from unnecessary wars, and there cannot exist a doubt,
that we shall draw much more copiously from the population, the arts, and the
funds of Europe, than they will draw from those of the United States.

There exists in the United States one description of private difficulties and
encumbrances, that must engage the solicitude of every feeling mind, which, by
an examination into the detail and interior of our affairs, has been led to
observe them. The cases alluded to are those of the citizens of two or three of
the states, who are burdened with heavy foreign debts or claims, which
originated before the revolution. Whatever they may be finally adjudged to pay,
the sum must be so great, and due from so many persons, as to give it the
resemblance of a public debt: and as in one of those states it has already
occasioned some sacrifices of their principal landed estates, very far below
their value, so it will probably operate in the others, unless some extensive
means, abundantly adequate the occasion, can be brought to operate, before or
at least at the time of executing the judgments of the courts, which may be
obtained. No resource, competent to the purpose, appears at all likely to
present itself, unless it be the funded debt or stock of the United States and
of the several states. The method by which this description of property can be
rendered most immediately and effectually subservient to the interesting
purpose of preventing the destruction of many families, would seem to be the
fixture of it at a stable, unfluctuating rate, adequate to its proper value,
under the existing circumstances of the United States. It is manifest, that in
such a state of the market, the dealers in the debt and others would sell out,
and would not buy in again, and that they would seek objects for their money in
the trade, the manufactures, the buildings, and the lands of the country, which
might promise them more advantage. A tenth part of the value of the public
debts, applied to the lands of the United States, would raise them every where
to their real value, so that the debtor, who might be under a necessity to sell
an estate, could dispose of his property, not only without a ruinous sacrifice,
but probably to uncommon advantage. The proprietors of lands and buildings,
which might be under this probability of sale, would sustain no risque or
injury in selling their estates for the public stock.

It may be alleged, that the holders of the debt will not go into places so
remote to make investments: but there are facts, which appear to warrant a very
different opinion. The funds of New England have been brought into
Pennsylvania, for investment in lands of several kinds -- the money of
Pennsylvania and Delaware has been invested in mills and lands in Virginia --
the greater part of the iron works of Maryland (the most costly estates in our
country,) were bought and worked by the capitals of residents in Great Britain
before the revolution. The same fact existed in one great instance in
New Jersey. The greatest cedar swamp, on the waters of the Delaware, that
supplies the Philadelphia market, is owned in New England; and people and
vessels from* that quarter, are annually sent to perform the business of it.
The American public creditors, citizens of the United Netherlands, have
recently purchased eight hundred tracts of land in a part of Pennsylvania,
further from Philadelphia than the banks of James river, York, or Rappahannock.
In short, if the history of this country were examined, as it regards this
subject, it would demonstrate, that the landed property of it has been
constantly animated by the application of the moneys of distant capitalists. A.
D. 1794. Great purchases by late holders of the public debt and bank stock in
Pennsylvania and New York, citizens and foreigners, have been made in the
district of Maine, in the state of Georgia, in the western and northern parts
of New York, in South Carolina, in the most remote parts of Pennsylvania, in
the state of Kentuckey, in the federal district, in the Norfolk canal, in the
Virginia lead mine.


SECTION V. CONCERNING THE FOREIGN DEBTS OF THE UNITED STATES.
AT the commencement of the present government in 1789, the United States were
indebted to France, Holland, and Spain, and to the foreign officers of the late
army, in a sum amounting to near twelve millions of dollars. Near a million and
two-thirds of this sum, was due for arrears of interest, inattention to which,
would have been too disgraceful to have admitted of a hope of foreign credit,
until measures were taken for its discharge. Above a million and one third of
the principal sum had become due, and the time of other instalments was coming
round. The resources of the country had been examined and considered, but not
tried. The claims of these foreign creditors, were originally, the most
delicate in themselves; and in the case of France, the state of her revolution
in the summer of 1790, placed her demand in a situation peculiarly interesting.
It was perceived, that the adoption of the federal constitution and the
measures taken to restore public credit, had made strong and favorable
impressions on the European money lenders: and it was not doubted, that the
arrears of interest and the principal due, might be discharged by loans, upon
terms which would produce very little loss. The requisite authorities were
given by the legislature, which resulted in the borrowing of a sum equal to the
discharge of all the exigible debt. But as the occasions of France were likely
to be emergent, and there was reason to confide, that a firm and steady pursuit
of the financial system, which had by that time been adopted, and an adherence
to the upright spirit of the constitution, would rapidly meliorate the credit
of the United States, it was deemed expedient to extend the authorities to
borrow, to a sum equal to the whole of the foreign debt, provided the
instalments, not due, could be discharged by means of loans advantageous to the
United States. The interest of above seven millions of the foreign debt, being
at the rate of five per cent. per annum, it was not doubted, that the money
might be obtained so as to render the discharge of the part, not exigible,
really advantageous. It has accordingly happened, that a sum adequate to the
principal and interest due, has been borrowed within the terms of the law, so
as to support the credit and good faith of the United States, and critically to
accommodate France. The further expectations of Congress have also been
fulfilled; a considerable loan at four and one half, and two loans at four per
cent. having been effected, so as to realize an advantage in the discharge of a
large part of the principal, which was at an interest of five per cent. The
United States having thus commuted their foreign debt, further than is due,
with honor, and, on a medium of the whole, with advantage, are relieved by
these operations from any probability of pressure to perform the remainder of
their European engagements. The friends of our public credit, of our national
safety and respectability, and of the freedom of France, among the citizens of
the United States, will reflect upon this actual course of events with cordial
satisfaction.

THE CONCLUSION: BEING MISCELLANEOUS THOUGHTS ON THE GOVERNMENT.
The people of the United States enjoy a peculiar felicity in the possession of
principles of government and of civil and religious liberty, more sound, more
accurately defined, and more extensively reduced to practice, than any
preceding republicans. There is not one iota of delegating or delegated power,
which is not possessed, or may not be acquired by every citizen. It is true,
that there are in practice, several deviations in the distribution of power to
the various subdivisions of the country, and to the proprietors of certain
descriptions of property; but these are acknowledged departures from principle,
and are known to have arisen out of the antecedent state of things. They could
not be immediately corrected without violent struggles and disorders, and
without injury to the property of descriptions of citizens, too great for the
country, at any former period, to compensate. Mild remedies are, however, daily
applied to these partial diseases; and it is manifest, that the course of time
is diminishing, and will finally remove them. The right of legislative
interposition, on the part of the chief magistrate, which, in the practice of
another country, has been commuted for a dangerous and injurious influence, is
here wrought into the essence of the constitution, and is not only exercised in
the independent and uncontrouled consideration of every resolution and bill,
but by the practical application of the qualified negative.

The execution of the office of the chief magistrate has been attended, through
a term of almost four years, with a circumstance, which to this nation and to
the surrounding world requires no commentary -- a native citizen of the United
States, transferred from private life to that station, has not, during so long
a term, appointed a single relation to any office of honor or emolument.

The senatorial branch of the government has been created and continued in a
mode preferable to that which is pursued in any other nation.

The representative branch is equally well constituted.

The military code, for the government of such troops as are occasionally
raised and employed, is well calculated to produce discipline and efficiency,
when time is allowed for the purpose, and consequently to render the United
States respectable in the eyes of foreign nations.

All christian churches are so truly upon an equal footing, as well in practice
as in theory, that there are and have been in the legislative, executive, and
judicial branches of the general government, persons of the following
denominations -- Episcopalian, Presbyterian, Independent or Congregational,
Quaker, Lutheran, Reformed, Roman, and probably others, which do not occur.
There have been, and indeed yet are, a few ecclesiastical distinctions in the
state governments, which reason and time are rapidly destroying. It is easy to
perceive, that religious liberty, supported by the national constitution, and a
great majority of the state constitutions, cannot but attain, in a very short
time, the same theoretical and practical perfection in the remainder, which it
has acquired in them.

The independency of the judiciary, as well in the tenure of their stations as
in the permanency of their compensations under the federal constitution, and in
most of those of the states, is an advantage over the ancient republics and the
generality of modern governments, of inestimable value in regard to liberty,
property and stability.

The United States, being without transmarine or separated dominions, are
exempted from two inconveniences, which have resulted from them. An immense
naval force has been found necessary to defend such territories, and to protect
the trade with them in time of war, and the difficulty of devising for them a
free legislation, has hitherto proved insurmountable. The British nation
declared, that they had a right to legislate for their colonies and dominions
in America, Asia, and Africa in all cases whatsoever, and the revolution of the
United States turned upon that cardinal point. When we observe, that the French
nation, ardent as they are in the pursuit of liberty, have not yet been able to
devise any system of government for their colonies without a dernier resort to
the legislature of France, it will be a source of comfortable reflection to the
friends of free and efficient government in these states, that we are not
perplexed by the necessity of so delicate, important, and difficult a political
operation.

It has been unfortunate for most nations, as well ancient as modern, that they
have had no settled preexisting mode of altering, amending, or renovating their
political system, to which they could resort without a deviation from the legal
course of things, hazarding the public tranquillity, and often freedom itself.
-- It is equally happy for the people of the United States, that in their
federal government, and in most of those of the states, there exists a
provision, by which those necessary and desirable ends may be obtained, with
whatever zeal, without recurring to irregularity or violence. The inestimable
alterative powers in the constitution of the United States etc. are here
contemplated.


Fundamental principles being already settled by common consent, and being
accurately and clearly recorded in the constitutions, the people cannot long
mistake the nature of a measure, a law, or a ^olitical maxim, which is really
opposed to those principles; and when the public judgment is decided upon any
one or more derelictions of those principles of magnitude sufficient to induce
an effort for reform, the will of the people cannot be successfully resisted or
even suspended. The consequence of this state of things will be, that the mass
of error will not easily accumulate, so as to become insupportable, being kept
down by these orderly natural exertions of the community, to relieve themselves
at an earlier stage of inconvenience. Too great a facility to change would,
however, (...) likely to produce fluctuations, injurious to order peace,
property, and industry, and indeed to liberty itself: but as the mode of
performing the amendatory or alterative operations is slow, and consequently
deliberate, trivial or dangerous changes would be very difficult to accomplish.
In this view there appears to be very little probability, that changes from
free or representative government, will take place; or that any modification of
hereditary power will be introduced into the governments either of the states
or of the union. The people will never deliberately consent to the abrogation
of those clauses in the several constitutions, which explicitly provide both in
general terms, and in particular detail, for free or republican government. Nor
does it seem easy, considering the degree of perfection we have obtained and
the certain, constant, and moderate operations of the amendatory clauses, to
accumulate sufficient public evil or grievance, to produce one of those
convulsions, which the ambitious are wont to seize as the moment to introduce,
by force, a despotic government. Even local circumstances conspire to favor
the permanency of liberty in these states. Being too remote from any foreign
nation, to render a war, requiring a great army, at all necessary, that
instrument, so often used by ambitious leaders, is not likely to be placed
within the reach of the enemies of freedom, while the union remains entire. It
is worthy of the most particular observation and remembrance, that a
dissolution of our government would immediately open a door to this danger, as
the several states or little confederacies, would each deem it prudent to
maintain a larger army, than is now requisite for the whole. The history of
Greece will instruct us that by this more than any other possible measure, we
should be prepared for the military domination of some modern Philip, or some
new Alexander. A strong union and a tranquil liberty would be miserably
exchanged for such a state of things.

It is an evident truth, that the penal laws of these states have been
gradually mitigated since the epoch of their independence, and it is no less
true, that the number of crimes does not bear so great a proportion to the
population, as was formerly the case, though an universal relaxation of the
police took place in the late war. It is, an ill symptom of the actual state of
things, in a society, when mild laws, strictly executed, are incompetent to the
preservation of order and public happiness. Our penal codes are, upon the
whole, among the least sanguinary, and it is believed, they are not cruel, even
in those unhappy cases, which impel the community to extremities. The
constitution of the United States has extracted all the gall from the
punishment of offenses against the national safety, by correcting the power of
legislating concerning them with a mildness unknown to the systems of most
countries. It is honorable to the humanity and magnanimity of the American
people, that this proceeding flowed from them almost unanimously, four years
after the revolution war. Future ages will do justice to a nation capable of
such an effort, at a moment so particular.

Taking the United States at large, there are few or no countries in which, at
this time, the just demands of private creditors can be obtained by a more
certain, a more expeditious, or a less expensive course of legal process. There
are some local and a very few general defects yet existing; but they are
vanishing before the spirit of the general and most of the state constitutions.
There is no part of the public conduct of this country more striking, than the
firmness with which they have applied the caustic to some inveterate cancers,
which had been derived to their pecuniary system, principally from adventitious
causes. It proves the existence of that virtue and fortitude, which qualify a
nation for republican government. There are some exceptionable circumstances,
yet to be done away; but the successful efforts, which have been made, justify
a confident expectation, that they will yield ere long to the powers and
influences which have eradicated much greater evils of the same kind.

THE recent date of these reflections on the state of the American union, will
naturally render them an interesting portion of this publication. It may be
matter of entertainment to the curious, and of instructive information to
those, who engage themselves in the study of mankind, to know what the United
States have been, have thought, and have done, in the antecedent stages of
their political existence, but to the world in general the real nature and
actual situation of their affairs at this time, and the prospects, which appear
to arise out of them, are subjects of much greater importance.

CHAPTER X. SOME IDEAS CONCERNING THE CREATION OF MANUFACTURING TOWNS AND
VILLAGES IN THE UNITED STATES, APPLIED, BY WAY OF EXAMPLE, TO A POSITION ON THE
RIVER SUSQUEHANNAH.
THE distance of the United States from the foreign consumers of many of their
exported productions, and from all of the manufacturers of their imported
supplies, have been placed among the most important considerations in favor of
their pursuing, in conjunction with other things, the business of manufactures.
To these inducements, of great and manifest strength in times of general peace,
the present universal war among the European powers has added new force. It has
become still more the interest of the United States to infuse into their towns
and cities further portions of manufacturing capital, industry and skill. The
following delineation of an establishment, which might be created by foreign or
domestic capital, was intended to exhibit the various and extensive
consequences in favor of the landholders and cultivators, which have
invariably resulted from manufacturing towns. Every item in the enumeration,
implies a demand for timber, fuel, grain, cattle, beer and other drinks, hemp,
flax, wool, iron, flaxseed, or some other production of our lands and farms.
Similar exertions on the sea coast might be equally or even more successful, as
the manufactures of the productions, as well of the agricultural states as of
foreign countries, might be combined with those of the immediate vicinity.

REFLECTIONS ON THE AFFAIRS OF THE UNITED STATES, OCCASIONED BY THE PRESENT WAR
IN EUROPE, RECOMMENDED TO AMERICAN AND FOREIGN CAPITALISTS.
It is highly prudent in every nation, seriously to consider the effects which
great events in other countries may have produced on their affairs, and to
anticipate, in time, the consequences, in regard to their interests, to which
such events may possibly give rise. The enhancement of the cost of our
manufactured supplies by the demand for the immense armaments by land and sea
now making in Europe, and the impediments to the cheap transportation of our
produce by the recent deduction of a large proportion of the vessels, which
lately carried them at peace freights, with the impossibility of building in
time a sufficient number of ships to perform the service, and to supply the
purchases by foreign nations, render it a matter of the most comfortable
reflection, that we have made such frequent and full examinations, of our
capacities in the business of manufactures; and that we have made so great
progress in the establishment of many of the most useful and necessary
branches. There occurs nothing to warrant a belief, that we shall cease to
maintain our course in peace. But it is manifest, that even in that desirable
situation, the inducements to pursue manufactures are not a little increased by
the advanced cost of our supplies, and the diminution of our carriers at peace
freights already mentioned. It will be wise then to devise new methods of
increasing our manufactures, in order to cheapen and multiply supplies, and to
extend the home market for our agricultural productions. It is moreover well
worthy of remark, that in consequence of the war in Europe many articles of
great importance in the building of houses, improving new plantations, and
supplying the settled country, and the industrious poor, are said to be
prohibited to be exported from Great Britain, because they can be applied to
military purposes, or may be wanted for themselves. How^ever reasonable or
customary in similar circumstances this may be, our citizens must actually be
subjected thereby to additional expense, and the charges of improving and
cultivating real estates must be increased. Manufactures of these prohibited
kinds of goods are therefore rendered indispensible by the situation of that
country, which is the principal foreign source of our supplies.

However improbable or impossible, war may appear In the spring of 1793.
in the judgment of many or most of us, it can do no injury to remark, that the
cost of our supplies would be so much increased by that worst of all possible
events, and the vessels to carry our produce at peace freights would be so
extremely diminished, if our own should be involved, that nothing but some such
great and vigorous efforts as that suggested for consideration, could save our
cultivators from a very inconvenient expense in procuring supplies, and a
reduction of the market prices of many articles of their produce.

It will be perceived, that the plan is laid upon a s^ale, which is not likely,
at this time, to be carried i^^o execution in any one place. It is necessary,
therefore, to remark that it is not intended in any view, but to exemplify what
might he done with a given capital. The owners, however, of certain great water
situations, might safely and advantageously lay out their adjacent grounds in a
town plat with such views, and they might sell, or let on ground rents, such
ordinary building lots, or such situations for water works, as purchasers or
tenants might apply for, leaving the plan to mature by time and the natural
attractions and advantages of the several scenes; or improvements might be
commenced upon a scale of 5,000, 10,000, 15,000 or 20,000 dollars, as capital
might be obtainable, and prudence might appear to justify. In all events, it is
conceived, that a profitable attention to our situation may be promoted, and
possibly some reflections favorable to the United States, and to the
proprietors of particular estates, and many vicinities, may be suggested by the
publication of the plan at the present very interesting crisis.

A PLAN FOR ENCOURAGING AGRICULTURE, AND INCREASING THE VALUE OF FARMS IN THE
MIDLAND AND MORE WESTERN COUNTIES OF PENNSYLVANIA, APPLICABLE TO SEVERAL OTHER
PARTS OF THAT STATE, AND TO MANY PARTS OF THE UNITED STATES.
In a country, the people, the soil, and the climate of which are well suited
to agriculture, and which has immense natural treasures in the bowel^ and on
the surface of the earth, the creation of a ready, near, and stable market for
its spontaneous and agricultural productions, by the introduction and increase
of internal trade and manufactures, is the most effectual method to promote
husbandry, and to advance the interests of the proprietors and cultivators of
the earth. This position has been assumed, with the firmest confidence, by one,
Hume.
and maintained and relied upon afterward by others, of the most informed and
sound minds in Great Britain, in relation to the internal trade, manufactures,
and landed interest of that kingdom, although it is an island possessing
uncommon advantages in its artificial roads, canals, rivers, and bays, which,
altogether, afford the inhabitants a peculiar facility in transporting their
surplus produce with very little expense to foreign markets.

To a nation inhabiting a great continent, not yet traversed by artificial
roads and canals, the rivers of which, above their natural navigation, have
been hitherto very little improved, many of whose people are at this moment
closely settled upon (...), which actually sink from one fifth to one half ^he
value of their crops, in the mere charges of transporting them to the seaport
towns, and others, of whose inhabitants cannot at present send their produce to
a seaport for its whole value, a thorough (...) of the truth of the position
is a matter of une^^lled magnitude and importance.

The state of things in most of the counties of ^^^nsylvania, which are
contiguous to, or in the vicinity of the river Susquehannah and its exten^^^
branches, is considered to be really and precisely that, which has been
described; and the object of this paper is to suggest hints for a plan of
relief from the great expense and inconveniences they at present sustain, by
creating a market town for their produce on the main body of that river, at
some proper place between the confluence of its eastern and western branches,
and the lower end of its present navigation.

It is proposed that the sum of five hundred thousand dollars, to be applied as
is herein after mentioned, be raised in either of the three following methods
-- that is to say, either by five thousand subscriptions, of one hundred
dollars each, to the capital stock of a company to be temporarily associated
for the purpose, without any exclusive privileges -- Or, by the sale of one
hundred thousand lottery tickets, at five dollars each; or fifty thousand
tickets, at ten dollars each, the whole enhanced amount of which is to be
redrawn in prizes agreeably to a scheme, which will be herein after exhibited
-- Or, by the application of five hundred thousand dollars, of the moneys in
the treasury (or otherwise in the command) of the state of Pennsylvania. -- The
inducements to the operation, either to the state, to the adventurers in the
lottery, or to the subscribers of the stock of the associated company, will
appear in the sequel to be an augmentation of about one hundred per cent. in
the value of the property to be embraced -- that is, in a profit of about one
hundred per cent. on the moneys to be raised or advanced for the purchase of
the lands, and the erection of the buildings.

The application of the above sum of five hundred thousand dollars, might be as
follows:

1st. In the purchase of two thousand acres of land on the western bank of
Susquehannah, as a town seat to be regularly laid off in a town or city for
inla^d trade and manufactures, with streets sixty feet wide, in oblongs of five
hundred (...), fronting the south western or prevalent summer winds, by two
hundred and twenty feet; each oblong to be inter^^cted by a twenty foot alley,
running lengthwise, or from north-west to south-east, so as to give all the
lots Sou^^-west front exposures, or south-west back exposure^, and outlets in
the rear.

The purchase of the land, including the farm buildings which may be on it, and
water rights, etc. would probably be at fifteen dollars per acre, for two
thousand acres, 30,000 Dollars. The contents will be a little more than three
square miles. The shape might be two miles on the river, by a little more th^n
one mile and one half running from the river. -- The number of lots of twenty
feet front, and one hundred feet deep, would be about twenty-six thousand.
2dly. In the erection of five hundred and ten stone and brick houses, of the
value of three hundred dollars each (inclusive of the value of the lots,)
153,000 Two hundred and twenty stone and brick houses, of the value of five
hundred dollars each, 110,000 Fifty stone and brick houses, of the value of
eight hundred dollars each, 40,000 Ten stone and brick houses, of the value of
two thousand dollars each, 20,000 Four stone and brick houses, of the value of
six hundred and fifty dollars each, 2,600 Two mills for preparing hemp, which
would often come down in boats, and on rafts from the rich new lands on the
upper waters of Susquehannah and its branches, one thousand two hundred and
fifty dollars each, 2,500 Dolls. One mill for preparing flax, 800 One mill of
about five hundred spindles, for spinning flax, hemp, and combed wool, to be
divided into fifty shares, of one hundred dollars each, to increase the number
of prizes, 5,000 One rope walk, 2,000 Two smaller ditto one thousand dollars
each, 2,000 Two tan yards, one thousand five hundred dollars each, 3,000 Two
smaller ditto, 1,500 One paper mill, 1,500 One flaxseed, hempseed, and rapeseed
oil mill, 1,500 One grist mill, 2,000 Two bake houses, five hundred dollars
each, 1,000 Two slitting and rolling mills, five thousand dollars each, 10,000
Dolls. One steel furnace, 3,000 One soap boiler's and tallow chandler's shop,
500 One malt house, 2,000 One brewery, 4,000 Ten grain and fruit distilleries,
of various sizes, averaging in value one thousand two hundred and fifty
dollars, each, 12,500 One printer's office for the English language, 500 One
printer's office for the German language, 300 Six blacksmith's shops, and
naileries of various sizes, averaging five hundred dollars each, 3,000 Two
cooper's shops, one three hundred, the other two hundred dollars, 500 One cedar
cooper's shop, 200 Four hatter's shops, two at five hundred, and two at three
hundred dollars, 1,600 One bleach yard and house, 1,000 Two fulling mills, one
a thousand, the other one thousand five hundred dollars, 2,500 Dolls. Two
potteries, five hundred dollars each, 1,000 Four wheelwright's and chairmaker's
shops, two at five hundred, and two at four hundred dollars, 1,800 Two
coppersmith's shops, one five hundred, the other four hundred dollars, 900 Two
pot-ash works, one three hundred, the other two hundred dollars, 500 One brass
founders's shop, 600 Two painter's shops, one five hundred, the other three
hundred dollars, 800 Two turner's shops, one five hundred, the other three
hundred dollars, 800 Two water forges, one thousand five hundred dollars each,
3,000 Four tilt hammer forges, one thousand dollars each, 4,000 One tobacco and
snuff manufactory, 800 Two boring and grinding mills for guns, scythes,
sickles, etc. at one thousand dollars each, 2,000 Two skin-dresser's shops,
five hundred dollars each, 1,000 Dolls. Four lumber yards on the river, fenced,
twenty-five dollars each, 100 Two gun smith's shops, one five hundred, the
other three hundred dollars, 800 Two boat builders yards and sheds, one four
hundred, the other three hundred dollars, 700 Four school houses, two for each
sex, (part to be German) at three hundred dollars (twelve hundred) and four
houses for the tutors, five hundred (two thousand) dollars, 3,200 One church
for all denominations, to be used in rotation by every society, until any one
shall have a place of worship of its own, when that society shall lose its
right, 4,000 Two taverns, one four thousand, the other three thousand dollars,
7,000 Two stables, one in the vicinity of each tavern, for thirty horses and
ten carriages, one thousand dollars each, 2,000 One hundred buildings, of the
value of two hundred and fifty dollars each, half with, and half without
cellars, for tradesmen's and manufacturer's shops, stables, etc. as occasion
may require, 25,000 Dolls. One large scale house to weigh loaded wagons, to be
erected on the market square, 500 One scale house to weigh hogsheads and other
things, of less than one ton weight, 100 One sail-cloth manufactory, 5,000 One
plumber's shop, 300 Two brick kilns, yards and houses, eight hundred dollars
each, 1,600 Two twine and cord factories, five hundred dollars each, 1,000 Four
slaughter houses and yards, 11,600 One starch work and dwelling house, 800 One
library of three hundred shares, of ten dollars each, to increase the number of
prizes, to be composed of books relative to the useful arts and manufactures,
3,000 One parchment manufactory, 500 One glue manufactory, 500 One pump maker's
shed and yard, 100 Charges of the superintendence of the execution, at one per
cent. 5,000 Dolls. 500,000
The buildings above mentioned will form a town of one thousand houses, useful
work shops and fac^ories by water, fire or hand, all of stone or brick, which
is larger by near one half than the borough of Lancaster. Being on the river
Susquehannah, ^ very great and extensive natural canal, which, with its
branches, flows through a country of fifteen millions of acres, and will be
connected with the lakes, the position for a town must be considered as
warranting a presumption, that the lots would be more valuable. -- In order to
extend this advantage, the buildings should be erected upon every second, or
perhaps every third lot; whereby a number of interval lots would be left, which
would be of nearly the same value. -- A further advantage would result from
such a disposition of the houses, as the vacant lots could be usefully applied
to garden purposes, until they should be built upon. As the proposed houses and
work shops would be of stone and brick, the possibility of the progress of
fire, would be less, if the owners of the interval lots should build wooden
houses hereafter, than if they were to erect such houses in a compact separate
quarter.

The lots, without the scene, which should be first built on, would cost, after
throwing out the streets and alleys, about five dollars, and might be
moderately estimated, were such a town erected, at the medium value of ten
dollars.

This town being contemplated as such an auxiliary to Philadelphia, as
Manchester, Leeds, Birmingham, and Sheffield, etc. are to the seaports of
Great Britain, it would be necessary to connect it with that city immediately
and effectually, by opening a good road to the Lancaster turnpike, by whatever
might be necessary to give it the benefit of the communication with
Philadelphia through the Swetara and Tulpohocken canal, through the Brandywine
canal, and through the Newport and Wilmington roads, and by all other means
which could be devised. -- It would also be proper to connect it with the
boroughs of Reading, Lancaster, York, Carlisle, etc. and with the western,
north-western, northern, and other great roads. -- Thus circumstanced, and with
the supplies of wood-fuel, coal, bark, grain, cattle, hemp, flax, wool, timber,
iron, stone, lime, forage, etc. which those roads, and the Susquehannah and its
branches, would certainly and permanently afford, this place could not fail to
become of very great profit to the subscribers or prize holders, or the state,
and to the landed interest, both tenants and owners. -- The expense of
transportation from the nearest navigable part of the Susquehannah by way of
Newport, is nine dollars per ton; from Middletown it is twelve dollars per ton,
to sixteen dollars per ton; and as four-fifths of the state are on or westward
of that river, the immense saving, which would be made by a great and stable
market like that contemplated, is equally manifest and desirable.

It may be asked, whether the owners of the houses, shops, and works would
receive applications from tenants? The answer is, that they would themselves be
induced to occupy some of them, that the boroughs in the vicinity have been
greatly extended by the settlement of tradesmen, manufacturers and others, who
depend upon them and upon the farmer, and that unless their inhabitants open
canals to the Susquehannah, or discover coal in their vicinity, those boroughs
which are not on that river cannot grow much larger, though the demand for
manufacturers is steadily increasing with our population. It is regretted, that
the latter increase of Lancaster has been inconsiderable. But the water works,
and the works by fire, proposed in the plan to be erected, would attract and
support tradesmen and the workmen requisite to proceed with the goods they
would have begun, as is constantly the case in Europe.

It may be safely affirmed, that no part of the United States, at present half
as fully populated as the five principal counties on the Susquehannah, offers
so encouraging or so certain a prospect for an inland town. -- It is, as it
were, the bottom of a great bag or sack, into the upper parts of which natural
and agricultural produce is poured from the north-east, from the north, and
from the west.

It will be observed, that many water works, and objects requiring the moving
power of water, are particularized in the plan. For which reason, and in order
to procure all the public and private advantages, which are attainable, it is
proposed to take some position, where the river can be so drawn out of its
natural bed, as to create those mill-seats and falls. It is confidently
affirmed, and is not at all doubted, that there are not wanting places of that
great and valuable natural capacity.

Doubts may arise about the expediency of erecting some of the works. It is
therefore observed, that those which are mentioned, are merely offered for
consideration; none of them are intended to be urged: but it is believed, that
most of them would prove, on examination, eligible.

The greater part of the private emolument would be realized, it is supposed,
by the erection of nine hundred dwelling houses of various sizes (in any of
which many kinds of manufactories could be pursued) and one hundred shops for
such branches, as by reason of their producing loud noises, or unpleasant
smells, or of their requiring greater room, could not be carried on among women
and children, infirm, aged, or sick persons, or within the compass of an
appartment in a common dwelling house. In that case, however, it would be
manifestly prudent, to bring the unimproved mill-seats into view, that they
might be in the way of early use and employment.

The reason of extending a view to the immediate erection of those water mills
and other works is, that by their very great consumption of the raw materials
and produce, which may be drawn by purchase from the farmers, they will as
early and materially increase the benefits of the proposed town to the
landholder and cultivator, without taking my hands from agriculture, or
preventing any from going to it.

It will be proper to ascertain, with precision and certainty, what would be a
reasonable value of two thousand acres of land, thus purchased, and thus built
upon, that the inducements to the operation may be duly exhibited. The borough
of Lancaster will appear to afford a mean of comparison, not too favorable,
when it is remembered, that a position on the west side of Susquehannah, would
give the proposed town a most extensive and fertile ^ack country for its
supplies by land, free from the expense and risque of any ferry; and that it
would acquire building materials, provisions raw materials, and the infinitely
important article, pi^ coal, the very important articles, timber and bark, in
the greatest abundance, and on the cheapest terms, by means of the navigable
waters of the Susquehannah, and that its traders and artizans could transport
produce and manufactures, and recieve supplies from Philadelphia through the
canal of Swetara, without any the least expense of carting.

An estimate of a town, consisting of the kinds and number of buildings
particularised above, may be reasonably made as follows: The actual first cost
of all the various buildings above mentioned, is stated to be 500,000 Dollars.
From these deduct the value of the four schools, and the church, seven thousand
two hundred dollars, which would be public, and would be of no value to the
owners of the town, as such, but as they might reflect value upon the houses,
manufactories and lots: also deduct the sum of five thousand dollars, allowed
for the charges of superintendance, 12,200 Remain as the actual cost and real
value of all the private buildings, 487,800 The value of one hundred lots, to
be given for twenty churches, and thirty-two for the market, court house, and
jail, nothing, but as they reflect value on the other property in the town,
000,000 The value of one thousand and ninety-nine lots, of the size of twenty
by one hundred feet, on which the above private buildings and works are to be
erected, when they shall be completed, at one hundred dollars each, on a
medium, 109,900 Dolls. The value of two thousand one hundred, and ninety-eight
interval lots (lying between and among the private and public buildings, and
exclusively of those without that part of the town plot, proposed to be built
upon with the fund of five hundred thousand dollars) at eighty dollars on an
average, 175,480 The value of one hundred twenty feet lots, making twenty large
lots equal to one hundred feet square, suitable for erecting twenty other
mills, with the requisite share of the water right, at five hundred dollars for
each mill seat, 10,000 N. B. These will make, with the improved mill-seats,
about forty, and will not require the height of water or command of a fall to
be kept for more than a quarter of a mile. It is believed much more might be
placed against this item. The value of the exclusive privilege of keeping
ferries, arising out of the ownership of the grounds, to constitute prizes,
5,000 The value of twenty-two thousand lots, accommodated with streets and
alleys, not within the part built upon as above, with the woods on them, and on
the streets and alleys, for fuel and timber, the stone, lime, clay, etc. for
building, at ten dollars per lot, to constitute prizes, 220,000 Dolls. 1,008,540


The several objects in the foregoing estimate of one million eight thousand
five hundred and forty dollars to constitute prizes, to be drawn by the
purchasers of five hundred thousand dollars worth of tickets: a scheme of a
lottery more protfiable than most, which have been exhibited, and which will
moreover yield great advantages to every proprietor and tenant of lands within
the sphere of trade belonging to the town.

Although such calculations and estimates as these ought always to be received
with the utmost caution, and to be examined with strictness, yet there are
circumstances, which, it is concieved, insure success to a well devised and
well executed plan in the scene already mentioned.

A very great and increasing supply of all those things which can create,
maintain, and extend a town; which can attract, cheaply support, and certainly
and thoroughly employ an industrious community, forced by the nature of the
river and country into this singular scene, justify an affirmation, that no
such situations for towns of inland trade and manufactures of native
productions exist in the populated parts of the United States. -- To estimate
the value of the river, and the water works, and their permanent influence upon
the prosperity and growth of such a town, let us for a moment suppose, that
twenty similar mills, twenty unimproved mill seats, and a copious canal leading
to the Susquehannah, were superadded to the present advantages of the borough
of Lancaster.

It cannot but be perceived, that most of the American inland towns have been
commenced without due attention to the powers of water, the advantages of
interior navigation, and a copious and certain supply of other fuel, when wood
shall become scarce and dear. -- The whole number of the houses in the towns of
some of the states is very inconsiderable, which is principally owing to their
produce having passed on without any natural stoppage or heavy expense of
transportation from their farms to their export market; or to a scarcity of
fuel which has been created, and will be increased by their growth.

There will be a peculiar certainty and stability in the value of property in
such a place as that contemplated, because its trade and manufactures depending
upon our own laws, and upon our productions, will not be subjected to the
injuries and vicissitudes, which often arise from foreign restrictions and
prohibitions, and from the defalcatio^^ of the imports of foreign and
precarious tropic^^ productions. On the other hand, every new discovery of a
mineral or fossil, every addition to the articles of cultivation in the great
landed scene, on which it will depend, whether for food or manufactures, will
yield fresh nourishment and employment to its inhabitants.

In addition to the reasons already suggested for placing the town upon the
western side of the Susquehannah, it ought to be added, with a view to the
present and all other plans of establishing towns in this climate, that the
eastern and northern sides of all waters in the United States, (the elevation,
dryness of the soil, and other things being equal) are less healthy than the
southern and western sides. As it further regards, that great concern, the
health and comfort of the citizens, it also merits repetition, that by the plan
proposed, no inadvertent or uninformed man will be able to build his house, or
place of business in such a manner as to deprive himself of the blessing of the
summer winds.

Although great stress has been laid upon a particular scene in the course of
this paper, from a thorough conviction of its fitness and value, it is
manifest, that many of the ideas will apply to such of the existing towns in
the state of Pennsylvania and elsewhere, to have a capacity to command, by due
exertion, and at a moderate expense, water falls, coal, or in^^^d navigation --
A diligent examination of their ^^^pective capacities, in those particulars,
ought, (...) the general principles suggested, to be made. (...) also clear,
that a very large part of those advantages may be gained at Harrisburgh,
Middle^^^n, the falls of Delaware, at the lower end of (...) Schuylkill canal,
and most of the other canals (...) the United States, by such a power of water
as has been mentioned above. In the states of Vermont and Kentuckey, in the
western parts of Pennsylvania and New York, in the north western and southern
governments, and in general at those places in the easternmost, or nearest
parts of all the western waters, and the southern or nearest parts of the
northern waters, where the internal navigation terminates, the whole of the
above plan, in a maturer state of their population, will apply, with the most
solid and extensive benefits to the cultivators and proprietors of the soil.
The grounds around the lower falls of many of the rivers emptying into the
Atlantic Ocean, are also very suitable for such a plan, because provisions,
wood, coal, and raw materials may be transported to them coastwise and from
foreign countries.


WERE two or three manufacturing houses (or firms) foreign or American, to make
a purchase of some fit situation to erect a variety of water works, and were
they to commence two or three several manufactories upon a considerable scale,
and to reserve suitable situations and a command of water for a number of
others which would follow, they could not fail to succeed in their respective
branches, and they would greatly enhance the value of the purchased lands. It
is unnecessary to repeat, in this place, the numerous circumstances in the
situation and affairs of the United States, which ensure success to well
selected establishments of manufactures, conducted with judgment and prudence.

CHAPTER XI. ABSTRACT of Goods, Wares, and Merchandise, exported from the
United States, from the 1st of Oct^ber, 1790, to 30th September 1791.
Species of Merchandise. Quantity. ASHES, pot, ton^ of 3,083 74/^6^ pearl, do.
3,270 ^0/1^6 Apples, ba^^els 12,352 Bricks, number 737,764 Boats, do. 99
Bellows, smiths, pair, 4 Beer, Ale and Porter, gallons 44,526 dozens 719 Boots,
pair, 482 Boot legs, do. 17 Brimstone, pounds 3,280 Blacking or Lampblack, do.
8,518 Bayberries, bushels 18 Cider, ba^rels 1,694 dozens 310 Chalk, pounds
20,000 Cotton, do. 189,316 Coffee, do. 962,977 Cocoa, do 8,322 Chocolate, box^s
479 Candles, myrtle, do. 348 wax, do. 185 tallow, do. 2,745 Cordage, cwt. 3,533
Copper ore, do. 20 pig, do. 216 manufactured, do. 1,480 sheet, do. 296 Coal,
bushes 3,788 Cranberries, do. 720 Corks, gross 300 Corn fan, number 1 Canes and
Walking-sticks, do. 598 Cotton and Wool Cards, dozens 25 Carriages, Coaches,
Chairs, etc. number 85 Wagons and Carts, do. 25 Duck, American, pieces 653
Russia, do. 30 Grain and Pulse. Indian Corn, bushels 1,713,241 Oats, do.
116,634 Buckw^eat, do. 14,499 Pease and Beans, do. 165,273 Horns and Tips,
number 119,776 Hides, do. 704 Hats, do. 435 Honey, gallons 1,740 Hops, pounds
650 Hemp, do. 1,544 Hay, tons 2,006 Iron, wrought. Axes, number 979 Hoes, do.
200 Drawing Knives, do. 24 Scythes, do. 48 Locks and Bolts, do. 2,000 Shovels
do. 261 Skimmes and Ladles, do. 15 Anchors do. 175 Grapnel, do. 18 Musques, do.
160 Cutlass^^, do. 72 Knives and Forks, do. 240 Chests of Carpenters Tools, do.
4 Iron, castings. Waggon^oxes, do. 100 Pots and Kettles, do. 808 Cannon, do. 37
Swivels, do. 8 Cannon Shot, do. 1000 Iron Paterns, do. 12 Iron, the Ton. Pig,
tons 4,178 Bar, do. 349 Bundles, do. 8 Hoops do. 16 Indigo, pounds 497,720
Leather, tanned and dressed, do. 5,424 Lime, bushels 1,320 Lead. Sheets, number
45 Pig, tons 16 Shot, pounds 6,473 Live Stock. Horred Cattle, number 4,627
Horses, do. 6,975 Mules, do 444 Sheep, do. 10,377 Drugs and Medicine. Glauber's
Salts, pounds 1,580 Sarsaparilla, Pin do. 14,900 Sassafras, Bark, tons 3 1/^
Sassafrass-root, do. 34 Earthen Ware. Stone, dozens 55 Yellow, Queens, crates
157 ^^^seed, casks 58,492 ^^ax, pounds 18,600 ^^^thers, do. 904 F^^nts, number
40,000 ^^^mes of Vessels, do. 1 Scows, do. 6 Boats, do. 10 Houses, do. 195
Windows and Doors, do. 31 Furniture, House. Tables, do. 75 Bedsteads, do. 18
Desks, do. 78 Bureaus, do. 21 Sophas, etc. do. 59 Clocks, do. 8 Clock-cases,
do. 3 Chests, do. 705 Chairs, Wirr, do. 5,134 Chairs, Ru^ do. 738 Fishery.
Fish, dried, quintals 383,237 Fish, pickled, barrels 57,424 Whale oil, gallons
447,323 Spermaceti oil, do. 134,595 Spermaceti candles, boxes 4,560 Whalebone,
pounds 124,829 Glass Ware, crates 21 Window, boxes 92 Ginseng, pounds 29,208
Groceries. Cassia and Cinnamo do. 1,778 Cloves and Mace, do. 900 Pepper, do.
492 Pimento, do. 141,701 Brown Sugar, do. 73,304 Loaf Sugar, do. 1,157 Other
Sugar, do. 1,200 Raisins, do. 400 Grain and Pulse. Wheat, bushels 1,018,339
Rye* do. 36,737 Barley* do. 35 Live Stock. Deer, number 4 Hogs, do. 16,803
Poultry, dozens 10,247 Merchandise, or Foreign D Goods, packages 1,439 Molasses
gallons 12,721 Millstones, number 2 Mustard, pounds 780 Madder, do. 1,034
Nails, do. 130,293 Negro Slaves, number 24 Nankeens, pieces 7,072 Nuts, bushels
1,240 Naval Stores. Pitch, barrels 3,978 Tar, do. 51,044 Rosin, do. 228
Turpentine, do. 58,107 Turpentine, Sits of, do. 1,172 Oil, Linseed, gallons 90
Porcelain, or China Ware, boxes 2 Powder. Gun, pounds 25,854 Hair, do. 1,276
Pomatum, do. 45 Paints, do. 1,520 Pipes, boxes 1 Printing Presses, number 4
Plaster of Paris, tons 4 Provisions. Rice, tierces 96,980 Flour, barrels
619,687 Ship Stuff, do. 6,484 Rye Meal, do. 24,062 Indian Meal, do. 70,339
Buckwheat Meal do. 422 Oatmeal, do. 6 Bread, do. 100,279 Beef, do. 62,372 Pork,
do. 26,635 Crackers, kegs 15,346 Hams and Baco^ pounds 295,647 Venison Hams,
do. 600 Cheese, do. 129,901 Lard, do. 522,715 Butter, firkins 16,670 Sausages,
pounds 250 Fresh Beef, do. 92,269 Ditto Pork, do. 29,334 Provisions* Carcases
of Mutton, number, 551 Neats' Tongues, barrels, 160 Oysters, pickled, kegs,
1,228 Potatoes, bushels, 22,263 Onions, do. 42,420 Reeds, number, 15,450
Spirits. American, gallons, 513,234 West India, do. 4,742 French Brandy, do.
158 Peach do. do. 753 Gin, do. 10,252 Ditto, cases, 3,717 Ditto, jugs, 2,039
Cordials, cases, 69 Sadlery. Saddles, men's, number, 414 Bridles, do. 402 Coach
Harness, setts, 74 Wagon Geers, do. 8 Shoes, pair, 7,046 Soap, boxes, 691
Sago, pounds, 2,382 Starch, do. 160 Snuff, do. 15,689 Steel, bundles, 1,375 Raw
Silk, pounds, 153 Silver, ounces, 103 Salt, bushels, 4,208 Spruce, Essence of
cases, 94 Seed. Garden, pounds, 1,060 Mustard, do. 660 Hay, do. 60 Cotton,
bushels, 109 ^kins and Furs. Morocco, number, 132 Calf, in hair, do. 402 Deer,
do. 1,063 Seal, do. 2,672 Bear, do. 37 Beaver and Otter, do. 100 Deer Skins,
dressed, pounds, 48,031 Ditto and other do. and Furs, do. 980 Ditto and do.
packages, 889 Tobacco, in hogsheads, number, 101,272 Manufactured, pounds,
81,122 Types, boxes, 3 Tallow, pounds, 317,195 Twine, per 112, 19 Tow Cloth,
yards, 6,850 Toys, for children, dozens, 112 Tin, boxes, 9 Manufactured,
dozens, 15 Teas. Bohea, chests, 17 Souchong, do. 492 Green, do. 178 Hyson, do.
2,235 Vinegar, gallons, 2,248 Varnish, do. 60 Wines. Madeira, do. 76,466 Other,
do. 32,336 Bottled, dozens, 6 Wax. Bees, pounds, 224,538 Myrtle, do. 2,272
Whips, numbers, 146 Wood. Staves and Heading, do. 29,061,590 Shingles, do.
74,205,976 Shook Casks, do. 42,032 Casks, do. 297 Laths, do. 25,500 Hoops, do.
1,422,155 Hoop-Poles, do. 3,450 Masts, do. 405 Bow-Sprits, do. 42 Bombs, do. 74
Spars, do. 4,983 Hand Spikes, do. 36,714 Pumps, do. 80 Boxes and Brakes, do. 56
Blocks, do. 7,040 Oars, do. 28,456 Oar Rafters, do. 13,080 Treenails, do.
45,905 Cedar and Oak Knees, do. 1,067 Breast Hooks, do. 50 Carlings, do. 13
Anchor Stocks, do. 809 Cedar Posts, do. 10,453 Oak Boards and Plank, do. feet,
963,822 Pine Boards and Plank, do. 37,288,928 Other ditto and do. do. 3,463,673
Scantling, do. 6,237,496 Oak, Pine, etc. Scantling, feet, 2,180,137 Oak and
Pine Timber, tons, 13,775 Lignumvitae, cwt. 1,180 Logwood, do. 105 Timber,
number logs, 38,680 Mahogany and Lignumvitae, number pieces, 3,251 Oak and Pine
Bark, cords, 499 Oak Bark, do. 57 Ditto Ground, hogsheads, 1,040 Mast Hoops,
dozens, 148 Axe Helves, do. 149 Truss Hoops, setts, 15 Yokes and Bows for Oxen,
do. 197 Lock Stocks, numbers, 4,000 Worm Tubs, do. 6 Wheel Barrows, do. 6
Wheels for Carts, etc. do. 50 Spokes and Fellies, do. 12,972 Spinning Wheels,
do. 17 Tubs, Pails, Bowls, etc. do. 204 Value, Dollars 17,571,551 45 Cts. Add
for two returns from Charleston, received, 827,651 Dollars 18,399,202 45 Cts.

See page 412.

A SUMMARY OF THE VALUE AND DESTINATION OF THE FOREGOING EXPORTS.
Dollars. Cts. To the dominions of Russia, 3,570 of Sweden, 21,866 2 of
Denmark, 277,273 53 of United Netherlands, 1,634,825 66 of Great Britain,
7,953,418 21 To the Imperial ports of the Austrian Netherlands and Germany,
362,010 21 To Hamburg, Bremen and other Hanse towns, 64,259 25 To the dominions
of France, 4,298,762 26 of Spain, 1,301,286 95 of Portugal, 1,039,696 95 To the
Italian Ports, 31,726 90 To Morocco, 3,660 50 To the East Indies, generally,
318,628 46 To Africa, do. 168,477 92 To the West Indies, do. 59,434 36 To the
north-west coast of America, 3,380 Uncertain, 29,274 75 Dollars 17,571,551 45
To the above add the amount of two quarterly returns, since received from
Charleston, South Carolina, 827,651 18,399,202 45

Treasury Department, October 1st, 1791. TENCH COXE, Assistant Secretary.

CHAPTER XII.
ABSTRACT OF GOODS, WARES AND MERCHANDISE EXPORTED FROM EACH OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA, (WITH THE AGGREGATE OF THE WHOLE) FROM THE 1st OCTOBER,
1791, TO 30th SEPTEMBER, 1792, BEING ONE YEAR.
STATES. New-Ham^shir^ Massachusetts Rhode Island Connecticut New York
New Jersey Pennsylvania Delaware Maryland Virginia North Carolina
South Carolina Georgia Total of each article. (...)
Pot, ton^ Pearl, do
90.6 0 691.13.2 52.7.0 23.8.0 3,550.0.0 50.19.0 15.0.0 4,473.13.2 19.0.0
2,029.8.0 46.0.2 14.4.0 1,215.1.0 17.17.0 8.0.0 3,349.19.2 Apples, barrels 571
295 209 4,59^ 6 743 39 121 6,582 Bran, bush. 82 26 108 Bricks, number 114,500
^84,000 40,500 85,800 34,600 6,000 35,000 38,500 3,000 2,000 743,900 Boats, do.
17 59 4 1 7 88 Boots, pairs 214 128 20 148 3 513 Beer, cider and porter, gals.
9,900 7,150 49,780 18,510 420 1,590 750 4,778 508 93,386 Ditto, dozens 50 300
208 76 249 130 50 1,063 Brimstone, lbs. 9,025 9,025 Blac^ing and lampblack, do.
92 3,750 3,842 Bellows, smiths, number 1 1 Cotton, lbs. 8,880 4,000 20,000
7,600 400 68,520 28,928 13^,328 Chalk, per cwt. 5.0.0 300.0.0 40.0.0 345.0.0
Candles
Wax, boxes Myrtle, do. Tallow, do.
176 22 1 199 175 1 1^8 14 1,911 564 814 61 20 225 168 18 183 19 3,997 Cordage,
per 112 lb. 10.0.0 1,724.2.0 2,131.0.3 24.0.0 407.0.0 170.0.0 51.0.0 4,5^7*2.3
Coal, bushels 3,730 126 590 3,332 25 5,220 13,023 Cranberries, do. 131 54 185
Corks, groce 12 12 Cards, wool and cotton, pairs 72 72 Cards, playing, packs
1,000 1,000 Coffee, lbs. 168,705 10,629 354,169 1,001,187 408,017 9,824 184,211
2,136,742 Cocoa, do. 6,000 6,000 ^^rriages
Coaches, chaises, chairs, etc. number Wagons do. Carts and drays, do.
2 3 2 8 2 7 1 25 2 1 3 10 2 11 21 44 Canes and sticks, do. 2^^ 228 (...)
Ore, lbs. Manufactured, do Sheet, do.
^^ 28 3,500 3,500 3,000 3,000 Duck, bolts 667 715 210 1,592

ABSTRACT OF GOODS, etc. EXPORTED.
STATES. New Hampshire Massachusetts Rhode Island Connecticut New York
New Jersey Pennsylvania Delaware Maryland Virginia North Carolina
South Carolina Georgia Total of each article. Drugs and Medicines
Glauber salts, lbs. Sarsaparilla, do. Snake-root, do. Pink-root, do.
Sassafras, tons Drugs, unknown, packages
160 160 94 20 480 500 1,094 149 5,300 2,912 3,426 300 1,000 13,087 1,000 5,000
6,00^ 11.2.0 6.10.0 5.8.0 2.0.0 4.0.0 29.0.^ 76 76 Earthen Ware, crates 69 1 14
5 1 22 112 Flaxseed, casks 691 4.047 4,595 2,249 24,687 10,150 2,464 721 2,739
38 52,381 Flax, lbs. 400 10,000 10,400 Feathers, do. 150 150 Fire
Engines, number Buckets, do.
1 1 233 233 Furniture H^use.
Bedsteads, do. Tables, do. Desks, do. Bureaus, do. Clocks, do. Sophas, do.
Settees, do. Mahogany Chairs, do. Windsor Chairs, do. Rush Chairs, do. Chests
Seamens' do.
13 13 46 2 28 9 2 87 1 32 12 10 1 56 2 2 4 1 5 2 1 3 20 10 30 24 24 86 36
1,65^ 151 336 780 20 3,061 60 60 269 269 Fisheries.
Fish, dried quintals Fish, pickled barrels Oil, Whale gallons Oil, Spermaceti
do. Spermaceti Candles, boxes Whale-bone, pounds
17,260 326,862 16,647 2,089 1,121 70 369 6 430 44 364,898 647 18,147 9,578
5,210 5,913 74 1,613 3,234 1,435 1,98^ 422 21 63,383 6,272 292,482 43,347 157
41,380 245 50,970 189 47^ 910 48,277 62,342 756 285 436,423 1,061 2,168 102 478
107 15 1 6 3,938 103,172 5,880 13,450 26,997 672 3,776 460 154,407 G^ain and
Pulse.
Wheat, bushels Rye, do. Indian Corn, do. Buckwheat, do. Oats, do. Pease and
Beans, do.
7 154 438 185,769 130,723 140,121 395,376 1,20^ 853,790 1,646 956 10,083 42
12,727 880 77,841 5,082 36,182 227,256 12,787 414,262 5,537 232,142 684,627
156,72^ 99,985 11,667 1,964,973 47 454 337 772 240 211 1,96^ 1,070 91 97,851
2,444 1,000 7,018 7,797 2,293 19 150 119,733 138 7,355 1,068 1,985 30,495
13,128 179 14,873 63,372 54,495 4,640 343 192,071

ABSTRACT OF GOODS, etc. EXPORTED.
STATES. New Hampshire Massachusetts Rhode Island Connecticut New York
New Jersey Pennsylvania Delaware Maryland Virginia North Carolina
South Carolina Georgia Total of each article. Groceries.
Brown Sugar, pound. Loaf Sugar, do Other Sugar, do Chocolate, do. Pepper, do.
Pimento, do. Gi^ger, do. Raisins, do.
178,049 386,014 123.340 302,720 5,214 126,819 1,122,156 1,896 191 1,000 12,550
323 5,200 600 21,760 54,000 54,000 4,170 432 1,150 940 6,692 2,440 2,600 5,040
400 982 230,803 48,750 11,100 18,600 310,635 18,420 18,420 4,970 100 3,700
8,770 Ginseng, do. 22,638 4,751 200 14,378 343 42,310 Glassware, crates 7 1 8
Glass for Windows, boxes 4 4 Grind-Stones, numbe^ 175 60 24 259 Gra^e-Stones,
do. 19 19 Hides, Raw, do. 702 900 1,602 Horns and Tips, do. 8,778 117,979
10,000 14,300 17,000 6,200 1,100 150 6,257 300 182,064 Hats, do. 564 80 30
2,606 12 148 3,440 Honey, gallons 1,005 200 120 5 60 1,390 Hemp, pound. 2,000
2,000 Hops, do. 2,250 2,250 Hay, tons 190.9.0 40.0.0 1,946.10.0 130.0.0 17.0.0
108.0.0 40.0.0 13.0.0 7.0.0 2,591.19.0 Iron.
wrought.
Nails, casks Axes, number Saws, do. Muskets, do. Shovels, do. Scythes, do.
Anchors, do. Grapnels, do.
castings.
Cambouses, do. Anvils, do. Cannon, do. Shor, do. Pots, kettles, and other
castings, do.
the ton.
Pig, tons Bar, do. Hooops, do.

164 1 1 3 40 49 258 550 55 53 658 36 36 42 42 372 12 384 139 139 36 4 7 19 1 4
71 30 30 2 2 12 12 53 16 14 83 500 740 1,240 2,100 47 185 70 2,402 0.6.0.0
108.10.0.0 448.0.0.0 797.0.0.0 1.445.0.0.0 468.16.0.0 3,267.12.0.0 124.18.3.0
97.2.1.0 0.16.0.0 107.10.0.0 21.0.0.0 351.7.0.0 3.11.0.0 4.4.0,0 7.11.0.0
15,6.0.0

ABSTRACT OF GOODS, etc. EXPORTED.
STATES. New Hampshire Massachusetts Rhode Island Connecticut New York
New Jersey Pennsylvania Delaware Maryland Virginia North Carolina
South Carolina Georgia Total of each article. Indigo, pounds 950 840 1,000
2,658 4,332 6,250 839,666 3,300 858,996 Ivory, casks 1 1 Lead.
Sheet, pounds Shot, do.
4,480 20,160 616 25,256 2,000 1,500 3,500 Leather, do. 7,523 90 2,690 3,358
1,650 1,491 2,500 234 19,536 Lime, bushels 230 400 252 90 810 96 1,878 Live
Stock.
Horned Cattle, number Horses, do. Mules, do. Deer, do. Sheep, do. Hogs, do.
Poultry, dozens
145 516 235 3,204 315 70 6 84 76 4,551 62 400 213 4,349 445 12 1 18 31 100
5,656 200 393 498 10 1,101 2 2 253 4,025 2,957 3,706 622 110 56 401 2^ 12,153
30 885 1,129 3,522 1,057 27 108 1,098 11,94^ 668 8^^ 21,291 27 1,094 873 3,179
941 18 10 133 96^ 3 70 7,316 Merchandise or dry goods foreign.
Packages, number Nankeens, pieces
324 4 20 102 746 464 5 1 37 7 1,701 2,840 9,500 12,340 Molasses, gallons 8,994
42 1,220 1,000 130 11,338 Mustard, pounds 2,000 120 1,120 Millstones, number 2
8 10 Naval Stores.
Pitch, barrels Tar, do. Rosin, do. Turpentine, do. Spirits of Turpentine,
gallons
623 20 2 1,953 462 196 202 4,490 795 402 9,145 780 3,998 600 85 9,377 8 5,889
29 2,900 19,017 21,395 2,509 2,692 69,279 88 539 106 334 41 21^ 15 1,337 119
4,348 122 11,531 7,140 17 1,481 17,620 13,55^ 11,102 79 67,148 960 6^ 1,028
Negroes, number 23 16 2 41 Nuts, bushels 43 18 106 9^ 4 267 Oil, Linseed
gallons 79 60 60 199 Powder, Gun qr. casks 31 51 176 56 189 467 Powder, Hair
pounds 600 650 990 300 2,540 Pomatum, do. 510 510 Porcelain, or China, chests 2
1 3 Paper, reams 106 7 15 128 Pipes, boxes 2 30 1 33 Paints, kegs 87 118 210
442 7 8^^ Plaster of Paris tons 3.0.0 3.0.0

ABSTRACT OF GOODS, etc. EXPORTED.
STATES. New-Hampshir^ Massachusetts Rhode Island Connecticut New York
New Jersey Pennsylvania Delaware Maryland Virginia North Carolina
South Carolina Georgia Total of each article. Provisions.
Rice, tierces Flour, barrels Bread. do. Crackers, kegs Rye Meal, barrels
Indian Meal, do. Ship Stuff, do. Buckwheat Meal, do. Beef, do. Pork, do.
Mutton, do. Tongues, kegs Hams and Bacon, pounds Butter, firkins Cheese, pounds
Lard, do. Fresh Beef, do. Fresh Pork, do. Carcases of Mutton, number Sausages,
pounds Tongues and Sounds, kegs Tripes, pounds Oysters Pickled, kegs Potatoes,
bushels, Onions, do.
9 1,423 1,225 112 6,314 48 6,720 ^ 1,352 441 5,544 106,419 12,152 141,762 406
26,736 6,225 4,411 104,826 59^ 347,742 24,188 191,799 108,824 3,077 5,441 192
824,464 87 4,491 625 3,080 15,359 137 31,911 551 8,043 14,723 414 1,255 310
80,986 2,049 1,416 12 11,663 50 12,970 497 3,722 5,125 76 65 37,645 229 3 595
9,725 597 2,648 329 14,126 575 330 2,685 7,155 553 34,335 1,110 3,093 2,737 68
33 7 52,681 505 60 3,700 532 1,383 6,180 12 253 265 1,784 28,453 7,067 22,108
8,290 215 3,205 50 1,010 717 298 992 149 74,338 112 4,726 3,916 7,113 6,224 221
4,461 80 1,829 2,876 5,822 796 22 38,098 17 17 2,354 16 48 2,418 33,281 16,476
19,768 107,100 13,750 305,230 3,961 9,271 8,028 50,126 16,382 1,990 585,353 296
4,101 992 870 2,497 95 1,541 68 91 216 54 931 9 11,761 28,027 14,731 29,602
26,300 1,000 15,240 877 1,050 3,598 4,100 1,400 125,925 362 101,022 42,936
72,644 94.720 3,260 88,640 3,360 4,190 38,940 53,371 11,640 160 515,245 75,092
75,092 3,008 3,008 425 425 1,480 1,480 329 35 6 370 6,000 6,000 139 995 206 576
57 1,973 419 3,947 6,055 1,766 3,282 3,007 198 9 25 91 835 19,634 10,381 58,304
25,703 6,540 8,805 14 739 82 530 825 284 112,207 Reeds, number 146,375 11,000
157,375 Spirits.
Country made, gallons Foreign distilled, do. Cordials, do.
1,712 470,357 280,179 2,214 94,912 53,702 400 19,530 6,957 222 17,930 948,115
26,794 27,092 286 13,221 12,755 2,396 285 944 277 84,050 223 223 Sadlery.
Saddles, number Bridles, do. Coach Harness, setts Wagon Geers, do.
7 93 125 674 5 63 6 973 7 43 125 676 18 869 6 6 2 150 152 Shoes, pairs 936
3,790 223 2,268 68 150 1,042 124 137 8,738 Soap, boxes 5 221 20 37 130 292 179
15 3 106 12 1,020 Starch, pounds 1,000 3,920 4,920

ABSTRACT OF GOODS, etc. EXPORTED.
STATES. New Hampshire Massachusetts Rhode Island Connecticut New York
New Jersey Pennsylvania Delaware Maryland Virginia North Carolina
South Carolina Georgia Total of each article. Snuff, do. 212 2,260 4,650 1,050
1,000 702 168 10,042 Salt, bushels 1,092 307 60 350 42 42 62 1,955 Spruce,
Essence of gallons 226 30 256 Steel, pounds 4,368 4,958 9,336 Silk, raw, chests
14 14 Silver, ounces 276 276 Seeds
Garden, boxes Cotton, bushels
20 20 100 100 Skins and Furs
Calf in Hair, number Elk, do. Bear, do. Seal, do. Sheep, do. Deer Skins, do.
Deer Skins, pounds Deer Skins, packages Beaver, pounds Otter, number Sable, do.
Tiger, Fox, Mink, etc. do. Skins and Furs unknown, packages
3 24 27 79 79 270 3 16 62 351 4,800 14,536 19,336 165 165 444 444 318 4,881
12,858 54,867 34,675 50,765 158,367 156 7 162 25 479 829 4,000 700 4,700 500 25
85 610 22 22 12 390 6 408 84 104 337 22 6 376 929 Tobacco
Hogsheads, number Manufactured, pounds
3 1,221 1,429 105 1,952 5 3,203 8 28,292 61,203 3,546 5,290 5,471 112,428
110,525 1,600 2,140 780 2,025 624 180 117,874 Tallow, do. 7,400 130,856 2,994
6,822 4,600 152,622 Tow Cloth, yards 540 1,660 60 1,222 351 3,833 Twine pounds
612 612 Tin Manufactured, dozens 46 46 Teas.
Bohea, chests Souchong, do. Hyson, do. Other green, do.
12 8 21 3 44 55 220 27^ 296 274 2 560 2 60 ^/2 3 ^ 1,198 1 89 2 92 Vinegar,
gallons 5,331 60 420 5,811 Varnish, barrels 1 12 13 Wines.
Madeira, gallons Other Wines, do. Bottled, dozens
809 4,793 694 30 9,313 3,810 748 1,078 450 420 22,145 11,128 3,154 12,044
1,380 5,556 33,262 50 359 91 500

ABSTRACT OF GOODS, etc. EXPORTED.
STATES. New Hampshire Massachusetts Rhode Island Connecticut New York
New Jersey Pennsylvania Delaware Maryland Virginia North Carolina
South Carolina Georgia Total of each article. Bees, pounds Myrtle, do.
500 8,222 602 91,542 94,135 10,882 30,685 2,846 49,784 160 299,358 240 240
Whips, number 500 500 Wood.
Pine Boards and Plank, (...) Oak Boards and Plank, do. Other Boards and Plank,
do. Scantling, do. Timber, do. Timber, tons Timber, pieces Mahogany, tons
Lignumvitae, do. Dye Woods, do. Dye Woods, pieces Staves and Heading, number
Shingles, do. Hoops and Poles, do. Shakes, do. Casks, do. Masts, do. Bowsprits,
do. Spars, do. Oars and Oar-rafters, do. Hand-spikes, do. Pumps, do. Boxes and
Brakes, do. Blocks, do. Treenails, do. Cedar and Oak Knees, do. Anchor-Stocks,
number Cedar Posts, do. Spokes and Fellies, dozens Mast-Hoops, do. Yokes and
Bows for Oxen, setts Lock-Stocks, number Cords of Wood, do
7,457,500 28,114,375 281,676 577,083 3,374,900 89,000 1,583,222 3,385 5^0,679
829,126 4,303,468 717,210 3,484,488 51,316,112 330,650 350,985 18,852 102,260
17,120 4,221 824,088 10,400 264,874 4,000 36,433 315,707 525,350 21,440 4,000
286,020 18,000 51,814 359,737 307,750 1,632,949 499,814 2,160,630 5,867,504
253,573 14,400 65,000 40,000 55,178 31,000 1,864,299 2,323,450 539 18,249 70 9
10 40 87 387 19,391 6,745 70 3,137 4,477 178 541 2 654 2,570 18,374 2.0.0 2.0.0
16.4.0 56.10.0 10.0.0 58.0.0 39.7.0 180.1.0 1.3.0 12.5.2 28.10.0 160.10.0
17.0.0 32.15.0 252.3.2 965 965 1,250,100 5,257,475 277,950 1,124,842 5,565,590
48,412 2,814,634 37,250 1,731,067 7,419,823 2,291,089 512,550 866,527
29,197,309 1,209,000 14,386,700 110,000 325,800 2,200,700 1,210,000 2,789,173
228,000 2,629,550 11,873,935 27,456,801 2,573,500 4,644,704 71,637,863 36,150
1,232,481 314,813 573,605 144,550 16,125 84,460 88,525 27,340 42,844 2,500
2,563,393 1,459 32,634 1,916 5,133 1,508 120 2,065 1,608 220 82 870 47,615 492
458 295 1,245 79 210 11 11 4 8 323 2 21 23 11 2,565 790 12 222 9 17 6 125 3,757
2,325 32,070 89^ 252 577 90 871 2,444 20 39,543 7,118 135 700 9,622 7,840 3,552
4,452 20 336 33,775 6 4 31 14 55 40 40 5,089 666 120 550 6,425 2,000 9,500
21,000 2,000 34,500 365 427 288 1,080 113 20 92 225 134 134 578 350 7,065 888
83 8,^64 50 59 109 182 17 5 204 3,100 3,100 1,073 12 82 4 1,171

ABSTRACT OF GOODS, etc. EXPORTED.
STATES. New Hampshire Massachusetts Rhode Island Connecticut New York
New Jersey Pennsylvania Delaware Maryland Virginia North Carolina
South Carolina Georgia Total (...) each artic^^. Wood.
Cords of Oak-Bark, number Oak Bark ground, hogsheads Frames of Houses, number
Wheel-Barrows, do. Corn-Fans do. Cart-Wheels, pairs Spinning-Wheels, number
Worm-Tubs, do. Tubs, Pails, Dishes, etc. dozens
74 5 200 3 10 2^^ 2,876 45 2,9^^ 5 1^6 1 1 4 4 1^ 12 24 6 1 2 2 37 7 2 52

VALUE OF GOODS, WARES AND MERCHANDISE EXPORTED FROM EACH STATE.
Dollars. NEW HAMPSHIRE 181,407 MASSACHUSETTS 2,889,922 RHODE ISLAND 698,084
CONNECTICUT 749,925 NEW YORK 2,528,085 NEW JERSEY 23,524 PENNSYLVANIA 3,820,646
DELAWARE 133,972 MARYLAND 2,550,258 VIRGINIA 3,549,499 NORTH CAROLINA 503,294
SOUTH CAROLINA 2,917,979 GEORGIA 458,973 Dollars 21,005,568
TREASURY DEPARTMENT, FEBRUARY 27th, 1793. TENCH COXE, Commissioner of the
Revenue.

CHAPTER XIII. A RETURN OF THE IMPORTS INTO THE UNITED STATES, FOR ONE YEAR,
ENDING ON THE 30th DAY OF SEPTEMBER, 1790.
GOODS, subject to 5 per cent. ad valorem, 13,044,824 90 Ditto, 7 per cent.
862,977 76 Ditto, 10 per cent. 624,674 59 Ditto, 12 per cent. 0 0 Ditto, 15 per
cent. 3,619 4 Spirits, of Jamaica proof, gallons, 610,703 Other distilled
spirits, do. 3,067,496 Madeira wine, do. 256,691 Other wines, do. 607,561 Beer,
ale or porter, in casks, do. 70,564 Molasses, do. 5,900,128 Brown sugar,
pounds, 17,380,746 Loaf sugar, do. 132,837 Other sugars, do. 177,279 Coffee,
do. 4,013,355 Cocoa, do. 896,946 Tallow candles, do. 15,157 Wax and spermaceti
candles, do. 4,224 Cheese, do. 88,771 Soap, do. 24,1^0 Nails and spikes, do.
1,579,947 Snuff, do. 2,198 Indigo, do. 32,283 Cotton, [this article being free,
there is no account of it kept by the collectors.] Tobacco manufactured, do.
3,182 In American v^ssels from India.
Bohea tea, Souchong and other black teas, Hyson, Other green teas,
do. 1,502,995 do. 378,032 do. 631,310 do. 89,515 In American vessels from
Europe.
Bohea tea, Souchong, etc. Hyson, Other green teas,
do. 298,768 do. 71,354 do. 15,736 do. 9,212 In Foreign vessels.
Bohea Tea, Souchong, etc. Hyson, Other green teas,
do. 9,612 do. 4,498 do. 4,644 do. 2,528 Cables, cwt. 635 1 10 Tarred cordage,
do. 5257 2 5 Untarred do. and yarn, do. 900 3 14 Twine or packthread, do. 609 2
8 Steel unwrought, do. 5,427 1 2 Beer, ale, porter or cider, in bottles,
dozens, 17,746 Wool and cotton cards, do. 780 Salt, bushels, 2,337,920 Coal,
do. 181,885 Playing cards, packs, 19,066 Pickled fish, barrels, 3468 Dried
fish, quintals 3,884 3 12 Shoes, slippers, etc. of leather, pairs, 49,003
Ditto, of silk or stuff, do. 20,701 Boots, do. 746

CHAPTER XIV. AN ACCOUNT OF THE TONNAGE OF VESSELS, ON WHICH THE DUTY WAS PAID,
IN THE UNITED STATES, FROM THE 1st OF OCTOBER 1789, TO THE 30th SEPTEMBER 1790,
INCLUSIVELY.
TO WHAT NATION BELONGING. STATES. United States. Mixed* ^ United States and
Foreign. Fran^^. Great Britain. Ireland. Spain. United Netherlands. Portugal.
Imperial and Germany. Hamburg and Bremen. Denmark. Sweden. Russia. Prussia.
TOTAL. Tons. Tons. Tons. Tons. Tons. Tons. Tons. Tons. Tons. Tons. Tons. Tons.
T. T. Tons. New Hampshire, 13,519 34 2,556 16,109. Massachusett^, 174,728.10
453. 6 19,382. 7 150 437. 9 249 195,401. 8 Rhode Island* 9,525. 5 174. 4 95. 9
46. 3 9,841. 9 Connecticut, 30,616. 10 3,458. 11 34,075. 9 New York, 48,922. 6
1,129 36,843 1,807. 3 1,753.6 1,763.6 292.9 226. 3 92,737. 9 New Jersey, 5,6^^.
7 79. 3 267 5,970.10 Pennsylvania, 52,987. 4 963.3 3,234. 7 40,202.10 1,800
4,342. 7 736.10 1,086 3 284. 4 105,638. 5 Delaware, 4,141. 3 1,782. 9 5,924
Maryland, ^7,008. 2 5,176 23,631 408 3,284 509 90,639. 2 Virginia, ^3,566. 2
2,121. 9 56,333. 8 83. 4 1,104. 4 668. 5 182. 9 104,060. 5 North Carolina,
19,8^3. 1 65 5,997. 8 213.10 49. 8 128. 2 26,287. 5 South Carolina, 19,7^7. 2
623. 2 20,634. 7 900 952. 7 298. 1 1.948 1,350 46,483. 7 Georgia, 11,^50. 6
710. 9 15,767. 4 111. 9 306. 3 394 28,540. 7 Grand Total, 492,100.10 963. 8
13,801. 4 226,953. 1 3,147. 2 8,772. 9 7,228. 3 2,849.9 801.9 1.948 2,415.10
310.11 394 761,710. 4

CHAPTER XV. GENERAL ABSTRACT OF DUTIES, ARISING ON THE TONNAGE OF VESSELS
ENTERED INTO THE UNITED STATES, FROM THE 1st OF OCTOBER 1790, TO 30th SEPTEMBER
1791.
UNITED STATES VESSELS. UNITED STATES COASTERS. UNITED STATES FISHERIES.
FRANCE. GREAT BRITAIN. SPAIN. PORTUGAL. UNITED NETHERLANDS. GERMANY. HANSE
TOWNS. DENMARK. SWEDEN AND RUSSIA. TOTAL AMERICAN TONNAGE. TOTAL FOREIGN
TONNAGE. TOTAL FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC. STATES. Tons. 95ths. Dols. Cts. Tons.
95ths. ^ols. Cts. Tons. 95ths. Dols. Cts. Tons. 95ths Dols. Cts. Tons. 95ths.
Dols. Cts. Ton^ 95ths Dols. Cts. Tons 95the Dols. Cts. Tons 95ths Dols. Cts.
Tons 95ths Dols. Cts. Tons. 95ths. Dols. Cts. Tons. 95ths. Dols. Cts. Tons.
95ths. Dols. Cts. Tons. 95ths. Dols. Cts. Tons. 95ths. Dols. Cts. Tons. 95ths.
Dols. Cts. NEW HAMPSHIRE 10,893 650.34 1,560. 93.60 629 37.74 264 132 1,386 693
162 81 13,028 781.68 1,812 888.40 14,840 1,670. 8 MASSACHUSETTS 96,564.25
5,822.98 46,063.94 2,767.56 29,560.27 1,774.70 404.57 202.28 22,495.93
11,251.21 1/^ 248.69 124.37 131 65.50 531.16 265.68 319.92 160 172,084.51
10,359.13 24,131.42 12,046.60 1/^ 196,215.93 22,405.73 1/^ RHODE ISLAND
19,196.70 1,151.84 9,103.18 546.25 810.87 48.65 88.18 26.46 280,71 140.37 47
23.50 100.51 50.26 29,110.80 1,729.90 516.45 240.60 29,627.30 1,970.50
CONNECTICUT 19,728.63 1,183.72 8,098.48 487.70 913.32 54.80 3,966.71 1,983.23
59.59 29.80 100.21 50.11 28,740.48 1,726.22 4,126.56 2,063.14 32,867. 9
3,789.37 NEW YORK 40,334.47 2,720.85 5,725 343.38 567.24 34. 3 1,503.24 751.60
25,154.47 17,576.56 243.24 121.62 1,563.71 781.85 1,079.71 539.85 46,626.71
3,098.26 39,544.47 19,448. 8 86,171.23 22,546.34 NEW JERSEY 1,213.24 72.79
4,567.92 274.34 5,234,69 302.94 5,234.69 302.94 PENNSYLVANIA 50,327.64 3,234.34
3,923.40 235.42 967 483.50 27,327.48 13,664.12 2,062.79 1,025.90 2,533.14
1,266.61 251.88 125.98 219 109.50 225.32 112.67 53,186.24 3,405.87 33,586.71
16,686.86 86,773 20,092.73 DELAWARE 4,610.23 276.61 1,187 71.22 1,913.24 956.62
163 81.50 5,797.23 347.83 2,076.24 1,038.12 7,873.47 1,385.95 MARYLAND
33,375.11 2,029.34 7,836.16 470.12 537.47 32.25 714.48 357.25 18,215.55
9,107.78 503 251.50 589 294.50 1,372.47 686.25 463 231.50 497 248.50 41,478.74
2,531.23 22,354.55 10,699.22 64,103.34 13,230.46 1/^ VIRGINIA 32,041. 6
1,922.36 1/^ 10,636.60 638.77 72.71 4.36 2,414.34 1,207.18 44,812. 9 22,406.70
65 32.50 180 90 194.43 97.25 42,750.42 2,565.50 47,665.86 22,947.59 90,416.33
25,513. 9 NORTH CAROLINA 23,962.75 1.437.80 6,796.31 438.56 ^/4 436.79 218.42
13,662.59 6,831.31 73 36.50 136.59 68.31 30,759.11 1,876.37 14,309. 7 7,019.54
45,068.18 8,895.91 SOUTH CAROLINA 22,497.55 1,349.75 4,675.38 280.77 25 1.50
339. 5 169.52 20,827.80 10,413.47 1,670.32 835.14 56.21 28.11 194.68 97.36
2,603. 9 1,301.50 76.54 38.28 27,197.93 1,632. 2 25,767.79 12,883.38 52,965.77
14,515.40 GEORGIA 7,063.40 423.80 733.20 43.96 391.60 195.82 16,165.75 8,082.88
102.5^ 51.26 243.88 121.96 218.54 109.28 7,796.60 467.76 17,122.45 8,561.20
24,919.10 9,028.96 TOTAL 361,754.28 22,276.54 110,906.77 6,691.67 33,116. ^
1,988. 4 7,523.40 3,744. 3 206,208.62 103,107.27 4,753.57 2,371.22 5,152.80
2,576.44 3,890.54 1,945.27 463 231.50 2,821.63 1,410.78 1,441,59 720.93 758.47
379.26 504,061.76 30,824.72 233,013.82 114,522.75 737,075.63 145,347.47

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, Register-Office, March 9 th, 1792. JOSEPH NOURSE,
Register.

CHAPTER XVI. CONTAINING A SUMMARY STATEMENT OF THE PRINCIPAL FACTS, WHICH
CHARACTERIZE THE AMERICAN PEOPLE, AND THEIR COUNTRY OR TERRITORY.
THE people of the United States have exploded those principles, by the
operation of which religious oppressions and restrictions of whatever
description, have been imposed upon mankind, and, rejecting mere toleration,
they have placed upon one common and equal footing every church, sect or
society of religious men.

They have exploded, in like manner, those principles, by the operation of
which, civil oppressions have been inflicted upon mankind; and they have made
an unexceeded progress in their practice upon the principles of free government.

While the fermentations of a civil and revolutionary contest were yet
operating upon their minds, amidst the warmth of feeling incidental to that
state of things, they have recently examined with sober attention the
imperfections of their national and subordinate civil establishments: they
reflected, with due seriousness, on the numerous inconveniences, which those
imperfections had produced, and upon the awful scenes in which they would
probably be called upon to suffer or to act, if their civil constitutions
should continue unamended: and they have since exhibited to the world (...) new
and interesting spectacle of a whole people, meeting, as it were, in their
political plain and voluntarily imposing upon themselves the wholesome and
necessary restraints of just government.

On two occasions, at the distance of four years, personal character and the
public interests have produced an orderly and unanimous election of the chief
magistrate of the United States, without one, even the smallest, effort or
measure of procurement.

During four years, the second station of executive public employment and all
of the third A. D. 1793.
grade have remained in the same hands, nor have any changes taken place in the
more subordinate, but a few from voluntary resignations and death.

The public debt is smaller in proportion to the present wealth and population
of the United States than the public debt of any other civilized nation.

The United States (including the operations of the individual states) have
sunk a much greater proportion of their public debt in the last ten years, than
any other nation in the world.

The expenses of the government are very much less, in proportion to wealth and
numbers, than those of any nation in Europe.

There is no land tax among the national revenues, nor is there any interior
tax, or excise upon food, drink, fuel, lights, or any native or foreign
manufacture, or native or foreign production, except a duty of about four pence
sterling upon domestic distilled spirits A. D. 1793.
. The greatest part of the public burdens are paid by an import duty on foreign
goods, which being drawn back on exportation, it remains only on what is
actually consumed. It is in that view the lowest in the world, and operates
greatly in favor of American manufactures.

Trade has been encouraged by a drawback of all the import duty on foreign
goods, when they are exported, excepting only a very few commodities of a
particular nature, which are not desired to be much imported into, or consumed
in the United States.

A national mint is established under the direction of the ablest practical man
in the arts and sciences which this country contains -- David Rittenhouse. It
is provided by law that the purity and intrinsic value of the silver coin shall
be equal to that of Spain, and of the gold coins to those of the strictest
European nations. The government of the United States foregoes all profit from
the coinage: a political and wholesome forbearance.

The ^^nks established in the several cities of Philadelphia, New York, Boston,
Baltimore, Charleston, Alexandria, etc. divide a profit of seven and an half to
eight and an half per cent. per annum More might be said with truth.
at present, which is paid half yearly.

The interest of the public debt of the United States is paid quarter yearly
with a punctuality absolute and perfect. There is no tax on property in the
funds and banks.

The shipbuilding of the United States was greater in the year 1792, than in
any former year since the settlement of the country, and it is much greater in
the current year, than it was in the last. Generally speaking, the art of
shipbuilding was never so well understood, never so well executed, nor was
there ever a time when so many of the manufactures requisite for the furniture,
tackle, apparel and arming of vessels were made in the United States.

The value of the manufactures of the United States is certainly greater than
double the value of their exports in native commodities.

The value of the manufactures of the United States, is much greater than the
gross value of all their imports, including the value of goods exported again.

The manufactures of the United States consist generally of articles of
comfort, utility, and necessity. Articles of luxury, elegance, and show are not
manufactured in America, excepting a few kinds.

The manufactures of the United States have increased very rapidly since the
commencement of he revolutionary war, and particularly in the last five years.

Household manufactures are carried on within the families of almost all the
farmers and planters, and of a great proportion of the inhabitants of the
villages and towns. This practice is increasing under the animating influences
of private interest and public spirit.

The exports of the United States have increased in the last two years about
fourteen per cent. In the last three years they have increased from eighteen
millions and one quarter: to twenty-six millions of dollars. September 30th,
1793.


Those exports consist in a great degree of the most necessary food of man and
working animals, and of raw materials, applicable to manufactures of the most
general utility and consumption.

There is not any duty upon the exportation of the produce of the earth, nor
can such duty be imposed on any exported commodities: the exportation of
produce may be suspended or prohibited.

Produce and all other merchandise may be freely exported in the ships and
vessels of all nations (not being alien enemies) without discrimination.

The exports of the United States are five times the amount of the national
taxes and duties They prove to be nearly six times. Sept. 30th, 1793.
.

The amount of the outward freight of the ships and vessels of the United
States, at this time, is probably equal to all their national taxes and duties.
The inward freight is considerable. The earning of the fishing vessels, in lieu
of freight, are also considerable. The coasting freights are greater in value
than both the last.

All ships and vessels depart from the United States, fully laden, excepting a
part of the East India traders.

A large quantity of tonnage is employed in the coasting trade.

A considerable quantity of tonnage is employed in the cod and whale fisheries.

The imports of the United States are less in value than the exports, deducting
the outward freights of their own ships (which are returned in goods) the nett
sales of their ships to foreigners, the property imported by migrators from
foreign countries, and the public impost.

The very great proportion of the imports, which consists of manufactures, (and
from raw materials, which America can produce) affords constant and inviting
opportunities to lessen the balance against the United States, in their trade
with one foreign country, holds out a certain home market to skilful and
industrious manufacturers in America, and gives promises to the landholder and
farmer, of a very increasing demand for their produce, in which they cannot be
deceived. Witness the steady price of our produce, during the embargo. A. D.
1794.


The imports of the United States, for consumption, have not been swelled in
proportion to the increase of their population and wealth. The reason is, the
constant introduction of new branches of manufacture, and the great extension
of the old branches.

The imports, for consumption, into the United States are composed of
manufactures in a much less proportion than heretofore, owing to the same two
causes.

The imports of the United States have almost ceased to exhibit certain
articles of naval and military supply, and others of the greatest utility and
consumption, owing also to the same two causes.

The imports of the United States, consist in a small degree of necessaries, in
a great degree of articles of comfortable accommodation, and in some degree of
luxuries: but the exports consist chiefly of prime necessaries, with some
articles of mere comfort and utility, and some of luxury. The following will be
found to be the quantities of some of the principle articles of exportation
from the United States, during the year, ending in September, 1792.

3,145,255 bushels of grain and pulse (principally wheat, Indian corn, rye,
beans and peace. 44,752 horses, horned cattle, mules, hogs and sheep. 1,469,723
barrels of flour, meal, biscuit, and rice, reducing casks of various sizes, to
the proportion of flour barrels. 146,909 barrels of tar, pitch, turpentine and
rosin. 116,803 barrels of beef, pork, mutton, sausages, oysters, tripe, etc.
reducing casks of various sizes, to the proportion of beef and pork barrels.
231,776 barrels of dried and pickled fish, reducing them to barrels of the same
size. 948,115 gallons of spirits, distilled in the United States. 7,823 tons,
12 cwts. and 14 lbs. of potashes and pearl-ashes. 112,428 hogsheads of
tobacco. 60,646,861 feet of boards plank, and scantling. 19,391 tons of timber.
18,374 pieces of timber. 1,080 cedar and oak ship knees. 71,693,863 shingles.
31,760,702 staves and hoops. 191 frames of houses. 73,318 oars, rafters for
oars, and handspikes. 48,860 shook or knock-down casks. 52,382 hogsheads of
flax seed. The exports of the year of which the above are a part, amounted to
21,000,000 of Dollars -- but the exports of the next following year (ending on
the 30th September, 1793) amounted to 5,000,000 more, being 26,000,000 of
Dollars. Provisions and raw materials have greatly increased. Of flour alone
there were shipped 1,013,000 casks. See paper Y. Book 2d.

The imports of the United States are now generally brought directly (and not
circuitiously) from the countries which produced or manufactured them -- China,
India proper, the isles of Bourbon and Mauritius, Good Hope, the southern
settlements of America and the West Indies, the Wine islands, the countries on
the Mediteranean and Baltic Seas, Great Britain and Ireland, France, the
Netherlands and Germany, Spain and Portugal.

Less than half the ships and vessels belonging to the United States, are
sufficient to transport all the commodities they consume or import.

Their citizens may be lawfully concerned in any branch of foreign trade,
whether carried on from the United States or from any other country. Except the
slave trade, March 1794.


Their commerce is diversified and prosperous, and consists in importing for
their own consumption, and for exportation; in the exporting, the coasting and
inland trades; the Indian trade; manufactures, shipping, the fisheries,
banking, and insurances on ships, cargoes, and houses. There is no branch of
commerce foreign or domestic, in which every district, city, port, and
individual, is not equally entitled to be interested.

The lawful interest of money is six per cent. per annum in most of the states:
in a few it is seven per cent. in one it is five per cent.

The commanders and other officers of the American ships are deemed skilful and
judicious; from which cause, combined with the goodness of their ships and of
their equipment, insurances upon their vessels are generally made in Europe,
upon the most favorable terms, compared with the corresponding risques on
board of the vessels of other nations.

The separate American states (with one small exception) have abolished the
slave trade, and they have in some instances abolished negro slavery; in others
they have adopted efficacious measures for its certain but gradual abolition.
The importation of slaves is discontinued, and can never be renewed so as to
interrupt the repose of Africa, or endanger the tranquillity of the United
States. The steady use of efficacious alteratives is deemed preferable to the
immediate application of more strong remedies in a case of so much momentary
and intrinsic importance.

The clothes, books, household furniture, and the tools or implements of their
trade or profession, brought by emigrators to America, are exempted from the
import duty, and they may begin their commerce, manufactures, trades or
agriculture on the day of their arrival upon the same footing as a native
citizen.

There is no greater nor other tax upon foreigners or their property in the
United States, than upon native citizens.

All foreign jurisdiction in ecclesiastical matters is inconsistent with the
laws and constitutions of the United States; and with the settled judgment of
the people.

Almost every known christian church exists in the United States; as also the
Hebrew church. There has not been a dispute between any two sects or churches
since the revolution. There are no tithes. Marriage and burial fees, small
glebes, land-rents, pew-rents, moneys at interest and voluntary contributions
are the principal means of supporting the clergy. Many of them are also
professors and teachers in the universities, colleges, academies and schools,
for which interesting stations, pious and learned ministers of religion are
deemed particularly suitable. There is no provision in the episcopal,
presbyterian or independent church for any clerical person, or character above
a rector, or minister of the gospel -- and this is generally, if not
universally the case. There are some assistant ministers, but no curates, or
vicars: also several bishops without salaries.

The poor taxes in the United States are very small, owing to the facility,
with which every man and woman, and every child, who is old enough to do the
lightest work, can procure a comfortable subsistence. The industrious poor, if
frugal and sober, often place themselves, in a few years, above want.

Horses and cattle, and other useful beasts, imported for breeding, are
exempted by law from the import duty.

All the lands in the United States are free from tithes.

The medium annual land rents of Europe are greater per acre than the medium
purchase is in the United States; including in the estimate the value of the
old improved farms in America, and the great mass of unimproved lands. A. D.
1793.


The military regulations and articles of war in the United States, are well
calculated to maintain that strict discipline and thorough subordination, which
are indispensible to the efficiency of an army. All the officers of the land
and sea-forces are, by the constitution appointed by the president, with the
advice and consent of the senate.

The production and manufactures of military supplies and articles, enable the
United States to derive from their own resources, ships of war, gunpowder,
cannon and musket-balls, shells and bombs, cannon and carriages, muskets,
rifles and cutlasses, grapnals, anchors, sail cloth, cordage, iron, lead,
cartouch-boxes, sword-belts, cartridge-paper, saddles, bridles and holsters,
soldiers' and sailors hats, buckles, shoes and boots, leathern breeches, naval
stores, sheathing paper, malt and spirituous liquors, manufactured tobacco,
soap, candles, lard, butter, beef, pork, bacon, hams, peace, biscut, and flour,
and other articles for the land or marine service.

The education of youth has engaged a great share of the attention of the
legislatures of the states.

Night schools for young men and boys, who are employed at labor or business
in the day time, have been long and beneficially supported, and the idea of
Sunday schools has been zealously adopted in some places. Free schools for both
sexes have been increased. Greater attention, than heretofore, is paid to
female education.

The people of the United States are ingenious in the invention, and prompt,
and accurate in the execution of mechanism and workmanship for purposes in
science, arts, manufactures, navigation, and agriculture. Rittenhouse's
planetarium, Franklin's electrical conductor, Godfrey's quadrant improved by
Hadley, Rumsey's and Fitch's steam-engines, Leslie's rod pendulum and other
horological inventions, the construction of ships, the New England whale-boat,
the construction of flour-mills, the wire-cutter and bender for card makers,
Folsom's and Brigg's machinery for cutting nails out of rolled iron, the
Philadelphia dray with an inclined plane, Mason's engine for extinguishing
fire, the Connecticut steeple clock, which is wound up by the wind, the
Franklin fireplace, the Rittenhouse stove, Anderson's threshing machine,
Rittenhouse's instrument for taking levels, Donnaldson's hippopotamos and
balance lock, and Wynkoop's underlators, are a few of the numerous examples.

It is probable, that all the jewels and diamonds worn by the citizens of the
United States, their wives and daughters are less in value than those which
sometimes form a part of the dress of an individual in several countries of
Europe. All capital stock is kept in action. There are no descrptions of men in
America and very few individuals, at the active times of life, who live without
some pursuit of business, profession, occupation, or trade. All the citizens
are in active habits.

No country of the same wealth, intelligence and civilization, has so few
menial servants (strictly speaking) in the families of persons of the greatest
property.

Family servants and farming servants, who emigrate from Europe, and who
continue soberly and industriously in family or farm service, for one, two or
three years, very often find opportunities to better their situations, by
getting into some little comfortable line of dealing, or trade, or
manufacturing, or farming, according to their education, knowledge and
qualifications.

America has not many charms for the dissipated and voluptuous part of mankind,
but very many indeed for the rational, sober minded and discreet. It is a
country which affords great opportunities of comfort and prosperity to people
of good property, and those of m^derate property, and to the industrious and
honest poor; a singular and pleasing proof of which last assertion is, that
there are very few, if any, day laborers, in the city and liberties of
Philadelphia, of the Quaker church. That religious society is very numerous,
but the sobriety, industry, and frugality which they practice, enables their
poor quickly to improve their condition, in a country so favorable to the
poorest members of the community.

That part of the tradesmen and manufacturers, who live in the country,
generally reside on small lots and farms, of one acre to twenty, and not a few
upon farms of twenty to one hundred and fifty acres, which they cultivate at
leisure times, with their own hands, their wives, children, servants and
apprentices, and sometimes by hired laborers, or by letting out fields, for a
part of the produce, to some neighbor, who has time or farm hands not fully
employed. This union of manufactures and farming is found to be very convenient
on the grain farms, but it is still more convenient on the grazing and grass
farms, where parts of almost every day, and a great part of every year, can be
spared from the business of the farm, and employed in some mechanical,
handycraft, or manufacturing business. These persons often make domestic and
farming carriages, implements and utensils, build houses and barns, tan
leather, manufacture hats, shoes, hosiery, cabinet-work, and other articles of
clothing and furniture, to the great convenience and advantage of the
neighbourhoo^* In like manner some of the farmers, at leisure times and proper
seasons, manufacture nails, pot-ash, pearl-ash, staves and heading, hoops and
handspikes, axe-handles, maple-sugar, etc. The most judicious planters in the
southern states are industriously instructing their negroes, particularly the
young, the old, the infirm, and the females in manufactures -- a wise and
humane measure.

A large proportion of the most successful manufacturers in the United States
are persons, who were journeymen, and in a few instances were foremen in the
work-shops and manufactories of Europe, who having been skillful, sober and
frugal, and having thus saved a little money, have set up for themselves with
great advantage in America. Few have failed to succeed. There appears to be
least opening for those, who have been used to make very fine and costly
articles of luxury and show. There is not so much chance of success for those
luxurious branches, unless they are capable of being carried on in a
considerable degree by machinery or water works; in which case they also will
thrive if the necessary capital be employed. -- There is already some
consumption of these fine goods in America, and as free an exportation of them
(without duty, or excise) as from any country in the world.

The views of the government of the United States appear by its declarations,
and by the strongest presumptive proofs to be the maintenance of peace, order,
liberty and safety. Intrigues at foreign courts and se^^et or open
interpositions or intermeddling in the affairs of foreign countries, have not
been imputed to the government of this nation. They have not manifested any
inordinate ambition, by seeking conquest, alone or in unity with any other
nation, for they have not attempted to establish or raise a great or
unnecessary navy The intended naval armament was manifestly proposed to
restrain the pirates of Barbary; and the measures relative to the additional
regular troops, the draught of militia, and fortifications are obviously
grounded on justifiable caution and necessary defense. April 1794.
or army.

The United States have been prudently and unremitingly attentive to those
objects, which enable a country to pursue, to an happy and profitable issue,
unambitious, defensive and necessary wars. Amidst an industrious cultivation of
the arts of peace, they have maintained and improved the military organization
of the whole mass of the able bodied citizens. They have restored their public
credit, as an indispensible mean of war, and they have successfully encouraged
all those arts, by which the instruments of naval and land armaments may be
expeditiously procured and created. Their measure of retribution to their
public creditors, foreign and domestic, has been considered, by some
intelligent citizens as even more than justice required. From an equal love of
justice, and from prudential considerations, they have, by a formal act of the
people, sanctioned a treaty recognizing the claims of the subjects of a foreign
country against whom an infraction and non execution of (...) same treaty was
alleged. Refraining most scrupulously from intrigues and influence in the
affairs of foreign nations it cannot be doubted, that they will be aware of
corresponding intrigues and influence in their domestic affairs, and that they
will check the appearances of such attempts with displeasure and effect.

BOOK II.
BOOK II.
CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.
THE preceding part of this work was prepared for publication in the summer of
the last year; but the epidemic malady, which occurred in Philadelphia, toward
the end of that season, prevented the execution of the design at that time.
Some observations and documents have since presented themselves, and are
intended to be comprised in the second book. Most of the latter are calculated
to render these views of our interests and capacities more particular and more
clear. The observations principally relate to the present stage of our affairs,
and will therefore be the more interesting, if they shall prove to be founded
in truth and reason.

CHAPTER II. REFLECTIONS UPON THE BEST MODES OF BRINGING THE FOREST LANDS OF
THE UNITED STATES INTO CULTIVATION AND USE.
THERE remain at this time, in most of the American states, extensive tracts of
land, covered with forests, applicable to every purpose of human life, for
which wood and timber are required. No country, so well accommodated with
navigation and adapted to commerce and manufactures, possesses as great a
treasure of the same kind. The manufactures, which can be made immediately of
wood, are no less numerous than important. Ships, boats, masts and spars, oars,
hand-spikes, anchor-stocks, casks and other coopers ware of every size and
kind, cabinet wares, and other household furniture, farming and mechanical
implements and tools, staves, heading, hoops, boards, plank, scantling, joists,
square timber, shingles, frames of houses, turners wares, carriages for
pleasure and for draught, corn-fans, wheel barrows, measures, scale plates,
timber for machinery and mills, cannon carriages, gun-stocks and other military
implements for the sea and land service are among the objects contemplated.

The manufactures, to which wood is necessary in the form of fuel, are also
numerous and important. Glass-houses, potteries, distilleries, brick-kilns,
furnaces, forges, mills for rolling and slitting iron and other metals,
refineries of sugar, black-smiths and all other smiths shops are among the
principal instances.

The manufactures to produce which, wood is requisite for the making of ashes,
are the great articles of soft and hard soap, which are of universal
consumption and the very important articles of pot-ash and pearl-ash.

To all these may be added the manufactory of tanned leather, which demands the
bark of various and innumerable trees.

Of the wooden raw materials and fuel for these invaluable and numerous
manufactures, the United States possess, if we may so speak, an immense and
unequalled magazine. They appear therefore to be invited to establish
manufactures in wood by the most weighty and obvious considerations.

But when it is remembered, that this immense magazine of wooden materials and
fuel will obstruct, for a time, the cultivation of millions of acres of the
best lands, we must feel another and a more powerful impulse to the active
promotion of manufactures in wood. To enforce these general ideas the following
application of them in the manufactory of potashes is here offered:

A METHOD OF CLEARING A FARM LOT OF NEW WOODLAND, EASILY PRACTICABLE BY PERSONS
HAVING NO MORE MONEY OR PROVISIONS THAN ARE SUFFICIENT TO PROVIDE THE FOOD AND
CLOTHING OF THEIR FAMILIES, DURING THE FIRST YEAR OF THEIR SETTLEMENT.
1st. The settler in making this clearing must take care to burn the brush and
wood, in such manner as to preserve the ashes. Out of the wood ashes, thus
saved, he should make as much pot ash, or pearl ash, as he can, and he should
dispose of this for ready money, strong clothing, axes, spades, ploughs, or
such other things for his farm, or family, as it would otherwise be necessary
for him to procure, by selling or bartering, grain or cattle, if he had them to
spare. It is believed, that the pot ash or pearl ash will procure him as much
value as all the expense and labor of the clearing, during the season would be
worth in cash. He will therefore obtain as much money or goods as will enable
him to hire assistance, in the next season, either to farm, or to clear land,
or to make his improvements, so as to save his own time, or labor entirely, for
clearing more land, or to help him in doing it. He must again make pot ash or
pearl ash, and he must again apply the money or goods, it sells for, to the
clearing of the next season. -- In this way it is plain, that he will derive
money enough from the clearing and pot ashes, of every year, to do much of the
same in the year following. A man who has 40, 50 or 100 dollars to spare, at
the out set, will get his land cleared, in this manner very fast indeed. If he
has sugar maple trees on his land, he may also obtain money, by making sugar in
February and March, and selling or bartering it for cash, or goods to be laid
out in like manner, in hiring hands the next season. If money is scarce in a
new settlement, and he barters pot ash or maple sugar, for strong trowsers,
shirts, hats or jackets, he will find it easy to procure laborers for such
necessaries. It is proper to observe, that if a man burns his wood and brush on
every part of his newly cleared field, it is doubtful whether he does not
injure the soil, by burning the half rotten leaves and light mould, or earth,
which have been made from the rotten leaves of many years. -- There is an
opinion, that the ashes left from burning the trees greatly enrich the land,
and that would be certain, if the light moldy earth and half rotten leaves
were not also consumed by the fire. The soil of all new countries appears to
have for its upper part, a layer or stratum of half rotten vegetable materials,
which are capable of being burned, but which it would be a great benefit to
plough into the earth. Potatoes, the best food for new settlements, grow
abundantly in that rotten vegetable soil. This is very well known.

It appears doubtful, whether the farmers in the long cleared counties of
New England, New York, and New Jersey, do not injure themselves very much by
making pot ash and pearl ash, considering how necessary the wood ashes are to
manure their farms, many of which are impoverished, and many naturally light.
To carry the fodder and litter from a farm to other places does not appear more
improper. But that is allowed to be very bad farming.

2dly. The above method of clearing lands, is obviously important to people of
large property, who are desirous of improving their estates and their country,
by clearing their lands expeditiously. They may effect it in two ways; either
-- 1st. by setting up pot ash works, at their mills or country stores, or other
central places, and buying wood-ashes of the settlers of new fertile lands, and
making them into pearl ashes, or pot ashes, and then selling them for
exportation; or 2dly. by employing wood-cutters and other laborers, to fell the
trees, and oxen or horses, with chains to bring the wood together for burning,
then collecting the heaps of ashes and making pearl ashes, which is a simple
and easy operation. It is said to be a fact, and it is highly worthy of notice
that the expense of clearing an acre of land is fully and completely
reimbursed, by the nett sale^ of the pot ashes or pearl ashes, which can be
made from the wood ashes, collected after thus burning the trees -- Hence it
would follow, that if a person of substance should purchase one thousand acres
of good new wood land, at any fixed or given price, (for example fifteen
shillings, sterling per acre This price is mentioned, because it is a low
medium of the land-rents of Europe, and because great quantities of fine lands,
covered with woods, are yet to be purchased, in America, at and far under that
price.
) and if he should be able, by force of money, in one year to clear all the
meadow land and half the plough land, by making pot ashes or pearl ashes, in
the second mode above mentioned, he would immediately raise his property in
productiveness to the level of the good cleared lands of Pennsylvania,
New York, etc. that is to seven, eight, ten, twenty, thirty and forty dollars
per acre: for such are the prices, according to the quality, advantages of land
and water carriages, and proximity to towns and villages. The capital or money
employed to make the pot or pearl ashes would be replaced by the sales of them
as above mentioned. This operation, when considered upon a scale of 100,000
acres, appears like a new creation of property.

THE United States have been brought, by slow degrees, to their present
knowledge of the value of their wood and timber. It is said to be not more than
twenty-five years, since the southern live oak or ever-green oak has been used
in ship-building. The importance of pot-ash is by no means duly understood at
this time, in several of the best wooded of these states. The value of the
maple sugar tree is not yet universally known. It is said, that the Hemlock is
capable of being made into shingles fit for home consumption or exportation, in
a degree which is not understood; and the white pine is more valuable, than is
supposed, for the same purpose. The southern pitch pine, and even the yellow
pine have been supposed, of late years to be more suitable than white oak for
beams, carlines, sills, and other straight timbers for ships and houses, in
places liable to rapid decay. It is little known, that it is as easy in America
to procure a beam, for a ship of war, of white oak or pitch pine, in one entire
piece, as it is difficult, in Great Britain. The actual and progressive
scarcity of all the most valuable kinds of timber in Europe has been hitherto
noticed in as small a degree, as the diversified and unequal resources of the
United States in that particular. The demand for wood and timber throughout the
world has been greatly extended in the present century, by the increase of the
aggregate tonnage of the fleets of public and private ships, by manufactures in
wood, and by means of fire, and by the wonderful increase in the number and
extent of the commercial and manufacturing towns of Europe and America. The
tonnage of the British navy for example in 1694, bears no comparison to that of
1794, and their private ships have undergone a similar augmentation. The whole
mass of the tonnage of the world is now immense. A defalcation of timber is
percieved in most countries, and, in the manner of what has been said
concerning grain, it may be safely affirmed, that the unavoidable deficiencies
of European wood and timber can only be supplied from America. We shall
therefore rapidly arrive at the use of our new lands, through the consumption
of our forests by the countries and colonies of the old world; and the proceeds
of our wood and timber in the mean time will be in lieu of the sales of grain
and cattle.

The political importance of these great natural productions (wood and timber)
is manifest and striking, in this age of manufacturing, and mercantile
competition, and of naval rival-ship and ambition. The value of our forests to
the seekers of the carrying trade and of naval power is greatly increased by
their yielding their possessors prodigious quantities of tar, turpentine and
pitch. It would be unwise however, in the United States to neglect the due
preservation of their timber: and considering how obviously important it is,
that we maintain an abundant stock, it is a comfortable reflection, that the
present redundance and cheapness of American lands enables us to effect the
preservation and reproduction of our forests with less inconvenience and
expense, than any other civilized nation.

CHAPTER III. CONTAINING THE TARIFF OF THE UNITED STATES, FOR THE INFORMATION
OF MERCHANTS AND MANUFACTURERS.
IT has been frequently observed in the course of the preceding pages, that the
duties laid for the purpose of revenue, on foreign manufactures imported into
the United States, are a great encouragement to similar articles, which are or
shall be manufactured in this country. It is indispensibly necessary to a view
of our affairs, that the advantages arising from the American impost to the
manufacturer of any domestic fabric should be distinctly exhibited. This will
be most easily effected by the following complete table of the duties payable
by law on all goods, wares and merchandise, imported into the United States of
America, after the last day of June 1794, and of the articles which are free
from impost. It may be proper to observe, that these duties are in the case of
importations in vessels of the United States, and that the rates are ten per
cent. higher in foreign ships.

[PAPER Z.]
A
ARMS, fire and side, not otherwise enumerated, 15 per cent. ad val. Apparatus,
philosophical, especially imported for any seminary of learning, free Ale, beer
and porter, in casks, 8 cents per gallon. -- in bottles, 8 ditto. Artificial
flowers, feathers and other ornaments for women's head dresses, ^5 per cent. ad
val. Anniseed, 15 ditto. Articles of all kinds of the growth, product or
manufactures of the United States, spirits excepted, free Anchors, 10
B
Brass cannon, teutenague, and wire, see cannon, free -- Iron or steel locks,
hinges, hoes, anvils and vizes, 10 -- All other manufactures of brass, 15 Balls
and balsams (see powders, pastes, etc*) 15 Beer, ale and porter in casks, 8
cents per gallon. -- in bottles 8 Bricks and tiles, 15 per cent. ad val.
Bonnets and caps (see hats) 15 Boots, 75 per pair. Books, blank, 10 per cent.
ad val. Books of persons who come to reside in the United States, free Buttons
of every kind, 15 Buckles, shoe and knee, 15 Brushes, 10 Bullion, free
C
Cannon of brass, from May 22, 1794, to May 22, 1795, free -- after the 22d
May, 1795, 15 Carriages (see coaches) 20 Cards, playing, 25 cents per pack. --
wool and cotton, 50 cents per dozen. Cables and tarred cordage, 180 cents per
cwt. Cabinet wares, 15 per cent. ad val. Caps and bonnets (see hats) 15 Carpets
and carpeting, 15 per cent. ad val. Cartridge paper, 15 Candles of tallow, 2
cents per lb. -- of wax or spermaceti, 6 Capers, 15 per cent. ad val. Canes,
walking sticks and whips, 10 Cambricks, 10 Cheese, 7 cents per lb. China ware,
15 per cent. ad val. Cinnamon, cloves, currants and comfits, 15 Chintzes and
colored calicoes or muslins, and all printed, stained or colored goods or
manufactures of cotton or of linen, or of both, or of which cotton or linen is
the material of chief value, 12 Cocoa, 4 cents per pound. Chocolate, 3 Clogs
and goloshoes (see shoes) 15 cents per pair. Cordage, tarred, 180 cents per
cwt. -- and yarn untarred, 225 Cosmetics, 15 per cent. ad val. Coal, 5 cents
per bushel. Colors, (see painters) 15 per cent. ad val. Copper manufactures,
15 -- in plates, pigs and bars, free Compositions for the teeth or gums (see
dentrifice) 15 Coffee, 5 cents per pound. Cotton, 3 Cotton or linen
manufactures, or of both, or of which cotton or linen is the material of chief
value, being printed, stained or colored, 12 per cent. ad val. -- not printed,
stained or colored, 10 Clocks and watches, or parts of either, 15 Coaches,
chariots, phaetons, chairs, chaises, solos or other carriages, or parts of
carriages, 20 Clothing ready made, 10 Clothes, books, household furniture, and
the tools or implements of the trade or profession of persons who come to
reside in the United States, free Cutlasses, from May 22, 1794, to May 22,
1795, free -- after the 22d May, 1795, 15
D
Dates and figs, 15 per cent. ad val. Dentrifice powders, tinctures,
preparations and compositions for the teeth or gums, 15 Dolls dressed and
undressed, 15 Drugs medicinal, except those commonly used for dying, 15 Drugs
and wood for dying, free
E
Earthen and stone wares, 15 Essences, (see powders, pastes, etc.) 15
F
Fans, 15 Fayal wine, 20 cents per gallon. Feathers and other ornaments for
women's head dresses, 15 per cent. ad val. Fringes commonly used by
upholsterers, coachmakers and sadlers, 15 Figs, 15 Flowers, artificial, 15
Floor cloths and mats, 15 Fruits of all kinds, 15 Furs of every kind undressed,
free
G
Glass, black quart bottles, 10 -- window glass, 15 -- all other glass, and
manufactures thereof, 20 Glauber salts, 200 cents per cwt. Gauzes, 10 per cent.
ad val. Geneva (see spirits) Ginger, 15 per cent. ad val. Goloshoes (see shoes)
15 cents per pair. Gloves of leather, 15 per cent. ad val. -- all other gloves
and mittens, 15 Gold, silver, and plated ware, 15 Gold and silver lace 15
Goods, wares and merchandise imported directly from China or India in ships or
vessels not of the United except teas, China ware, and all other articles
liable to higher rates of duties, Goods, wares and merchandise intended to be
re-exported to a foreign port or place, in the same ship or vessel in which
they shall be imported -- and all articles of the growth, product or
manufacture of the United States, spirits excepted, free Goods, wares and
merchandise not herein otherwise paticularly enumerated and described, 10 per
cent. ad val. Glue, 15 Gun powder, from May 22, 1794, to May 22, 1795. free --
after the 22d May, 1795, 10
H
Hangers, 15 Hair powder, 15 Hats -- of beaver, felt, wool, or a mixture of any
of them, 15 -- all other hats, caps and bonnets, 15 Hemp, 100 cents per cwt.
Hides, raw, free Household furniture of persons who come to reside in the United
States, free
I
Implements of the trade or profession of persons who come to reside in the
United States, free Indigo, 25 cents per pound. Iron wire, free -- cast, slit
and rolled, 15 -- steel or brass locks, hinges, hoes, anvils, and vizes, 10 --
all other manufactures of Iron, steel or brass, or of which either of these
metals is the article of chief value, not being otherwise particularly
enumerated, 15 per cent. ad val.
J.
Jewelry and paste work, 15
L.
Lace of gold and silver, 15 Laces and lawns, 10 Laces* lines, fringes tassels
and trimmings, commonly used by upholsterers, coachmakers and sadlers, 15
Lampblack, 10 Lapis calaminaris, free Leather, tanned and tawed, and all
manufactures of leather or of which leather is the article of chief value, not
otherwise particularly enumerated, 15 per cent. ad val. Lead and musket ball,
from May 22, 1794, to May 22, 1795, free -- after May 22, 1795, 1 cent per
pound. -- All other manufactures of lead, or in which lead is the chief
article, 1 Lemons and limes, 15 per cent. ad val. Linen or cotton manufactures,
or of both or of which cotton or linen is the material of chief value, printed,
stained or colored, 12 -- not printed, stained or colored, 10 Lisbon and
Oporto wines, 25 cents per gallon. Looking glasses, 20 per cent. ad val.
M.
Manufactures of tin, pewter and copper, 15 -- of iron, steel or brass, not
otherwise particularly enumerated, 15 -- of leather, not otherwise particularly
enumerated, 15 -- of lead not otherwise particularly enumerated, 1 cent per
pound. -- of cotton or linen, or of both, printed, stained or colored, 12 per
cent. ad. val. -- of ditto, not printed, stained or colored, 10 -- of glass
(see glass) -- of tobacco (see snuff and tobacco) -- of wood (see cabinet wares
and wood) -- of the United States, spirits excepted, free Mats and floor
cloths, 15 Malt, 10 cents per bushel. Marble, slate and other stone bricks,
tiles, tables, mortars and other utensils of marble or slate, and generally all
stone and earthen ware, 15 per cent. ad val. Madeira wines (see wines) Mace, 15
Medicinal drugs, except those commonly used in dying, 15 Merchandise, goods and
wares, imported directly from China or India, in ships or vessels not of the
United States except teas, china ware, and all other articles liable to higher
rates of duties, Merchandise, goods and wares, intended to be re-exported to a
foreign port or place in the same ship or vessel in which they shall be
imported -- and all articles of the growth, product or manufacture of the
United States -- spirits excepted, free Merchandise, goods and wares not herein
otherwise particularly enumerated and described, 10 per cent. ad. val. Mittens
(see gloves) 15 Millenary, ready made, 15 Molasses, 3 cents per gallon. Muskets
and firelocks, with bayonets suited to the same, and musket ball, from May 22,
1794, to May 22, 1795, free -- after the 22d May, 1795, 15 per cent. ad val.
Muskets and fire locks, without bayonets, 15 Mustard in flour, 15 Muslins and
muslinets, printed, stained or colored, 12 -- not printed, stained or
colored, 10
N.
Nails, 2 cents per pound. Nankeens, 12 per cent. ad val. Nutmegs, 15
O.
Oranges, 15 Ornaments for women's head dresses, 15 Ointments, oils and odors
(see powders, pastes, etc.) 15 Olives, 15 Oil, 15 Oporto and Lisbon wine, 25
cents per gallon.
P.
Paper hangings, 15 per cent. ad val. -- writing and wrapping, 10 -- sheathing
and cartridge, 15 Painters colors, whether dry or ground in oil, except those
commonly used in dying, 15 Packthread and twine, 400 cents per cwt. Paste
boards, parchment and vellum, 10 per cent. ad val. Paste work and jewelry, 15
Phaetons, see coaches, 20 Plaster of Paris, free Pewter manufactures, 15 per
cent. ad. val. -- old, free Pepper, 6 cents per pound. Perfumes, 15 per cent.
ad val. Pistols, from May 22, 1794, to May 22, 1795, free -- after the 22d May,
1795, 15 Pictures and prints, 10 Pimento, 4 cents per pound. Pickles of all
sorts, 15 per cent. ad val. Printed, stained or colored goods, or manufactures
of cotton, or of linen, or of both, 12 Philosophical apparatus, specially
imported for any seminary of learning, free Porter, beer and ale, in casks, 8
cents per gallon. -- in bottles, 8 Powder for the hair, 15 per cent. ad val. --
gun powder, from May 22, 1794, to May 22, 1795, free -- after the 22d May,
1795, 10 Powders, pastes, balls, balsams, ointments, oils, waters, washes,
tinctures, essences or other preparations or compositions commonly called sweet
scents, odors, perfumes, or cosmetics -- and all powders or preparations for
the teeth or gums, 15 Plumbs and prunes, 15
R.
Raisins, 15 Raw hides and skins, free Rum, see spirits,
S.
Salt, see note* 12 cents per bushel. Salts, glauber, 200 cents per cwt.
Stained, printed or colored goods or manufactures of cotton, or of linen, or
of both, 12 per cent. ad val. Salt petre, free Saint Lucar wines, 30 cents per
gallon. Starch, 15 per cent. ad val. Sail cloth, 10 Slate, stone and stone
ware, 15 Saddles, 10 Sattins and other wrought silks, 10 Steel, 100 cents per
cwt. -- iron, or brass locks, hinges, hoes, anvils and vizes, 10 per cent. ad
val. -- all other manufactures of steel, 15 Sheathing and cartridge paper, 15
Sherry wine, 33 cents per gallon. Sea stores of ships or vessels, free
Spermaceti candles, 6 cents per pound. Sweet scents, (see powders, pastes,
etc.) 15 per cent. ad val. Spirits distilled in foreign countries, viz. From
grain, First proof, 28 cents per gallon. Second do. 29 Third do. 31 Fourth do.
34 Fifth do. 40 Sixth do. 50 From other materials. First proof, 25 Second do.
25 Third do. 28 Fourth do. 32 Fifth do. 38 Sixth do. 46 Spirits distilled in
the United States, imported after the fifth day of June, 1794, in the same ship
or vessel in which they had been previously exported from the the United
States, viz. From molasses. First proof, 13 cents per gallon. Second do. 14
Third do. 15 Fourth do. 17 Fifth do. 21 Sixth do. 28 From materials of the
growth or produce of the United States. First proof, 7 Second do. 8 Third do. 9
Fourth do. 11 Fifth do. 13 Sixth do. 18 Spikes, 1 cent per pound. Silver and
plated ware, 15 per cent. ad. val. -- lace, 15 Skins, raw free Shoes and
slippers of silk, 25 cents per pair. -- other shoes and slippers for men and
women, clogs and goloshoes, 15 -- other shoes and slippers for children, 10
Swords and cutlasses, from May 22, 1794, to May 22, 1795, free -- after May 22,
1795, 15 per cent. ad. val. Stockings, 15 Stone and earthen ware, 15 Soap, 2
cents per pound. Solos and other carriages, 20 per cent. ad. val. Sulphur, free
Sugars. From July 1st, to Sept. 30, 1794, inclusively. Brown, 1 cent per pound,
Clayed, 3 Lump, 3 Loaf, 5 Other refined, 2 From and after Sept. 30, 1794.
Brown, 1 Clayed, 3 Lump, 6 Loaf, 9 Other refined, 6 Sugar candy, 10 per cent.
ad. val. Sauff. From July 1st, to Sept. 30. 1794, inclusively, 10 -- From and
after the 30th of Sept. 1794, 22
T.
Tassels and trimmings commonly used by upholsterers, coachmakers, and sadlers,
11 Tables of marble, slate, other or stone, 15 per cent. ad. val. Tallow
candles, 2 cents per pound. Teas. From China and India, Bohea, 10 Souchong and
other black teas, 18 Hyson, 32 Other green teas, 20 From Europe. Bohea, 12
Souchong and other black teas, 21 Hyson, 40 Other green tea, 24 per cent. ad
val. From any other place. Bohea, 15 Souchong and other black teas, 27 Hyson,
50 Other green teas, 30 Teneriffe wine, 20 cents per gallon. Twine and pack
thread, 400 cents per cwt. Tin manufactures, 15 per cent. ad. val. -- in pigs
and plates, free Tinctures, (see powders, pastes, etc.) 15 Tiles and bricks, 15
Toys, not otherwise enumerated, 10 Tobacco, manufactured, -- From July 1st, to
Sept. 30th, 1794, inclusively, 6 cents per pound. -- From and after the 30th of
Sept. 1794, 10 Tools of the trade or profession of persons, who come to reside
in the United States, free
V.
Velvets and velverets, 10 per cent. ad. val.
W.
Wares of tin, pewter and copper, 15 -- earthen or stone, 15 -- china, 15 --
gold, silver, and plated, 15 -- goods and merchandise imported directly from
China or India in ships or vessels not of the United States, except teas, china
ware, and all other articles liable to higher rates of duties, -- goods and
merchandise of the growth, produce or manufacture of the United States,
(spirits excepted,) free Wafers, 15 Waters and washes, (see powders, pastes,
etc.) 15 Walking sticks, whips and canes, 10 Wax candles, 6 Watches and clocks,
or parts of either, 15 cents per pound. Wines, London particular Madeira, 56
per cent. ad val. -- London market, do. 49 cents per gallon. -- Other, do. 40
-- Sherry, 33 -- St. Lucar, 30 -- Lisbon and Oporto, 25 cents per gallon. --
Teneriffe and Fayal, 20 -- All other wines (not to exceed thirty cents per
gallon in American vessels. or thirty-two cents per gallon in foreign vessels)
40 per cent. ad val. Window glass, 15 Wire of brass and iron, free Wool and
cotton cards, 50 cents per dozen. Wool unmanufactured, free Wood
(unmanufactured) free Wood manufactured (exclusive of cabinet wares) 12
Y.
Yarn untarred, 225 cents per cwt. All other goods, not before particularly
enumerated and described, 10 per cent. ad val.
To the encouragement to the manufactures of the United States resulting from
the foregoing table, very considerable additions are to be made for freight,
insurance, commissions, porterages, costs of packages, premiums on bills, or
other losses on remittances to Europe. The aggregate of these is unusually high
at this juncture, for a season of peace.

There is no duty on exports, nor is there any prohibition of exportation,
excepting the temporary instances of certain military articles.

NOTE. The duties on Salt are at the rate of 12 cents per bushel of 56 lb. or
less.

CHAPTER IV. A STATEMENT OF THE TONNAGE OF VESSELS, WHICH HAVE PAID DUTY IN THE
PORTS OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, BETWEEN THE 1st DAY OF OCTOBER, 1791,
AND THE 30th DAY OF SEPTEMBER, 1792, INCLUDING THE COASTING AND FISHING VESSELS.
To what nation belonging. Tons. THE United States, 549,279 The United States
and foreign nations, jointly, 407 France, 24,443 Great Britain, 209,646 Spain,
3,148 United Netherlands, 3,123 Portugal, 2,843 Hamburg and Bremen, 5,677
Denmark, 752 Sweden, 943 Total, 800,261

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, REVENUE-OFFICE, JANUARY 21st, 1794. TENCH COXE,
Commissioner of the Revenue.

CHAPTER V. AN ABSTRACT OF GOODS, WARES, AND MERCHANDISE, EXPORTED FROM THE
UNITED STATES, FROM THE 1st OCTOBER, 1792, TO 30th SEPTEMBER, 1793.
Species of Merchandise. Quantity. Ashes, pot tons of 4,359 9 pearl do. 1,807 6
Apples, barrels 8,994 Bark of oak, hogsheads 3,108 -- cords 444 -- essence of,
gallons 208 Bricks, number 683,070 Boats, do. 73 Boots, pairs 1,^67 Shoes, do.
15,102 Beer, porter and cider, gallons 137,631 bottled, dozens 776 Blacking or
lampblack, pounds 70 -- hogsheads 100 Bellows 'Smith, pairs 1 Cotton, bags
2,438 Chalk, tons 16 Candles, Wax boxes 48 Myrtle, do. 18 Spermaceti, do. 5,874
Tallow, do. 9,857 Cordage, tons 469 19 Coal, bushels 14,719 Cranberries, do.
166 Cards, Wool and Cotton dozens 34 Coffee, hogsheads 3,895 tierces 1,914
barrels 10,175 bags 1,789 pounds 10,764,549 Cocoa, hogsheads 12 tierces 55
barrels 180 bags 336 pounds 133,675 Carriages* Coaches, chaises and chairs,
number 54 Wagons, carts and drays, do. 48 Wheel-barrows, etc. do. 44 Copper,
packages 146 Duck, pieces 2,630 Drugs and medicine, pounds of 52,720 --,
packages 281 Sassafras, tons 67 10 Earthen-ware, crates 175 Flaxseed, casks
51,708 Flax, pounds 1,474 Furniture, House packages, 44 Tables, bureaus, etc.
number 175 Windsor chairs, do. 3,884 Chests, do. 201 Fishery. Fish dried,
quintals 372,825 --, pickled, barrels 45,440 Oil of whale, gallons 512,780 Oil,
spermaceti do. 140,056 Whale-bone, pounds 202,620 Grain and Pulse. Wheat,
bushels 1,450,575 Rye, do. 1,305 Barley, do. 30 Indian Corn, do. 1,233,761
Buckwheat, do. 330 Oats, do. 78,524 Peace and Beans, do. 40,620 Groceries. Loaf
Sugar, hogsheads 9 --, tierces 6 --, barrels 59 --, pounds 27,554 Brown Sugar,
do. 4,539,809 Chocolate, do. 7,432 Raisins, do. 84,800 Almonds, do. 13,900
Pimento, do. 114,255 Cloves, do. 500 Pepper, do. 14,361 Ginger, bags 478 Cassia
and Cinnamon, packages 351 Glass, boxes 47 --, packages 13 Ginseng, pounds
71,550 --, packages 188 Grindstones, number 38 Hides, do. 9,78 Horns and Tips.
number 91,142 Hats, do. 2,777 Honey, gallons 732 Hops, packages 73 Hay, tons
1,871 Iron. Nails, casks 144 Axes, Spades, and Hoes, number 951 Anchors, do. 11
Grapnels, do. 215 Pots, kettles, and other castings, do. 6,117 --, casks 3
Cannon, number 43 Shot, tons 13 Pig, do. 2,089 Bar, do. 763 2 Hoops, do. 27 11
Indigo, casks 462 --, pounds 690,989 Ivory, packages 10 Lead. Pig, number 241
Shot, pounds 952 Sheet, tons 1 Leather, pounds 17,301 --, packages 52 Lime,
bushels 748 Live Stock. Horned Cattle, number 3,728 Horses, do. 4,613 Mules,
do. 1,105 Sheep, do. 12,064 Hogs, do. 9,934 Poultry, dozens 6,428 Merchandise,
or Dry Goods, packages of 4,136 Nankeens, pieces 10,972 Tow Cloth, yards 14,947
Molasses, gallons 28,733 Millstones, number 2 Naval Stores. Pitch, barrels
8,338 Tar, do. 67,961 Rosin, do. 1,715 Turpentine, do. 36,957 Spirits of
Turpentine, casks 93 Negro Slaves, number 21 Nuts, bushels 502 Oil. Linseed,
gallons 1,183 Sweet, boxes and baskets 1,168 Powder. Gun, qr. casks 1,286
Powder. Hair, pounds 12,810 Paper, reams 75 Pipes, groce 48 Paints, kegs 102
Pearl, boxes 67 Provisions. Rice, tierces 134,611 Flour, barrels 1,074,639
Bread, do. 76,653 Crackers, kegs 43,306 Rye Meal, barrels 12,695 Indian Meal,
do. 37,943 Ship Stuff, do. 3,871 Buckwheat, do. 146 Beef, do. 75,106 Pork, do.
38,563 Neat's Tongues, kegs 867 Tongues and Sounds, do. 209 Hams and Bacon,
pounds 521,483 Butter, firkins 9,190 Cheese, pounds 146,269 Lard, do. 597,297
Sausages do. 2,863 Pickled Oysters kegs and pots 1,561 Potatoes, bushels 20,367
Onions, bushels and bunches 269,380 Reeds, number 123,276 Spirits, American
gallons 665,522 Foreign, do. 224,614 Gin, cases 10,761 Sadlery. Saddles, number
1,114 Bridles do. 997 Harness setts 20 Soap, boxes 6,620 Starch, pounds 5,440
Snuff, do. 35,559 Salt, bushels 1,107 Spruce, essence of boxes 81 Silk, raw
pounds 104 Silver Sweepings, casks 7 Skins and Furrs, pounds 426,318 --,
packages, number 1,123 --, do. 27,446 Tobacco, hogsheads 59,947 --,
Manufactured pounds 137,^84 Tallow, do. 309,366 Twine, do. 3,760 Tin, boxes 121
Teas. Bohea, pounds 21,521 Souchong, do. 3,020 Hyson, do. 17,672 Other Green,
do. 7,725 Vinegar, gallons 3,473 Varnish, casks 24 Wines. Madeira, gallons
49,180 Other Wines, do. 180,929 Bottled, dozens 1,330 Wax. Bees, pounds 272,800
Myrtle, do. 1,273 Wood. Lumber, feet 65,846,024 Timber, tons 21,838 --, pieces
12,272 Dye wood, tons 319 10 Staves and heading, number 29,734,854 Shingles,
do. 80,813,357 Hoops and poles, do. 2,304,853 Shooks, do. 37,863 Empty casks,
do. 6,944 Masts and spars, do. 5,052 Oars, do. 20,251 Handspikes, do. 19,169
Pumps, do. 43 Blocks, do. 4,814 Treenails, do. 91,632 Spokes and Fellies, do.
22,076 Lock stocks, do. 600 Cords of wood, do. 1,119 Frames of houses, do. 311
-- of vessels, do. 2 Cart wheels, do. 78 Yokes and bows, pairs 696 Mast hoops,
dozens 27 Tubs, pails, etc. do. 95

Value of Goods, Wares, and Merchandise, Exported from the United States.
New Hampshire, 198,197 Dollars. Massachusetts, 3,676,412 Rhode Island 616,416
Connecticut 770,239 New York 2,934,370 New Jersey 54,176 Pennsylvania 6,958,736
Delaware 71,242 Maryland 3,687,119 Virginia 2,984,317 North Carolina 363,307
South Carolina 3,195,874 Georgia 501,383 Total, 26,011,788
[NOTE.] Sundry returns from small ports, not yet received.

A Summary of the Value and Destination of the Exports of the United States,
agreeably to the foregoing Abstract.
To the dominions of Russia 5,769 Dollars. the dominions of Sweden 301,42^ the
dominions of Denmark 870,50^ the dominions of the United Netherlands 3,169,536
the dominions of Great Britain 8,431,239 the Imperial ports of the Austrian
Netherlands and Germany 1,013,347 Hamburg, Bremen, and other Hanse Towns
792,537 the dominions of France 7,050,498 the dominions of Spain 2,237,950 the
dominions of Portugal 997,590 the Italian Ports, 220,688 Morocco 2,094 the
East Indies, generally 253,131 Africa, generally 251,343 the West Indies,
generally 399,559 the North-West Coast of America 1,586 Uncertain 3,986 Total,
26,011,788
Treasury Department, Revenue-Office, March 20th, 1794. TENCH COXE,
Commissioner of the Revenue.

CHAPTER VI. MISCELLANEOUS FACTS AND OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING THE STATE OF
PENNSYLVANIA, SUPPLEMENTARY TO THE FOURTH CHAPTER OF THE FIRST BOOK.
IT has been already affirmed, that the business of ship building is in a
course of extraordinary prosperity in the United States. From the books of the
Inspector General of American commerce, under the British government, it
appears, that there were built in Pennsylvania in the year 1769, no more than
1649 tons of new vessels; in the year 1770, 2354 tons; and in the year 1771,
only 1307 tons. The return of new vessels, built in the state of Pennsylvania,
during the year 1793, though a grievous epidemic malady was introduced, in that
term, into its only seaport, exhibits the number of 8145 tons. These vessels
were generally built of the southern live oak and cedar, and were consequently,
of the first class in value and excellency. This great increase of so capital a
vehicle of commerce, is an evidence as well of the growth of trade, as of ship
building. It is, however, proper to observe, that the measurement of 1771, was
much less accurate, than that of 1793. The medium of the actual tonnage of the
three former years, mentioned above, was perhaps 2,300 tons.

But there is a stronger proof of the growth of trade in the port of
Philadelphia, and in the state of Pennsylvania. This results from the
astonishing increase of exports. The aggregate value of all the commodities
shipped from Philadelphia, to foreign countries, during one year, ending on the
30th September, 1792, was 3,820,646 Dols. The aggregate value of the like
exports, from Philadelphia, during one year, ending on the 30th September,
1793, was 6,958,736 Dols. The aggregate value of the like exports, from
Philadelphia, during one half of a year, ending on the 31st of March, 1794, was
3,533,397 Dols.


It is to be remembered also, that the epidemic malady, already mentioned, and
the embargo in the last spring, interrupted the commerce of Philadelphia,
during a term of nearly five months, in the close of 1793 and the beginning of
1794.

The exports of the state of Pennsylvania, during the year, ending on the 30th
September 1793, were more than one fourth ( i. e. nearly seven twenty sixth
parts) of the exports of the whole of the United States. The transportation of
merchandise and domestic manufactures, coast-wise, and by land were also very
great.

The catalogue of books at this time for sale, and which have been published by
less than a dozen of the booksellers of Philadelphia, contains three hundred
and twenty setts of different books, of one volume in duodecimo to eighteen
volumes in quarto; also many charts, maps, and pamphlets, small histories and
chapman's books. This precious branch, which diffuses indispensible knowledge
in every line, yields large profits to the manufacturers, the artizans, and the
United States, upon a small capital, in sheepskins, lead, lamp-black and
useless rags.

There are established in the city of Philadelphia, three incorporated banks,
which may be safely affirmed to be in full and perfect credit, and to yield a
better dividend, or half yearly profit, to their stockholders, than any similar
institutions in Europe: they are, 1. The Bank of North America, established in
the year 1781. 2. The Bank of the United States, established in 1791. 3. The
Bank of Pennsylvania, established in 1792.


The United States of America are interested to an amount much less than a
major part of the stock in the second; and the state of Pennsylvania in a
similar degree in the third. They are all banks of discount and deposit, and
issue notes payable in specie, on demand to the bearer. Their organization is
upon a plan and on principles nearly uniform, and very much like to those of
the Bank of England. Foreigners are considerably interested in all of them. The
Bank of the United States has many proprietors in other parts of this country.
It has branches, or subordinate offices, in Boston, New York, Baltimore and
Charleston.

The following table is extracted from authentic documents. The third column
shows, in detail, the number of taxable inhabitants of each of the existing
counties of Pennsylvania, and of the city of Philadelphia. The two preceding
columns exhibit the number of the like inhabitants in two several years prior
to the revolution.

A COMPARATIVE VIEW OF THE NUMBER OF THE TAXABLE INHABITANTS OE PENNSYLVANIA,
IN THREE SEVERAL YEARS BEFORE AND SINCE THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION.
A. D. 1760. A. D. 1770. A. D. 1793. The city of Philadelphia, 7088 The county
of Philadelphia, 8321 10455 6885 The county of Montgomery, 4360 The county of
Delaware, 4761 5483 2216 The county of Chester, 5270 The county of Lancaster,
5631 6608 6409 The county of Dauphin, 3481 The county of Bucks, 3148 3177 4644
The county of Northampton, 1987 2793 4697 The county of Luzerne, 1409 The
county of Allegheney, 1501 3521 2510 The county of Huntingdon, 1717 The county
of Washington, 5045 The county of Fayette, 2844 The county of Mifflin, 2468 The
county of Cumberland, 3869 The county of Bedford, 2881 The county of
Westmoreland, 3451 The county of York, 3302 4426 6974 The county of Franklin,
3570 The county of Berks, 3016 3302 5511 The county of Northumberland, 3878
31667 39765 91177 A. D. 1760. A. D. 1770. A. D. 1793.

On this interesting document, a single remark is sufficient irrefragably to
evince, that the prosperity of Pennsylvania is much greater at this time, than
it was in the year 1770. The ratio of the increase of taxable persons in 1793
would have been equal to the proportion between the years 1760 and 1770, if the
taxables in 1793, had been 68,000; but they over run that number by more than
23,000. It may be truly observed, that the redundant population of New England,
the old counties of New York, New Jersey, the Delaware state, and Maryland,
must have migrated into Pennsylvania in great numbers during the late war.

The following valuable table, relative to Pennsylvania, has been received from
the editor of le Niveau de l'Europe and de l'Amerique, A comparative view of
Europe and America, by M. Egron, of Philadelphia. It may serve any considerable
public or private interests in this country, if documents elucidating such
interests, should be transmitted to M. Egron, by the persons concerned.
and is inserted in this volume with his permission.

THE STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA. North latitude between 39 41 30 and 42. Its
longitude from the meridian of Philadelphia, between 0 25 east, 5 23 west.
Length from east to west 280 miles. Its width from north to south 156 miles, at
69 miles to a degree. Its limits: on the north and north-east, the state of
New York; on the east, New Jersey; on the south-east, the state of Delaware; on
the south, the state of Maryland and part of Virginia; on the west, the state
of Virginia and the Western territory of the United States; and on the
north-west, Lake Eric, Rivers; the Delaware, which separates Pennsylvania from
New Jersey and New York: the Susquehanna, formed by two branches, one from the
west and the other from the north-east: the Monongahela and the Allegheney,
which by their junction and courses form the Ohio: The Youghiogeny, the Lehigh,
the Juniata and the Schuylkill.
Date of the foundation. Names of Counties. Length Breadth Population in 1790.
Square miles. Acres of Land. Population in miles square. Chief Towns. North
latitude of chief town. Meridian longitude of each town from Philadelphia.
SITUATION. 1683. Philadelphia. 23 5 1/^ 54,391 140 89,600 388 71/144
Philadelphia. 39d 57m s 0d 0m 0s on the west bank of the Delaware river. 1683.
Bucks. 38 15 25,401 642 411,900 19 ^^6/^2^ Newtown. 40 14 0 12 0 East. 5 miles
from the Delaware. 1683. Chester. 44 22 27,937 861 551,400 32 3^5/^74
West-Chester. 39 58 0 28 0 West. 16 miles from the Delaware. May 10, 1729.
Lancaster. 41 40 36,147 884 566,240 43 ^3/^^1 Lancaster. 40 2 30 1 9 0 10 miles
from the Susquehanna. August 10, 1749. York. 64 24 37,747 1,630 1,043,200 23
^^7/16^ York. 39 17 1 30 8 miles from the Susquehanna. January 27, 1750.
Cumberland. 37 28 18,243 978 626.240 18.653 Carlisle. 40 11 30 2 0 14 ^/4 miles
from the Susquehanna. March 11, 1752. Northampton. 111 1/^ 35 24,250 3,841
2,458,240 6.316 Easton. 40 21 0 4 30 at the junction of the rivers Lehigh and
Delaware. March 11, 1752. Berks. 67 29 30,177 1,6^0 1,030,400 18.743 Reading.
40 42 46 30 on the river Schuylkill. September 20, 1771. Bedford. 77 50 13,124
3,310 2,118,400 3.964 Bedford. 40 3 21 28 miles from the Potowmack river. March
21, 1772. Northumberland. 180 80 17,16 9,202 6,145,280 1.821 Sunbury. 40 51 30
1 42 at the junction of the W. and N. E. branches of the Susquehanna. April 8,
1773. Westmoreland. 50 40 16,01^ 1,991 1,274,240 8 Greensburg. 40 18 3 23 16
miles from the Monongahela. May 8, 1781. Washington. 65 32 23,86^ 1,911
1,223,040 12.448 Washington. 40 11 30 5 7 17 miles from the Monongahela.
September 26, 1783. Fayette. 37 1/^ 33 13,325 739 473,280 18 Union. 39 54 4 35
11 miles from the Monongahela. September 9, 1784. Franklin. 30 24 15,655 800
512,000 19.568 Chambersburg. 39 56 2 28 30 2 miles from the Potowmack river.
September 10, 1784. Montgomery. 33 16 22,929 539 344,960 42.539 Norris-town. 40
7 30 11 30 on the Schuylkill. March 4, 1785. Dauphin. 45 25 18,177 916 586,400
19.842 Harrisburg. 40 15 20 1 42 on the east branch of Susquehanna. September
25, 1786. Luzerne. 80 61 4,904 3,530 2,259,200 1.384 Wilkesbarre. 41 13 30 46
on the north-east branch of the Susquehanna. September 20, 1787. Huntingdon. 76
35 7,565 2,239 1,432,960 3.378 Huntingdon. 40 27 0 2 52 on the Juniata.
September 19, 1789. Allegheney. 131 40 10,309 7,019 4,289,920 1.538 Pittsburg.
40 26 30 4 51 at the junction of the Monongohela and Youghiogeny, the union of
which forms the Ohio. September 19, 1789. Delaware. 20 11 9,483 180 115,200
52.683 Chester. 39 51 0 13 on the Delaware. September 26, 1789. Mifflin. 72 27
7,562 1,851 1,184,960 4 Lewisburg. 40 35 2 26 on the north bank of the Juniata.
The city and 21 counties. 434,373 45,016 28,810,160 9.650

It is a curious fact, that the price of produce at Pittsburg, three hundred
miles from Philadelphia, is higher by fifty per cent. at this time, than it was
fifty years ago in the city of Philadelphia. In the year 1739, wheat was sold
in that port for two shillings and nine pence per bushel, flour for seven
shillings and three pence per cwt. and Indian corn for one shilling and six
pence per bushel. These truths are interesting to the interior land holder and
to the political econimist. The invention and information of the American
cultivators and statesmen at the present time with the capital and numbers of
the former, are powerful auxiliaries, which did not exist in the year 1739. The
distillation of spirits of the highest proof, the production of silk, the
supplies of the army, the cultivation of tobacco, hemp, and flax, the
manufactory of salt, cheese, butter, pot-ash, flaxseed oil, leather, steel,
rolled, and slit iron, and the finest flour, with furnaces, forges, canals, and
turnpikes, greatly reduce the charges of transportation, and increase the value
of natural and agricultural productions in the midland and western counties.
These advantages may perhaps be easily extended, if the city of Philadelphia
and the interior towns and villages will pursue such of the ideas, suggested in
the tenth chapter of the first book, as may be convenient to their situation,
and to the pecuniary circumstances of their inhabitants.

The interior of Pennsylvania is peculiarly adapted and impelled to the
manufactory of glass, earthen ware, stone ware, and iron ware. The forests on
the Delaware, Lehigh, Lehiwaxen, Schuylkill, Susquehanna, and its two branches,
and on Juniata, and Penn's creek, are now so near to a great population, that
immense quantities of those several manufactures might be delivered by water
carriage. On the completion of the canals they might be transported, in like
manner, to Philadelphia and from thence to foreign countries.

The healthiness of the climate of Philadelphia is evinced by the fact, that
although it was established very long after the two next largest towns in the
United States, New York and Boston, yet it is little short of the size of both.
The city and county of New York, and the towns of Boston and Charlestown,
contained in 1791 no more than 52,752 persons: the city and county of
Philadelphia contained in the same year 54,391 persons. The counties of
New York and Philadelphia are both very small and much less than any other in
their respective states. The latter is most populous. It must be admitted, that
this increase is to be ascribed in some degree to the general prosperity of
Pennsylvania, New Jersey and the peninsula between the Delaware and Chesapeak
bays.

A more direct proof of the healthiness of Philadelphia is to be deduced from
the books of the Dispensary, a public charity from which medicine, advice and
assistance are extended to the poor, under every disorder and disease, without
expense. In the year 1790 the patients, which were under the care of the
institution, amounted to 1892 poor citizens and foreigners. Of these only
sixty-three died. The want of proper food, raiment, bedding, nurses,
cleanliness, and safe and comfortable apartments, must have contributed to the
mortality of a part of these, as the patients were generally working people and
all paupers, and the funds of the Dispensary are applied in a very small degree
to those articles. Medicine, advice and assistance are the chief objects of
their plan.

A malignant fever similar to that of 1793 obtained an entrance into a few
families in the close of the summer of 1794, but as the disease did not spread
or extend in Philadelphia, though it did spread in the small airy town of
New Haven in Connecticut, and in the suburbs of Baltimore upon Fell's point, it
is manifest that the climate of Philadelphia is not more disposed to that kind
of malady than other large towns. Indeed the three instances of 1794 would
prove it to be less disposed to promote such diseases, than smaller towns.

It may be considered as a fact strongly in favor of the industry, sobriety
and tranquillity of the city of Philadelphia, that its breweries exceed, in the
quantity of their manufactured liquor, those of all the seaports in the United
States. The corporation of the city wisely favor houses for the retail sale of
beer and other malt liquors. Good regulations on the subject of intoxicating
liquors are infinitely important to health, morals, industry, property and good
government: or in other words to the lives, prosperity, honor and happiness of
the people.

The number of slaves of all ages and sexes in the city of Philadelphia has
been gradually worn down to 273; and there are not more than 3000 in the state
of Pennsylvania. The laws and constitution prevent their increase, and are
silently and steadily working the abolition of slavery. The migration hither of
a free yeomanry has been increased by the very limited number of slaves.

The variety and extent of the foreign commercial correspondence of the city of
Philadelphia is very great. This is evinced by a well known fact, that in all
the great branches of foreign trade the Philadelphians have taken a very
considerable share. They commenced the American trade with India and China;
they have pursued the commerce of Russia, though hemp and iron are two of the
staple articles of Pennsylvania; they have entered more largely into the Dutch
trade than New York, though it is well known that Philadelphia did little and
New York much in that branch of commerce before the revolution; Philadelphia
carries on much more trade, both external and internal in commodities not of
her production, than any other port; which will appear to be clear, when it is
remembered how much of its supplies and of those of the adjacent country are
drawn from native manufactures, that its imports are very great and its exports
are near seven twenty sixth parts of the whole shipments of the United States,
and that it has a very large share of the coasting trade.

It is very extraordinary, that Philadelphia has never yet engaged in the cod
and whale fisheries, though Britain and France have carried on the former on
the American coasts, and they and the Dutch have pursued the whale fishery in
very distant seas. These, it appears, may shortly become very good objects for
the accumulated capital of Philadelphia.

There are in that city two incorporated companies for the insuranee of houses
and other buildings against fire, and two for the insurance of ships and
merchandise against the dangers of the seas, enemies, etc. -- Of these
corporations (one against fire) existed before and three have been established
since the revolution: further proofs of the accession of capital and expansion
of the powers, capacities, and operations of that prosperous city.

Philadelphia is remarkably well accommodated by natural deposits of excellent
materials for build-and improvements in its vicinity, and indeed within its
boundaries: brick-clay, gravel, sand, limestone, and quarries of common stone
and marble, with great forests of white and yellow pine, oak, cedar and other
wood and timber on the waters of the rivers Delaware and Schuylkill, which
bound its eastern and western extremities.

The penal code of Pennsylvania, though never severe or cruel, has been greatly
mitigated within a few years. In most instances ignominious, painful and
sanguinary punishments have been commuted for a serious and edifying solitude,
a sober and strictly temperate regimen, and a constant, regular, useful and
very industrious employment. Experience appears to be in favor of the
experiment.

It does not appear, that any of the American states make so large quantities
of pig iron and bar iron as Pennsylvania, nor is there any state which appears
to have in its bowels so much pit coal in situations favorable to manufactures
of American productions and internal trade.

It is estimated, that taking into the calculation the extent and number of the
existing forges and furnances of Pennsylvania, the new iron works of the last
seven years are equal to one half of all those, which had been erected in the
state during and before the year 1787.

OTHER and similar remarks might be added to this chapter, concerning the state
of Pennsylvania, but enough has been said in this and the former chapter See
Chapter 4. Book I.
to give a general idea of that important member of the American union. This
addition has been necessarily very miscellaneous and without any regular plan.

CHAPTER VII. CONTAINING A VIEW OF THE SUBJECT OF FOREIGN DISTILLED SPIRITS,
EXTRACED FROM A PUBLICATION IN THE YEAR 1789.
[PAPER T.]
THE quantity of foreign liquors, imported into the United States, is very
great. The several species, commonly introduced, wines excepted, are unhappily
the most injurious to health both of body and mind. Ardent intoxicating
spirits, gross and unripened, form the present importations; viz. the rum of
Great Britain, Denmark, and Holland -- the brandies of France and Spain -- and
the geneva of Holland. We may compute them at two millions of dollars, to which
they certainly amount, besides rum made in the United States of foreign
molasses: a distressing sum, indeed, if it were paid even for necessaries,
which Providence had been pleased to withhold from us: a grievous sum, as it is
paid (in provisions and other articles of prime necessity or universal value,)
for a poisonous luxury: an alarming sum, comparing it with any reasonable
estimate of our national revenues. When we reflect on this prodigious expense,
no argument is necessary to convince us how desirable it is to vary, so far as
we can, the kinds of liquors consumed, and to obtain substitutes on less
disadvantageous terms. Some ideas to these ends are here proposed for
consideration.

If we suppose the rum, brandy, and geneva, imported, as above, into the United
States, to be worth, on a medium, three shillings and four pence Pennsylvania
money, or forty ninetieths of a dollar per gallon -- then the quantity, so
estimated at two millions of dollars, will be four millions five hundred
thousand gallons. It appears by the public returns of 1792, that 4,869,992
gallons of dist^lled spirit^ were imported into the United States during that
year.
By a mixture of three parts of water with one of rum, gin or brandy, we shall
have eighteen millions of gallons of drink, as strong as porter or the stoutest
beer. This quantity is equal to five hundred and sixty-two thousand five
hundred barrels of those malt liquors, worth, at thirty-three shillings and
four-pence (or four dollars and forty ninetieths) the sum of nine hundred and
thirty-seven thousand five hundred pounds, or two millions five hundred
thousand dollars, which immense value would arise from the barley and hops of
our farms, and the staves and hoops cut out of our woods. The quantity of
barley, necessary to make these five hundred and sixty-two thousand five
hundred barrels of stout beer or porter, at soar bushels to a barrel, is two
millions two hundred and fifty thousand bushels, exclusive of the hops, staves,
hoops, and firewood, necessary in the manufactory. How comfortable to the
country would such a manufacture be, in which few laborers are wanted, and
wherein fire and horses perform so great a part of the work! -- Imposts upon
foreign liquors appear, in this view of the subject, to be a wholesome and
efficient encouragement to agriculture, impelling us to what we ought to do,
and very easily can perform. The superior virtues, both moral and political, of
a country, which consumes malt liquors, instead of distilled spirits, need only
to be mentioned.

In addition to these substitutes for foreign liquors, drawn from native
productions, we may add cider and metheglin; of which large quantities can be
made, and which will come into more general use, as agriculture advances, and
economy prevails. We might mention also the spirits of fruit and grain; but it
must be acknowledged that the domestic manufacture of ardent spirits from
fruits and grain, threatens this country, no less than foreign liquors, with
much public and private evil. Beer and cider would yield the farmer as great
benefits, and are subject to fewer disadvantages. The friends of internal peace
and order, and of practical religion -- the advocates and promoters of American
manufactures -- the great body of farmers and planters -- in short, all classes
of our citizens have manifestly an interest in promoting the manufacture and
consumption of those valuable articles, beer, porter, cider, and metheglin.

This review of our resources for the expensive article of liquors, is taken
with a design to place the subject properly before us. Its magnitude will
inspire us with a disposition to proportionate exertions. Sufficient means
present themselves, by which we may be relieved of this immense tribute to
foreign nations, some of whom require us not only to give them in exchange
articles of the first intrinsic value, but even to pay them for bringing it to
our own ports.

CHAPTER VIII. CONCERNING THE PUBLIC DEBTS, AND REVENUES OF THE UNITED STATES.
THE foreign and domestic debts of the United States of America, as they
appeared upon their public books on the first day of the current year, 1794,
amounted to a little more than seventy-four millions of dollars. From this sum
seven or eight millions are to be deducted, being different kinds of stock
purchased in by means of the sinking fund or due upon the books or upon
certificates from the United States to several of the members of the union:
that is to themselves. Of the entire balance, about fourteen millions will not
bear interest until the year 1800. Much of the debt bears an interest at one
half of the established rate of this country. Some of it bears an interest of
two-thirds, some of three-fourths, and some of four-fifths of the medium of the
legal interest of the states. It therefore results that forty-eight millions of
dollars in specie, about L.11,000,000 sterling, would purchase or discharge all
the debts of the United States, which they owe to individuals, or to bodies
politic other than themselves.

The revenues of the United States were estimated in 1791 at 3,329,750 dollars;
and in 1792 at 3,700,000 dollars. They have always exceeded the estimates.

The revenues of 1793, and 1794, are very much advanced and are in full
proportion to the commerce, agriculture, and prosperity of the country. The
surplus revenue of 1793 was estimated at 2,300,000 dollars. It was appropriated
by law to the means of public strength and defense.

CHAPTER IX. MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS UPON CERTAIN IMPORTANT FACTS AND
CONSIDERATIONS, WHICH OCCUR, AT THE PRESENT TIME, IN THE AFFAIRS OF THE UNITED
STATES INTENDED AS A CONCLUSION TO THIS COLLECTION.
THE critical state of things during the last twelve months between the United
States and the kingdom of Great Britain renders it highly interesting to
reflect, for a moment, on the present condition of our mutual commerce.

It is established by a recent investigation in Great Britain, that in the year
1791 the United States of America took from that kingdom (exclusive of Ireland
and the British East Indies, from which they import many manufactures) the
immense value, in British manufactures, of Sterling, L.3,929,771 12 8 In the
same year France, now at war with England, took, as the equivalent for the
advantages of Mr. Eden's treaty, only 576,632 6 10 And Russia took 281,243l.
1s. Denmark and Norway 219,803l. 11s. Sweden 36,259l. 4s. 6d. Poland 39,833l.
16s. 9d. Prussia 43,402l. 16s. 2d. Germany 778-213l. 3s. 2d. Holland 692,725l.
8s. 3d. Austrian Flanders 387,399l 7d. The French have checked, for a season,
the Flemish, German, and Dutch demand of British goods.
Portugal and Madeira 657, 388l 7s. 3d. Spain and the Canaries 582,914l. 4s.
3d. Gibraltar and the Streights (partly British demand) 224,67^l. 16s. 9d.
Italy 932,148l. 9s. 1d. Turkey 99,206l. 1s. 8d. the foreign West Indies 462l.
12s. 3d. and Florida 15,300l. 15s. 1d. in all L.4,990,974 7 11
From the latter sum of L.4,990,974 7 11, it is necessary to deduct
considerably for the consumption of Gibraltar, where, it is presumed, the
consumption of British goods extends to every manufactured convenience and
necessary -- not only fine cloths and linens, but malt liquors, cheese, soap
and candles, loaf sugar, shoes, hats, cast iron utensils, etc. etc.

It is well known, that several of the foreign nations which take off the above
British manufactures, send in return to Britain great quantities of their own
fabrics; for example, Russia sends hempen and flaxen manufactures, and milled
iron articles, probably to a greater amount than her above demand of L.281,000
sterling; and though Germany and Holland can ship very little value in raw
materials, provisions, or lumber, yet their exports to Great Britain in 1791
were L.1,569,000 sterling. This large amount must have included a greater value
of Dutch and German manufactures, than the difference between our import from
Britain, and that of all those foreigners. The same remark applies to the
British trade with France, Russia, Flanders, etc. and indeed the United States
of America promote the demand of all those countries for British manufactures,
by permitting Britain to send us foreign goods to the value of nearly a million
and a half of dollars per annum. Hence it appears almost certain, that the
United States of America take from Great Britain a greater balance of
manufactured goods, than is taken from Great Britain by all those foreign
nations. The important question occurs: how ought a wise and just nation to
conduct themselves toward such great customers and consumers? If an error
should be made in the decision, it will be prejudicial to the United States,
and pernicious in the extreme to the commerce of Great Britain.

The weight of the inducements to an equitable and generous deportment on the
part of Great Britain is not a little increased by similar facts in relation to
the employment of her ships. It appears from a British statement of her trade
with all the world and from the promulgated documents of Congress, that the
vessels of that country, loaded in the United States in 1791 and 1792. were
about equal in tonnage to all the British vessels cleared out of Great Britain
for Russia, Denmark and Norway, Sweden, Prussia, Poland, Hamburg, Bremen, and
Germany in general.

A solution of the extraordinary increase of imports from Great Britain, into
the United States, will be useful to ourselves.

The astonishing prosperity of this country, in consequence of the restoration
of union and order in 1789, is a very principal cause. Since that time our
exports (including a freight upon them) have increased by more than two
millions sterling. Our consumption is therefore more free (perhaps too much so)
as to the quantity, and particularly as to the quality of the commodities; and
the new buildings and repairs of old ones, requiring glass, hardware, etc. have
exceeded those of all former times. The population of those states is known to
advance, under common circumstances, at the rate of five per cent. per annum.
The prosperity of our country, and the disorders of France, of her neighbors
in Europe, and of her colonies, have occasioned a great and most rapid increase
of people, part of which may be temporary. These consume fine goods. The sum
paid by one foreign nation, to transient refugees from the disordered parts of
its territories, sojourning in the United States in the summer of 1794, is said
to have been no less than 60,000 dollars per month, equal to 720,000 dollars
per annum.
The exportations of British goods from this country to foreign markets should
be taken into the estimate, particularly the French colonies. The sails and
furniture of the extraordinary quantity of new vessels, built in our ports, is
also to be noted: nor is the quantity of furniture and goods brought in by
European emigrators to be forgotten. The stock on hand in the wholesale and
retail stores throughout the country (the surplus of importations) is very
great, though the coarse and substantial articles for building, apparel and
furniture, are generally sold between the arrivals of the spring and fall
vessels: and lastly the tools, implements and materials for works and
manufactories, to be built and established among us, are not inconsiderable,
but are a new demand on our part, which has been created since 1775, and which
has been greatly extended in the last ten years.

It is particularly worthy of calm remark on both sides of the Atlantic, that
the exports of manufactures from Great Britain to Canada in the year before
mentioned (1791) was no more than 243,000l. sterling, being less than one
sixteenth part of our demand. In that small sum was included, of course, the
supply of British manufactures for the Canadian Indian trade. Let considerate
men determine then, whether that branch of commerce (the fur-trade) is of
sufficient importance to justify the hazard of a difference with the United
States. The whole importation (furs included) from Canada and Hudson's bay,
into Great Britain, amounted in 1791, to no more than 135,000l. sterling. Had a
war appeared to arise about such a trifle, it might have been suspected on
reflection, that political considerations were the true and secret cause. To
acquire a portion of our territory would probably have been deemed the real
object of our neighbor. To frustrate or prevent a dismemberment of our country
would have been the honest and avowed object of the people of the United
States. But it seemed good to Providence to save the two nations from the
destroying scourge of war.

It has been confidently expected by many in this country, that the
re-animation, accession and accumulation of its capital would gradually relieve
us from the alleged necessity of trading with those who could best afford us
the accommodation of credit. The expectation was reasonable, and it therefore
will not be disappointed. The merchants of the United States are now prepared
to purchase very large portions of their supplies with ready money in the best
and original markets. When the disorders and immense military demand on the
continent of Europe shall cease, it is not at all doubted, that this ability
will plainly appear, wherever the nature of the market shall afford an adequate
temptation. It is not alleged here, that this ability will materially vary the
foreign sources of our supplies, whatever may be the case: but it obviates much
of the arguments drawn from the consideration of credit.

It is believed, that miscalculations of the resources and faculties of the
United States have affected the mutual interests of this country and of several
nations, with which we have intercourse. Many of these errors have been touched
in the preceding pages. One more is intended to be noticed here. It is an
opinion, which has been maintained, that the United States would be destitute
of revenue were any circumstances to interrupt their British trade. The
importations into the United States were very considerable in the most
difficult years of the late war. The prize goods (and these pay duty) were of
great value. It is certain, that the revenue from foreign and domestic spirits
amounts, at this time, to one million, six hundred and fifty thousand dollars,
of which a very large part is drawn from sources other than British. The
revenue from wines, China goods, and molasses, are entirely from other sources,
as those from coffee, sugar and cocoa are in a large degree. Russia and the
Hanse towns now, and Rotterdam, Amsterdam, Ostend, France and Italy, in
tranquil times, would furnish great supplies for money and produce, and some of
them for credit. These would yield us revenue of course. -- If unhappily a war
were to take place, neutral bottoms, with cargoes belonging to themselves,
would afford large supplies, which the political claims of Great Britain
prevented in the revolutionary war. Every European country would maintain its
right to trade with America, The armed neutrality, and the present armament of
Denmark and Sweden, afford serious lessons on this subject -- as also the
conduct of Portugal and Holland toward the United States.
acknowledged independent by that country, which then upheld a claim to check
all intercourse between her and the foreign world. That trade would also yield
us revenue. -- So far as the manufactures of the United States might diminish
the importations from foreign countries, it is obvious that our citizens could
well afford to pay a proportionate tax. If we should save the whole value of a
bale of linens for example, by making it at home, we could have no difficulty
in raising or paying one tenth of its value in the form a land tax, or some
other equitable and reasonable contribution. The modes of revenue of all
nations are unfolded to us, and we have no reason to doubt that our lawmakers
are less able to devise original plans of taxation, than those of other
countries. An useful lesson upon this subject may be obtained by considering
how much more easy and effectual have been the financial measures of the United
States, since 1786, 1787 and 1788, than was expected by unwise and unkind
observers in those three years. The short question is this. -- Has America the
substance, wherewithal to defray the expenses of her political existence? Let
those, who are capable, compare her present operations in every line with those
of 1775: and let them also compare the public contributions of this happy
people with those of the nations of the old world -- taking duly into view the
productions and exportations of each. Let them also remember that the
depredations on the British commerce, in the late war, were great indeed, and
that the exertions of that day could be far exceeded at this time.

It is highly favorable to the character, the energy, and safety of the United
States, that the importation of slaves has ceased, that the increase of white
population and gradual emancipation have reduced the proportion of those
unhappy, and once dangerous people to a very safe point indeed in the nine
middle and northern states, and that a very extraordinary increase of white
population has taken place in the southern states. The subdivision of lands and
of all other property, by the recent laws of descent, facilitates and occasions
the sales of farms to the people of the more northern states, and to European
emigrants; and promotes the rapid course by which the whites are over-numbering
the blacks. Kentucky, the Southern Territory of Congress, the western parts of
Maryland, Virginia, and the Carolinas, are not in the most remote danger of
inconvenience from the negroes. The low and level counties of Maryland,
Virginia, North Carolina* and South Carolina, where the blacks are most
numerous, are so near to the sea, that the transportation of a force by water,
were it unexpectedly to become necessary, and the collection of the
neighboring and interior militia, would ensure the immediate suppression of
any disorderly movement. The midland and interior counties being inhabited
almost entirely by whites, no refuge could be had there. The number of slaves
in the United States is somewhat more than those of French St. Domingo, but the
white people of this country are one hundred times as many as the white people
of that colony were at the commencement of the existing disorders in that
island: and are far more energetic, and better armed.

It will be pleasing to the friends of religious liberty to perceive, that no
evils whatever have resulted in America from the nonexistence of an
established church, nor from an entire separation of ecclesiastical influence
from the civil power.

It has been sometimes feared, that the luxuries and dissipations of Europe
would be quickly introduced, with their capital, into the United States. Most
of those, who have come among us have been led hither by serious views of
advantage or driven by misfortune. Hence it is true, that we really have no
striking examples of dissipation or expense among the families, who have chosen
America for their home. They have been duly sobered by their plans of
emolument, or by reflection on the losses and difficulties, which have
constrained them to leave their native country. It is really true that they
have rather accommodated themselves to the American modes of life, than pursued
or introduced those of Europe. A fact equally beneficial to them and to us. It
is, however, highly prudent to remember, that the United States having become
by their independence in some sense, the colony of all Europe further wholesome
provisions in our laws, calculated effectually to prevent inconveniences,
which might arise from the sudden introduction to power of persons of every
variety of character, disposition and property, are truly worthy of legislative
consideration. But while we obey this obvious and solemn dictate of prudence,
let us not cease to be perfectly equitable, kind, and generous to those
foreigners who may desire to set down among us: and particularly let them fully
enjoy the rights of religion, protection, occupation, profession and property.
When the course in which these states have wisely marched to the goal of
freedom, civil and religious, is duly remembered, it will be safe to affirm,
that no general description of foreigners are likely to be indispensible
auxiliaries to the American people in those important objects, immediately on
their arrival. When the wisdom, which any person may have brought with him
shall be sufficiently directed by his experience and knowledge of those things,
which belong to our peace and which concern our general interests, and when he
shall have manifested a sufficient common interest in this community, those
temporary precautions, which prudence may at first require, will become
unnecessary. This principle of caution is not a new one. It will be
satisfactory to prudent men at home and abroad, that the constitution of the
United States and those of the several states have been framed with
considerable attention to its obvious expediency.

It is not unfavourable to the form of government adopted by this country, that
no monarchy in the civilized world, exercised over an equally numerous people,
has been so well able to maintain internal tranquillity and foreign peace in
this day of general convulsion and disorder. The recent instance of opposition
to a law of the union has evinced the disposition of the people of America to
maintain their government, the efficiency of the constituted authorities, and
the alacrity of the body of militia of four several states. This prompt
exertion will be deemed, on serious reflection, no inconsiderable proof of an
unalterable determination to maintain order and the civil power, when it is
remembered that the rejection of a similar law was attempted in England, within
the present century, and actually effected by tumultuous influences on their
legislature itself, equal therefore to the late disorders in the south western
counties of Pennsylvania. In the United States it may be at least affirmed,
that the secondary consideration of a particular mode of revenue has been put
out of question in order to maintain the primary object of an efficient
republican government.

It appears from a very incomplete but authentic note of the vessels built in
the United States during the eighteen months following the 31st day of December
1792, that they amounted to nearly 80,000 tons. The ports of Nantucket, Boston,
Alexandria, the two Wilmingtons, Edenton, and (for one year of the time)
Baltimore, and several others of inferior consequence were, not included in the
return. The quantity built at Philadelphia was 10,204 tons, although the
epidemic malady of 1793, suspended the business for one entire quarter. The
district of Maine appears to have built 15476 tons, though some of the returns
from thence are deficient. During the first year of the existing general
government (from March, 1789, to March, 1790) the whole ship-building of the
United States was 17 to 18,000 tons, and in the second year, ending in March,
1791, it was about 32,000 tons. Such has been the progress and such is the
present state of the first of our mechanic arts.

It is of some importance to the harmony between the United States and foreign
countries, that circumstances of unfavourable discrimination against us are
gradually wearing out of the systems of those countries. An instance of this,
but little noticed in America or Great Britain, has occurred in the regulations
of the latter country with respect to foreign manufactures. Before April, 1792,
no manufactured articles of the United States could be imported into that
kingdom. This exceptionable discrimination operated against us only. On the
first of that month the annual order of the king of Great Britain in council
legalized the introduction of American manufactures upon the footing of the
most favored foreign nations. The two countries have thus placed each other on
an equal ground in that particular, excepting that Britain has done that by a
temporary executive order which the government of the United States have done,
upon the principles of imparti^lity, by reiterated legislative acts. The
existence of the late rigid prohibition of our manufactures in Great Britain,
though formerly of little importance, would have been of considerable
inconvenience to us in the event of a war between that country and the maritime
powers in the north of Europe. Tanned leather, rolled and slit iron, steel,
cannon ball, cordage and flaxen and hempen yarns for example (some or all of
them) are imported into Great Britain to a large amount from those nothern
nations. These articles on the occurrence of such war, we could supply to
considerable advantage. Grain spirits, starch, malt, soap, candles, and tawed
skins, and other articles must become redundant and cheap in the United States
and a foreign market for them may be found desirable. The powers now at war
have doubtless consumed no small value of these articles from America during
the last three years. Holland, the Austrian Netherlands, the Hanse towns, the
European ports of France, and the colonies of several nations have received by
ordinary importation from the United States considerable manufactures of grain,
of the fat of animals, of wood, of iron, of leather and skins, of flax and
hemp, and of fur.

Terrifying reports of danger from the American Indians have been widely
circulated in some foreign countries. It is a fact, however, that there is not
the most remote possibility of injury from those savages to more than a
twentieth or thirtieth part of the inhabitants of this country. Nineteen in
twenty or twenty-nine in thirty of our people are as free from that danger, as
the people of Germany* or Great Britain. All the counties on and near ^he
atlantic ocean, all the midland counties and all the first ranges of the
western counties are perfectly safe and even undisturbed. In the unconnected
range of frontier co^nties, the inhabitants are often partially alarmed in the
time of an actual Indian war, and it is true that they sometimes suffer. But
this has little effect upon them as is proved by facts, which speak more
strongly than any thing, that can be said upon the subject. The old frontier
county of Cumberland in Pennsylvania, for example, contained, in the year 1760,
no more than 1501 taxable inhabitanst, and in the year 1770 no more than 3521
taxable inhabitants. It had a narrow front on the western bank of the river
Susquehanna, and extended from thence over the Allegheney mountain beyond the
head of the Ohio to the western limits of the state. By a public return of
1793, See Chapter VI. Book II. for a comparative view of the taxable
inhabitants of Pennsylvania at three periods.
it appears that the counties, erected since out of the original county of
Cumberland are inhabited by the increased number of 24,785 taxable inhabitants.
Four of them, which are beyond the Allegheney mountain, and nearest to the
Indians, contain nearly one third more than those four which lie between that
mountain and the river Susquehanna. Much the most populous of the whole eight,
is the county of Washington, which lies the nearest to the Indians, and has in
it near 24,000 inhabitants of all ages and sexes.

The great prices of American exports, both the spontaneous productions of the
earth and the fruits of cultivation, which have been obtained in our home
market, during the last six years, together with the prodigious increase of
some of them, have given an immense spring to the landed property and the
agricultural interests of the United States. For example our whole export of
flour in 1786, supposing it to be 300,000 barrels, at five dollars, has been
advanced to nearly 1,100,000 barrels in 1793 at seven dollars. It is to be
remembered also that as very great improvements in agricultural skill and
economy are obviously practicable in this country, much consequent increase may
be reasonably expected. The commerce, which has resulted from this great
natural cause, the prosperity of agriculture, is of the most satisfactory and
unfluctuating kind. Those, who have nearly 800,000 barrels of flour to sell and
ship in 1793 more than they had in 1786, will have so much the more to do in
their banks, their insurance offices, their counting houses, their tradesmens
shops and on their wharves; so much more for their millers to grind, and for
their coasters to transport, so much more to employ their outward ships, and so
much more to fill their inward vessels, and in short, so much more of all the
pleasing and profitable details of an honest, intelligent and flourishing
commerce, solidly founded upon, and inseparably blended with the prosperity of
the farmer, the planter, the grazier, the iron master, and the land holder of
every description.


