AN ORATION DELIVERED AT ROCHESTER; ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, SEVENTEEN HUNDRED
NINETY FOUR.

THEY sought FAIR FREEDOM in a foreign soil,
The pleasure lessened the attending toil.
ADDISON. BY JOSEPH CLARK, Esquire.

DOVER: PRINTED BY SAMUEL BRAGG. -- M, DCC, XCIV.

ERRATA.
In the 4th page, 2d line for peasant and affluent read, (...) and the
affluent. 18 h line, for (...) read (...). -- 5th page, 26 h line, for (...)
are, fluid, read electric fluid, 6th page 8 h line, for now, read (...). 17 h
line, of Indie^, read, of the Indu^ 9th page, 13th line, for agreeable, read
agreeably.

AN ORATION, andC.
To celebrate the Monarch's Fame is the Poet Laureat's task -- To record the
rise and fall of Empires is the peculiar province of the historian -- but to
immortalize in anniversary commemorations the emancipation of a people from the
shackles of slavery, is the far more grateful employment of a freeman. The
orators of old might dazzle with the splendour of diction, and the populace kiss
their chains oiled with the harmony of words. Dem^^^^enes, in philippic
strains, might rouse the Greeks to arms, and Cicero, in diffusive language, add
a temporary fuel to liberty within the walls of Rome.

But Liberty, established on the broad basis of independence, and the peoples'
virtue needs not the aid of sweet flowing periods, nor hidden remedies
concealed in gilded pills. Undeceitful experience realizes the substance from
the shadow, and discriminates between the Phantom and Fruition. She mnigles
herself through the whole body of the people, and her right hand is equally
embraced by the Peasant and affluent. She wants not the venal style of the
sycophant, to proclaim her value, nor pens dipped in wisdom to enhance her worth.

The illusive pen of venality, to calm the breast of oppression finds no place
with her; neither does she worship affliction, through the mirror of deception.
Whilst the courrier in despotic governments, to please his prince, tortures
truth and language, and philosophizes oppression into system, and the venal
writer to cast a shade over the misery of his fellow mortals, tells them in all
the gravity of aristocratic eloquence, that happiness is theirs. Whilst slave,
is made accestary to the oppression of his fellow slave, and all tread together
the same round of misery and despair. The Freeman possesses in actual
enjoyment, what the slave knows but in idea, the whole extent of her eloquence
is embraced in this expression, I am free!

The unity of truth needs not the circumlocution of language to prove its
existance; it is incapable of alloy. The gay style of tyrants with all its
gaudy attire must give place to the chaste style of democratic simplicity; and
whilst the mind of genius is laboring to prove unexisting felicity, and
consolating shadows into substance; the free man with less expense of truth and
virtue, enjoys the prize, the other fails to obtain.

It is my part, this day, to lead in this place the celebration of that event
which ought to be recorded in letters of gold not only on each American breast,
but likewise on the breast of every friend to humanity -- The declaration of
the Independence of the United States of America! An event which will redound
to the benefit of unborn millions! an event which future ages will sanctify
with festive oblations, and for which they will have most abundant reason to
bless those who first embarked in that cause which gave birth to it.

On the fourth of July 1776, the American Congress declared these states free
and independent, and totally absolved them from all allegiance to the British
crown. The effects arising from this severance of connection with the British
empire, we have now had eighteen years experience; the event has amply proved
the utility of the measure, and the wisdom of those who adopted it.

This famous declaration, which emancipated three millions of people from the
hand of tyranny and oppression, has been annually celebrated in this country
with festivity and joy.

But the occasion which gives rise to these general displays of festivity and
congratulation, is not confined solely to this western world. We see the sacred
principles of Liberty and the Rights of Man, expanding far and wide, their
benign influences; and catching like electric fire fluid, among the long
oppressed inhabitants of the European nations. Already has the fair goddess of
Liberty erected her standard in France, and twenty five millions, in holy
devotion, have bowed the knee to her sacred shrine. This benign friend of the
human race, like the latent fire of enthusiasm is now making the most rapid
strides in those countries which for ages have been grovelling under the dark
clouds of despotism.

Nor will she stop her career till she has brought all her enemies under her
feet. Thus shall the offspring become instructors of wisdom to their parents.

Now will the genius of Liberty, if I may be indulged a prophetic idea, be
confined within the narrow bounds of Europe; her influences, are as pervading
as the solar rays, and her resources as inexhaustable as infinite goodness.

Having erected and established her standard in the European world, she croses
the Helespont to give Liberty to Asia. Thither waving her inviting Banner till
the Rights of Man ride triumphant on the Banks of Indies, and Africa in her
turn experiences the happy influences of her power, germinating in her soil.
However phantastic, the accomplishment of these events, may be, to the mind of
the skeptic, they will ever be the ardent wishes of that benevolence, which is
exercised in diffusing some share of its own felicity. Of that humanity, which
ever ought to characterize a reasonable Being.

But let us return from these ideal contemplations of foreign Countries, to
what passes, and is livelily exhibited in our own. It is here that we behold
the blessings arising from Freedom and Independence. It is here that we behold,
almost exclusively exercised the birth Right of Man. A government which is the
legitimate offspring of the peoples' will, as equally remote from
Licentiousness on the one hand, as from tyranny on the other. A government, the
result of wisdom, founded in justice and as sacred as virtue. It is here in
this land of Liberty and Freedom, that we have the most abundant testimony from
experience, that man is capable of governing himself; a position which the
sages of old acknowledge to be beautiful in theory, but denied its reducibility
to practice.

In the present unhappy disturbances in Europe, and the convulsions which have
lately distracted that part of the world, the wisdom of our government, and the
blessings of our Independence, have been singularly manifested. Although our
local situation naturally detatches us from the vortex of European politics,
yet we must inevitably have been involved therein, had it not been for our
Independence. Although every effort has been made, which invention could
suggest, not only by European emissaries, but by internal enemies of our
government, to plunge us into this transatlantic war, and as the grossest
violations of the principles of neutrality, which it has been the policy of
this country, to observe, have been practiced yet we have hitherto, happily
escaped that misfortune. Whoever will cast his eye upon the history of Europe,
for two Centuries past, will find that there has been an actual existing war in
that country for nearly one half of the time during that period, and which has,
indeed, not been confined to one or two Nations, but has commonly embraced in
its consequences, most of the European powers. In fact, the present monarchical
governments in that county, are so complex and intricate, chief executive
powers, so attached to each other, by family compacts and the ties of
consanguinity, that it amounts almost to a total Destruction of Independence
among them, so that it would seem upon the Principles of the present
complicated system of Politics in Europe, that the millions of that beautiful
country, are destined by nature, to be the abject slaves of a few crowned
heads. They would like the ancient Egyptian tyrant, shake the reins of
oppression over the head of their fellow mortals, harnessed to the chariot.

The Principles of slavery seem to have been so ^^corporated in the
constitution, the mind so accustomed to vassalage, and the understanding so
cramped by oppression, that human nature seems to have forgotten its original
dignity. The French nation in their late and present struggles for liberty seem
to have vibrated to the opposite extreme. From excess of Despotism, they appear
to be plunging themselves into the gulf of Anarchy -- An evil infinitely worse
than the most absolute Tyranny.

It may be doubted, whether there are many Frenchmen in France, who have a true
American idea of the Rights of Man; so irregular and so capricious has been the
conduct of their National Assembly.

The solution of this political problem, that man is capable of governing and
being governed, of diffusing and enjoying happiness, without the intervention
of hereditary Lords and Tyrants, is reserved for America -- It is to this
couutry that the world is Indebted for the demonstration of this fact, that,
though the laws of society can regulate the inheritance of property, it cannot
that of the human mind.

That princes and subjects, masters and slaves, were inseparable appendages of
human nature was the ancient received opinion, and under the practical
influence of this idea, have mankind been subjected for many ages.

But in this enlightened age, we behold mankind assuming their native dignity.
The human mind, subjecting itself to the Empire of Reason -- We behold each
individual freely exercising the disposal of his life, liberty and property,
agreeable to the laws.

The doctrine of mine and thine is no longer confined to the uncertain caprice
of a despot, but its principles are defined by the permanent laws of our
country -- If then my fellow citizens, we have been thus highly favored; thus
distinguished from the other nations of the earth, with the blessings of
Independence, with a free, equitable and permanent government; with the most
unlimited exercise of all those rights and privileges, to which we are
entitled by the laws of nature and of nature's God; is there not the widest
field open for the display of gratitude! Ought we not this day in commemoration
of that glorious event, to that invisible being, who disposes of affairs
according to his will, offer up our tributes of praise and thanksgiving? Ought
we not to consider, wherefore it is, that providence has been pleased, to make
such manifest interpositions in our favor? That being without arms, ammunition
or money, without friends or allies, without laws, government or discipline, we
were enabled to oppose, for a time, the unjust encroachments of one of the
mightiest powers in Europe -- And finally with subsequent and unforeseen aid,
supported in the conflict, till our enemies were compelled to ratify and
acknowledge that declaration which we are now celebrating

And while we are thus emproving this opportunity, to celebrate the
Independence of our country; do not our breasts heave with gratitude, and our
hearts palpitate with joy, in contrasting the present, with the year seventeen
hundred twenty one; when this town was an uncharter'd forest, and its only
inhabitants were beasts of prey; and for many years afterward the inhabitants
who had settled here, were continually exposed to destruction by the incursions
of the Indian savages There was actually present at the delivery of this
address, the husband of a woman killed by the Indians in the year 1747, with
several of her children -- Also not only several of the brothers and sisters of
four men who were killed the year before, but many of their children.
-- Methinks, I now have in my eye, some of the relatives of those who have
severely experienced the effects of their savage barbarity -- Whose husbands or
wives, parents or children, brothers or sisters have been sacrificed to the
shrine of their inhuman cruelty; it will not be expected that I should enter
into a historic deduction of those events, as they are foreign from the design
of this days celebration. Those facts, it is probable, are much better known to
many of you, than to me. It is sufficient for us that we have no further
occasion, to fear their insults, nor dread their vengeance. The husbandman
needs not now, his musket as his necessary companion at the plough, nor the
garrison for his evening retreat. WARVILLE'S Travels.
His arms may now rest suspended in his house, and with his wife and children
he may now sleep in quiet, labor in peace and be happy. I doubt not, on this
glorious occasion, that with the female part of this assembly I shall find
union of hearts and hands.

You my female friends, in a particular manner, have abundant reason to
rejoice; the delicacy of your persons, and the tyranny of custom, render it far
more difficult for you to emigrate from countries groaning under the iron hand
of oppression, than it is for us. You will therefore, I presume cordially join
in the celebration of this day. Your bosoms will glow with gratitude, and your
countenances bloom with joy, in the contemplation of that event, which restores
to you, your husbands, your lovers and your friends. The sweetness of your
smiles, will alleviate any sufferings we may be called to endure in this
fluctuating scene of things, and greatly enhances the felicities of
Independence.

As we have now a firm and efficient government, founded on the laws of
equality and justice, which is recognized by most of the belligerent Powers of
Europe, and which has become the admiration and the envy of the world; let us
not be inattentive to the practice of those moral virtues without which no
government can exist; may we be inspired with holy zeal in the exercise of
benevolence and good will to mankind. As we respect the benefits of liberty and
freedom, so let us, with religious devotion, adore that being on whom alone we
are dependent. May we never want a disposition, to abound in the discharges of
public faith and private virtue. May liberty and the rights of man, remain in
this country as long as the procreative principles of nature shall exist; and
future ages forever hail the day which gave them Independence.

FINIS.

