MEMOIRS OF GENERAL DUMOURIER, WRITTEN BY HIMSELF

.... VITAM QUI IMPENDERE VERO. TRANSLATED BY JOHN FENWICK.

PART 1.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY SAMUEL HARRISON SMITH, CHERRY-STREET, ABOVE
FOURTH-STREET. 1794.

CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I. Of the General State of Affairs in France 33 CHAP. II. Of the State
of the Armies -- -- 41 CHAP. III. General Dumourier Departs from Liege to Paris
50 CHAP. IV. General Dumourier's abode at Paris -- 58 CHAP. V. Trial of the
King -- -- 65 CHAP. VI. Fruitless attempts of General Dumourier in behalf of
the King -- 71 CHAP. VII. Death of the King -- -- 78 CHAP. VIII. General
Dumourier's conferences with Cambon 83 CHAP. IX. Interview of General Dumourier
with some Jacobins -- -- 90 CHAP. X. Of the Executive Council of France 95
CHAP. XI. Retreat of Roland from Administration 109 CHAP. XII. Negociations
with Holland and England 115 CHAP. XIII. Departure of De Maulde, of Maret, and
of General Dumourier from Paris -- 123 CHAP. XIV. Fruitless Negociations.
Declaration of War 127
PREFACE.
IT is among the misfortunes that attend General Dumourier, to be abandoned by
the world; to be the outcast of society; to be compelled to fly from city to
city to seek an asylum from the rage and madness of countrymen who imagine they
will serve the public cause and rid the world of a traitor if they can but
plunge a dagger into his breast; and to avoid the wretch whose avarice would
tempt him to gain the price offered for his blood by the Convention. Compelled
to live among strangers under the disguise of an assumed name, and to submit to
the pain of listening to opinions on his conduct, equally severe and unjust,
that are industriously circulated by the hired journalists of the different
courts of Europe, who bestow their praises only on the successful, and every
where encountering emigrants, who detest him with little reason, and as much
ferocity as the jacobins, this man, whom Ministers and Courts received with
flattering caresses When he quitted the army, but afterward calumniated and
persecuted, for having published memorials which contained his real and serious
opinions, at length obeys the call of his duty, by giving to the world the
Memoirs of his life.

The most extravagant and contradictory tales respecting him have filled the
journals of Europe, and portraits have been drawn of him so unlike each other,
that not only his character, but his existence is become an enigma.

The Courier of Europe represents him with the force of Hercules, the
licentiousness of Mark Anthony, the treachery of Hannibal, the cruelty of
Sylla, and the military and political talents of Caesar; they have also
attributed to him, the possession of immense riches in the English funds. On
the contrary the Journal of the Lower Rhine describes him as possessing
talents, but being deficient in judgment. This opinion, Dumourier regards as
true praise, for he was never desirous of being thought subtle or practiced in
the art of changing his opinions according to his interests. He has always had
fixed principles and a determined character. His mind was formed by the study
of Plutarch; and he has mixed too little with men, to be known by any but a
select few. Excepting during his travels and his wars, he has lived surrounded
only by his books, and his chosen friends, of whom the greater part no longer
exist. Far from esteeming the maxim of the Epicureans, which recommends the
concealment of our actions, his whole life shall be exposed to the observation
and judgment of his contemporaries. He has nothing to lose by his conduct;
already he is poor, calumniated, proscribed, all that mankind regard as
miserable; but he has every thing to gain, since men of elevated and upright
minds, who read these Memoirs, will become his friends. With such men only he
desires to live, and to whatever nation they belong, he shall always regard
them as his fellow citizens.

The celebrated Dictator Fabius Maximus, he who alone could check the victories
of Hannibal, and whom Dumourier earnestly endeavored to imitate in his
campaign against the king of Prussia, made this observation to Paulus Emilius,
when he went with Varro, to command the army, "Let him not fear who thirsts for
glory; for, although we often find that true merit is eclipsed for a time, we
have never known it to be entirely lost; it bursts at last through the clouds
which encircle it, and appears arrayed in its bright and genuine colors."

Dumourier thought like Fabius, but their situations were widely different.
Fabius resided on his estate with his, family, exposed indeed to the calumnies
of a faction, but honored in the Senate, and by all the sages of Rome. They
still regarded his counsels and preserved him in the command of the army, nor
had ingratitude effaced the many services he had hitherto rendered his country,
or destroyed the expectation of his still rendering them many more. Fabius was
thus enabled to follow the bent of his mild and moderate disposition; and wait,
in tranquillity, the progress of truth and justice. Such are not the happy
circumstances of Dumourier; and however short a time he may have to live, it
will be too long if it be stained with the injustice of the public opinion. Not
only therefore for himself, his contemporaries, and his country to whom he may
one day be useful, but in justice to his friends, his relations, his advocates,
he is obliged to repel the calumnies which follow him, and to dissipate the
cloud which obscures the truth. This he will do by an honest and accurate
detail of such facts as are important, and of which he was a competent witness.

For these reasons he is obliged to change the order of his Memoirs, and to
submit to the public opinion the third volume, which contains the circumstances
of the year 1793. These are the more important as they will enable the reader
to foresee the issue of the strange events that have lately happened in Europe,
in studying the nature of their motives and causes. If General Dumourier have
stated any of them erroneously, his contemporaries are competent to detest his
injustice, but he has surely this great reason for speaking the truth, that he
may not increase the number of his enemies. He describes the French as they
really are, and not such as Europe has hitherto regarded them, who seem to
believe that the whole French nation are without religion, without honor, or
humanity. The French are engaged in a bad cause. We are compelled to regard
them with horror; but prudence will not permit us to despise them. They have
displayed a magnificent courage; and, had they followed the opinion of virtuous
and experienced men, this period of their history would have been as honorable
as it is now disgraceful and wretched.

Unhappily, their licentious excesses have destroyed the liberties of Europe.
The example of their misfortunes, has induced every people to believe that they
had better wear their chains in peace, than fall into an anarchy that can never
end but in absolute despotism.

There are two questions that naturally present themselves to which Dumourier's
justification ought to reply, by stating the motives of his conduct, which
appears to be in contradiction with his own opinions.

It is asked, why did Dumourier, after the arrest of Louis on the 10th of
August, refuse to obey the orders that he had received from another general, to
make the soldiers renew their oath of fidelity to the king?

Dumourier had then under his command ^0,000 men in the camp of Maulde near
Tournay, and the Austrians who had a much larger army, were indefatigable in
harrassing his troops. Dillon had been sent to remove the general in his
command. The ministers were then evidently inimical to the revolution; and, as
we shall see in the second volume of these Memoirs, pursued a conduct that was
the cause of the king's misfortunes. The circumstances of the frightful scene
of the 10th of August, were not accurately known in the camp. To engage the
troops to renew their oath, according to the orders of General Dillon, was to
prejudge the cause of the people, (...) the (...) dard of rebellion against the
nation, and to engage the army in a dispute respecting parties, at the very
moment when we had a soreign enemy to combat; and the inevitable consequence
would have been to have exposed the unfortunate Louis to the daggers and
vengeance of the populace.

Again it is demanded, how can Dumourier justify his conduct at the time when a
Convention was appointed for the purpose of abolishing the monarchy and
establishing a republic, in acknowledging the authority of this Convention,
giving his sanction to the destruction of the monarchy, and to the assumed
power of the republic.

It was shortly after the general's refusal to give the oath to the troops in
the camp of Maulde, that Fayette deserted from his army, and Dumourier was
ordered to take the command in his stead. The king of Prussia entered Champagne
with a formidable body of troops; and terror and treason ensured his success.
Longwi and Verdun were taken. Dumourier, being in force in his camp at
Grandpre, assembled his army at St. Manehould. The history of France does not
present so dangerous a crisis. The 20th of September, the day on which the
Convention declared France to be a republic, Dumourier and Kellerman repulsed
the Prussians, who had attacked them at Valary. The two armies were in sight of
each other and every day threatened to come to an engagement; and this surely
was not the moment to enter into quarrels respecting the form of government!
The enemy were to be driven from the territories of France. The country was to
be saved. Besides, the people were incensed against the king, whom they
regarded as a traitor. At such a period to have maintained his prerogative,
would have been the signal for his massacre. The people would have looked upon
such an attempt as an act of treachery, which would have deprived Dumourier of
the confidence of his countrymen, and thereby have left France an easy prey to
the enemy.

As soon as the Prussians had retreated, Dumourier began the campaign in the
Low Countries, and it was not till he had gaine^ the Belgians for allies, and
had acquired influence by his success, that he had any reason to hope that he
could give peace to his country, deliver the imprisoned king, and establish on
secure foundations the constitution of 1789. After that period, circumstances
arose so extremely contrary to all possible expectation, Dumourier's journey to
Paris, and the horrible murder of Louis XVI. so clearly convinced Dumourier of
the guilty aims of the Convention, and the implacability and power of the
Jacobins, that the general resolved at all hazards to separate the cause of the
country from that of the monsters by whom it was governed. His plan was bold.
No other person in France had means in his power, for that purpose, so
apparently well founded. But every circumstance turned against him, and, above
all, the inconstancy of his army.

The apparent contradiction between Dumourier's political principles and his
military conduct have drawn upon him the unjust reproaches of many of the
Emigrants, and of several persons of good sense, who could only judge from
their mistaken view of the facts. As minister of foreign affairs, Dumourier
certainly has shown a sincere attachment to the Constitution; of this his
dispatches, his discourses to the Assembly, are an abundant proof. He has
equally opposed Republicans and Royalists. He procured the dismission of three
ministers of the former party, without leaguing himself with the court faction,
and in consequence he was exposed to the fury of the Jacobins, who loudly
demanded his being sent to the prison of Orleans. The public opinion of
Dumourier's principles at that period, was so decided, that the following
couplet was placed at the bottom of his portrait. Inflexible soutien du trone,
et de la loi,
Il fut ami du peuple, il fut ami du Roi Inflexible supporter of the throne and
of the law, he was at once the friend of the people and of the king
.


Afterward appointed to the command of the army, he had neither time nor
inclination to concern himself in the intrigues and crimes of Paris. He was
solely employed in repelling the enemy.

He is reproached, however, with never having changed his party, till he was no
longer victorious, but the reproach is unjust; for, in the first place, he
never changed his party, since, although he quitted the Republicans, with whom
he had been long disgusted, yet he did not join the Royalists; and that no
doubt might remain respecting his opinion, he instantly proclaimed his desire
of re-establishing the constitution of 1789. Secondly, his sentiments were
constantly in opposition to those of the Convention, the Jacobins, and the
Minister of War, during the time of his expedition into Belgia, from the month
of November, as may be seen in his correspondence with Pache, published in
January 1793. In this same month of January, he sent to the Convention four
memorials, against the tyrannical decree of the 15th of December, and he
neither presented himself to the Convention, nor the society of Jacobins; on
the contrary, he gave in his resignation at that period. Thirdly, compelled for
his personal safety to return to the army, he persevered in opposing the
tyranny and injustice of the Convention. It was on the 12th of March that he
wrote the well-known letter to the Convention, which was considered by the
Jacobins as so great a crime. Hence, before he went to engage the Prince of
Cobourg, and to decide the fate of France, and her enemies on the plains of
Nerwinde, his quarrel with the Convention was open and proclaimed. He was
proscribed. He was, therefore, compelled to overthrow the Convention, or perish.

The reproach that General Dumourier never quitted the Republican party till he
was vanquished, was expressed with the greatest bitterness, in a letter written
by the Elector of Cologne, to the General, which was published with a cruel
ostentation which that prince might have foreborne against a man then
unfortunate and a fugitive. But surely it is to be supposed, that this Prince
will regret the injustice done to General Dumourier, when, by the reading of
these Memoirs, he shall be convinced that it is an injustice. None of the
wrongs the General has endured, has afflicted him so much as this, since the
author of it is held in such just estimation throughout Europe.

Every nation in Europe must be convinced, that its most important interests
are involved in the catastrophe of the French Revolution. If the belligerent
powers should re-establish the monarchy, the vengeance of the nobles, and
consequent proscriptions will fall on the greater part of the people. But, as
the people are fortunately the most numerous body, as they have enjoyed the
blessings of Liberty, and felt the advantage of holding the sovereign power in
their hands, the triumph of the nobility and clergy, would be but momentary; it
will endure no longer than while the foreign troops are enabled to support
them. Every day will be productive of fresh rebellions, and another Revolution
still more destructive and terrible than the present, will restore the people
to the exercise of the sovereignty. But if, by the imbecility of the allied
powers, the National Convention and the Jacobins are enabled to maintain the
republic, then will their system of fraternization be exercised with
irresistible sorce; and finally, not only the neighboring nations, but the
most distant countries will imitate the rebellion of France, and all Europe be
reduce to a state of anarchy, while by a grand and rapid Revolution, the
existing governments of the world will be hastened to destruction. There is a
just medium, however, which the sensible part of the French nation eagerly
desire to be adopted, and which would insure general tranquillity to Europe; it
is that France should become a limited monarchy.

It is to this end the sovereigns of Europe ought to direct their efforts; and
it is by so doing only they can secure the safety of the monarch who shall
mount the throne of France. It is the only bond of universal peace.

If it be true that the ancient monarchy cannot be restored in France, it is no
less certain that the species of Democracy, which exists there at present,
cannot be of long duration.

Abstract notions have been too much consulted in this important matter, which
may easily be reduced to a few simple truths. There is no political
constitution which will not render a people happy, if it be the choice of the
people, and if the government be enabled to act without any other restraint
than that of the law. The monarchical form of government is exclusively suited
to large and populous nations, because such only are enabled to provide for the
expense of monarchy. The republican form is better suited to small and poor
countries, because it is administered with less expense. In the former, there
is a unity of power, which costitutes the perfection of government; and it also
includes secrecy and promptitude, without which great and complicated affairs
cannot be successfully conducted. Aristocracy is necessary in a Republic;
drawing together the authorities that otherwise would be without union, and
excluding the tyranny that results from the arbitrary will of a people
governing themselves. Pure democracy will always produce an inconsistent and
ineffectual government, because it neither admits of union of opinions, nor of
prudence, promptitude, nor secrecy; and it includes in itself principles that
beget disorders among the people, and are entirely subversive of their
happiness.

All the Republics that we are acquainted with, ancient or modern, have been
meliorated by Aristocracy. We must not even except Athens, which was devoid of
success and splendour, excepting when its councils were directed by Aristides,
Themistocles, Cymon, and Pericles; and was reduced to slavery, at first by
Sparta, and afterward by Philip of Macedon, when the democracy triumphed, and
when celebrated men were no longer at the head of its affairs.

The civilization of our manners, the extent of our commerce, our wealth, our
luxuries, in a word all the enjoyments on which are founded the splendour and
happiness of our age, are opposed to the establishment of a Republic. If we
will have a perfect equality among men for the basis of our political union, we
must go back to the simplicity of the first ages, cast away our advantages, and
return to a state of nature. A government founded on equality can be nothing
more than the contract of a savage people, who, for the first time, have
assembled in society.

The French have erred strangely in this respect. They compare themselves to
the first Romans; but Brutus, in freeing Rome from the Tarquins who were
detestable tyrants, in abolishing royalty, was better informed of the interests
of men, than to establish equality and democracy. He preserved the royal
authority while he divided it between the Consuls, to whom he left the Lictors,
the Fasces, and the Ax, as well as all the real attributes of royalty. He new
modelled the sovereign power, by ordaining that the hands which held it should
be changed every year. Yet the Consuls were taken from the Senate, that is to
say, from the Aristocracy. Afterward, indeed, new changes took place in the
government, when bold plebeians attacked the privileges of the senate by their
decemvirs and tribunes. But the government remained five hundred years an
aristocracy; and when the people had made innovations, if the senate had not
conceived the sublime policy of rendering the Roman people a nation of
conquerors, its government would have resembled that which we have since seen
in the Republic of Florence: Always feeble, always agitated by civil wars, and
open to the invasion of every ambitious neighbor, Rome would have been
conquered, or would have become, a dower, or a heritage like Florence; and
scarcely would history have spoken of that city, which her aristocracy rendered
the most celebrated of the whole world.

But even this species of republic which Brutus founded, and which may be
considered as a mixed government, extending only over a small territory, it
would have been impossible to have re-established, after the death of Caesar,
or Tiberius, or Nero. The circumstances of the Roman Empire, at that period,
would have destroyed the Republican spirit in its birth. The bounds of the
empire were too much enlarged; the Romans were too rich; luxury, arts, and all
the enjoyments that spring from them, had spread their influence too much to
accord with the austerity of a Republic. And liberty does not necessarily
demand a Republican government. England is a proof, that a people may be free
under a monarch. Liberty consists in being free from obedience to all laws but
those that the people themselves have made. The law is the sanctuary in which
the sovereignty resides; and kings or other magistrates to whom the executive
power is delegated, being subject to the law, the people are as free as they
can be consistently with their happiness. Such are the bounds of a true
liberty, and all beyond is anarchy.

Nothing can be better proved than that a republic cannot now be established,
without the destruction of those very advantages which distinguish the age. We
cannot obtain the object, without confounding property, and forcing the minds
of men to submission by terror and crimes. To be a Republic, we must first be
in a state of anarchy; but does anarchy conduct to equality and liberty? No. It
overthrows all established order; and, in the place of hereditary authority,
substitutes that of the populace, which being directed by less reasonable
principles, necessarily exercises an insupportable ryranny: Of which France is
an example. The palaces and rich property of the nobility and clergy cannot be
equally divided; and they become the prey of those miscreants that are the most
depraved and daring, and perhaps, one day we may see the Ex-capuchin Chabot,
Lord of Chantilly; Bazire, Lord of Chambord, and Merlin, Lord of Chanteloup;
and filling the places of the great Conde, the Marshall de Saxe, and the Duke
de Choiseuil. Perhaps we shall see changes a thousand times more extravagant
and ridiculous. And what good will result to the people by these hideous
changes? They will still have masters. But of what a new and contemptible race!

This disastrous state of things is at present confined to France, but its
democratic or rather monstrous Republic cannot exist but by the spreading of
anarchy among all its neighbors. Thus her interest, and every part of her
policy, (which she is not even desirous of concealing) consists in preaching
and propagating anarchy. As experience proves that it is easy to deceive and
betray a people in preaching liberty to them, (since it is less difficult to
create confusion than to restore order), and as the poor are more numerous in
every country than the rich and the noble, it is to be feared that, tempted by
the example and support of the licentious people of France, all nations will
imitate her excesses, and turbulence and anarchy become universal.

This confusion accompanied with all its miseries is inevitable, if the foreign
powers are unable to stop the progress of the French Revolution. The forces
employed by the allies are so great that success is infallible if they be
directed by wisdom and prudence. But if the allies abuse their power and rob
the unfortunate family, whose defenders they avow themselves to be, the excess
of the French people will be justified, and the same dangers and misfortunes
will again desolate Europe.

General Dumourier has discussed this subject more fully in another work, which
he has delivered to persons who have promised to convey it to the Emperor, and
he hopes for the sake of mankind, that it will not be neglected or forgotten.

Although General Dumourier has asserted the necessity of founding every stable
government on an aristocracy, it is not to be understood that he would grant
all right and privilege to the nobles and nothing to the people. Nobility was
in its original the reward of virtue; and the titles, honors, and feudal
rights attached to it, are the legitimate property of their descendants, and
nothing could be more unjust than to deprive such of the nobility as have not
brone arms against France of any part of their hereditary rights. But nobles
should have no privileges in the eye of the law, either in engrossing of
places, or in exemption from duties. In a free government, all are equal in
this respect, and a nobleman is a simple citizen. He has no just claim to the
acquisition of places but by his services, his talents, and his virtues. He has
the advantages of education, leisure, and the example of his ancestry. Of these
it is his duty to avail himself; but these are his only just advantages; and in
this system is to be found the only true equality that has existed in any age,
or among any people.

It is not because all the members of the Convention, and the generals of the
armies of France have been raised from among the vulgar that the decrees of the
former, or the military conduct of the latter, excite the disdain and the
indignation of Europe, but because they are absurd, criminal, ignorant, and
cruel.

Certainly a state may exist without a king, a court, or a nobility; but it is
not true that a great and powerful nation can exist without nobility; for
nobility being the reward of virtue, becomes a motive not easily to be
destroyed in the descendants of the virtuous man.

This applies only to nobility, as it existed in its origin, for that which is
sold by kings is a wretched abuse, the offspring of the avarice of kings, and
will cease of itself as a ridiculous vanity, when titles shall no longer be
attended with pecuniary privileges, which the public opinion has forever
abolished in France, and which if an attempt be made to restore it by foreign
powers will but serve to produce another Revolution.

The aristocracy that General Dumourier regards as necessary to all government
is that of virtue and talent. To govern men, to fit in judgment upon crimes, or
to decide on questions of property, to instruct men in the duties of religion,
to conduct the citizens of a great empire in war, are employments that must be
studied as other employments are. The declaration of the Rights of Man, and the
Constitution to which it served as a basis, will instruct the future king of
the French, in what manner it is his duty to select those who are to aid him in
the government of the kingdom. The right of choosing such men is the noblest
attribute of royalty. Let us examine that sublime Constitution, and we will
find that no condition can be found more happy for a wise and virtuous man than
that of a king of France.

Frenchmen, listen to the temperate and informed part of Europe, again adopt
with sincerity, that true code of philosophy, and your monarch will be
respected and powerful, your nobility will again become worthy of their
ancestors, your clergy pious, worthy, and useful, and you will become the
happiest nation of the earth!

Such is the zealous wish of a man whom you would destroy, because he saved
your country, and has always spoken with sincerity; whom the emigrants load
with calumnies, because in quitting his country he would not turn his arms
against her like themselves; whom the ministers of foreign courts declared to
be a dangerous man because he asserts that the sovereign power resides in the
people. No sufferings will induce him to change either his opinions or his
conduct, or his wishes for your happiness, since reason and not the chances of
fortu^^ ought to conduct the wise man.

And you also, sovereigns of Europe, be persuaded that the perfection man whom
you seem to condemn, to whom you refuse the asylum which he ought to find among
you, although he brings no other title than a pure and honest mind, be
persuaded that he is influenced by the love of mankind, which inspires him with
respect for all just authority, that he is actuated with the desire of seeing
peace restored to all nations, that he abhors war, and renounces it for
himself, even in the service of his country, excepting when he believes it to
be necessary to arrest the course of ambition and injustice.

BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE OF GENERAL DUMOURIER. EXTRACTED FROM A LETTER
WRITTEN TO A FRIEND.
-- AT present, my dear friend, let us quit these abstract notions, too sublime
to be the general subject of a letter, and let us enquire what is the result of
such principles. It is that we ought to do all the good we can in our stations:
to be humane: but, above all, to be just. It is never our duty to enquire what
the opinions of men respecting us will be, and our actions ought never to be
influenced by an attention to the question of what may be thought of them. It
is in times of great public commotion, during the revolutions of empires, that
this principle ought to be maintained with the greatest firmness. It is then
that the just man will call forth his talents to save his country, exert his
genius to represent the dangers of excess, and his courage to stand between the
nation and a great crime.

He will be hated and persecuted by all parties, since he will not flatter the
passions of faction; but he consoles himself in recollecting that he performs
his duty. Persecutions appear but an incident that he was to expect; and he
supports them with fortitude, because he knows they are the effect of mistake
that cannot be lasting.

History restores the virtuous man to his just rank among his fellow-citizens.
My enemies cannot deny that I have acquired great military same; but, to
obscure it, they paint me as a faithless, immoral, unprincipled man. They would
drive me from the theater of Europe to make room for meaner actors. I am
willing to remain a spectator of the scene, but I cannot consent to descend
from the stage with opprobrium. These considerations have driven me to two
decisive measures. The first, to publish the facts that justify the latter
period of my public life, which has been the most calumniated. The second, to
deliver myself up into the hands of the emperor, who, instigated and deceived
by the gross Calumnies of my persecutors, has given orders to have me arrested.
Prudence perhaps would dictate a different conduct on my part, but duty rests
on other calculations. These are mine: that this valuntary surrender of myself
into his power ought to convince the emperor of my innocence, and incline him
to lay aside his prejudices. He is represented as a just man; I believe him to
be such. He will value the confidence I place in his character, he will produce
the accusations they have urged against me, and I shall prove their falsehood.
These memoirs will have appeared, in the interval, to justify me to the world;
and, having gained the confidence of a monarch even more than any other
interested in the re-establishment of peace and order, I may again render
services to humanity and my unhappy country. Should the emperor refuse to hear
my justification, and consign me to the oblivion of a prison, I shall only have
to suffer and to die. But this history of my life will vindicate my name. The
consequences of the treachery and injustice of my persecutors will fall on
themselves; and the emperor himself will regret me.

In the approaching month, I shall be fifty-five years of age. Shall I really
suffer less, if, by shamefully concealing myself, I can escape a few days of
reproach or imprisonment?

I will now give you a short history of my life, which may serve as a
supplement to my memoirs, if I am not allowed time to finish them. I was born
at Cambray in 1739, of parents not affluent, although noble. My father was a
man of great virtue and understanding; he bestowed on me a very careful and
extensive education; at eighteen years of age I became a soldier; and at
two-and-twenty I was honored with the cross of St. Louis, and had received
twenty-two wounds.

On peace being made in 1763, I began my travels, to study the languages and
manners of different nations. The Emigrants have said, that at this time, I was
employed as a spy by the French ministry. It is not improbable that the
petitmaitres of Tarentum and Athens (if there were any such men there) have
said as much of Pythagoras and Plato.

In 1768, I was put upon the staff belonging to the army in Corsica; and,
having served with reputation in the two campaigns of 1768 and 1769, I was
raised to the rank of Colonel.

In 1770, the Duke de Choiseuil appointed me minister to the confederates of
Poland; and I commanded a body of men in that country during two campaigns, and
conducted several very important negotiations with various success. As the
measures of the confederates were ill concerted, their revolution was
unfortunate, and ended in the partition of Poland.

In 1772, the Marquis of Monteynard, minister of war, employed me in correcting
and revising the military code of laws; at the end of the same year, this
minister by the express order of Louis the XV. entrusted me with the management
of a secret negotiation relative to the revolution in Sweden; but, having
received my instructions on this affair immediately from the king himself, and
unknown to the Duke D'Aiguillon, minister of foreign affairs; I was arrested at
Hamburg in 1773, and conducted to the Bastile by the orders of that minister.
The irresolute Louis XV. yielding to the importunities of Madame du Barry his
mistress, and the Duke Aiguillon, disgraced the virtuous Monteynard, forebore
to inform the Duke of the authority he had given me to negotiate, and suffered
me to bear the weight of a criminal prosecution, which the Duke D'Aiguillon
suspecting the truth, feared to carry to all its extremity. I rejected offers
of friendship and protection made me by this despotic minister whom I did not
esteem; and after lying six months in the Bastile, I was banished to the Castle
of Caen for three months.

Louis XV. died soon after; and D'Aiguillon was disgraced. I had no inclination
to take advantage of the expiration of the Lettre de Cachet, for the purpose of
regaining my liberty; I was anxious to be completely justified, and therefore
petitioned Louis XVI. to remove me to the Bastile and to order a revision of my
trial. The king would not permit me to remain in prison, and commanded M. du
Muy, M. de Vergennes, and M. de Sartine to revise the trial, and those three
ministers signed a declaration that I had been unjustly prosecuted. Immediately
after I was sent to Lisle, in my rank of colonel, to make a report respecting
the new military maneuvers which the Baron de Pirsch had brought from Prussia.
I had also a commission to examine a plan for improving the navigation of the
river Lys, and another plan of forming a harbor in the channe^ at Ambleteuse.
And these employments occupied the latter end of the year 1774, and the who
(...) of 1775.

In 1776, I was joined in a commission with the Chevalier D'Oisy, captain of a
man of war, and Colonel la Roziere, one of the ablest engineers (...) Europe,
to determine on a proper place in the channel for the construction of a naval
port. I passed the year 1777, in the country twenty leagues from Paris. It is
the only period of repose in my life. At the end of that year, I was invited to
Paris, by M. de Montbarey, minister of war, on account of the rupture between
England and her colonies, which I had long predicted.

In 1778, I procured the office of commandant of Cherbourg to be revived and
given to me. Being persuaded that Cherbourg was better calculated that any
other place in the channel for a national harbou^, and being aided by the zeal,
activity, and influence of the Duke d'Harcourt, governor of the province, I
obtained a decision, in favor of Cherbourg, of a question that had been
agitated during an hundred years, concerning the preference to be given to
Cherbourg or La Hogue, for the site of a naval port. From that time till 1789,
I was occupied in superintending the works of Cherbourg; and, during that
period, I was but three times at Paris. When I first arrived at Cherbourg, it
contained no more than seven thousand three hundred inhabitants, and when I
quitted that place it contained nearly twenty thousand inhabitants.

The emigrants, not contented with saying I was a spy from the ministry while I
was on my travels, have also reported that I was employed by the war office as
one of the tools of its secret intrigues, although the time that I have passed
at Paris, in the different journeys I made to that place during twelve years,
did not altogether amount to six months, and although in these journeys I very
rarely visited Versailles.

Let us review this history: twenty two wounds received in battle, six
campaigns made in Germany, two in Corsica, and two in Poland, important trusts
discharged, a city raised from obscurity to a flourishing condition, a naval
port established, fortified, and rendered fit for the purposes of the navy,
twenty years spent in travels, that had a knowledge of mankind for their
object, and in fine the study of languages, of the military art, and of the
policy of nations; such are the events of which it is composed. It will be
happy for France if she produce many such designing and selfish men. If those
who were called by their birth, their wealth, and their dignities to maintain
the honor; and produce the happiness of their country, had qualified
themselves with equal care, France would either have needed no revolution, or
the revolution would have been more happy and honorable.

For my part, the revolution was not necessary to raise me to dignities. I
should soon have been lieutenant general in the ordinary course of promotion,
and was on the point of receiving honors that men at that period sought after.
I possessed an income of 20,000 livres, which was equal to my wants and
desires. Yet I could not but see that France was disgraced abroad, and ruined
within. I foresaw that she hastened to this latter period of her misery; and
have often warned those of the ministers, whom I esteemed to be honest men, of
the event.

When the revolution commenced, I deprived its character of much of its evil in
the place where I commanded. At Cherbourg, the excesses of the populace were
punished by me with death; but the people could not accuse me of being inimical
to their liberty. Those who were placed in like situations would have rendered
an inestimable service to their country, in exerting the same firmness with the
same discernment.

The military governments of towns in France being suppressed, I went to Paris,
where, during two years, I studied the influence and character of the
revolution. The flight of the princes of Franco was an irreparable injury done
to the cause of the king. I foresaw that the exercise of the Veto would not
produce the end that was proposed by it, and would occasion the ruin of the
monarch's cause, and I opposed it by all the means that were in my power.

In 1791, I was appointed to the command of the country from Nantes to
Bourdeaux. At that period a religious war raged in La Vendee, and the people
laid waste the castles and lands of the nobility. I had the good fortune to
calm the minds of the people, and to preserve tranquillity in that country till
the month of February, 1792, when I was recalled to Paris, was raised to the
rank of lieutenant general, and appointed minister of foreign affairs.

I am reproached with having caused the war by my counsels; but I shall prove
that the war was already inevitable, when I began my administration, and that
indeed it might be said to have commenced. I acknowledge, however, that my
opinion was decidedly for the declaration of war, as was also that of the king,
who, not only approved of my memorial to the National Assembly on that subject,
(which was three days in his hands) but made corrections in it, and himself
composed the discourse he delivered to the assembly on that occasion.

At the end of three months, finding myself embarrassed by the various
factions, and being sincerely desirous to see the king's council possessing
proper dignity, and his measures governed by constitutional principles, I
changed the ministry, and obtained a promise that the king would sanction two
decrees which appeared expedient to his service. Having done so, I would have
retired from the administration. The king would not grant me his permission;
the ministry was again changed by his order and I took the war department. But,
soon perceiving that the court had deceived me, I resolved not to be the
instrument of their intrigues. I predicted to the unhappy king and queen all
the misfortunes in which they were involving themselves, and I gave in my
resignation three days after being appointed minister of war.

I was not driven from the councils of the king as the emigrants have asserted,
but resigned in opposition to the entreaties of Louis. He was two days before
he would accept of my resignation, and he did not suffer me to depart without
expressing the deepest regret.

After that period, I commanded the armies with the greatest success. If the
French had displayed as much moderation and virtue as they have enjoyed of
success, peace had been long since restored to Europe; Louis would have been on
his throne; and the nation would not have been, as now, stained with crimes,
and the slave of anarchy. France would have been happy and illustrious under
her constitution and her king.

I have now, my worthy friend, given you a short history of my life, and it
will stand in the place of one more circumstantial, if opportunity be not given
me to prepare a fuller account for the public. My heart is unburthened in
sending you this letter. Here, I wait the orders of the emperor, and the
decision of my fate, without inquietude. My mind, far from being weakened is
fortified by disasters; and I shall be always myself.

MEMOIRS OF GENERAL DUMOURIER. FOR THE YEAR 1793. BOOK I.
CHAP. I.
Of the General State of Affairs in France.
IN the early periods of the Revolution we have seen the French combating for
their independence with courage. But there was too much violence in their mode
of acquiring liberty to afford any hope that they would enjoy either that or
their subsequent successes with moderation. Having been hitherto victorious,
they had no doubt that they were now invincible. They no longer thought of
maintaining the good will of a people who had received them with open arms.
They beheld nothing but conquests before them; and, while they tyrannized over
the minds of their newly adopted brethren by turbulent clubs they robbed them
of their property and left them without any species of liberty either moral or
physical.

Every person of character and political experience had retired from the
management of affairs, to escape the persecutions of an Ochlocracy that
governed under the sanction of the dreadful society of Jacobins. The King was
in prison. The worthy of every description were persecuted under the names of
Feuillans, Moderes, and Intriguers. The constitution was destroyed. Paris was
in the hands of the federates, invited there by the Girondine party, but who,
on their arrival at Paris, had been gained by the Jacobins. These federates now
threatened to bring to the scaffold Pethion, Brissot, and all the leaders of
the Girondine party. But their threats were loudest against General Dumourier,
whom Marat, Roberspierre, and the other heads of the Jacobins pointed Out as
the instrument and protector of that party, then distinguished by the name of
the politicians The word in the original is Politiques. At Paris, the
Girondist^ were called Les Politiques, or Les Hommes d'Etat. But these epithets
were used in disdain, because the politics of Statesmen were deemed to be
unworthy of the simplicity of freeman.
. This was a prejudice against the general altogether unfou^^ed; for he was
unconnected with either party, having no more esteem for one than the other,
but regarding them as equally adverse to the tranquillity of France, which he
saw no means of establishing but by a revolution capable of destroying the
influence of both. To this end his army was his only engine; and it will soon
be seen how little there was to be relied on.

France at the period of which we are now speaking, assumed an appearance of
prosperity that deceived and elated the people; and more especially, the
predominant party. But she had rendered herself odious to foreign nations; and
was, in truth, divided and weakened within herself. On the side of Italy, the
French army was extended among the Alps by the acquisition of Savoy; and was
further aggrandized by the addition of the county of Nice. These territories
had incorporated themselves with the Republic, but violence alone was the
author of the union.

Clubs composed by a few corrupt men, who could exist only by a change in the
government, were established in every city by the Jacobin soldiers that were
scattered throughout the different armies. Their violent resolutions at once
acquired the validity of law. Questions were not even put to the vote. Every
thing was carried by menaces and force. And patriotic addresses arrived at
Paris from the foot of the Alps, from the mountains of the principality of
Basle, from Mayence, Liege, and the cities of Belgium. The National Convention
believed, or affected to believe, that the blessings of our condition were
ascertained by foreigners ranging themselves under our colors.

Geneva became a club instead of a republic. Claviere gave a loose to old
resentments that he harbored against his country; and being appointed minister
of finance by the Girondine party, he sacrificed General Montesquieu, who, in
discharge of his duty as general of the army in the neighborhood of Geneva,
had attempted to save that city and Switzerland from the baneful influence of
the Jacobins.

The principality of Porentruy, deceived by Gobet bishop of Paris, and by his
nephew Ringler, two despicable adventurers, had also incorporated itself with
France, and had adopted its dangerous reveries.

Custine was master of Worms, Spire, and Mayence; but he had neglected to enter
Coblentz, and had evacuated Franckfort, after having excited the detestation of
the inhabitants against the avarice and turbulence of a people in whose hands
the torch of philosophy had lighted up the flames of discord.

Between Custine's army and that commanded by Dumourier in the Netherlands,
another had been placed under the orders of General Bournonville. But this army
had been nearly annihilated in a disgraceful expedition undertaken by its
general against Treves, after he had lost the opportunity of attacking that
city with advantage. One third of his army being thus destroyed, the remainder
retired for the purposes of recruiting into cantonments in Lorraine. The
Prussians and Austrians took possession of the intervals left open by this
retreat; and their position, connected with Coblentz, Treves, and Luxembourg,
entirely cut off the communication between Custine and Dumourier; so that there
was no longer any concert in the efforts of the two armies. And indeed
Dumourier's plans had already been deranged by the stupid pride of Custine, by
the ignorance of the convention, and by the treachery of Pache, Meunier, and
Hassenfratz, who having the direction of the war department and resolving to
ruin Dumourier, had disorganized the armies and withheld their means of
subsistence. The Netherlands were ^n the hands of the French army called the
^rrny of Belgium, composed of that of Dumourier and the army of the Ardennes
commanded by General Valence. The latter was not more than 15,000 strong. The
two armies occupied Aix-la-Chapelle and the banks of the Meuse. Clubs agitated
all the cities of Belgium. The convention had sent commissioners to execute the
odious decree of the 15th of December, that sequestered the public property of
Belgium; and so had frustrated the hopes of uniting those rich provinces to the
French republic although that union was the very object of this oppressive
decree. But the convention were eager to seize on the wealth of Belgium
previous to any union. Such was the plan of the financier Cambon; and he
boasted of the project.

The immoral and ferocious dispositions of the six commissioners employed in
this affair were well calculated to ruin the scheme. Danton was a man of great
energy of character; but was without education and equally detestable in mind
as he was coarse and disgustful in appearance. La Croix was an adventurer, a
debauchee, and a braggart; and was destitute of all sense and honor. Camus,
the most rugged, haughty, awkward, and pedantic of the Jansenists. Trielhard,
little differing from Camus. Merlin of Douay, a well-meaning man; but
splenetic, and infected with extravagant and theoretic notions. And Gossuin, a
monster of a brutal and sordid spirit These portraits seem to be drawn with too
much severity. If much may be said against these deputies, it is also well
known that they have rendered many services to their country. We should have
been unwilling to have published these and other personalities that are to be
found in General Dumourier's Memoirs, if we had bad any right to suppress them,
and if we are not morever persuaded that the important facts, extensive views,
and useful objects of the work would amply compensate for some intemperate
passages. Besides when we recollect the ingratitude and gross calumnies that
have pursued General Dumourier (who probably has discovered more talent and
conduct than any other person in the revolution, and who certainly as a general
has gained the most important victories and acquired the greatest glory) we
cannot wonder that in writing of his bittered enemies, he has indulged himself
in writing satire instead of history. Note by the British Editor.
.

To these commissioners were joined thirty-two others named by the executive
council, but recommended by the club of Jacobins at Paris. The greater part of
these assistants were miscreants who came only to massacre and pillage
throughout the rich provinces of Belgium. They overran the unfortunate
country; and while, by the terror of sabres and fusees, they drove the
inhabitants to demand their being incorporated with the French republic, these
men plundered the churches and palaces, emptied the coffers and sold the
furniture of all who fell under their displeasure, and whom they marked with
the odious name of Aristocrats; and whom often consisting of fathers of
families and old men, and women and children, they sent as hostages into the
fortified towns of France.

The north and west of France began to unfold the seeds of discontent against
this bloody and horrible anarchy. The revolters of La Vendee were not however
dangerous as yet; and there had been no difficulty in crushing them utterly, if
any foresight had existed in the National Convention, or in the Councils of the
executive power. But what is to be expected from a government in which while
the wise hesitated, mad men step in and decide.

Two factions equally attrocious, the Mountain, and the Girondine party,
divided the Convention.

The former, made up of the most furious Jacobins, neither palliated their
wicked principles nor their crimes. They spoke of nothing but blood and death.
And, being without capacity to govern, having neither knowledge nor digested
plan, they would suffer no dominion whatever. Not even the principal men of the
faction could boast of ruling it; and the liberty of the faction consisted in
anarchy.

The other faction, composed of metaphysicians and intriguing statesmen, had
long abused the superiority acquired hy their talents, and their more
cultivated education. They had treated the Jacobins with disdain. The executive
council was their instrument. And they imagined they securely held the reins of
government. But the Convention had been disgusted by their insolence and pride;
and it was known, that this faction were the enemies of royalty only because
they aspired to fill its place. Hence the independent part of the assembly,
those men who execrated the atrocities of the Jacobins, stood yet more in fear
of the ambition of Condorcet, Brissot, Pethion, Gensonne, Guadet, Vergniaux,
etc. And thus all other parties became united to humble the presumptuous
Girondists.

The measure of bringing the unhappy king to trial, resulted from the hatred of
the two factions. It served them mutually for food; but the Girondists have too
late discovered how fatal it has been to them. Louis, the victim of their
ambition and of their cowardice dragged them down in his fall, and left the
field open to the triumph of the Jacobins.

The factions that split the assembly, divided the departments also; each
espousing the passions of their deputies. Bourdeaux, Marseilles, and Lions,
hated the Mountain; and were the first to begin an opposition, that has since
degenerated into a civil war.

The Pyrennees and the inclemency of the season, still secured the frontier
provinces of Spain; and that kingdom, at its leisure, collected the forces that
were afterward directed again Roussillon; while the Convention, occupied
entirely by their own quarrels, and by the state of Paris, provided none of the
means of repelling the attack.

Paris, the most miserable and most guilty city that has existed, thought
herself the rival of Rome, because in the space of a few months, she had become
the scene of crimes, massacres, and catastrophes, that were the accumulation of
ages in the capital of the Roman empire. Forty theaters, always crowded, amused
her trifling, cowardly, and cruel inhabitants; while a small band of villains,
no less ridiculous in their pretensions, than barbarous in their deeds,
supported by two or three thousand dependants, the outcasts of the provinces,
and many of whom, indeed, were not Frenchmen, destroyed the memory of the
massacres and horrors of each evening by those of the succeeding morning. The
frightful cavern of the Jacobins vomited forth every ill, and spread terror
through every house. All men of property trembled, and citizens, who, in
peaceful times would have been mild and virtuous, hardened their hearts against
pity, and were ready to applaud guilt, lest they should become its victims. All
who had the remains of virtue or shame were fled or were driven from the
administration of the department, of the municipality, and of the sections. An
insallible sign always precedes the fall of nations. Then good men hide
themselves; and the wicked and violent alone remain in the conduct of affairs.
And in this crisis, it is not even in the power of supernatural aid to save the
people from the effects of public phrenzy.

Such was the terrible situation of France in the beginning of the year 1793.
Such is the gulf to which democracy leads, when the populace takes the place
of the nation, and tyrannizes over it by the Oligarchy of a few depraved
wretches selected from the refuse of the people. At Rome a senate, during many
ages, controuled popular vehemence; and directed it, not toward happiness, but
to the aggrandisement of the nation; for Rome turned her arms abroad, that she
might not destroy her own offspring. France has no such counterpoise as that of
the Senate of Rome; and the want of virtue in the governing party can bring
nothing but disgrace and misfortune on her head.

CHAP. II.
Of the State of the Armies.
ALTHOUGH the political condition of France had even possessed more solidity,
and had been regulated by a prudent assembly, although France had gained the
hearts of the nations to which her arms had opened her the way instead of
having disgusted them by a tyranny more offensive than that of a formal
despotism, it had been impossible that this new Republic should support herself
against the interests of the whole of Europe, unless she had established a
military system capable of making head against a universal attack upon her
territory by sea and land. The National Convention, never mistrusting
themselves on any subject, because they were ignorant of the political
combinations of things, issued a decree on the 19th of November, 1^92, against
every despot in the universe, and invited the people every where, to throw off
their yoke; promising them protection and fraternity on condition of their
adopting the French System. But they ought to have humbled the Empire, Prussia,
Spain, and Russia, before they made so proud a declaration. A just assembly, an
assembly regarding the rights of man united in society, (for man in savage
state has no rights, and a state of nature confounds all rights) would have
perceived such a decree to have been unjust. The maxim of compelling men to
come in is not more philosophical in a social view, than it is in theology. The
Jacobin preacher is not less unjust, than the preacher of the church of Rome;
and it is unbecoming of liberty to be propagated, like the alcoran, by the
sword.

But in taking the violent step of the 19th of November, it will at least be
supposed, that the Convention, desiring to range all men on the side of
liberty, had taken due precautions that the decree should be something more
than a vain and dangerous boast, and consequently that they had placed their
military establishment on the strongest footing. General Dumourier, on becoming
minister of the war department (which situation he held but three days, being
appointed on the 13th and quitting it on the l6th of June, 1792) read a bold
memorial to the National Assembly, proving clearly, that they thought not of
the army, and that far from placing it in a state to support the war, they were
trifling with the public liberty and safety. This memorial was forgotten. The
campaign was begun. The General's success which ought to have gained him the
confidence of hi fellow-citizens, if no further yet as far as respected the
military department, served merely to throw suspicion on every advice he gave
them. They not only altered his plan of the campaign, but they were desirous of
retarding his too rapid progress. The Girondine party frankly told him, they
should be extremely sorry to see him force the enemy too promptly to demand
peace, since they feared the consequence of the return of the army before they
should have finished the constitution.

The Jacobins, who supposed the General to be connected with the Girondine
party, accused him of ambition. Their contemptible journals, especially that of
Marat, affected to make him at one time dictator, at another Duke of Brabant,
and at another head of the Orleans faction, and under this last fiction,
described him as intending to place the eldest son of the infamous and odious
Philip, on the throne. Nothing could be more contradictory than these
calumnies; for if Dumourier desired to be dictator, he surely was not the ag^
^r of the house of Orleans; if his aim was to be Duke of Brabant, he had then
an interest foreign to the party intrigues of his country. But the absurdest
accusations were sufficient in France to tarnish innocence. It has however seen
that calumny was too feeble to stop the progress of a victorious general; and
machinations of a more effective nature were employed, and which ended in the
destruction of the miliary resources.

Servan, having discovered the difficulties of the war department, feigned
sickness; and while he declared the insufficiency of his strength for the
fatigues of his situation, he appointed himself general of the army of the
Pyrennecs. Servan was lieutenant colonel in the preceding month of May. His
health unequal to the duties of the cabinet, was robust enough to support the
fatigues of the field. Yet the Revolution, it seems, was undertaken to reform
the improper distribution and abuse of employments!

Roland, minister of the interior department, was the most intriguing and least
capable of the Girondine party. He had a friend, named Pache; a man of talents
and great zeal, who had formerly been secretary to the Marshall de Castries
and had educated his son. Roland imagined he could make himself master of the
war department, in procuring it for Pache. We shall afterward see how far the
result was favorable to the designs of Roland.

Pache now became minister of war, chose the following men, or was obliged to
appoint them, to fill the principal departments of his office; Meusnier, an
academician and a man of sense, but of as depraved a mind as could be found in
France; another academician, named Vandermonde; a Jacobin who had rendered
himself ridiculous by the affected vulgarity of his manners, and dangerous by
his intrigues, and who had assumed the name of Hassenfratz to conceal the name
of le Lievre, under which he would have been recognized to his disgrace; and
Audouin who was Vicar of St. Eustache and son-in-law of Pache.

These new ministers threw every thing into confusion in the different
departments of the war office, during the most important and hazardous
campaign. The few persons of experience that remained were discharged and their
situations filled, not merely by Jacobins, but by such of them as had
distinguished themselves in the massacres of the first six days of September.
The administrations established for the supply of arms, clothing, provisions,
and for regulating the hospitals, were abolished. The old and experienced
commissaries and contractors were either dismissed, or calumniated, or dragged
to the bar of justice; or thrown into-prison, and rendered infamous without
being heard. As these imprudent and unjust measures equally affected all the
armies, although particularly aimed at that of Dumourier, the complaints of the
generals were universal. Commissioners from the Convention were sent to examine
into the truth of the complaints. Their reports were alarming. But the
committee of military affairs, who in no case could have any other effect than
to embarrass the measures of the war department however wisely concerted, was
now made the instrument of justifying the false statements of Pache in direct
opposition to those of the generals and commissioners. The Convention passed to
the order of the day; and Pache escaped with having been simply ordered to the
bar, and with the reproaches which the generals continued to lay upon him.

The commissioners Camus, Gossoin, Danton, and la Croix, were themselves
witnesses in the month of December, of the distressed condition of the army in
the camp of Liege; and rendered an account of it in their reports to the
Convention. but without applying any effective remedy to the evil. The army was
composed of forty-eight battalions; the completest of which were from three
hundred and fifty, to four hundred men, and many of them were not more than two
hundred: the whole amounting to between fourteen and fifteen thousand foot. The
cavalry were about three thousand two hundred. Most of the foldiers were
without shoes, and encamped in the mud, their feet being protected by nothing
but hay twisted together. The rest of their clothing corresponded with this
deplorable appearance. Clothes had been distributed to some, but those, to the
number of fifteen hundred, deserted and returned to their respective homes. The
sick filled the hospitals, where they were in want of every thing. To such a
state was the victorious army of Jemappe reduced after the conquest of Belgia.

This army had been obliged to stop short on the banks of the Meuse for want of
provisions; and, if its distress had been known to general Clairfait, he might
have engaged it with great advantage, for the carriages of the artillery were
almost entirely destroyed, and in the preceding month of December six thousand
artillery horses had died at Tongres and at Liege for want of forage. The foot
had but ten thousand fusees in a condition for service. The cavalry were in
want of boots, saddles, cloaks, carbines, pistols and sabres. The army was
without money; and often the staff officers raised contributions among
themselves to make out the soldiers subsistence-money for the day.

General Dumourier could have supplied all these wants in Brabant, Liege, and
Holland; and had even entered into the necessary contracts and made reports
respecting them; but every plan was rejected and all his arrangements
destroyed. The commissary Ronsin, had orders to condemn, embarrass and retard
every measure. His hostility was open; he paid no regard to the opinion of the
general: for he was certain of the support of the military committee, of the
financier Cambon, of Pache and his dependants, together with the secret
protection of the commissioners of the Convention, who appeared to blame these
disorders, but suffered them to remain without a check, and in the account they
rendered in the month of January execused Ronsin although they acknowledged him
to be unfit for his situation.

Manufactures were established at Paris for every thing wanted in the armies.
Cloth was conveyed from Liege to Paris to make clothing for the troops. Leather
was bought at Liege, at Dinans, and all along the banks of the Meuse, to make
shoes at Paris, which were sent to the army at nine livres each pair, although at
Liege shoes cost no more than four livres, or four livres ten sous per pair.
Cloaks that could be manufactured at Antwerp for nineteen or twenty-one livres
each, cost fifty livres each at Paris; and cloaks were sent from Paris to the
army. The corn of the Netherlands was sent to Nantz, from Nantz to Paris, was
ground in the mills of Mont Martre, near Paris, and sent back to the
Netherlands.

The greatest evil that resulted from these disorders, was their influence on
the conduct of the soldiery. We have already taken a review of the character of
these troops, and have seen how difficult it was for General Dumourier to avail
himself of their courage. It may even be said, that he had accomplished what
seemed to be impossible; and that in beating the Prussians and Austrians, he
had obtained a victory more tedious and difficult over his licentious soldiers,
having introduced discipline and love of order into an army, one fourth part of
which was composed of troops of the line, infected by the spirit of the times,
and the other three parts of volunteers, each having an opinion of his own, and
each proud of his victories, and rendered susceptible of more mischief than
good, by his notions of equality.

In the beginning of the campaign of 1792, the battalions were in want of
officers. The superior officers were ill chosen, and were without influence.
The soldiers themselves chose their captains, lieutenants, and subaltern
officers, and hence these officers were subject to the caprice of men, who
acknowledged no superior. A single Jacobin was sufficient to ruin a battalion
by his licentious discourses; and it was only by culpable condescentions that
an officer could preserve his rank, or obtain promotion.

The city of Liege was the tomb of Frenchmen. They died there of hunger and
every species of distress. And this city, where the army knew nothing but
wants, was more satal to it than Capua, with its enjoyments, had been to the
Carthaginians.

The people of Liege had carried the Revolutionary spirit to an excess,
proportioned to the excess of their sufferings when they were betrayed and
subdued by the Prussians. They had therefore withdrawn their confidence from
the leaders of the Revolution, who labored to secure liberty on the
foundations of wise principles. Fabry and Chestrel, who were very honest men,
and wished only for the welfare of their country, had entirely lost their
influence. The populace of Outremeuse, perhaps the most dangerous in Europe
after those of London and Paris, had made themselves masters, not of the
government, for there was none, but of the public force. Those unhappy men
thought only of vengeance and punishment. They conducted the French (...)o the
houses of their particular enemies, whom they treated as Aristocrats; that is
to say, they pillaged and murdered them. This cruel intestine war, in which
each French soldier took an active part either for or against his host,
destroyed the little discipline and good conduct which had hitherto existed in
the French army in the midst of misery, want, and complicated distresses. But
it was impossible to punish, for it was impossible to discover the guilty. The
people of Liege cast the fault upon the French; and the French recriminated
upon the people of Liege. The General would have established the punishment of
death for such crimes. It had even been demanded of him by his army in a moment
of enthusiasm. But the Commissioners, while they seemed to approve of this
severity, secretly and effectually opposed it. Since that time, we have seen
that one of the causes of the execution of the unfortunate Custine, was the
having established the punishment of death in his army.

Dumourier's army occupied can^onments from Aix-la-Chapelle to Liege, in which
cities were all the officers who could not procure quarters with their
battalions. So that the soldiers were almost left without commanders. Want had
carried marauding to its utmost pitch. The soldiers robbed in bands from
village to village; and the peasants took their revenge in killing such as, at
any time, they found single.

General Dumourier, prevented by these circumstances from pushing on to
Cologne, and forcing Clairfait to repass the Rhine, resolved at least to secure
the Meuse. He therefore ordered the army of the Ardennes, consisting of 15000
men, and commanded by General Valence, to join him; and placed them on his
right, in the countries of Stavelo, Malmedy, Spa, Verviers, and Huy. A body of
18000 men under the command of General d'Harville, occupied the Meuse from
Givet to Namur; having his out-posts at Ciney, March, and Rochefort. The army
under General Miranda occupied the left from Tongres to Ruremonde. It consisted
of 18000 men. New battalions, lately arrived from France, formed the garrison
of the Netherlands. And this line along the Meuse amounted to from 65,000 to
70,000 men; and would have been sufficient to have seized upon the country
between the Meuse and the Rhine, and to have occupied the banks of that last
river from Burick to Cologne, if it had been possible, first, to take
Maestricht, which General Dumourier was not permitted to do, although he had
proposed it in the beginning of December, and had it then in his power;
secondly, to place a garrison in Juliers, which was also forbidden him because
it was deemed necessary to keep terms with the Elector Palatine, left he should
deliver the passage of Manheim to the Imperial army, by which means they would
have cut off the army of Custine from Alsace; and, lastly, if the army of
Belgia had been provided with provisions, arms, clothing and money, so that it
might have marched in the month of December, and have forced the Imperialists
to repass the Rhine.

General Dumourier was persuaded of the impossibility of his preserving his
position on the Meuse, while he should neither be in possession of Guelders,
Venloo, Maestricht, nor Juliers, He wrote to the Convention and the Minister of
the War Department to that effect. The reasons of his opinion will be found in
his correspondence with Pache, printed in January, 1793. It was toward the
close of the preceding November that his quarrel commenced, with that Minister,
with the Jacobins who supported him, and with the Convention who had not
discernment to foresee the effects of his criminal conduct. In December began
the trial of the unfortunate Monarch, whole mild character conducted him to the
scaffold. From that instant, the general soresaw the crimes and misfortunes
that have since sprung from the chaos in France. He attempted to sound the
dispositions of his army respecting the King, but his Staff-officers whom he
employed in the task effected nothing, and thenceforward the general was
proscribed. Not one soldier, not one officer would consider the case of the
king. Every one discovered the same apathy; and this cold disposition in the
army on that point, hastened the General's design of visiting Paris.

CHAP. III.
General Dumourier departs from Liege for Paris.
GENERAL Dumourier was thus a prey to various chagrins in the palace of the
Prince Bishop of Liege; and, if it can be a consolation to that Prelate, he may
read with pleasure that after the most splendid victories, this general was
more unfortunate than himself. He had been harrassed by the calumnies of the
Jacobins from the moment that he had saved France by driving a formidable foe
out of her territory. The conquest of Belgium had increased the column of his
enemies, to express himself in the words he used to the National Convention
after the battle of Jemappe. He almost reproached himself with having lost the
opportunity of quitting the command that was offered him on his return from
Champagne, by the ingratitude of his fellowcitizens. He had caused the war to
be declared, in his former situation as minister of soreign affairs; he had
afterward conducted it with glory as a general; he had nothing wherewith to
reproach himself on these accounts; but he saw the successes of the war
mouldering away, and he could not but be penetrated with grief, since the
important share he had taken in the public concerns during nine months, had
identified his fate with that of his country.

All his letters and memorials were either rejected or misinterpreted; and his
counsels slighted. Cambon declared, nothing could be more dangerous to a
republic than a victorious general. It was laid down as an axiom in the tribune
of the National Convention, that ingratitude was a necessary virtue in
Republicans. The Convention withheld the recompenses due to the heroes of
Champagne and Belgium, because the General had demanded them. By a decree, they
authorized the minister of war to annul the nomination of officers made by the
Generals. The corpse were left destitute of officers. New and ignorant men came
from France, to gather the fruits of the army's toils. The General complained
of these things to the National Convention; and declared, if they would not do
him right respecting them, both as to the wants of his army and the other evils
which were the cause of its destruction and disorganization, he should be
compelled to give in his resignation.

He demanded as an indispensible step, the revocation of the impolitic and
unjust decree of the 15th of December, that had driven the Belgians to despair.
Notwithstanding the remonstrances of the General, it had been resolved in the
Convention that the decree should take place on the first of January. Cambon
had obtained this decision; the four Commissioners Camus, Gossuin, Danton, and
La Croix, supported him; and the two latter boasted that they had done so, to
avenge themselves for an insult they had received at Ath, where they had been
refused a lodging. The General's honor was concerned in preventing the
execution of the tyrannical decree, because when he entered the Netherlands on
the third of November he had published, with the fanction of the National
Convention, a proclamation declaring to the Belgians, that the French entered
their country as friends and brethren; that they came to give them entire
liberty; and that the people should be left to choose their own constitution and
mode of government, without interference from the French. The decree not only
destroyed the force of this proclamation, but also robbed the unhappy Belgians
of all remains of liberty. The Commissioners sequestered the public property
and that of the clergy; and this nation no longer possessed any public revenue,
nor the authorities necessary to preserve even the form of government.

Cambon expected to find money for the expenses of the war, in this plunder of
a country that was the friend of France, and that had not been conquered, but
had voluntarily associated itself with the Republic. This criminal and fordid
conduct produced no benefit to France; on the contrary, it deprived her of
40,000 men, that the Belgians were willing to furnish, and fifty millions of
livres that they would have poured into the French treasury, to contribute to
the defense of their liberty; and was followed by the loss of those fine
Provinces, and excited a detastation of the National Convention and their
Commissioners, that will be eternal.

By an article of the decree the generals were charged with its execution, and
were required to place the seals on the public property. General Dumourier
rejected this dishonorable employment; and the commissioners gave the charge
to Ronsin, who employed as his instruments, soldiers and clerks of office, all
Jacobins, who stole half the wealth they were ordered to secure in the name of
the nation.

The general, being unable to prevent these base actions, resolved, at least,
to mark his disapprobation of them as much as he could, to the Belgians, by
being absent, if that were possible, while they should be transacting. On
these, and all the other subjects of his vexation, he explained his views so
clearly to the commissioners, and General Valence supported his reasonings with
such force, that in a conference held at Liege between the commissioners, the
generals, and the administrators that were entrusted with providing subsistence
for the army, it being clearly shown to these administrators that they could
not furnish him provisions even to remain at Liege, much less to march forward,
it was decided that Camus, the President of the commission, should return to
Paris, attended by General Thouvenot, the first to make a suitable report to
the National Convention, and the second to lay before the military committee an
account of the wants of the army, and to obtain the necessary arrangements, and
also solid and ample contracts for establishing magazines on the Meuse, and
more than all the rest, to obtain a revocation of the decree of the 15th of
December, which added the whole Belgic nation to the number of our enemies.
General Thouvenot took with him also written observations of generals on the
plan of the campaign, as laid down by the minister of war, and was to bring
back with him a decision on that point. -- The journey, however, was altogether
unsuccessful, notwithstanding the talents of General Thouvenot, because Camus,
opiniated, deceitful and vulgar, and not contented without engrossing all the
honor of the embassy, assumed the sole right of speaking, supported the
decree, and yielded to the will of others respecting the article of the
committee of contracts. Thus, instead of removing the evils complained of, he
only increased the difficulty of the general's situation.

Meanwhile General Dumourier shut himself up in the palace of Liege, and was
employed in soliciting leave to return to Paris, and in reflecting on his
misery. He continued to declare in his letters and memorials that it was
impossible for him any longer to hold the command if the Convention did not
abolish the committee of contracts, which was no better than a den of knaves,
and had cancelled his bargains of every kind with the Belgians; and if they did
not change the minister for the war department, who had nearly ruined the
armies, and if they should continue to treat as conquered countries the
provinces that should be allied to France.

Such were the ostensible motives on which the general demanded leave to go to
Paris. He had another, however, much more essential; but which he concealed
with the utmost care. It was to endeavor to save the unfortunate Louis the
XVIth, by representing to the governing party the danger to which the nation
was exposed without; and the necessity of forming a solid plan for the
campaign, which it would be necessary to commence at a very early period. He
hoped the weight of this consideration, aided by other motives, he meant to
urge on the different sactions in the convention, would secure a suspension of
the abominable trial.

General Dumourier was in this embarrassed situation at Liege, and his mind
agitated in the manner we have seen, at the very moment when the Jacobins were
contriving, to bring him to trial; and when they pretended that he passed his
time surrounded by courtezans and actresses. The ministry indeed had sent him a
detachment from the opera; but these returned to Paris after a stay of no more
than twenty-four hours. This expedition, and that of a troop of comedians from
the theater of Montansier, cost the nation more than 100,000 livres, the
government pretending to inculcate French revolutionary principles to the
Belgians, by exhibiting democratic pieces in their theaters. The general
disdained to be the protector of such sollies. All that he saw of these
deputies from the opera was at his table, having invited them to dinner. And
certainty they conducted themselves with much decency and good sense; and
discovered much more sagacity than the ministers that had sent them.

The general found it extremely difficult to obtain his leave of absence. Pache
and the Jacobins feared his presence at Paris. And having in vain urged the
state of his health and his need of repose, he was at length compelled to
engage the commissioners to demand the leave of absence directly in their own
name, and to declare solemnly his determination to resign in case of refusal.

In the midst of the vices that infected the army, there remained a sentiment
of justice among the soldiers which secured their attachment to a general with
whom they had always been victorious, and to whom they could no way attribute
their present distress. The commissioners therefore declared in their letters
that the army would certainly disband themselves should the general resign. The
leave of absence arrived; and the General prepared instantly to depart,
although La Croix proposed to make a tour with him to Aix-la-Chapelle, in the
hope of detaining him still longer in that country. But Dumourier had secretly
determined never more to resume the command; and was not willing by visiting
the quarters, to make a tacit engagement with the soldiers for his return.

He arrived at Brussels; the command of which he had given to General Moreton.
This man, who died in good time at Douay, had played a very curious part at
Paris in the Revolution. He was an Aristocrat, taking that word in its most
odious acceptance. He had been colonel of the regiment of La Fere, and he had
been broken under the old government for the vilest acts of military despotism.
Resentment threw him into the hands of the Republican party; and his influence
in the councils of the Palais Royal had made him one of the chief actors in the
Revolution. Become secretary of the Jacobins he plotted to procure a revision
of his former sentence; but the sentence remained in its original state. He was
afterward appointed colonel in the army of the north, and as he was well
acquainted with all the parts of the discipline of the infantry, and had
considerable ability, General Dumourier appointed him chief of the staff to the
army of the North. When Dumourier took upon him the command in Champagne,
Moreton, who could not penetrate the veil that covered that affair, although
perfectly brave, misconducted himself at the breaking up of the camp of Maulde;
and was in danger of being massacred by the people of Valenciennes. General
Dumourier's return to the army of the north, then become the army of Belgium,
replaced Moreton at the head of his staff. But as Thouvenot possessed qualities
for the situation which Moreton wanted, Dumourier made the latter
lieutenant general by seniority (for six months was sufficient to advance men
to the highest rank by seniority in this revolutionary army) and gave him the
command at Brussels and in Brabant, in order to make General Thouvenot head of
the staff. Moreton then threw off all restraint toward General Dumourier, and
entirely gained by the Jacobins, to whom he already owed many obligations, he
opposed the sentiments and judgment of his General in every possible way. He
adopted the decree of the 15th or December; and became hateful to the people of
Brabant. General Dumourier found him surrounded by the Jacobin populace. He had
raised a corpse that assumed the name of the Sans Culottes. These came to make
an harangue to the General; and used the phrases thou and citizen. Dumourier
was offended with this grossness; and plainly told them that being chiefly
French soldiers, they ought not to address him in such familiar phrases,
because such expressed an equality inconsistent with the discipline of an army;
that they ought to call him General or Citizen-general, but never citizen,
without such like addition. He ordered their statutes to be brought to him, and
told them, that on his return from Paris, he would decide respecting them: for
this mob demanded pay; and were really paid, though unknown to the General,
with the consent of the commissioners, as a recompense for their services, or
rather for the atrocious vexations they had committed.

General Dumourier had before this, sent a proclamation from Liege, to engage
the Belgians speedily to hold their primary assemblies, and forthwith to choose
a constituent assembly; because in the decree of the 15th of December it was
said, that the sequestration of the public property should cease when the
people of Belgia should have chosen their representatives. The commissioners
saw clearly enough that the appointment of an assembly would restore the
Belgians to their liberty, and would deprive the commissioners of the
administration of the public revenue, and especially of the plundering of the
churches. They therefore delayed the publishing of the General's proclamation;
and afterward its execution, and prevented the holding of the primary
assemblies at Alost, the place Dumourier had appointed, with a view to
counteract the influence of the populace of Brussels. The General had been
warned by the example of Louis the XVI. who might have avoided the influence of
Paris, by assembling the states general at Tours, Orleans, Blois, of Bourges.
But seeing, now, that the only means of snatching Belgium from the tyranny of
the French Convention had failed, he continued his journey without delay to
Paris.

CHAP. IV.
General Dumourier's abode at Paris.
GENERAL Dumourier arrived in Paris on the first of January. Having reflected
that, on his visit to that place after the expulsion of the Prussians from
Champagne, Marat and the other Jacobin journalists had reproached him with
showing himself at the theater, and with seeking popularity, he resolved to
avoid all places of public resort, to live as privately as possible, and to see
only his particular friends, or such persons as might be useful to him in the
objects of his journey.

He was five days without leaving his apartments, during which he composed four
memorials: the first on the necessity of recalling the decree of the 15th of
December, which had been confirmed and even aggravated by two decrees passed on
the 28th and 31st of the same month; the second, respecting the ill effects of
the committee of contracts, and the necessity of replacing on the old footing
the supplying of the army with provisions, forage, horses, clothing, etc. by
the appointment of intelligent contractors; and the third and fourth on
military affairs and the plans of the ensuing campaign. He concluded each of
these memorials by a new declaration of his resolution to resign if the
National Convention should neglect any of these objects. He accompanied them by
a letter to the President, requesting him to engage the Convention to form a
new committee for the purpose of treating with the Generals, both as to the
wants of the armies and future military operations. On the 7th of January, he
sent the memorials and his letter to the president, whose name was Treilhard,
who had formerly been an advocate, and who shortly after this was joined with
Merlin of Douay, another advocate, to the four former commissioners of Belgia.
The president neglecting to communicate the papers to the Convention, General
Dumourier wrote him another letter, very short and peremptory.

On the 11th of January, a summary account of the affair was given to the
convention. The letter was read. The memorials were suppressed there, and sent
to a committee of twenty-one members recently established under the name of the
committee of general safety. The most popular members of the other committees
had been selected for this committee, They opened their sittings on the 13th,
and the General was invited to assist. The memorials were read. Ignorant and
frivolous disputes succeeded. All spoke together. And, after sitting three
hours, they broke up without making the least progress. A further memorial,
more detailed on certain points, was demanded of the General. As to the plan of
the campaign, the members unanimously agreed utterly to decline the
consideration of it, alleging that it belonged properly to the executive
council. The General attended a second sitting of the committee, held on the
evening of the 15th with a memorial containing ^ minute statement of the
required information. There were not more than half of the members present.
They dropped in one after another; and, running slightly through the memorial,
which was very long and intricate, no more was said of the matter.

General Valence arrived previous to this sittings he was admitted, and read a
memorial respecting the recruiting and new modelling of the army. He proposed
that the infantry should be divided into brigades, by incorporating two
battalions of the National guards with each battalion of the line. This
project, adopted by the Convention in the midst of the ensuing campaign,
completed the ruin of the French army, by rendering it a body of mere
volunteers without restraint or discipline. The attention of the committee,
whose tristing and inquisitive disposition was equalled only by their ignorance
and indifference to the public welfare, was caught by this novelty, although it
ought never to have been discussed but in a time of peace, or at least not till
the conclusion of the campaign and the committee entirely threw aside the
important objects cotained in the General's memoirs.

General Biron, having quitted the army of Alsace to take upon him the command
of that in the country of Nice, assisted also at the third sitting; and read a
very pressing memorial respecting the new contractors and the committee of
contracts. The minister of war being ordered to attend, and not being able to
answer the accusations of the three Generals, was very grossly treated by the
committee, charmed with finding an opportunity of humbling a minister. They
had, however, a just occasion in the present instance, for the minister had no
other defense to offer than the presenting of statements taxed with being
false. And the whole affair was referred to the military committee, the least
respectable of all the committees of the Convention.

General Dumourier afterward attended a fourth sitting. There were but five
members present. They discussed nothing. And, when they separated, they told
him they would send for him when they should have occasion to consult him
again. Immediately the General retired to a small country house at Clichy, from
whence he came every day to Paris in the prosecution of his greatest object,
that of saving the king. He was never again called to attend the committee of
general safety. All the important affairs of France were suspended during that
moment for the purfuit of a measure that involved the ruin of the nation. The
Convention were occupied by nothing but the trial of the king; which was
prosecuted with the greatest bitterness and most indecent ba^barity.

It was from the sat of his memorials that General Dumourier expected the
salvation or the ruin of his country. Had they been adopted, he designed to
have presented himself to the Convention, to have appeared in public, and
openly to have canvassed for the unfortunate monarch. He might then have
promised himself an important influence. He would have been surrounded by a
number of officers and soldiers of his army who were on leave of absence at
Paris. And, by adding other means to these, he would have commanded a party
sufficiently strong to counteract the Jacobins, and their support, the
federates. This resource was lost; and, far from being abi^ to save the king,
General Dumourier, destitute of power and influence, and considered as a man
dangerous to the republic, because he disapproved of the crimes that were
committing, feared only to injure Louis XVI. to precipitate the horrible
catastrophe, which thencesorward appeared inevitable, and which has cost the
General nothing but anguish.

A contemptible man, a man without knowledge and capacity, General La
Bourdonnaye, the personal enemy of General Dumourier, in revenge for having
lost the command of the army of the north in the preceding year, in consequence
of complaints made against him by General Dumourier, pnblished throughout Paris
that the General had no other object in coming there than to save the most
honest man in the kingdom. It was an appellation that indeed General Dumourier
had very justly given to the king in a letter written in 1791; and which had
been printed, with the other papers found in the iron chest, that Roland had
lately delivered up to the Convention.

The same report was spread by the Jacobins, especially by Marat and his too
active faction. It was said that the General held consultations with Roland and
the Girondists every evening. And these last, offended that he was as unwilling
to Visit them in private, as the Jacobins, spread the rumor that he secretly
saw Philip Egalite; that man unworthy of bearing the name of Duke of Orleans.

Dumourier wen^ each day to the council; and returned in the evening to Clichy.
But he never dined with any of the Ministers, except Le Brun and Garat. He
avowedly shunned the houses of Monge, minister of the marine; Roland, minister
of the home department; Claviere, minister of the finances; and above all, that
of Pache, minister of the war department.

The war-office was become the filthiest place imaginable, where 400 clerks,
and numbers of women, affected to carry slovenliness of dress and coarseness of
manners into a system: Nothing was forwarded in the office, and nothing but
rapacity was to be seen on all hands. Several of the villains employed in this
department, having Hassenhatz and Meusnier at their head, worked day and night
to collect false depositions, and to forge papers, to substantiate the
accusation that Hassenfratz had made at the Jacobin society against the
General, charging him with having embezzled twelve hundred thousand livres in
his contracts in Belgium. They excited the hatred of the federates against the
General; and often passing by groupes of these, he has heard them propose in a
loud voice to place his head on the top of a pike. One day in particular, he
thought himself happy in escaping through a narrow passage from a gang of those
federates in the street of Montmartre, being warned against them by a tradesman
who knew him, he having formerly lived two years in the same street. In the
general meetings of the sections and in the coffee-houses, men were paid to
declaim against him; and it was more than once in contemplation to seize upon
his person.

The frightful Santerre, commander of the National guards of Paris, professed a
great attachment to General Dumourier; and frequently pressed him to dine with
his brother-in-law. His design was to entice him to dine with Marat. The
General always declined the invitation, but on the politest pretenses; obliged,
in order to escape assassination, to behave with seeming respect to this
execrable man.

A circumstance that happened at this time, rendered the situation of the
General more critical, although he had no concern in it. Colonel Westerman had
caned Marat on the Pont-neuf, for having in his journal accused the Colonel of
being the creature of General Dumourier, and the principal instrument of his
rob^eries. Marat thirsted to revenge himself on the General, whom he supposed
to be the author of the insult. Dumourier every day received intimations of
Marat's designs against him, both from particular friends and by anonymous
letters. And the General, for the first time in his life, adopted the
precaution of carrying pistols in his pocket.

Du Bois de Crance, the most cowardly and barbarous of the Jacobins, being one
day at table with the General, showed a disposition to offend him, imagining
that the General, would be terrified by his great bulk and the ferocity of his
air. General Dumourier laid hold of him, and imposed silence upon him very
effectually. Du Bois de Crance, in revenge, repeated every day in the
Convention that Dumourier despised its members, painting it as an assembly
consisting of four hundred fools headed by three hundred robbers. Thus a
violent storm gathered round the General; and his enemies waited only for his
resignation to arrest and try him. He had long before been proscribed.

CHAP. V.
Trial of the King.
IT was in the same temper that this horde of cannibals pushed on the trial of
the King with the bitterest fury and the most horrible joy. The trial is in the
hands of all tne nations of Europe. The proofs, documents, and pleadings are
published, and will remain the dishonor of the French nation to all posterity.
Never was crime committed with such cowardice, such cold bloodedness, and such
deliberation of mind. More than an hundred and fifty members of the pretended
tribunal, had printed and published their opinion even before they had been
made acquainted with the facts and papers, on which it ought to have been
founded. They ought therefore to have abstained from giving their vote, or
their vote ought to have been rejected; but the unfortunate Louis XVI. had none
of the privileges of an accused man on his trial. It is astonishing that the
three hundred and ten members, who had the courage to vote for preserving the
king's life in spite of the daggers at their throats, had not resolutely
insisted that each of the judges who had given his opinion publicly in writing,
should be incapacitated from voting. But those friends of humanity will pardon
this reflection in an historian, who, far from designing to cast a reproach
upon them, wishes to have the power of raising a column to their names, as
deserving of remeinbrance, as were the names of the heroes at Marathon. In the
unworthiest assembly in the world, were found three hundred and ten men, who
acted with conscience and courage in the midst of general depravity and
cowardice, and to whom the royal family of France has an eternal obligation.
Just and humane citizens, receive the homage of a soldier, who acknowledges
more courage in your conduct than he has shown, or than he has seen, in all his
battles where he commanded with such success and glory!

This homage is pure and disinterested. He who pays it expects nothing from
kings, and is the friend of liberty; and, having served his country honestly
has renounced her, whether she again be brought under the terrible yoke of
despotism, or, by the ignorance and false policy of the combined powers, she
shall remain a republic under the iron system of the Jacobins: For he no longer
has any hope of seeing France governed by a constitutional king, subject to the
law, and the support of the law. Your virtue shall be more respected in after
times, inasmuch as it shall appear in the same page with the conduct of the
Girondists, whose intrigues, as far at least as they are known to General
Dumourier, shall be delivered over, one by one, to history whose province it is
to punish crimes.

It has often been demanded if it were the intention of the Girondine party to
save the king. The question is difficult to answer; and it does not seem that
we can discover the truth, but in distinguishing two periods of very different
characters in the existence of this faction, and consequently in its ambitious
members, that varied with the change of circumstances.

It is certain that this faction, after having long swayed the Convention and
the ministry, elated by the excess of their influence, openly aspired to the
establishing of a Republic, as the means of perpetuating their power. They had
subdued the feuillans, the moderate party, and the royalists. They had enlisted
most of the daily journals on their side. The Paris Journal, the Chronicle, the
Monitor, the Patriot, the Thermometer, the Journals of Gorsas and of Carra, in
a word, all that were esteemed, and in great circulation, were composed,
corrected, and edited by the members of this faction. The best orators of the
Convention, Gaudet, Vergneaux, La Source, Brissot, Gensonne, and Condorcet,
gave reputation and currency to the opinions of the faction. They had seized
upon the direction of the principal committees. Sieyes and Condorcet were at
the head of the committee of the constitution. Brissot and Gensonne governed
the diplomatic committee associated with that of general safety. The committee
of finances was entirely at the devotion of Cambon, whom the Girondine party at
that time believed to be their partizan. And they ruled Paris during all the
mayoralty of Pethion.

This faction may be called the Jesuits of the Revolution. They acted on the
same political system; they possessed at first the same unlimited power;
blinded, afterward, in a like manner, by pride, they committed the same
faults, and underwent the same fate. During their reign they contemned and
insulted the royal family. Pethion, in the same carriage with the King and
Queen, on their return from Varennes, took every occasion to declare that he no
longer designed to support the monarchy. The unfortunate Queen related the fact
to General Dumourier; and Pethion afterward acknowledged it, on his naming it
to him.

But in the month of November 1792, circumstances were entirely changed. The
popularity of King Pethion, for so he was called in Paris, had sunk under the
ascendancy of the Jacobins, and the Marseillois, whom the Jacobins had gained
by patriotic orgies. A weak but honest man, named Chambon, had succeeded
Pethion in the mayoralty. He was despised, and without power. The Jacobins
tyrannized over the sections; and the commune of Paris assumed an authority
independent of the Convention and frequently superior to it.

Barbaroux, deputy from Marseilles, one of the Girondine party, relying on his
influence in that city, undertook to bring a new body of men from Marseilles;
and, mean while, the party employed Roland, the minister of the interior, to
invite the deparments to find Federates to relieve Paris and the Convention
from the tyranny of the former body of Marseillois. Nothing could be more
imprudent than this measure. It could not fail to produce a civil war, unless
the new Federates, should strengthen them against their antagonists: gained
like the former by the Jacobins, which happened in the sequel.

The intrigues of the Girondists were unmasked with great capacity, by Danton,
La Croix, Roberspierre, and Marat. Impartial men in the Convention, saw the
dangerous ambition of the Girondine faction. It was then that the party ought
to have adopted a decisive conduct in defending the innocence of the king, and
opposing the sentence of death; and then, had they fallen, they would, at
least, have fallen with honor. But it it is most probable that, on the
contrary, their efforts would have been successful, that the departments would
have joined them to save the king and the country, and that the Jacobins would
have been crushed. But the Girondine party possessed not the courage their
situation demanded. They contented themselves with proposing an inadequate
appeal to the people on the fate of Louis XVI. And this was considered as
holding out another signal of civil war.

The Girondists were terrified, and yielded to the torrent; but they did not
save themselves by their cowardice in voting with the Jacobins against the
unfortunate monarch, who thus fell the victim of the united villainy of
implacable monsters, and ignorant intriguers. Pethion had the base cruelty, in
a moment, while pity yet hesitated to condemn the king, to recall the
remembrance of the violence that was ascribed to him on the unhappy days of the
9th and 10th of August. Having thus incensed his hearers by an unworthy charge,
he concluded by voting for death. The veiled opinion of Condorcet, amounted to
the same sentence. The conduct of this artful schoolman abounding in subtlety,
and destitute of feeling, has been equally atrocious in every stage of the
Revolution.

Brissot, Gaudet, Gensonne, and Vergniaux, were even eager to vote contrary to
their known sentiments.

The accusation against Louis XVI. contained no article sufficienty weighty to
sanction the judgment. The catastrophe of the 10th of August, was no crime to
be imputed to the king. Carra had the impudence to publish in his journal, and
declare in the Convention, that the event of that day had been prepared by a
committee of five persons, among whom were Pethion, Roberspierre, and he,
Carra; that the committee met in a small public house in the Fauxbough St.
Antoine; that the scheme of obliging the king to arm and oppose the people, had
failed twice, and had even been on the point of sailing on the 10th of August.
Hence it is clear, had this paper of Carra, been produced on the trial, it had
justified the king, by proving the necessity of his taking up arms in his own
defense. But neither justice nor policy, nor good sense, were concerned in his
trial.

Providence seems to have destined the arrival of this period, so disgraceful
to France, and so decisive of her fate. All things conspired against the
unfortunate and innocent victim. Even the Emigrants, in the zeal of a mistaken
attachment, adopted measures that were fatal to him. Bertrand, ex-minister of
the marine, a resugee in England, imagined he could save the king by sending to
the Convention authentic papers, proving that the leaders of both parties had
negociated with the king in secret. Danton and La Croix, especially, were so
directly implicated in the papers, that their credit had been utterly ruined,
if Danton, master of the mountain, that is to say the Jacobin party, and La
Croix, who influenced the Plain, that is to say, the independent part of the
assembly, had not united their efforts to bury the memory of those papers with
the ill-fated king. The zeal of Bertrand, instead of saving Louis, hastened his
death. The murder was committed. On the guilty evening all the theaters were
full. Unhappy Frenchmen! When you shall read this chapter, bathed with the
tears of him who offers the picture of the greatest of your crimes to your
view, you shall tremble for yourselves, and you shall acknowledge the terrible
vengeance that awaits you to be just.

CHAP. VI
Fruitless attempts of General Dumourier in behalf of the king.
AMONG the absurd and unjust accusations of the Emigrants against General
Dumourier, that which has obtained most credit with ignorant and superficial
men is, that he did not avail himself of the ascendancy which his victories
gave him over his army, to lead it to Paris, and liberate the king. But it is
to be considered, first, that his influence with his army was always very
precarious, and events afterward proved that it was not to be relied on;
secondly, that this army was more than a hundred leagues from Paris, was in
want of every necessary for a march, not being able even to quit the country of
Liege, without great hazard of losing its artillery for the want of horses;
that this step would have abandoned that country to the Austrians, who also
would have followed him; and that it would have been a degree of treachery to
the honor and interests of the French nation, which would have cost the
General and all his principal officers their heads before they could even have
entered France; thirdly, that this army had for some time been in an absolute
incapacity of proceeding even to the Rhine, which was only twenty leagues
distant, and consequently could not accomplish the longer march to Paris.

General Dumourier, however, did entertain the project of conducting, not the
whole of his army to Paris, but a chosen detachment of troops of the line. But
the example of Fayette, taught him to regard this measure as a perilous
extremity; and some legal form and pretense was wanting to give it color, and
to preserve to him the confidence of his soldiers in the execution of it. He
had declared, and written and repeated osten to the leaders of the Girondme
party, and especially to Barrere, who has since occasioned such mischief by his
versatility, that, if the convention were overawed, they had to write but four
lines in the form of a decree, and he would forthwith march 20,000 men to their
assistance. Whether it were the effect of timidity, or a confidence in their
own means and intrigues, the members that were still considered as the most
respectable in the assembly were unwilling to employ this resource. Indeed
their views, such as they have since been discovered to be, would naturally
prevent them from placing much confidence in the General, whom they knew to be
perfectly attached to the constitution and to the re-establishment of order.
Seeing no hope of such a decree as the General had pointed out, and governed by
the motives that have been amply detailed in the foregoing chapters, he
departed singly for Paris; but he had sent before him, on leave of absence,
many of the officers commanding corpse, and other officers, and soldiers, both
of the line and national guards, and among them some Parisians, all of whom had
promised him their services in behalf of the king. It is to be observed also
that at the time of his departure, although the trial of Louis XVI. was begun,
it could not be foreseen, especially by one at the distance of an hundred
leagues, that the issue would have been so speedy and fatal. The General well
knew that the criminal ferocity of the Jacobins would incite them to press
forward this hateful and bloody catastrophe by every means within their reach:
but he thought that the Girondists, not for honest reasons, but for political
reasons and for their own safety, would spin out this affair, and so give him
time to take measures for the rescue of the king. It was not till his arrival
at Paris that he knew the true state of things, and saw how inadequate his
resources were to the magnitude of the talk.

General Dumourier had been on terms of friendship with Gensonne, a deputy of
the department of Gironde, and had found an opportunity of pardoning some
hostile measures of that deputy toward him the preceding year, when Dumourier
quitted the ministry. He had discovered in Gensonne great capacity and judgment
and a humane disposition; and he willingly renewed his connexions with him.
General Dumourier opened his mind to him relative to the king. He expressed his
horror at the crime that was about to stain the nation; he made him sensible
that such a detestable triumph given to the Jacobins would end in the ruin of
all the honest part of the nation, and would render the anarchy that afflicted
France incurable; that such of the nations of Europe as had regarded with
indifference and perhaps with pleasure our interior struggles, our war with
Austria and Prussia, and perhaps were not unwilling to see our successes
against those two powers, could not but be shocked at the barbarity of
murdering Louis XVI. and would be thenceforward engaged in honor to join the
enemies of France, till we should have every power in Europe against us without
one ally. These reflections seemed to make great impression on Gensonne; but to
whatever cause it was owing, he undertook nothing, and even avoided the
General, who had afterward little opportunity of seeing him.

Dumourier conversed with several other deputies of the same party, as well as
with many of the independent party in the Convention, to whom he represented
that, the nation being now a republic, Louis was to be tre^^ed simply as an
individual; that it was indecent impolitic, and unreasonable to waste time,
that ought to be employed in preparations against the dangers of the ensuing
campaign and in reinforcing the armies, in the prosecution of the trial of a
single man, whose fate was of no importance to the nation; and that it would be
wise at least to suspend this useless measure till after the war. The more
reasonable of them acknowledged the trial to be an unjust and unwise
proceeding, but said, that the members of the Mountain had taken their
measures, and, should the trial now be abandoned by the Convention, the
Jacobins would excite an insurrection, fall upon the temple, and massacre the
whole of the prisoners. The General then told them that he could not think they
were sufficiently authorized by their constituents to try the king; that, since
they made an affair of consequence of the trial, it appeared to him it would be
necessary to their own security to demand instructions in precise terms on the
point from the departments, least one day they should be reproached for the
deed by the nation, and least they should one day become personally responsible
for the irregularity and violence of the act. They answered to this, that the
imprudent proposal of appealing to the people made by the Girondine party had
deprived them of the resource the General now proposed; since it was feared the
convoking of the primary assemblies for such instructions would be the signal
of a civil war.

It then occurred to the General to suggest an idea that seemed to have great
weight with these deputies, although in the end it failed of effect like all
the rest, because every man seeing a poignard at his breast, chose rather to be
a murderer than a victim. The idea was, that a long war had existed between the
nation and the king, that the day of the 10th of August had decided the fate of
both, that the king had fallen into their hands, and could no longer be
considered as any thing but a prisoner of war, yet without criminality, because
both parties had in like manner had recourse to arms; that a foreign war raged
against the nation, and that they ought to deem themselves fortunate in having
a precious hostage in this prisoner, who might serve them in a case of
extremity. The General added, that should they persist in thinking the king
guilty, they ought to form a tribunal authorized to collect facts, to examine
and confront the witnesses, and to prepare the way for a final decision, with a
deliberation due to the subject; that this act of justice would satisfy the
bitterest enemies of royalty, would give the people time to reflect, and to the
Convention an opportunity to finish the constitution, which was the grand
object of their mission; and when the primary assemblies should be convoked for
the acceptance of the constitution, all the proceedings of the tribunal might
be laid before them, and they be called upon to decide the fate of the king.

Having spread this opinion in conversation and even in writing, the General
saw Pethion, with whom till this period he had been on terms of friendship, and
represented to him that it became him personally to interest himself in behalf
of Louis XVI. since otherwise, a malignity of mind would be imputed to him that
certainly was not in his character. Pethion appeared to be moved by the
General's reasoning; and declared that personally he loved the king, and that
he would exert his utmost influence to save him.

General Dumourier then addressed himself to Roberspierre, by the medium of one
of his friends. He represented that it was entirely in Roberspierre's power to
save Louis XVI. that the magnanimity of the action would immortalize his name,
and that in consequence of it the generals of the army would look up to him as
the first man in the state, and that the dictatorship would be the reward of
his virtue; but that otherwise he would fall into the same contempt and
execration as Marat, with whose name that of Roberspierre would thenceforth be
constantly associated. This idea the General knew to be peculiarly odious to
Roberspierre.

General Dumourier knew that the Jacobins despised the Convention and hated the
Girondine party. He insinuated to them by secret agents, that if they wished to
become masters of France and Europe, and to rise on the ruins of the National
Convention, they had only to declare their will that the trial of Louis should
be suspended, and that a more important object, the state of the war, should be
taken into consideration.

Drouet, postmaster of St. Menehould, who had arrested the king at Varennes,
was a deputy of the Convention and a Jacobin. The brother of Drouet, a very
honest and faithful man, was in the General's service, and was greatly attached
to him. Dumourier gave this man instructions to prepare his brother's mind for
the impressions he wished it to receive, and afterward to bring him to Clichy.
The General painted to Drouet the crime he and his associates were committing
against the king, with such energy, that Drouet, struck with horror, promised
to move for the suspension of the trial both in the Convention and in the club
of the Jacobins. Had there been one member sufficiently resolute to make the
proposition, the king had been saved. No one had the courage. Drouet fell sick
and was not present when the sentence was passed.

Each day the General visited various parts of Paris, went into the shops and
houses of individuals, and took occasion always to turn the conversation to the
king's trial. He observed how strange a circumstance it seemed that the
Convention should suddenly become a tribunal; that if Louis were still king,
the nation ought to decide by whom and with what forms he should be judged;
that if he were no longer king, it was unfit that time so precious to the
nation, should be lost in enquiring into the guilt of an individual. And to
these considerations he added reflections on the mild virtues and misfortunes
of Louis XVI. Sometimes he was listened to with eagerness and pity; but
frequently, he was requested to forbear speaking of so dangerous a topic; and
sometimes condemned for introducing it. At times, he exposed himself to serious
danger, by expressing his surprise, that in a great city like Paris, there
should not be five or six thousand men with courage sufficient to rise against
two or three thousand villains, who calling themselves Federates, held the city
in absolute subjection. A well informed tradesman, casting down his eyes and
blushing with shame, made this answer one day to the general: Citizen, I see
what you would have us to do. But we are cowards and the king will be
sacrificed. What (...) you hope from a city that, having 80,000 armea men,
suffered itself to be intimidated on the first days of September, by less than
6000 Marsellois and Bretons? The general left the man's house, and retired to
an unfrequented part of a public walk, to indulge in his melancholy reflections.

Those soldiers of his army that he met with from time to time, seemed to be
devoted to revelling, and to be wholly insected with the phrenzy of the
Federates; and some even joined the party of his enemies, filling the different
clubs and meetings of the sections with absurd accusations against him.

From all these attempts to serve the king, which the general renewed every day
in various forms and disguises, and with much risk to his own person, he reaped
nothing but the dreadful certainty of the king's ruin. Paris seemed indifferent
on the subject. During the twenty days previous to the death of the king, that
he studied the temper of that city, he perceived not the smallest
commiseration, neither among individuals nor in the public, in behalf of the
unfortunate Louis. Nor indeed any abstinence from their amusements in the
frivolous and savage Parisians.

CHAP. VII.
Death of the King.
ALTHOUGH General Dumourier's constitution was robust, his health yielded for a
while to the acute vexations of his mind. On the 18th of January, he fell sick
and was confined at his house at Clichy, till the 22d. He now resolved to quit
Paris in a few days; and never to enter it more till he should come to disperse
that unworthy assembly, who were base and wicked enough, wantonly,
precipitately, and without proof, to condemn to death an innocent king, who had
ever loved his people, whose faults were not his own, who had banished the
torture from criminal trials, who readily adopted every proposal for the public
benefit, and had himself invited the nation to remedy all abuses and to provide
for its happiness. Kings are subject in common to many of the causes by which
Louis XVI. was reduced to this unhappy condition; they are besieged and
betrayed; they are kept in ignorance and see nothing as it really exists; nor
have they power to quit the circle in which they are placed, in search of the
virtuous man whose pure dignity shuns the corruption and insolence of courts.
-- But it must have been the completest disorder that could hurry a whole
nation to the murder of their king, after having often blessed and adored him;
and having compared him to Louis XII. Henry IV. and all the best and most
beloved of their monarchs. The club of Jacobins conducted the French to this
pitch of folly and wickedness.

The 21st January, the day of the death of Louis XVI. is the true epoch of the
ruin of the Republic, of the restoration of the monarchy, and it may be feared
of the triumph of despotism. The French nation began the career of liberty
gloriously. Their first excesses were pardonable, as they resulted from the
obstinacy of the abuses (...) was necessary to destroy. A noble constitution,
although in some degree it was imperfect, seemed to secure the happiness of
France. General Dumourier's journeys into England, Germany, Switzerland, and
Italy, at that period, convinced him of the general approbation it obtained.
But the king, seduced by his perfidious counselors, attempted to escape from
his people, after having sworn to maintain the constitution. He was discovered
and taken. The National Assembly of France acted as became a great nation. They
restored the king to his rights; and from that instant the king ceased to be
dangerous to the liberties of the people. He was governed faithfully by the
principles of the constitution. They were engraven on his heart. And if his
ministers or his courtiers still sought to violate the law, the constitution
had provided a remedy for the evil. The agents of the executive power were
responsible with their lives for misconduct in the government, but an absolute
inviolability was attached to the person of the king. The third legislature of
France however, tended visibly to Republicanism; they were bent on the
overthrow of the constitution. It was necessary to raise new accusations
against the king for his destruction; and to this object the Girondine faction
proceeded with the most refined perfidy, while the Jacobins openly acted in the
same cause with a wild and brutal insolence. Carra and the journalists of the
Jacobins have placed this subject in the clearest light, in tracing the
intrigues which engendered the catastrophe of the 10th of August.

The affair of the 21st of June, was a prelude to that catastrophe, although
directly it produced nothing more than a disgusting insult to the nation and
the constitution, in the unfortunate person of the king. The ferocious Santerre
was heard to say on that day, We have failed now, but we will return again. The
National Convention neither punished nor resented the insult. On the contrary,
the two factions, which notwithstanding their mutual hatred had many wicked
objects in common, were preparing for the execution of a greater plot; and had
assembled the Marsellois and Bretons from the extremities of the kingdom, to
insure success.

These were the true causes of the bloody and decisive 10th of August. The
ministers and generals, it is true, took measures, on their part, against the
assembly, and the Jacobins; supposing however, that they were culpable, the law
was armed against them, but ought to have had no operation on the king, who was
both innocent and inviolable, and who was to be considered merely as the
occasion and not as the author of the steps taken in his name. The nation was
convinced of this truth; and if Louis had been firm he had not fallen. His
assassins basely punished the mildness of his character with death; and the
mildness of his character should have pleaded for mercy.

But this good and weak monarch found in his religious principles, a strength
that bore him heroically through his martyrdom. The particulars of his death
are preserved, and are inestimable aids in the study of the human heart. They
add new aggravations to the crimes of the Parisians. An innumerable crowd
attended the execution. Barbarous joy, or an unfeeling curiosity, were the only
impressions that appeared in the guilty spectators. No one had the courage to
shed a tear; and it will scarcely be believed, that the domestics of the good
king pressed nearest to the scaffold, and were the most implacable of the
multitude.

On arriving at Paris, on the 22d, General Dumourier went to the house of
Garat, minister of justice, who seemed to be extremely affected by the death of
the king, but more especially by the duty that had been imposed on him, and the
other ministers, of reading the sentence to the king. The unfortunate Louis
during the solemn office, remained standing, and assumed a tranquil and
majestic countenance, without offering remonstrance or complaint. He said only,
that it was not just to charge him with treason, since his intentions had
always been pure, and since he had constantly desired the welfare of his
fellow-citizens. After requesting a little time to prepare for his death, he
dismissed the ministers with an air of dignity and gentleness, the remembrance
of which affected Garat very much in speaking of it. General Dumourier, Cabanis
the friend and physician of Mirabeau, and the minister, were mutually affected.
They read over the will of this unfortunate prince. It had been written with
his own hand, in some places there were erasures, but the writing was clear,
and without any marks of being written with agitation. It contained four pages
written on letter paper. The first was consecrated to religion, and the homage
was just; since, in that principle, he found courage, support and consolation.
The three other pages exhibited an example of magnanimity, reason, and
philosophy. This will, since published to the world, is one of the noblest
writings that the mind ever produced under suffering circumstances. The
monsters of the National Convention have said, that this writing justified the
king's sentence; because, having no object in common with the world, on the
point of becoming the victim of the ingratitude of his subjects, he had
employed in two or three places the language of royalty, and disdained to
flatter their prejudices.

During the existence of a monarchy of fourteen hundred years the French have
assassinated many of their kings. But the deed was always the crime of an
individual; the rage of the nation against, the perpetrator was extreme; and
the villain was punished with the most horrible tortures. It was reserved to an
enlightened and philosophical age to produce a like crime, committed in the
name of the whole French nation, approved by the majority, and regarded as an
act of Heroism.

Is the continuance and prosperity of a republic, founded on such guilt,
soberly to be expected? -- certainly not. The monsters have killed Louis XVI.
but they have restored royalty. This inconsiderate and changeable nation,
always running to the extremes of passion, will herself massacre her iniquitous
judges and her furious Jacobins, and run to adore new kings. The efforts for a
reasonable liberty that have been made during three years by true Patriots will
be lost; and France will present the picture of a monarchy crowded with
disgraces and crimes, dismembered and ruined, in which a rigid despotism must
long combat a destructive anarchy before the reign of the laws can be restored:
and then it shall not be the laws of the people. The whole of this generation,
even those that are but newly born, shall endure the punishment of the
atrocious crimes of four years: crimes that posterity will scarcely be
persuaded to credit.

CHAP. VIII.
General Dumourier's Conference with Cambon.
HAVING particularly traced the transactions that most affected General
Dumourier in a catastrophe that he could neither prevent nor foresee, it will
be necessary to pursue the account of his other occupations in Paris during
this unhappy month of January. An essential object of his journey was to obtain
the suppression of the decree of the 15th of December, or at least a tacit
agreement from the Convention, that it should not be put in execution in
Brabant. He demonstrated to the Convention that the people of Brabant were
wholly alienated from the French; than an open rebellion was to be feared if
the decree should be executed; that on the appearance of the Austrians in force
the French would have an additional enemy in the Belgians, who might easily
attack their weakened garrisons, cut off their provisions and render their
retreat impossible. The Convention were too presumptuous, and too much taken up
with the king's trial to attend to these remonstrances.

One individual of the Convention controlled the department of the finances
with the most absolute sway. This was Cambon a man of a most irregular mind;
ignorant and destitute of sound principles, yet scheming and unrelenting in his
projects. D'Espagnac had been arrested on the 22d of November, along with
Malus, for fulfilling an engagement that they had made with Servan respecting
carriages for the army, and which was very important to the nation. He was
still a prisoner at Paris; but at liberty to go about with a guard. He
possessed a mind abounding in resources. He had gained the confidence of Cambon
on all the subjects of finance, and offered to procure the General a conference
with this dictator of the national treasury; the General consented and they
went to breakfast with Cambon. This man boasted of having obtained and
supported the decree of the 15th of December. His reasons for the project he
said were that the treasury was empty; that France had six hundred thousand
troops on foot, and paid two hundred million of livres per month for the
expenses of the war. The General observed that six hundred thousand men ought
not to cost two hundred millions per month, and that the armies of France did
not amount to more than three hundred thousand effective men. Cambon answered,
that the national guards of all the frontier cities received the same pay as
the army, as well as part of the national guards of Paris; he declared he saw
no other resource, than the execution of the decree, for carrying on the war;
that specie already cost the nation fifty per cent, and that soon it would not
be procured even at cent per cent.; that he had but one remedy against this
evil, which was to seize on all the specie in Belgia, and the silver in the
churches and banks. He acknowledged this to be unjust, but he thought it
unavoidable; he said, that when the Belgians should be ruined and reduced to
the same distress as the French, they would necessarily unite their fate with
that of France, as the people of Liege had done, who threw themselves into our
arms, being poor and involved in debt. He added, that then France would admit
the Belgians as members of the Republic, and with the same policy they might
hope to proceed conquering people after people; that the decree of the 15th of
December was well calculated for this purpose, because it tended to disorganize
the neighboring states, that being the most fortunate thing that could be done
for France.

The General objected that, beside the barbarity of the project, it was
impracticable; that we were now in the middle of the month of January; that our
armies were weakened; that no one thought of the means of recruiting them; nor
of the plan of the ensuing campaign, although on the eve of being opened; that
the people of Belgium were entirely averse to the disorganizing principles of
our Revolution; that we had neither time before us to remove what he (Cambon)
called their prejudices, nor to crush them; that in the beginning of the
approaching March, the enemy would attack the French posts upon the Meuse,
which were too distant from each other, and not sufficiently strong; that,
masters of the passage of Maestricht, they would penetrate the center of the
French line; that the Belgians, finding a power to protect them, would take up
arms every where at once, and would put to the sword the garrisons in the
interior part of Belgium, composed of seeble battalions of new levies; that,
occupying the posts behind the French, they would not only cut of the
provisions of the army, but its retreat; that in this situation the army could
not gain France, but would be entirely ruined, and thus all would be lost to
the Republic. General Dumourier represented, moreover, that these odious
robberies would not produce as much to France as would a just conduct toward
the Belgians; that it would be more prudent to borrow part of the treasures of
the clergy, and so to interest them in our success, than to seize upon the
whole by violence; that, as to specie, there would be no necessity for sending
any from France into Belgium, where it was in abundance; that the true means of
putting it in circulation, and at length to replace it by assignats, was to
engage the rich merchants of Antwerp, Brussels, and Ghent, in the furnishing of
provisions, clothing, and all the necessaries for the war; that, in this way,
the supply of every thing would be secured, and the expenses reduced to one
half; that the contractors would receive assignats in payment, and would be
compelled by their own interest to give them currency. The General observed
that the Convention, by annulling the decree of the 15th of December, would
effectually free the Belgians, whom they had reduced to a slavery more
revolting than their former servitude; that in this case the Belgians would
form a free constitution, raise troops, and join our arms; that this fraternity
of arms and mutual services would induce them, more effectually than any other
means, to demand at least a permanent alliance with the Republic, if not an
entire union.

Cambon seemed inclined to yield, especially when the general promised him
that, should these just, moderate and wise means be adopted, he would not only
forbear longer to demand any thing for his army, which the resources of Belgium
could provide for in abundance, but that he would procure the French treasury
several millions by way of loan. He well knew that the Belgians, to withdraw
themselves from their present ruinous slavery, would fulfill the promises which
he now made in their name.

After this first conference, Cambon went to the Convention, and, in the heat
of the debate, said in the tribune, that if the decree of the 15th of December
was not executed, it would be because Dumourier had opposed it by the
prerogative of his Veto. Notwithstanding this dark treachery, in which, to
render General Dumourier odious, Cambon assimilated him with the king, whose
trial was then prosecuting with bitterness, the General consented to have
another interview with him, and even invited him to dinner, together with a
deputy named Ducos.

The second conference, which lasted more than six hours, was not carried on
with much temper. General Dumourier having said that if Cambon was resolved
upon oppressing the Belgians, he might seek another General, since Dumourier
never would consent to become an Altila to a people who had received the French
as friends and brethren; Cambon took an opportunity to tell the Convention that
nothing could be more indecent than to hear a General threatening to resign in
consequence of every decree that was past contrary to his opinion; that the
Republic must not rest upon one man, and that they ought either to impose
silence on the General, or to punish him. In this fruitless manner terminated
the General's conferences with Cambon, whom he expressly warned against the
events that have since happened.

It was not without reason, Cambon had said, that he was devoid of resources
for the war. In January, there was no more in the national treasury than an
hundred and ninety-two millions of livres in assignats, and from fifteen to
twenty millions of livres in specie. These sums were not sufficient for the
army till the month of April, and the whole presumed value of the lands of the
clergy was already consumed by the emission of assignats on that fund.

Dumourier acquired this knowledge in the second sitting of the committee of
general safety. As it was then resolved to augment the army to three hundred
and seventy thousand men, he represented to the committee, that the decree for
that purpose would be useless, as was the case with others of the same kind the
preceding year, if the minister of war did not at the same time present a
statement of the sums necessary for each particular article belonging to the
augmentation, such as clothing, arms, horses, etc. and if the Convention did
not place these sums at the immediate disposition of the minister of war.
Cambon, who assisted at the sitting, acknowledged the truth of the General's
observation, but stated the poverty of the treasury, and said he knew not on
what fund to issue new assignats, since the only resource that remained was the
national forests, and the estates of the emigrants. Instantly, the violent part
of the committee cried out, they had nothing to do but to sell those estates
forthwith. Disputes succeeding, the General requested leave to give his opinion.

He desired the committee to consider that the lands of the clergy had sold
exceedingly ill; that a part still remained unsold, the general apprehension
being such that there were no buyers; that, if under these circumstances, they
should order the sale of the estates of the emigrants, valued at more than
twelve hundred millions of livres, this great addition to the lands on sale
would still further diminish the value of the whole, and complete the ruin of
the nation; that the discredit of assignats recently issued would be still
increased by this fatal operation; since the public, judging by the price of
the lands, would doubt the sufficiency of the funds on which the assignats were
grounded; for, supposing they should hazard the emission of twelve hundred
millions on the estates of the emigrants, as some members had proposed, either
they would not find purchasers, or the produce of the sale would not amount to
the third of the enormous sum; that then the state would lose the other two
thirds of that sum, and Would be menaced with inevitable bankruptcy.

As to the national forests, he represented that wood was already very searce
in France, and, if they alienated these forests, the purchasers would cut down
the whole; that, besides the enormous consumption of wood for articles of every
kind, France had not a sufficient quantity of coal for firing; and that,
independent of this inconvenience, which France would seel for more than a
century, this resource would not produce, at the utmost, more than two or three
hundred millions of livres, although it stood valued at eight hundred millions.

The weight of these considerations was acknowledged, and it was agreed to
leave these two objects untouched; and thus, General Dumourier saved the
estates of the emigrants for that time: but, neither this service, nor many
others General Dumourier has rendered the emigrants, could ever obtain him
justice or candor on their part.

The committee resolved upon proposing to the Convention the issuing of six
hundred millions of livres in assignats, on the gross fund of all the national
lands, without appropriating any specific part for the security.

This mode of issuing paper on vague funds is a dangerous practice in finance,
and it was this kind of abuse of confidence which ruined Law's system in 1720.
However, the committee had as yet kept it within bounds. It has since been
carried to twelve hundred millions of livres. This is a smooth descent that
leads to bankruptcy; but bankruptcy is the last resource of Cambon. He has
himself said that it is inevitable. As to the Convention they are not employed
in considerations so profound. They have no object but to exist from day to
day, without the trouble of inquiring what will be the result. In such hands is
the richest kingdom in the universe.

CHAP. IX.
Interview of General Dumourier with some Jacobins.
DUMOURIER had been a member of the society of Jacobins in the early part of
its career; but, at that period, neither Marat, Camille Desmoulins, Bazire,
Merlin, Chabot, nor Bourdon, were known in the society, nor the rest of that
list of contemptible characters, afterward chosen, to the surprise of all just
men, to form the most atrocious assembly in the universe. The General never
attended their meetings very assiduously; although the adventure of the red
cap, which he was obliged to put on when he went to the Jacobin society on his
being made minister, might beget an opinion that he was a zealous partizan of
the sect.

The following is the history of the fact. Dumourier told the King, that he
imagined it would be useful to the King's personal interest, but especially to
the public concerns, for the new ministers, named by him on the recommendation
of the people, and who were members of the Jacobin society, to present
themselves to the society, lest they should now be suspected of joining the
aristocracy; and he proposed to attend the sitting of that evening himself. The
King perceived the importance of the measure, and approved of Dumourier's
design. Some days previous to that, the factions had adopted the red cap for
the emblem of liberty. Dumourier, and the Girondine party, who had hitherto
professed to be the friends of order, and who, indeed, cannot be reproached
with having flattered the Jacobins at any period, convinced Pethion, then mayor
of Paris, then beloved by the Jacobins, then all-powerful, that this badge
assumed by the people, might be productive of the greatest disorders, if not of
the horrors attending the contest of the white and red roses in England, and
that of the times of the hoods in King John's reign at Paris. Pethion, at that
period, possessed an absolute ascendency over Roberspierre and the Jacobins;
and promised that he would write a note to them on the subject, and that the
red cap should be suppressed. The day on which Pethion was to write was the
same that Dumourier had chosen for paying his respects to the Jacobins. The
letter was indeed written, but had not arrived when Dumourier entered the hall
of the assembly. All the members had red caps on their heads, and a cap was
offered to Dumourier as he was mounting the tribune. He was compelled to put it
on, or imprudently to subject himself to very great risks. -- Dumourier said
little in the tribune. Having assured them that, when war should be declared,
he would quit his pen to serve them with his sword, he left the hall. He was
scarcely gone, when Pethion's letter was announced and read, and produced the
desired effect, in banishing the caps from the assembly; so that half an hour
would have saved the minister this disgrace. The public, misled by false
royalists, that is to say, by the anti-constitutional party, have misjudged
this fact, which was but a mere accident.

At the time of Dumourier's quitting the administration, the Jacobins were
become his bitterest enemies. The General's success in Champagne, had restored
him a little to their favor, in spite of Marat's accusations; and he appeared
at the club, for a quarter of an hour, on his being at Paris, in October 1792.
But he never held any correspondence with the society, nor with any one of its
members.

Hassenfratz, Andouin, and the other clerks of the war-office, were never
absent from the meetings of the Jacobins. They multiplied accusations against
the General; and often demanded that he should be compelled to appear at the
bar to answer their charges. But in the midst of these intrigues, the Jacobins
were desirous of attaching the General to their party. The majority usually
opposed his enemies; and, when Hassenfratz produced his grand accusation
respecting the embezzlement of two hundred thousand livres, together with the
papers to substantiate the charge, the society silenced him, and passed to the
order of the day.

The Jacobins even employed several of their emissaries, to induce the General
to attend their sittings. Anacharsis Clootz, used various arts to that end; but
the General always excused himself, on the ground that he could not appear at
the society till he had offered his homage to the Convention. Doctor Seyffer
made attempts of the same nature; as well as Proli, an adventurer of Brussels,
who was desirous of procuring at least an interview between the General and one
Desfieux, a celebrated Jacobin, and one of the most active itinerants of the
sect, who, arriving at Bourdeaux, found means of disgracing the members of the
Girondine party, and of exciting the populace against the honest part of that
great city. Jean-Bon St. Andre, who was a member of the Convention, and an
enthusiastic Jacobin, notwithstanding he had the reputation of being an honest
man, having conceived a great esteem for Dumourier, although he had no personal
acquaintance with the General, was extremely anxious to bring about this
interview, and requested that he might be present. The General was not
satisfied that the adventurer Proli, whom he despised, should be the medium of
this negotiation; however, for many important reasons, he, at length, consented
to the interview.

On the day appointed, the General was indisposed; but as he would not, by a
violation of his word, seem to be wanting in respect to Desfieux and St. Andre,
to both of whom he was a stranger, he made another appointment to meet them at
the house of Bonne-Carrere, who was the intimate friend of these two persons.

The interview took place at the house of Bonne-Carrere. Desfieux appeared to
the General to be a man of mean capacity, and of a violent disposition.
Jean-Bon St. Andre seemed better informed, and more moderate. No arrangement
could be made respecting the mode of the General's presenting himself to the
Jacobin society; nor on the conduct the society would observe toward him,
governed as it was by Marat. Dumourier, therefore, declined entering into any
engagement to present himself to the society; nor did he make any declaration
of a contrary intention.

As to the trial of the King, which the General feared to touch upon, excepting
very slightly, lest he should injure the cause by seeming to be interested in
it, he saw that Desfieux and Jean-Bonne St. Andre, were governed by savage rage
against the King, which vented itself in the vilest and most unjust terms; and
he perceived clearly, that he had nothing to hope on that point from these men.

They vehemently supported Pache and his associates, and Desfieux, who called
himself the organ of the Jacobins, requested Dumourier to withdraw his
accusations against the minister of war, whom the Jacobins, he said, were
determined to preserve in his place; and invited the General to join their
faction in disgracing Le Brun, Garat, Claviere, and above all, Roland; which
ministers they considered as the agents of the Girondine party.

The General now resolved to break off these negociations entirely; and
informed Bonne-Carrere of his determination. But he felt the danger to which he
should expose himself in taking this step; and especially in pursuing the plan
he had laid down, and which he had announced to the convention, of resigning
the command. He well knew, that thenceforth he must either join, the Jacobins,
and become the accomplice of their crimes, or deprived of the command, his only
shield against his enemies, he should be pursued on the unjust accusations of
Hassenfratz, and delivered over to the execrable Revolutionary Tribunal, that
has since murdered Custine on the slightest pretenses.

Dumourier therefore made up his mind upon the course he should pursue; and
which he afterward adapted to the political circumstances that will be related
in the following chapters. Losing all hope of saving the king, he now thought
only of the means of avenging his death, of saving his unfortunate queen and
her son, and, by the establishment of a limited monarchy, of putting an end to
the frightful disorders that were completing the disgrace and ruin of France.

CHAP. X.
Of the Executive Council of France.
IT was with the six ministers exercising the executive power in France, that
General Dumourier transacted the chief part of his business during the
twenty-six days that he passed at Paris. And here it will be necessary to
observe that, in a writing he published after that period, by an error in the
press, twenty-six hours were put for twenty-six days. In consequence of which
error, a criticism appeared in one of the English papers, in which the general
was seriously reproached with asserting he had performed, in twenty-six hours,
the business of twenty-six days.

The ministers were Roland, to whom we will give a chapter apart. He was hated
by the other five, who concealed all they could from him. They were themselves
divided into two very opposite parties. One was composed of Le Brun, minister
of foreign affairs, whom Dumourier had made first clerk, and who was very fit
for that situation, being industrious and well informed; but he had neither
sufficient dignity nor energy of mind to act for himself, and was rendered
deceitful by his timidity of character, even toward his benofactor, although he
still regarded him as necessary to his support. He had dismissed from his
office Marat and Noel, two men neither deficient in talents nor honeily; had
appointed no person to superintend the business of the office, and to
distribute the work to the different superior clerks; and he had taken for his
principal secretary a man of the name of Isabeau, whose reputation was none of
the fairest. Occupied, like ministers of former times, by intrigues for the
preservation of his place, he was more influenced by the Jacobins than became a
man, to whom Brissot, Condorcet, and the other heads of the Girondine party
dictated the policy of his foreign negociations.

Of the faction of Le Brun was Garat, minister of justice, a man of an able and
upright mind, and to whom no reproach could be made excepting that, by an
adulation unworthy of himself, he had endeavored to apologize for the well
known murders of the first days of September. Grouvelle, although only
secretary of the council, may be considered as having all the influence of a
minister, since he assumed much authority and gave his opinion, and decided on
every thing. -- He was a man of letters, overbearing, and open in his avowal of
bold and extravagant notions of liberty.

On the other side was Pache, minister of war, a man of sense, and possibly an
honest man, but ignorant and blindly devoted to the Jacobin party. He had a
wife and daughter, equally ugly and ill tempered, who frequented the clubs and
even the haunts of the Marseillois, to demand the king's death. The war-office
was become a club, breathing nothing but blood and carnage. The clerks always
wore the red cap at their desks, and used the phrases thou and thee to every
one, even to the minister, who himself affected a slovenly dress, and courted
the Parisian populace, by assuming their manners.

The same disgusting scene presented itself in the office of the marine
department, from which all the clerks of character and experience were driven,
to make way for ignorant and furious Jacobins, who, notwithstanding the
filthiness of their appearance, have acquired immense fortunes.

The war-office and that of the marine department, united in presenting an
address to the National Convention, signed also, as it was said, by the two
ministers, demanding that the king should be put to death. Monge, the minister
of the marine, was an academician, had been an excellent lecturer in
hydrography, and seemed a man of simple manners, but was a little ungracious in
his behavior. He was entirely devoted to Pache; and, in concert with him,
supported the Jacobin faction in the council.

Claviere, minister of the finances, although he was connected with and
supported by the Girondists, and was the relation of Brissot, frequently joined
the other faction, from a love of contradiction, and because it was the most
active and powerful. Like the rest, he thought of nothing but of preserving his
place, which Cambon, and the committee of finance were endeavoring to suppress.

Such was the executive council of France, in the most critical period of her
existence. An obvious and sad reflection naturally presents itself; the French
Revolution, under the pretense of equalizing all men, has debased all men. Most
of the Jacobins, belonged to the lowest class of the people; and, unable to
find among themselves persons equal to the first stations, they lowered the
nature of those stations to their own level. Hence, there is neither dignity,
nor character, in the government: nor respectability, nor a sense of duty in
the people; and the populace, unlike the Athenian democracy, are drunken and
savage slaves, usurping the place of the Spartans. The ancient government was
destroyed to remedy the abuse of distributing places among the nobles, without
any regard to their moral capacities. Yet, instead of the Revolution replacing
them by men of talents, it has filled their seats with artful and impudent
plebeians.

France cannot escape her entire ruin, But in freeing herself from the
subaltern tyrants that invade every department. Unhappily, she no longer has
the means in her own hands, since these tyrants are masters of the money, arms,
power, and authority of the nation. But the ignorance and barbarous rage of
this horde is destructive of itself; and foreign arms will restore the ancient
despotism, instead of forming that just equilibrium between the talents of men
and the employments of the state that constitutes the perfection of government.
This state of things however, cannot remain long; because the love of liberty
is too deeply rooted in France to be ever again wholly destroyed; and the
restoration of despotism will beget another revolution, the moment that foreign
troops shall be withdrawn from the country, and shall leave the nobles of
France, scattered over that vast kingdom, to the vengeance of the people,
called down on their heads by the abuse of their short lived triumph.

The council did not interfere in the fate of the king. Le Brun and Garat,
seemed to apprehend the consequences of the trial; but they feared to employ
the means, or to indulge in the idea, of putting a stop to it, or of suspending
it; and confined themselves to a declaration, that it was unfortunate for
France that such a trial had commenced. Roland was the most terrified of all
the ministers at this trial; because, in reflecting on the imprudence, and on
the injustice of his former complaints against the King, no doubt he felt that
he was the principal cause of the king's danger. He relented and was silent. It
belonged to the malignant mind of Claviere, to rejoice at the trial; and
besides, he had always discovered a personal hatred against Louis XV^ As to
Pache and Monge, they canvassed openly for the king's death. And Grouvelle
declared, that it was necessary to the honor of the Republic, that he should
die.

The open and bitter quarrels that existed between the minister of war and the
generals, on the complaints made by the latter respecting the armies, and the
providing of necessaries for the troops, could never bring the council to take
any step in its collective capacity relative to those subjects. Exery one of
the members reserved an exclusive authority in his own department; and Pache
laid before the council, as well as before the committee of war, statements
which were altogether false, and which were uniformly opposed by new complaints
from the Generals, and by the reports of the Commissioners of the Convention
with the armies. The council heard all the reports and complaints, but they
still upheld the committee of contracts, which was secretly influenced by
Claviere, the friend of Bidermann, who was at the head of the committee; and
the affairs of the armies were conducted as before. No provission was made
either for the clothing subsistonce, or acco^^^ments of the troops, nor for the
hospitals, nor for the ammunition that was wanted in the frontier places, nor
for the works necessary to put them in a state of defense. At that time the
Jacobins had resolved to place one of their faction at the head of the
municipality, and had promised to make Pache mayor of Paris; he, therefore,
gave himself little uneasiness respecting the future embarrassments of the war
department; which Hassenfratz and Meusnier were to quit along with him.

The more we reflect on the conduct of the Jacobins, the more are we lost in
conjecture respecting the spirit by which they were guided. It is certain, that
they have been continually industrious to disorganize France, and to render
useless the immense resources she possessed for the defense of her liberty;
they have ruined the fleets and armies; they have imprisoned or driven out of
the kingdom, the ablest officers; they have lavished the treasures of the
nation in wild and ineffectual expenses; they have destroyed the commercial and
political connections of France with other nations; and have set every nation
at defiance; and it cannot be doubted, that the society has been influenced by
English, Italians, Flemings and Germans, pretending to be furious Jacobins, and
who were known to be ^he spies of foreign governments. In this class may be
ranked Clootz, Marat, Chabot, Pio, the Jew Ephraim, De Buscher, and many others.

The decree of the 15th of December, far from being disapproved of by the
Council, was supported by every one of the members, Le Brun had been secretary
to the people of Liege, during this revolution, to which he had given his
support by a periodical work, entitled, "The Journal of Europe." This paper was
not ill written; and it was in consequence of seeing it, that Dumourier had
placed him at the department of foreign affairs. Le Brun was of opinion, as
well as most of the other revolutionists of France, that a revolution could not
be successful without being attended by a complete disorganization; so that he
could not fail to approve of a decree, calculated to disorganize a people, who
had the misfortune to call upon us for aid. The principles of Dumourier, which
inclined him to respect the liberty, property, and opinions of others, could
not be very acceptable to Le Brun. But Le Brun was silent on the subject to
Dumourier, although he, in concert with Marat, Chepy, and his other emissaries,
had established a destructive engine in Belgium, under the name of the
Revolutionary Committee. The General complained to the minister of the language
and conduct of Chepy, desiring he might be recalled, as being dangerous to the
affairs of France in Belgium. Le Brun, however, not only countenanced Chepy,
but gave him new instructions that greatly extended his power.

In the same manner while the General was soliciting the revocation of the
decree of the 15th of December, the council appointed, on the recommendation of
the Jacobins, thirty-two commissioners of the Executive Power, to whose
situation was annexed the salary of 10,000 livres, besides the expenses of
their journey, and the profits of their robberies. These commissioners were
furnished with ridiculous instructions, in which the council feigned to confine
their authority within narrow bounds; but the commissioners paid no regard to
their instructions, having themselves given an arbitrary latitude to their
power. These miscreants inflicted the greatest wrongs on the Belgians, and
caused among that people an utter abhorrence of the French name.

The plan of the ca^paign remained yet to be settled. Cambon had asserted that
France maintained 600,000 troops. It was now the 15th of January, and the
council knew not how many troops France really had on foot, nor how many
enemies she would have to contend with, in the campaign. The General slated to
the Council that, although all Europe should declare against France, she having
no civil war, (for the revolt in La Vendee had not yet broken out) might defend
her frontiers with three hundred and seventy thousand men (the sixth part, of
them being cavalry) exclusive of the garrisons and troops of the fleet, by
standing on the defensive on the south and on the banks of the Rhine, and
confining their offensive operations to the frontiers extending from the
Mozelle to Dunkirk. The General proposed to distribute the troops in the
following manner: 80,000 men to compose the army of Belgium; 40,000 men that of
the Ardennes; a corpse of 20,000 to be posted on the Mozelle, to keep open the
communication between the armies of the Ardennes and that of the Rhine; 50,000
to compose the army of the Rhine; a reserve of 20,000 men to be placed at
Chalons or Soissons; a corpse of 15,000 at Lions, to watch Switzerland and
Pied^^nt; 40,000 for the army of Savoy and countries of Nice and Provence;
25,000 for the army of the Pyrennees; 40,000 for the coast of the West, from
Bayonne to Breast; and 40,000 for the coasts along the channel, from Breast to
Dunkirk. All these armies might mutually assist each other; and, as the whole
of France was armed, even should the enemy penetrate any part, it was not to be
doubted they would be repulsed or overwhelmed.

General Dumourier also proposed that Custine's army, which had already
evacuated Franckfort, should fall back upon Landan, leaving a garrison in
Mayence sufficient to compel the king of Prussia to lose three or four months
before that place, which would afford time to put the fortified towns of
Alsace, Lorraine, and the Ardennes, into a proper state of defense, and to make
the enemy on that side ^ose the rest of the campaign.

The General further proposed that the greatest efforts should be made to push
the campaign on with vigor on the side of Belgium, because that being a flat
country without fortified places, or even without any of those naturally strong
situations of country which stand in the place of fortresses, the fate of the
war in these provinces must be decided by battles. On this scheme, if the
French should be victorious, the greater part of the French army might pass the
Rhine: and if unsuccessful, might retire behind the fortresses of Flanders and
Artois; however the whole campaign might pass without the French lines being
broke in upon in this quarter.

Instead of this plan, which Dumourier laid before the Committee of General
Safety, as well as the Executive Council, La Clos, who had just been appointed
to the command in India, proposed that they should instantly send him out with
fifteen vessels and 15,000 men, which measure necessarily involved a war with
England and Holland, although it had then been very easy and was very necessary
to the fafety of France to have avoided that war.

The object of this expedition of La Clos was to make himself master of the
Cape of Good Hope and the island of Ceylon; and afterward, to join Tippoo Saib
and to attack Bengal.

Kellermann, on paying his respects to the National Convention, on his
departure to take the command of the army of Dauphine, which amounted to nearly
twenty thousand men (exclusive of the army of the country of Nice, under
General Biron, from ten to twelve thousand men) received orders from the
President to go and conquer Rome; and the General gravely answered, that he
took his leave to go to Rome. This army had also been weakened by drawing
between seven and eight thousand men from it, for the fleet that lay at Toulon,
destined to conquer Sardinia. This expedition was undertaken in the most stormy
part of the year, in a narrow sea, abounding with rocks and islands; and part
of the fleet was lost, and the expedition failed.

The army of the Pyrennees consisted only of an extensive establishment of
staff officers, without troops. Yet the Convention had resolved upon conquering
Spain, and had destined 40,000 men, that were not raised, and General Servan,
for the purpose. There were 110 troops on the coast of the west and north;
excepting some weak garrisons at Belle^sle, and at two or three other places on
that coast. There was no army of reserve. Fifty thousand men were wanting to
complete the army of Belgium and that of the Ardennes; the army of Alsace did
not amount to 20,00 men, exclusive of 22,000 shut up in Mayence; and the army
of the Mozelle did not amount to 12,000 men.

In order therefore to put the plan of General Dumourier in execution, there
were wanting more than 150,000 men; together with the provisions, arms, and
clothing, for this large body of troops. Above all, France was in want of
cavalry. The armies of Belgium and of the Ardennes required a body of 20,000
cavalry; and the two armies had not 6,000; and they were in want of 15,000
artillery horses.

The General's plan was adopted; the 370,000 men were decreed to be raised; and
a few alterations made in the distribution of the troops; but this was all that
over was done toward the execution of the plan. However, the General obtained
an order a few days before his departure for 15,000 men of the new-raised
battalions to march from the third line in Pieardy, Flanders, and Artois, where
they were altogether useless, into mariti^^e Fl^nders.

Independent of the Executive Council, from which (as Le Brun and Garat
suspected) a great many projects were concealed, especially those respecting
foreign politics, there were two private committees held at the house of
General Dumourier, which seemed to dispose of the fate of the empire; and which
in fact produced nothing. They were composed of the two ministers Le Brun and
Garat, and those members of the Girondine party, Condorcet, Pethion, Gensonne
and Brissot. It is probable that the only object of the party, in establishing
these committees, was that their existence should be known to Paris, in order
to beget an opinion that the General was entirely devoted to them; and thereby
to strengthen the party, by the acquisition of his friends. Le Brun even seemed
unwilling that the negociations then carrying on with England and Holland
should be at all enquired into by the committees; and requested the General to
forbear touching on the subject; and it was never introduced.

Brissot boasted of his plans for the conquest of Spain and Italy; but the
General easily detected the folly of his calculations.

The situation of the Republic with Switzerland, was an interesting subject.
The malignity of Claviere, had been lately gratified, in compelling General
Montesquieu to become an exile to escape the fangs of his persecutor the vile
Du Bois de Crance; and, in disorganizing Geneva, his native country. Brissot
and his adherents maintained, that it was necessary to compel the Swiss Cantons
to abandon, their neutrality; or, in case of refusal to attack them; and it is
probable that in this they were acted upon by the agents of the combined
powers, to whom it was very important that Switzerland should join the
confederacy. The General proved by arguments, drawn from the relative
situations of France, Switzerland, and the Combined Powers, to which these
metaphysicians were strangers, that it was prudent to conciliate the good
dispositions of the Helvetic body toward France; yet, at the same time to
maintain an army of 15,000 men to cover Lions, and to be ready on any emergency
on that side.

Dumourier was the more desirous of preserving this neutrality, because it was
during his administration, that the event of the disarming the regiment of
Ernest happened at Aix. At that period, he made every compensation he could to
that brave regiment, for the injustice of his countrymen; he presented the red
ribband to the two principal officers, and provided for the safety of their
retreat with their men to the frontiers.

General Dumourier always exerted every means in his power to preserve peace
with Switzerland; a measure that was so just, and so necessary to the welfare
of the two nations. But he must own, that his efforts have less contributed to
that difficult task, than the prudent and firm conduct of Colonel de Weiss, a
member of the sovereign council of Berne, and a writer distinguished by works
which display extensive knowledge, energy of mind, and goodness of heart. This
officer, without possessing any ostensible diplomatic character, was respected
by the ministry, was listened to in the committees, and had even acquired an
influence in the convention. Tranquil when surrounded by danger, and
uncorrupted in the midst of crimes, he had the courage to say to one of the
leaders of saction, I know that you can cause me to be arr^sted or massacred;
but proofs of your villainy that would bring you to the scaffold in eight days,
are within my reach: I demand that a peaceable conduct on the part of France,
toward my country, be the price of my silence.

On another trying occasion, when a superior offi^^^^^^ blu^^y (...) in the
midst of a sentence, to demand if, daring to speak the language he held, he had
a 100,000 men at his beck in the Fauxbourgs of Paris, No, he answered
haughtily, I am single; but I have a bundred thousand republican sentiments in
my heart of which you are destitute. He was applauded by his audience; and
continued his discourse.

His work entitled, A rapid survey of the relative interests of the Helvetic
body, and the French Republic, which was published in a crisis of great danger
to both countries, exposed and defeated the hostile projects of a faction,
toward Switzerland, on the eve of execution; and it is very probable that,
without the foresight and courage of Colonel de Weiss, war had been declared
against the Helvetic body before the end of February. Various secret
preparations were already making for an attack upon Switzerland, in pursuit of
an ill digested plan of Robert, Claviere, and other Swiss emigrants. The attack
was to be made on three points at once. A column, composed of part of the army
of the Upper Rhine, and augmented by new levies, was to take Basle by surprise,
or assault, and keep the Austrians in check. Another column, drawn from the
army of the Alps, was to blockade Geneva, where the French had numerous
partisans, and to penetrate by Versoix into the Pays de Vaud. The third
division, composed of chosen troops, was to march suddenly by the Pass of
Porentru, already occupied by the French, against Berne, whose treasury,
granaries, and arsenal, excited the cupidity of the projectors of this plan.
Berne had been already secretly reconnoitred; and, although it be nearly
surrounded by a rapid and deep river, it was expected that the place would be
carried, by pouring in bombs and ^ed-hot balls from the neighboring heights,
before the Swiss militia could assemble with force to oppose the attack. The
projectors of the plan also expected a powerful diversion to be made in their
behalf, by the discontented party, (whose numbers were greatly exaggerated) of
the Lower Valais, Neuf-Chatel, Pays de Vaud, Soleure, Lucerne, and Fribourg,
This last city was destined to be an object of signal vengeance, on account of
some offense she had committed respecting the assignats. The popular
governments were to be informed that these hostilities would not affect them,
and that France would continue to preserve peace with them. As to the other
cantons, the commissioners and other seditious preachers were to overthrow
their constitutions, s^r up the poor against the rich, massacre, imprison, or
banish the magistrates and principal citizens, seize upon specic, provisions,
horses, and arms, compel men of property to emigrate that their estates might
be confiscated, outrage religion, and in the name of liberty and the public
good to ruin this free and happy people, and reduce them to slavery. The
expedition was to have been prompt; but the explosion was prevented, and
Claviere and Brissot, overawed by Weiss, laid aside a project in which
Switzerland, from the character of the times, had every thing to hazard.

The conquest of Rome and Spain, were deserred till armies could be raised to
march against those countries. As to all other affairs, the sittings of these
two committees were as fruitless as were the deliberations of the committee of
general safety, and those of the executive council. Dumourier could not, by any
motive, obtain of the^^ the accomplishment of any object, calculated to serve
the nation.

CHAP. XI.
The Retreat of Roland from the Administration.
AT the time of the king's death, Roland, who had long strove to maintain his
situation in the ministry, against the will of the Jacobins, as well as against
the real inclinations of his own party, sent a letter to his colleagues
announcing his resignation. The ministers never appeared more cheerful than on
the day they received this letter, and the council appeared more like a school
relieved from the restraints of a troublesome pedant, than a grave meeting of
Statesmen. Roland's resignation, made part of a compromise between the Jacobin
and Gironde parties, in which it was agreed, that both Roland and Pache should
quit the ministry. But the consequences were very different to those two
ministers, the latter of them acquiring a situation of more real importance
than any in the ministry; while the former remained more than ever exposed to
the infults and persecutions of the Jacobins.

This sacrifice made of Roland by his party, is another instance of the
cowardice of that faction, which ought never to have abandoned a man, of whose
services they had availed themselves, without any respect to his peace or
safety. In truth, the whole conduct of Roland, in his public character, was a
mistaken policy, which exposed himself and his party to Continual danger.
Roland did not possess much strength of mind, but had acquired extensive
information on the different branches of trade and manufactures; and, if it had
been expedient to divide the duties of the adminstration of the home
department, which was too extensive and too complicated for a mind of such
little energy, it is probable, he would have made an excellent minister of
commercial concerns. He was upright in his designs, and was possessed of a mild
and philanthropic disposition; but the desire of appearing a rigid moralist
induced him to assume a severity of character unnatural to him. He hoped to
resemble Cato the Censor, and had adopted his turn of conversation, at once
cold and repulsive, but without the genius and boldness of that celebrated man.
In his dress he was nice and singular, following the fashions of former times;
but this was at least less displeasing than the slovenly affectation of the
Jacobins. His deportment was grave, and not unbecoming the dignity of his
station. He was indefatigable in the application of his talents. But he loved
too much to gratify the will of the people, and was too ready to believe that
the higher orders were oppressive and unjust; and this disposition, that
becomes dangerous when it is too generally indulged, conducted him habitually
into precipitate and imprudent measures. -- He was candid in his examination of
the subjects belonging to the other departments of the government, such as
those relating to the armies, the marine, and foreign negociations; and
suppported, with great sincerity, all propositions that came before the council
of a just and reasonable nature. Perceiving the equivocal conduct of the other
ministers, mistrusting their, talents and perhaps their good faith, he would no
longer admit of any responsibility of the council in a collective capacity: and
his pertinacity in resusing to answer for any measures but those that were the
consequence of his direct orders begat a greater hatred of him than ever among
his colleagues.

The temper and qualities of Roland would have sitted him well enough for the
ministry had the republic been settled on its foundations, and if the times had
been more free from the violence of party rage, for he was a rigid republican.
This disposition was the cause of his ill conduct to Louis the XVI. and of the
imprudent step of delivering into the hands of the Convention the fatal chest
containing the monarch's passive Passive! Such is the word in the original, and
it is printed in Italics. Dumourier seems to have thought that Louis XVI. was
innocent, because he had not courage or capacity to contrive the means of
injuring the nation. Supposing he is not mistaken in that conclusion, he seems
to have forgotten, that he was conceding one of the great points, insisted upon
by the friends of Democracy, that it is in vain to have an innocent king, if
his ministers, mistresses, wives, or favorites, be not innocent also; as it
would be in vain that these latter should be innocent, if the king be
avaricious, deceitful, or tyrannical.
correspondence, in which those base men found pretexts for the martyrdom of
that unfortunate prince.

Perhaps it was prejudicial to the interests of Roland that he was governed by
his wife, who was a woman of fine talents, and whom he acknowledged to be the
critic, that gave a polish to his numerous works; but certainly it was among
his misfortunes to be surrounded by ignorant and designing journalists, who
composed, under his directions, those verbose harangues that covered the walls
and public buildings of Paris; for the Jacobins had the address to turn this
^^gine of faction against him and his party.

Among the women who have risen to celebrity during the French revolution, no
one has acted a more conspicuous or noble part than that of Madame Roland. She
was between thirty and forty years of age, had a lively and healthy
countenance, and a most interesting figure; she dressed with great taste;
conversed with ability; although perhaps with too much wit and resinement; she
was innocently gay, and had placed herself at the head of a party consisting of
metaphysicians, scholars, members of the Convention, and ministers. Every day
these partisans of Madame Roland paid their respects to her, and on the Friday
of every week they dined at her house, where the conduct and politics of
statesmen took their character from Madame Roland's opinions. -- None of the
wives of the other ministers were admitted to these meetings.

It would be unjust not to notice the spirit with which Madame Roland conducted
herself under an insult of the Jacobins, at a time when her husband's name had
already fallen into great discredit. Interrogated at the bar of the Convention,
^respecting the injurious accuiations of an unprincipled man named Viard, she
said, I am the wife of citizen Roland; I bear the name of a virtuous man, to
whom I am proud to be allied. -- Certainly it required all the malignity of the
Jacobins to persecute such a woman.

Although Madame Roland possessed much good sense, she permitted it to be seen
that she governed her husband, and thereby did a disservice to his reputation,
for which she could not compensate by the value of her councils. It was Madame
Roland that selected Pache and Lanthe mas to aid her husband in his
administration; and the former of them so entirely gained the considence of
Roland, that he was appointed minister of war through Roland's interest. Pache
was no sooner the colleague of Roland, than he became his enemy, and sought by
every means to ruin him, and for that purpose he did not hesitate to become the
partisan of the most intemperate men among the Jacobins. The contest between
those two ministers was open, and their hostile attacks were without measure or
decency. They both descended from their situations, but with Pache it was only
to rise to higher power. Roland was to be subjected to new and more bitter
misfortunes.

Other women have also distinguished themselves during the revolution, but
without the dignity that has been preserved by Madame Roland; excepting,
indeed, it be Madame Necker, who, in many respects, may be considered as the
rival of Madame Roland's fame, and whose age and experience, if it rendered her
less agreeable to the thoughtless, gave her the advantage as the counselor of
her husband. Mademoiselle La Brousset, Madame de Stael, Condorcet, Pastoret,
Coigny and Theroigne, were either artful females, like those who haunted the
courts of former times, or differed in nothing from the vulgar and furious
women of the Fauxbourgs of Paris.

One unfortunate woman, Elizabeth Corday, has consigned her name to history, by
an act, which happily for humanity will find few imitators, although it
delivered the earth from a monster.

The executive council seemed to have undergone no change by the retreat of
Roland from the ministry. During a considerable period before his resignation,
he had been entirely occupied in brooding over his vexations, the attacks of
his enemies, and the means of his defense. Every satire of the Jacobins that
was directed against him, begat in his apprehension the obligation of
justifying himself to the Convention; and the members of the Convention, who,
perhaps, were more irritated by the austerity of Roland's virtue, than by the
petulance of his spirit, saw nothing in those homilies but an insupportable
pride. His own party, no longer deriving reputation from his name, had, in
truth, renounced him; and had very ignorantly resolved to sacrifice him. Roland
flattered himself that his resignation would not be accepted, and he remained
in the house appropriated to the minister of the Home Department, till he was
no longer permitted to doubt of his fate. During the latter part of his
administration, he seldom slept in this house; as the Jacobins, to terrify him,
frequently sent bands of the foederates to make excursions during the night
round the house. In this manner were the representatives of the executive power
treated in France. Le Brun and Claviere have been since accused and imprisoned;
and Garat was accused and arrested after having resigned. So ferocious has been
the character of this revolution that, of the men who have had an eminent part
in it, such only have been out of the reach of a violent death as have fled and
are in exile.

CHAP. XII.
Negociations with Holland and England.
FRANCE, at that period, had no other declared enemies than Austria, ^^^ssia,
and Sardinia. She had displayed a superiority over those powers during the
preceding campaign, which would have been entirely decisive, if, according to
the plan of General Dumourier; Custine, instead of passing the Rhine to levy an
inconsiderable contribution on Frankfort, and for which France paid so dearly,
had made himself master of Coblentz, where there was no garrison; and if the
wants of the army had been supplied, so that the army of Belgium might have
taken up its winter quarters along the banks of the Rhine, from Cleves to
Cologne; that of the Ardennes, from Cologne to Andernach; that of the Mozelle,
from Andernach to Mayence, including Coblentz; and that of Alsace, from Mayence
to Landau, including Spires. This position would have compelled the county of
Luxembourg to have surrendered, by cutting off its supplies of provisions. The
armies would have had behind them a country on which, whether it were neuter or
an enemy, they might long have subsisted; and, by opening the campaign early in
the spring, might have passed the Rhine without difficulty, and have penetrated
into the center of Germany, where the French would have been received with open
arms, if they had possessed the prudence to have forborne from exciting terror
in the inhabitants by unjust decrees and by the sending of rapacious
commissioners to commit violence, insults and robberies.

This great plan was neglected; yet France might have sustained herself with
reputation and effect against her enemies who were in truth already overcome,
if her conduct and not drawn new enemies upon her.

Means existed, at this period, for preserving Spain in her neutrality; and by
employing them the nation would have spared herself the guilt of a great crime.
The king of Spain engaged with the Convention to remain neuter, on condition
that the life of the unfortunate Louis XVI. should be spared. This step does
honor to the Spanish monarch: and it is difficult to imagine why the French
princes did not follow so bright an example. The implacable, ignorant
Convention rejected the terms of the Spanish monarch with disdain, and thereby
committed a new crime against the nation, by creating her a new enemy, without
consulting her on the necessity or prudence of their conduct.

The courts of London and the Hague, had for some time betrayed a hatred to the
French revolution; and the death of Louis XVI. could not but increase that
hatred. But, in England, no part of the nation was willing to enter into a war
against France, excepting the king, who considered his differences with the
French as a personal quarrel. And in Holland, every party dreaded to be drawn
into a war. It was therefore possible for France to preserve peace with those
two countries; and, till that period, she had wisely cultivated the good will
of Holland, from whence she drew specie and provisions; and it was easy to have
continued that system.

In the latter end of the month of November, General Dumourier proposed to the
executive council, the taking of Maestricht, without which he could neither
defend the Meuse nor the country of Liege. He thought it reasonable, after many
examples in former wars, to take and hold this place, engaging by a duly
authorized manifesto, to restore it at the end of the war. At that period his
army was victorious and full of ardour. He had, after the taking of the citadel
of Antwerp, assembled the whole of his heavy artillery at Tongres and Liege, in
order not to expose the horses belonging to the artillery to die for want of
sorage, (as the Jacobins have stupidly asserted) but to make himself master of
Maestricht. That place was not as yet palisadoed, nor provided with a garrison,
nor with any thing necessary to sustain a siege. Venloo was in the same
condition. Causes of complaint were not wanting to give a color to the
enterprise; and to throw the imputation of being the aggressors upon the Dutch,
if they should resent his conduct, for they had already frequently violated the
neutrality, and had recently prohibited on pain of death, all exportations of
provisions to France, while provisions in immense quantities were drawn from
Holland, to establish magazines, on the Lower Rhine, for the Imperialists and
Prussians. The executive council rejected the general's propositions, and
expressly commanded him to preserve the strictest neutrality toward Holland,
which injunction the general was punctual in observing. They then sent him an
order to undertake the siege of Luxembourg during the winter; but, the general
showing the absurdity of the plan, it was not put in execution.

As the executive council had thus neglected the opportunity of seizing upon
Maestricht, which may be regarded as the key of the Netherlands on the side of
the Meuse, the general was of opinion that it would no longer be prudent to
commit any hostility on the part of France against Holland, being convinced
that a war with England must be the consequence of such hostility; and his
advice was thenceforward to preserve a neutrality with both England and
Holland, with the utmost solicitude.

The friendship of Holland was indispensibly necessary to enable France to hold
Belgium, for if the Dutch delivered the passages of Maestritcht and Venloo to
the Austrians, the Meuse would be no longer tenable, and the French would be
compelled to abandon the countries of Liege, Gueldre, Limbourg, Brabant, and
Namur, and retreat behind the Scheld: contracting their lines within the
country lying between the citadel of Antwerp and Valenciennes. And in the case
of the English and Dutch assembling an army in Dutch Flanders, the French would
be further forced to abandon the Scheld, and retire behind the river Lys, and
under the fortified places of French Flanders and Artois.

At this time there were at Paris many Dutch refugees victims of the Dutch
revolution, and of the faithless and feeble conduct of the minister Brienne.
Many among them were respectable and opulent men, who assured the French
ministry that their party in Holland was much more considerable than that of
the Stadtholder, which indeed was true. These representations were disregarded
till the month of January, when Le Brun after giving them an hearing, reserred
them to General Dumourier for his opinion respecting their resources, and
especially respecting a plan of invading Zealand which the Dutch patriots
represented as easy to be undertaken, and certain of success. After a
deliberate examination the general judged the plan to be impracticable, but
wrote to the minister that he should postpone giving a definite an^^er till he
should be at Antwerp, and be able more particularly to examine the several
parts of the project; and it was resolved that the Dutch refugees should
proceed to Antwerp with their revolutionary committee; and orders were given to
the Dutch legion, consisting nearly of 10,000 men, to garrison Antwerp, and to
be ready to form the advanced guard of the French army, in case of a war with
Holland.

An agent of Le Brun was appointed to attend the Dutch revolutionary committee;
but no positive engagement with them was entered into, and all that related to
them was rendered dependent on the issue of a negotiation which was then on the
point of commencing.

At the time that Dumourier had been minister for foreign affairs he had sent
to the Hague, as minister plenipotentiary, Emanuel de Maulde, a colonel in the
French army, who had conducted himself with great prudence and ability, had
procured arms and horses for France, and had so well reconciled his attention
to the interests of the refugees with the respect due to the government of the
country, as to acquire the confidence and esteem of the two factions that
divided Holland. This conduct, which was conformable to his in structions, was
too moderate to be agreeable to the temper of the present times; and de Maulde
had moreover the misfortune to be noble. Le Brun in particular conceived an
aversion to him. The military committee disapproved of his sending fusees to
Dunkirk. His measures were opposed on every side, and his intentions
calumniated. He was recalled; and in his room was appointed Noel, whom the
general had made principal clerk in the office for foreign affairs. Noel,
although an extremely honest man, arriving with prejudices against de Maulde
and plans much less moderate than those on which Maulde had acted, was very ill
received; and, attributing his reception to de Maulde, became his enemy and
accuser.

De Maulde, on his arrival at Paris, called upon the general; and told him
that, if France desired to preserve a neutrality with Holland and England,
nothing was more easy; that, although the ministers of the two courts would
neither acknowledge the National Convention, nor treat with Le Brun, yet the
grand pensioner of Holland, Van Spiegel, and the English Ambassador, Lord
Auckland, had charged him to declare that they would willingly treat with
General Dumourier.

At the same time, Benoit, who had been agent of the French ministry at London,
and had just arrived from that place, informed Le Brun on the part of
Talleyrand, late Bishop of Autun, De Talon, and other French emigrants, who had
political connections with the British ministry, that Pit and the council of
St. James's had nothing more at heart than to treat for the preservation of the
neutrality, provided that General Dumourier should be charged with the
negotiation, and should proceed to England for the purpose of settling its
terms, which he might easily accomplish before the opening of the campaign.

This overture of the English ministry was, at first, communicated to no other
person of the executive council than Garat and Le Brun. Garat, who was
possessed of a found judgment, zealously embraced the offer, and proposed to
send the general as ambassador extraordinary ^o England, without, however
superseding Chauvelin, with instructions to demand a decisive answer respecting
war or peace. The king's trial was not yet concluded, but the cruel catastrophe
was sufficiently foreseen; this circumstance suggested new considerations to
Garat, who feared that the English court might be treacherous enough to detain
Dumourier in England, and thereby deprive France of her best general. Dumourier
was compelled to dissemble that he also saw the probability of that event, and
that it was the only thing he desired. In order that he might escape from the
hands of the misereants who governed his country, he appeared to subscribe to
the prudence of Garat's precaution. It was however, determined that the affair
should be laid before the council, and a proposition be made by Garat to send
General Dumourier as Ambassador extraordinary to London, in consequence of the
overtures made by the ministers of England and Holland; to give the General
instructions to conduct the negotiation with suitable dignity and promptitude,
and whatever might be the issue, to return instantly to put himself at the head
of the armies. It was resolved to demand from the English ministry every
possible security for the person of General Dumourier, and for the full liberty
of returning at his pleasure.

When the proposition was laid before the council, Clavier^, Pache and Monge
opposed it in the most decided manner, undoubtedly incited by jealousy and love
of opposition, for they well knew the distress of their respective departments
and their incapability of supporting a war that would become so general.

Dumourier was extremely afflicted with the fate of a measure which seemed to
have promised his deliverance, as well as an important occasion of serving his
country; but he was not discouraged. He was of the opinion of Garat and Le Brun
that the design should not be discussed any more in the council, but prosecuted
secretly till it should be in a state to insure success. It was agreed that de
Maulde should depart instantly for the Hague, under the pretense of his private
concerns; that Noel should be recalled and placed elsewhere; that the General
should charge de Maulde with a letter for Lord Auckland, informing him that the
General would he at Antwerp on the 1st of February to visit his troops in their
winter quarters, and that having learnt from de Maulde, his friend, that Lord
Auckland had spoken of him with esteem and confidence, it would be a
circumstance of great pleasure to him if an opportunity should offer of meeting
that nobleman on the frontiers, and that perhaps this interview might be
beneficial to the interests of the two nations, and the cause of humanity. It
was also determined that, should Lord Auckland receive this invitation with the
good will that was to be expected, the General should give him a meeting, and
might even if it was found necessary pass into England.

It was further decided, that Maret, who had already been several times in
England, should be sent to London, to learn from Mr. Pit, if he really desired
to treat personally with General Dumourier. Chauvelin, minister plenipotentiary
of France to the court of London, did not at all accord with Talleyrand, who
had been sent with him as an advertiser in his negotiation, and had not at all
succeeded in the object of his embassy, which he was ambitious of conducting
without the participation of his colleague. Many indeed were the obstacles
Chauvelin had to encounter; he had against him the prejudices of the English
nation; the king of England, the most -- -- Despotique
. in Europe, and the most enraged against the French Revolution; the French
emigrants; the persons who had been given him as advertisers and assistants;
the National Convention of France; and his own inexperience. It was thought
necessary if Dumourier's journey should take place to sacrifice Chauvelin, or
rather to give him some other embassy; for Dumourior, who had been the intimate
friend of his father, and had given him the appointment to England, insisted
that he should be sent to Venice or Florence, that he might continue his
diplomatic career with success.

It appears to be but just to say a word here of the disposition that Dumourier
has always displayed in his public character.

Whether it were the effect of good nature, or of a sense of justice, he has
been anxious not to prejudice the interests of any other person in the public
employment, and has obliged and served great numbers; and of course it is not
greatly surprising, that he has met with much ingratitude.

Chauvelin, as it has been said, was to be recalled, and Maret was to be
appointed to his situation, on the general's departure from London; so that
Maret was extremely interested in the success of the negotiation, and had
strong motives for smoothing the difficulties that might be in the general's
way, and thereby to render his stay at the court of London as short as possible.

CHAP. XIII.
Departure of de Maulde, of Marel, and of General Dumourier from Paris.
IN pursuance of these plans, Emanuel de Maulde, proceeded to the Hague,
although the death of the king. which happened while they were in agitation,
seemed to be an event entirely destructive of them; for the certainty that
Holland was eager to preserve peace induced Garat and Le Brun to believe that
all resentment excited by that ho^^^^^ catastrophe would yield to the great
object of preserving peace, and they were not deceived.

Maret's departure was unwisely postponed, (taking place only on the same day
that General Dumourier left Paris) under pretense of first sounding Mr. Pit
respecting the General's journey to England, by the means of one of his
friends, who had already been employed in the same capacity on a former
occasion by Maret. But the General had reason to believe that Le Brun, offended
that the Court of St. James's would neither treat with him as minister of
foreign affairs, nor with the Convention, was not sorry to undermine this
negotiation by giving scope to the rash ignorance of Brissot, and the folly of
the diplomatic committee, who seeming to think that France had not enemies
enough to contend with, studied to increase the number, by insulting every
nation.

Maret's mission was altogether unsuccessful. Chauvelin had never been
acknowledged in England as minister of the Republic, the Court of St. James
having considered his mission at an end on the abolition of Royalty in France,
and having permitted his stay in London merely as an indulgence granted to an
individual. And when the news of the cruel death of Louis XVI. arrived in
England, Chauvelin was ordered to quit London in four and twenty hours, and the
kingdom in eight days. It was under these circumstances that Maret arrived in
England, and received an order from the council instantly to quit the kingdom.

But this reception of Maret by the Court of St. James's, did not put a stop to
the negotiation in Holland. General Dumourier departed from Paris, on the 26th
of January, with a mind filled with apprehensions; he had not been able to
prevent the commission of an unprovoked, fruitless, disgraceful, and fatal
crime; he had not succeeded in procuring a revocation of the decree of the 15th
December, nor in obtaining an exception in behalf of Belgium, and thereby to
preserve the French army in case of retreat; nor in establishing an effective
administration for the supply of arms, subsistence, etc. for the army; nor in
his attempts to procure the necessary repairs of the fortified places,
reinforcements of the armies, horses for the cavalry, or any of that multitude
of objects, the supply of which was necessary to the opening of the campaign;
nor (which in every case was the greatest of his afflictions) to save an
innocent king, whose goodness was personally known to him. He was about to
resume the command of a disorganized army, abandoning itself to robberies, and
every species of excess, ill armed, in want of clothing, and dispersed in the
impoverished villages along the Meuse, and the Roer. New troops were daily
arriving from Germany to augment the army of General Clairfait, who with great
capacity had made a stand, and maintained himself between the Herffle and the
Roer with a comparatively small number of troops, in want of every thing, and
terrified at the rapacity with which the conquest of Belgium had been
accomplished: That general having counteracted all the ill effects of their
long retreat.

The Prince of Cobourg, celebrated for his glorious campaign against the Turks,
was about to take the command of this army. In the case of Dumourier waiting
till the Prince of Cobourg should attack him, he was well assured that he could
not resist that General in front, and, at the same time, the Prince of
Hohenloe, who would attack him on his right flank by Namur, the citadel of
which was then repairing very slowly by the French; and if the English and
Dutch should have time to assemble an army on his left flank, on the side of
Antwerp and Dutch Flanders, even the retreat of Dumourier would no longer be
secure, having to march through fifty leagues of slat country, with a
disorderly army, pursued and almost surrounded by three armies more
considerable than his own and continually assailed by the Peasants and the
inhabitants or the cities, whom, the excesses committed by order of the
Convention, had driven to desperation. Deneral Dumourier, therefore had no
other hope of diminishing his perplexities, but the negotiation committed to
the care of de Maulde. In truth, his confidence in that was considerable, since
Holland had the utmost dread of a rupture with France, being quite unprepared
for it, and having the greatest interest in the preservation of the neutrality.

We are about to give an account of the further circumstances of this
negotiation, which was broken off in the beginning of February, by the unwise
and haughty impetuosity of the National Convention. The abrupt declaration of
war, made by that Assembly against England and Holland, gave France an air of
persidy, respecting that negotiation with which the English have reproached
them with some appearance of reason; but the same charge may be retorted on the
English, and it is probable that Pit had no other design than to amuse General
Dumourier, to gain time to make the necessary preparatives for war; and the
treaty entered into by the Court of St. James's with the court of Turin, at
that very period, confums the opinion. So much truth is there in the
observation, that history is but a picture of the errors and crimes of
government.

CHAP. XIV.
Fruitless Negotiations. Declaration of War.
IMMEDIATELY on the arrival of de Maulde at the Hague, which was in the latter
end of January, he presented General Dumourier's letter to Lord Auckland, who
testified the greatest pleasure to de Maulde on reading it, and told him that
the interests of England and Holland being inseparable in this affair, he
should communicate the proposal to Van Spiegle; which was no sooner done, than
the latter embraced the project of a conference on the frontiers between the
Ambassador of England, the Grand Pensioner, and General Dumourier.

Lord Auckland dispatched three packet boats, immediately succeeding each
other, to his court, and dc Maulde sent his secretary to Antwerp, where the
General had arrived on the 2d of February, after having visited the posts from
Dunkirk to Antwerp.

Throughout Picardy, Artois, and maritime Flanders, Dumourier found the people
overwhelmed with terror and grief, at the tragical death of Louis XVI. The very
name of Jacobin, he perceived, excited equal fear and horror. In all the
cities, however, there were numerous emissaries of the Jacobins, who stirred up
the populace against the moderate and wise part of the citizens, and collected
accusations, little regarding whether true or false, against the different
administrators of the departments.

At St. Omers and Dunkirk, there was not the least appearance of preparations
being made for the war, and there were s^^^^ely any troops to be seen, for the
minister of war had weakened maritime Flanders to furnish the augmentation of
10,000 foot and 1500 cavalry, for the army in Austrian Flanders, in consequence
of the General's having demanded that reinforcement. The minister of war even
drew new battalions afterward from this country, which was part of the actual
feat of the war, to form a body of 12,000 men near Cherbourg, from whence the
General had observed a diversion might be made into England, in case war with
that power could not be avoided.

Nieuport and Ostend, were in the same condition as St. Omers and Dunkirk, not
having a single battery mounted, to prevent any vessels of war entering those
ports. There were not even cannon for the purpose; nor could any be obtained,
without taking them from Dunkirk, which had not sufficient for its own
fortifications.

Dumourier struck with the disorder that pervaded the whole country, and seeing
that his embarrassments every moment increased, was greatly satisfied with the
first success of de Maulde's negotiation. He instantly dispatched a courier to
Le Brun, with the original answer of Lord Auckland, which stated that the
British minister and the grand Pensionary of Holland, had agreed to proceed
together to the frontiers to confer with the General; that Lord Auckland had
sent several dispatches to his court, to obtain its sanction, and instructions
relative to the conference; that he should soon receive an answer, and that his
intentions were not to gain time, nor to retard the General's preparations for
the campaign.

The dispatches of de Maulde, which accompanied those of Lord Auckland, gave an
account of the circumstances of his interview with the British minister, and
the grand Pensionary of Holland. Those ministers, as de Maulde was prepared to
find, expressed the utter abhorrence of the atrocious barbarity recently
committed at Paris; but as de Maulde gave them positive assurances that the
General partook of their sentiments on that subject, and was filled with the
profoundest indignation against the authors of the crime, that horrible affair
did not retard the negotiation; and it was settled without any difficulty, that
as soon as Lord Auckland should have received the instructions of his court,
the conference should take place at the Moor Dyke, on board a yatch belonging
to the Prince of Orange, which would be prepared to receive the General. De
Maulde concluded by declaring his persuasion, that the conference would be
attended with the greatest success.

The General entertained the same hopes, and had prescribed to himself the plan
he thought it his duty to follow. He resolved not to betray the interests of
his unhappy country; on the contrary, it was his intention to diminish the
number of her enemies, in settling the neutrality of England and Holland on a
sure basis; but, after he should have rendered this last of his services to
France, he resolved to free himself from the imputation of partaking in the
crime of his countrymen, and no longer to fight for absurd tyrants whom he was
anxious to punish, instead of aiding in the support of their hideous tyranny.
He did not design therefore to return to Antwerp but to retire to the Hague,
and from thence to publish a memorial in justification of his conduct.

He unfolded a part of these designs in a letter to de Maulde, which was
communicated to the two ministers. They requested leave to take a copy of it,
but de Maulde declined granting that permission, being unauthorised by his
friend; but at the same time he delivered Lord Auckland a letter from the
General, informing that minister that he should receive with great pleasure
news of the sanction of the British court to these measures.

At the moment when the negotiation was in this promising state, while the
General consoled himself with the hope of being freed from the insupportable
yoke of combating for tyrants, under the certainty of becoming one day the
victim of their ingratitude and cruelty, whatever might be his success; while
he thus flattered himself, on the 7th of February he learnt by the public
papers that the National Convention had declared war against Holland and
England, on a report made by Brissot in the name of the diplomatic committee
This news reduced him to despair, for it was altogether unexpected. He had
quitted Paris on the 26th of January; had arrived at Antwerp, only on the 2d of
February; Le Brun, then, had not waited to receive his first dispatches, nor
intelligence respecting de Maulde's negotiation. It seems that Le Brun had
precipitated the report of the affront offered to the Republic in the person of
Chauvelin, by order of the king of Enggland, to excite the anger of the
thoughtless Convention, and thereby raise an insurmountable obstacle to the
measures he had concerted with the General.

As to Brissot, he had, as was usual with him availed himself of this
opportunity of insulting both kings and people, in which he was zealously
seconded by Barrere and the Jacobins. Thus the two factions united in taking a
most disastrous step without discussion and without consideration.

The war was declared, but Le Brun sent no intelligence to General Dumourier,
on whom the burden fell with the greatest weight, and little enquiry was made
in the council, whether he was at all in a condition to support himself against
these new enemies.

On the day that General Dumourier, heard of the declaration of war against
England and Holland, de Maulde arrived at Antwerp from the Hague, with a second
letter from Lord Auckland, congratulating him on having received an authority
from his court to enter on the conference, which was fixed to commence on the
10th, at the Moor Dyke. The General instantly dispatched a courier informing
Lord Auckland of the declaration of war; and observing, that although he must
admit the declaration of war to have been a little abrupt, he must observe it
had been occasioned by the conduct of the English Ministry; first, in detaining
two French vessels laden with corn, notwithstanding the remonstrances of the
French ministry to the contrary; secondly, in contemptuously ordering the
French Ambassador to quit the kingdom, while a negotiation was pending between
the two nations; and thirdly, in causing Lord Auckland to publish, on the 2d of
February, an address to the States General, which was an insult to the French
nation, and equivalent to a declaration of war.

The General had also causes of complaint against the Grand Pensionary Van
Spiegle. He had in vain demanded of him the liberation of Colonel Micoud, a
French officer, who, after gaining a considerable lawsuit against a merchant
in Holland, had been thrown into prison, through the credit of the merchant, on
a vague accusation of having spoken too freely of the government. He had driven
a troop of French comedians from Amsterdam without even granting them time to
collect the sums due to them; he had permitted Noel the French minister at the
Hague, and Thainville, his secretary, to be insulted by the emigrants, and had
afterward abruptly ordered them to quit the country; he had allowed the
emigrants to appear in military uniforms at the Hague; and finally had suffered
the greatest enmity to be expressed against France with impunity.

It is certain that the conduct of the courts of St. James's and the Hague was
inexcusable, since in the midst of a negotiation entered into (in consequence
of overtures from themselves) with General Dumourier, whom they had demanded to
conduct the negotiation, they had provoked the anger of the National
Convention, whom they knew to be haughty and impatient, and incapable of a
temperate conduct. It is but just therefore to reproach them as well as the
French with the evils resulting from this war, which is to be considered as
only in its beginning, and which will be the source of other equally
destructive wars.

It may be said, that providence has united all the people of Europe to inflict
a punishment on the enormous crimes committed by the French nation; and perhaps
to punish their own errors by the calamities they will have to endure in this
long, afflicting and bloody contest. The Atheists of the National Convention,
and these are the most ignorant and wicked of the members, because it is not
through the influence of philosophy that they have become Atheists, but through
the influence of their crimes, have considered what the General has said to
them respecting Providence in his letter of the 12th of March, as an unmeaning
rhapsody; to such men he has to answer, that Providence leaves us free to make
a virtuous or vicious choice, but that from the first choice necessarily
results the character of our actions, good or bad; that which is just is alone
true; that which is unjust is the effect of error in the mind; that this is
above all true with respect to governments; and that justice conducts nations
to happiness, and injustice to misery: that when a nation is universally
infected with a licentious spirit, as is the case with France, all her motives
and actions tend to her ruin; hence the same phrenzy which induced France to
commit the fruitless crime of murdering Louis XVI. and of treating his family
as a herd of slaves, dictated the decree of the 15th of December, which is
equally devoid of justice and policy, which has lost the nation the good will
of every people who were attached to her, has infused divisions into her
councils, familiarised her with accusations, robberies, and massacres, has
begotten her filthiness and grossness of manners; her wantonness in creating of
enemies, and indifference to the means of resisting them; and in fine her
anarchy and total want of order, which has already inflicted upon her the first
punishments of that long series that awaits her. For from the moment that
France became a Republic, she degenerated into the most unfortunate country
that the annals of the world have produced.

We will conclude this book with a melancholy reflection on the condition to
which France has reduced herself by her errors; she had been presented with a
constitution formed in a short and difficult period by her first legislature,
which was not indeed perfect but highly valuable, and which every people of
Europe admired and envied. The two factions that existed in France, in
combating each other, nevertheless were of one mind to destroy this
constitution. The court hoped to recover its former power and numerous means of
gratifications; and the Jacobins entirely to beat down royalty, which they
hated, but which was so necessary to the happiness of Frenchmen; and while the
constitution was a theme of praise with all reasonable men in other parts of
Europe, the French blamed, spurned and rejected it. But the merits of the
constitution were unknown to the people of France, for they never permitted
themselves to judge of it but through the medium of their furious passions.

END OF THE FIRST PART.
MEMOIRS OF GENERAL DUMOURIER, WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.

.... VITAM QUI IMPENDERE VERO. TRANSLATED BY JOHN FENWICK.

PART II.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY SAMUEL HARRISON SMITH, CHERRY-STREET, ABOVE
FOURTH-STREET. 1794.

CONTENTS OF THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I. Page Plan of the Campaign. 141 Page CHAP. II. Preparations for the
Expedition against Holland. Orders to the grand Army. Advice given by General
Dumourier to the Minister of War. General Thouvenot and the Commissary
Petit-Jean at Antwerp. Orders for the raising of Battalions in Belgium. General
Valence at Antwerp. Loan. Manifesto 148 Page CHAP. III. Assembling the Army.
Its Amount. First Movements. General Dumourier's meeting with the Swedish
Ambassador. Taking of Breda, Klundert, and Gertruydenberg. Siege of
Williamstadt. Blockede of Bergen-op-Zoom, and Steenberg. Summons given to
Heusden. General Dumourier at the Moor Dyke. Preparations for passing to Dort,
by the Moor-Dyke and Roowaert. Second Project of Passing by Gertruydenberg. The
General receives Orders to join the Grand Army: Departs. Instructions given to
General de Flers. 157 Page CHAP. IV. The General arrives at Antwerp. Sends the
Agents of the Executive Power from that Town. Arrives at Brussels. Addresses
the Representatives of the People. Writes to the Convention. Arrests Chepy, and
Estienne. Several Proclamations. Arrives on the 13th of March at Louvain. The
Commissioners of the Convention come to that City to meet the General. 174 Page
CHAP. V. State of the Army. Its Position. The General's Orders to the different
Divisions. He resolves to give Battle to the Enemy. 183 Page CHAP. VI. Battle
of Nerwinde 192 Page CHAP. VII. Retreat of 19th of March. Action of
Gotzenhoven. 199 Page CHAP. VIII. Retreat of the 20th and 21st of March.
Engagement of Neerwelpe. La Croix and Danton at Louvain. Engagement of the 22d
of March. 203 Page CHAP. IX. Retreat to Brussels. Evacuation of Brussels. Camp
of Enghien. Camp of Ath. Conference at Ath with Colonel Mack. The Arrest of
General Miranda. 209 Page CHAP. X. Camp of Tournay. 215 Page CHAP. XI. Retreat
to the Camp of Maulde. 218 Page CHAP. XII. Arrest of the Commissioners of the
Convention, Camus, La Marque, Bancal, and Quinette; and of Beurnonville,
Minister of War. 227 Page CHAP. XIII. Attempt to assassinate General Dumourier
on the 4th of April. Events of the 5th of April. Departure of General
Dumourier. 238 Page CHAP. XIV. Dumourier at Mons. Establishment of the French
at Leuze. Congress of Antwerp. Second proclamation of the Prince of Cobourg.
Departure of the General for Brussels. 248 Page CHAP. XV. Conclusion. 253 Page
MEMOIRS OF GENERAL DUMOURIER. FOR THE YEAR 1793. BOOK II.
CHAP. I.
Plan of the Campaign.
WE are now entering upon the history of a campaign more rapid, more varied,
and perhaps more important, in its events, than any of former or later times.
The nature of the campaign was not foreseen till the first week of February;
the plan was conceived and arranged between the 7th and the 22d of that month;
and the campaign finished on the 5th of the following April.

The history of this short period, offers, to the contemplation of the military
man, Cities taken in defiance of of immense innundations, a great battle, a
variety of engagements, and a retreat which excited the astonishment of the
generals of the enemy, aad from which they could not withhold their praise: It
exhibits an example of the two species of war, the offensive, and defensive:
And it may be said to have involved consequences that will decide the fate of
France, and perhaps that of Europe.

Nor is this history less interesting to the philosopher, whom it will confirm
in the opinion, that the destiny of empires is often dependent on circumstances
that are apparently inconsiderable; and that the character and fortune of one
man may decide the fate of a nation. In the preceding year, General Dumourier
had preserved the independence of France, by his success in the plains of
Champagne, and rendered her name illustrious in those of Belgium: for, at that
period, the greatness of the danger which threatened France united all minds
under his standard, and compelled the nation to display her energy under the
direction of his counsels. In the period we are now considering, the situation
and character of the French people were changed. The nation or rather those who
^overned and misled the nation, intoxicated with success, and blinded by their
crimes, no longer listened to the general, who would now have saved his
countrymen, both from a foreign yoke, and from the tyranny of their own
mistaken passions.

He was not seconded in his efforts. He was not obeyed. He was opposed, and
betrayed; and his campaign was unfortunate, notwithstanding his exertions to
turn the fortune of war in his favor. On the point of conquering Holland, the
conquest was snatched from his hands. He formed a second plan, and victory was
torn from him by his own troops. In the midst of a retreat, that was as
successfully conducted as it was bloody and destructive, he projected another
design, which preserved his army, and arrested the ruin of Belgium, which,
otherwise, would have been complete. But this design fell short of its greatest
object, the deliverance of France: and, in that, it was defeated by the fierce
pride of the convention, and by the fickleness of his troops; and General
Dumourier was compelled to quit his army, and to seek a retreat among
strangers, who could not forbear to esteem him.

Thenceforth, the French were no longer the same people. In the soldiery,
savage rage succeeded valor; there was neither talent in the plan of the war,
nor conduct in its execution; the French slew and were slain, without remorse,
or consideration. It was not war that they carried on; and the carnage would
already have been terminated, if the force that opposed them were that of a
single people, or were not rendered ineffectual by the clashing of various
interests and counsels.

The situation of General Dumourier was embarrassing, when he knew that England
and Holland were on the point of adding their forces to those of the other
enemies of France. If the persons who were at the head of affairs, had been
well informed and prudent men, he directly would have advised them to evacuate
the Netherlands which could no longer be preserved; and to post the troops
behind the fortified places of the north, holding for a while the banks of the
Scheld, and the citadel of Namur. But this reasonable proposition would have
been regarded as proceeding from cowardice or treachery; and would have brought
the general to the scaffold. Or, if it had been accepted, it would have
delivered the General into the hands of tyrants whom it was his object to crush
for the safety and happiness of his country. Entering France with an enemy in
pursuit of him, and with the appearance of a slight, he would have instantly
lost his military reputation, which was only to be preserved by single
successes; and his fate would have been at the disposal of the Jacobins of
Paris, whom this retreat would have reinforced with the whole amount of his
army. He could not therefore extricate himself from this desperate situation,
but by the hardiest and most decisive means. His military fame and the celerity
of his movements, could alone open him the way to the supply of all that was
wanting to his army. Clothing, accoutrements, horses, arms, provisions, money,
all were to be found in Holland; and there, he was compelled to seek them. He
conceived the design of conquering Holland by a daring blow; and we will now
rapidly review his plan, and his resources.

The Dutch refugees had formed a small revolutionary committee at Antwerp,
where was also the Dutch legion. The committee possessed more zeal than
ability; and, although they expended considerable sums of money in maintaining
a secret correspondence with the different Provinces of the Dutch Republic, the
information which the general received through their means was extremely
deficient, especially respecting the military state of that country. All that
could be relied on with certainty was, that the party of the patriots was very
considerable: particularly at Amsterdam, Haerlem, Do^t, and throughout Zealand.
The general pretended to reassume the consideration of the plan, which the
committee had laid before him at Paris, of making an irruption into Zealand. He
affected to examine it minutely in presence of the committee, and feigned to
give it his approbation; in order to cover a plan more bold in appearance, but
in truth more certain of success, because it appeared to be more impracticable.
He did not disclose that design to any other persons than to Mr. Koch and Mr.
De Niss, whom he thought deserving of his entire confidence; and whose zeal,
probity, strength of mind, and love of their country, entitled them to be the
deliverers of their fellow citizens.

The plan for the invasion of Zealand, was as follows: The refugees had learnt
that the Stadtholder had formed the design of fortifying the Island of
Walcheren, as a place of retreat for the States General and the members of the
government, in case the French should enter the country, and should be joined
by the people, whom the government mistrusted. The Dutch Committee proposed
that a cosiderable body of men should depart from Antwerp, and proceed, with as
great secrecy and dispatch as possible, by Sand^liet to the island of South
Beveland, and from thence to the island of Walcheren, and, seizing upon
Middleburg and Flushing, should make themselves masters of that latter island.
The garrisons of those two towns, it is true, did not amount to more than
twelve or fifteen hundred men, and were raw and undisciplined troops. But if
the inhabitants had not joined their deliverers, the French soldiers would
infallibly have been cut off. There was nothing to prevent the island receiving
succors to double the amount of the French detachment; there were already
several English frigates at Flushing; and the Dutch had a squadron of armed
vessels in the Scheld, lying under the fortress of Batz, a league below Lillo,
which would entirely have cut off the retreat of the detachment to the main
land.

No success could be expected in this expedition, without such promptitude and
exactness in the execution, as the general could not expect either from his own
troops, or those of the Dutch patriots. He had not a single general officer
under his command to whom he could confide so dangerous an enterprise. He could
not abandon the command of the main army, to undertake the expedition himself.
Had he yielded to the opinion of the Dutch patriots, he would certainly have
been led into an unsuccessful enterprise; and this unfortunate check in the
beginning of the campaign would have completed ^he rein of his small army,
consisting of new troops, that had already suffered much by his absence, and
were shortly after beaten, discouraged, and almost dispersed on the Roer and
the Meuse.

But if, by the chance that belongs to military movements, this expedition had
been successful, however brilliant it might have been, it would have produced
no real benefit to the general. On the contrary, it would have deprived him of
five or six thousand of his troops, who, would have been separated from him by
an arm of the sea, and all the places of Dutch Flanders: leaving him without a
force sufficient to undertake any thing further.

The better to conceal his real designs, however, he professed to adopt that
plan of attacking Holland, and he made some dipositions as if he was about to
undertake it seriously. He had, at Antwerp, some small vessels under the
command of Captain Moultson, an American officer in the French service, who had
assisted in the taking of the citadel of Antwerp. This small squadron consisted
of the Ariel of 24 guns, a brig of 14 guns, and three gunboats. He ordered
these vessels to be fitted out, to proceed to fort Lillo, and there to cast
anchor. He directed a furnace to be constructed on each of the gun-boats, for
the purpose of heating balls. He commanded the sort of Lillo, and that of
Liefkenshoeck, and the citadel of Antwerp, to be furnished with provisions, and
put in a state to sustain a siege. He assembled, at Antwerp, all the Dutch
vessels that on the declaration of war had been detained in the canals of the
Scheldt, and ordered them to be prepared to serve as fireships.

He wished it to be believed that his object was to burn the Dutch vessels
lying at anchor under the fort of Batz; and to seize upon that fort, which
mounted forty guns. The Dutch vessels retired to Ramekens. In short, every
thing seemed to indicate, during several days, that the general's movements
were directed against Zealand; and he gave the enemy reason to imagine that the
campaign would open by the invasion of that country. Meanwhile, the general's
thoughts were wholly occupied with his own plan; which was extremely simple,
although, had it never been attempted it must have appeared wholly
impracticable. This plan was, to make his way with a body of troops to the
Moordyke, deceiving and evading the garrisons of Breda, and Gertruydenburg, on
his right; Bergen-up-Zoom, Steenburg, Klundert, and Williamstadt, on his left:
and, passing the arm of the sea which runs between the Moor-dyke and Dort, and
which is about two leagues in breadth, to land at Dort: where being arrived he
should be in the heart of Holland, and would have no obstacles to encounter in
marching by Rotterdam, Delft, the Hague, Leyden and Haerlem, to Amsterdam. By
this plan, he would take all the strong places of Holland in the rear.
Meanwhile, General Miranda, with a detachment of the grand army, was to bombard
Maestricht, and Venloo; and, as soon as he should know that General Dumourier
had reached Dort, he was to leave General Valence to continue the siege of
Maestricht, and to march with 25,000 men against Nimeguen, where General
Dumourier was to join him by the route of Utrecht.

This plan, executed with rapidity, would have had little serious dfficulty to
encouter, since the Stadtholder neither had an army assembled, nor had adopted
any settled plan of defense; and since, of all the enterprises that might be
undertaken by Dumourier, this was the least to be expected: for it seemed to be
no better than an attempt to march an army through the eye of a needle These
are the words of Dumourier
.

Dmourier's next design was, as soon as he should be master of Holland, to send
the battalions of national guards back into Belgium; to assemble an army
entirely composed of troops of the line, and commanded by generals of whose
fidelity he was assured, and to compel the States General of the United
Provinces, to order a surrender of all their towns: to make no changes in the
government, but such as should be indispensibly necessary; to dissolve the
Dutch Revolutionary Committee, to the members of which he had already signified
that in case of success, they might be severally appointed to the public
situations of their respective Provinces, supposing them to possess the
confidence of their fellow citizens; to preserve the Dutch Republic from the
tyranny of the commissioners of the national convention, and from the influence
of Jacobinism; to fit out a fleet with all possible expedition at Rotterdam, in
Zealand, and in the Texel, in order to seize upon the Dutch settlements in
India, and to secure the possession of them by strong garrisons; to offer a
perfect neutrality to the English; to station, in the conntry of Zutphen and
Dutch Guelders, an army of observation consisting of 30,000 men; to furnish
money and arms for the raising a body of 30,000 men, in the countries of
Antwerp, the two Flanders, and Campine, on whose attachment he could rely; to
permit the French to occupy no other part of the Netherlands, than the country
of Liege; to annul, throughout Belgium the decre^ of the 15 of December; to
invite the people of that country to assemble at Alost, Antwerp, or Ghent, for
the purpose of forming on a solid basis such a government as should be
agreeable to them; and after that to assemble an army of Belgians of 40,000
men, composed of battalions of 800 men each, together with a body of cavalry.
Dumourier further designed to offer a suspension of arms to the Imperialists;
and in case of its being rejected, to raise an army of 150,000 men in order to
drive them beyond the Rhine; but if it were accepted he hoped to gain time and
means to execute the rest of his plan, which was, either to form a Republic of
the eighteen Provinces of the Netherlands, if that should be agreeable to the
people, or to make an offensive and defensive alliance between the Republic of
the Seven United Provinces and that of Belgium, and to raise an army of 80,000
men in the two countries for their joint defense, till the conclusion of the
war; to invite France to enter into an alliance with the two Republics, and to
put an end to her anarchy by re-adopting the constitution of 1789; and in case
of France refusing to accede to this proposal, to march to Paris with an army
composed of the French troops of the line, and a body of 40,000 Dutch and
Belgians, in order to dissolve the National Convention, and annihilate the
power of the Jacobins.

Such were the outlines of General Dumourier's plan, which was communicated
only to four persons. It will appear visionary to the reader; but being founded
on the circumstances of the times, and on well combined calculations, it could
not have failed of success, if the most disastrous events, entirely unconnected
with the conduct and arrangements of General Dumourier, had not broken all his
measures, and forced him to sacrifice all his hopes to the immediate safety of
the grand army, on the point of being entirely destroyed, by the mismanagement
of the officers who commanded under him.

CHAP. II.
Preparations for the Expedition against Holland. Orders to the grand Army.
Advice given by General Dumourier to the Minister of War. General Thouvenot and
the Commissary Petit-Jean at Antwerp. Orders for the raising of Battalions in
Belgium. General Valence at Antwerp. Loan. Manifesto.
GENERAL DUMOURIER, having taken his resolution, may be still said to have had
all his means to create. At Antwerp, there were two battalions of national
gendarmerie, consisting of 350 men each, who were dangerous only to their
officers and the peaceable inhabitants of the city, being the most detestable
and undisciplined soldiers that ever entered the field of battle. These
ferocious Janissaries received each 40 sols per day in specie without
deduction; appointed their own officers; and committed every kind of crime. The
general, after passing them in review, declared in the strongest terms, that,
should they continue to commit the excesses of which they were accused, or to
be guilty of any disobedience of orders, he would instantly send them back to
France. This body of gendarmerie was composed of the ancient French guards.
There were also, at Antwerp, one hundred and fifty dragoons of the 20th
regiment; three battalions of national guards; and about two thousand of the
Dutch legion, two hundred of which were horse. Twelve battalions of national
guards, newly raised, and having neither fusees, accoutrements, nor shoes, were
quartered in the cities and villages of West Flanders; and had no idea that
they should be obliged to take the field till the month of May.

Cannon, mortars, magazines, money, commissaries, together with their
assistants, were altogether wanting. But there was not a moment to be lost. The
rashness of the national convention, in declaring war against Holland, had
warned the Dutch to prepare for their defense; and, unless the general had
attacked them with the utmost celerity, the enterprise would have become uterly
chimerical. And, indeed, had the Dutch prepared for their defense with as great
activity as the general ^sed for attacking them, the project must have been
unsuccessful.

General Miranda had remained at the head of the army of the North during the
whole winter. This general was a Peruvian by birth; and was a man o^ capacity,
and extensive information. He was bette^ versed in the theory of war t^^ ^^my
other of the Frenc^ generals, but he was not ^q^^lly well versed in the
practice. His intimacy with Pet^^^^ had been the cau^^ of his entering the
service the preceding year, as major general. He joined Dumourier at the camp
of Grandpre; and had been of great service to him, in the different attacks of
the Prussians, particularly in the retreat of the 15th of September. But he had
a haughtiness of disposition, and a bluntness of manner, which begat him many
enemies; and he was unfit to command the French, whose confidence it is
impossible to gain but by good humor and a conduct expressive of respect for
them.

Dumourier had procured him the appointment of lieutenant general, in the month
of November 1792; had conferred upon him the command of the army of the North,
and had promised to obtain him the rank of general, on the first opportunity.
Miranda was afterward offended that Valence, an older lieutenant general than
himself, (having commanded with great reputation general Kellermann's advanced
guard, and several detached corpse, during the campaign of 1792) should have
been raised to the rank of general on the recommendation of Dumourier. He never
forgave this preference; but his resentment, unfortunately for France, did not
display itself till the day of the battle of Nerwinde. At the time we now speak
of, he still appeared full of attachment to Dumourier. And that general had
written to him from Paris to make preparations for the opening of the campaign,
very early in the spring, by the siege of Maestricht, in case a rupture should
prove to be unavoidable with England and Holland.

Dumourier's own army was then under the command of general Lanoue, who was a
very brave and ^^nest man. Fifty years past in the service had rendered him
respectable; but had also diminished his vigor. He was assisted by general
Thouvenot, an officer of very uncommon merit.

The army of general Valence was commanded, in his absence by
lieutenant general Le Veneur, a man of great courage but of a limited capacity.

Dumourier ordered General Miranda to present himself before Maestricht with a
part of his army, without too much weakening the posts, ^n the Meuse; to
reinforce himself to the number of ^^ or (...) men drawn from the other two
armies; and ^comm^nica^^ these orders to the respective generals, that they
might contract their lines, and hold their troops in readiness to take t^^
field, if the Imperialists, whose numbers were daily increasing in their
quarters, on the Herstle, and the P^russl^ns who were also daily receiving
reinforcements at Wessel, should betray any designs of forming a junction to
relieve Maestricht, which was expected. General Dumourier thought it prudent
not to point out the position that might be proper for this army of
observation; and he acknowledges that, in this, he committed a great error.

In the remaining part of General Dumourier's instructions to Miranda, he
confidentially unfolded his plan for attacking Holland. He desired him not to
open the siege regularly before Maestricht, being too early in the season for
such an undertaking, but to endeavor to carry the place by a vigorous assault
with bombs and red hot balls, in the same manner as the Duke of Saxe-Teschen
had attempted to carry Lisle; and, when General Dumourier should have informed
him that he had reached Dort by the Moor Dyke, to leave General Valence before
Maestricht, and to proceed by forced marches to Nimeguen, passing by the
frontier of the Duchy of Cleves, in order to intercept the Prussians, if they
should attempt to reach Hollands before him: and to this latter purpose,
Dumourier desired him to send General Champmorin (a most able engineer) against
Venloo, while Miranda should besiege Maestricht, and by that means to make
himself master of the lower part of the Meuse as far as Genep.

General Dumourier confined the number of men that Miranda should employ in
this expedition to 25,000 or ^0,000, at the utmost, that he might not too much
weaken the posts on the Meuse, He recommended the greatest dispatch in the
preparations, so that Maestricht might be invested by the 12th or 15th of that
month; and he appointed lieutenant general Bouchet, an experienced engineer, to
assist Miranda in the siege.

Dumourier wrote nearly in the same terms to Lanoue and Thouvenot; enjoining
them to inform the troops, that he should review them, after having visited the
quarters on the lower Meuse. He wrote to lieutenant general Moreton, who
commanded in Brussels, that he was setting off immediately for that city. And
to General d'Harville, ordering him to assemble his troops at Namur on the 20th
of February, as he designed to review his division on the 22d of that month.
Thus, in misleading such of his generals as were not to be employed in the
expedition he effectually deceived the enemy, who were utterly at a loss to
conjecture in what point he would begin the campaign.

Some days after General Dumourier quitted Paris, Pache resigned the war
departmemt in ord^^ to be chosen Mayor of Paris, and was succeeded by General
Bournonville, for whom Dumourier had procured the rank of lieutenant general
and afterward of general in a very short space of time. Dumourier had been used
to call him his Ajax and his son. In truth he had commenced his career with
great spirit, and had evinced a sincere attachment to the general. Dumourier
now informed him merely, that it was his design to attack Holland, without
entering into any detail of his plan, lest he should be betrayed by the
indiscretion or the dishonesty of the clerks of the war office.

Pache, a little while before his quitting the ministry, had ordered the
demolition of the small part of the fortifications of Mons and Tournay which
then remained. These imprudent orders had disgusted the inhabitants of those
two cities. General Dumourier suspended the execution of the order; and, he not
only desired the new minister of war to revoke it, but strongly recommended to
him to repair the fortifications of those two places, with the utmost dispach.
He also counseled him to fortify with equal speed the strong place of the
castle of Huy; to make ditches round Malines, which might easily be put in a
state of defense by inundations; to erect strong batteries at Ostend, Nieuport,
and Dunkirk, in order to strengthen our frontiers on that side, in the probable
case of our being obliged to evacuate Belgium. General Dumourier further
advised Burnonville to complete the ^ines from Dunkirk to Bergues; to form an
entrenched camp at Mount Cassell; and to fortify Orchies between Li^le, Douay,
and Conde; Bavay, as an out-post to Quesnoy, between Conde and Maubege; and
Beaumon between Ma^bege and Phill^p^ville.

Such were the counsels respecting fortifying that frontier which were given by
General Dumourier, although he is a cused of having betrayed his country.
General Dumourier faithfully served his country till the moment that he quitted
her; and he will again serve her; with the same zeal and fidelity, if he should
ever see her governed by a king, under the sanction of a constitution. Had his
counsels been followed, the combined armies would have been detained longer on
the exterior frontier, by that line of posts and would not, have penetrated so
easily into France.

General Dumourier also requested Bournonville to send him reinforcements of
men, and to order General D'Arcon to join him, with some able engineers, having
to make a campaign that would abound in sieges. Bournonville acceded to all
Dumourier's requests, as far as was in his power, with promptitude; and General
D'Arcon arrived at the army immediately afterward.

This general, although one of the best engineers and one of the worthiest men
in France, had been accused of aristocracy by the well known Prince of Hesse, a
contemptible Jacobin; and had been deprived of his command; but General
Dumourier, who had been long acquainted with his merit, restored him to the
service of his country, and found him worthy of the trust reposed in him.

General de Flers commanded at Bruges. He was a brave man; but was opinionated,
and did not possess much capacity. Having received a wound with a musket ball
in the camp of Maulde, Dumourier made him major general; and afterward sent
him to Bruges, to take upon him the command in West Flanders, and had given him
orders to receive the reinforcement of 10,000 men, which Pache had marched into
that country on the General's request.

When Dumourier arrived at Bruges, de Flers laid before him a plan which he had
formed for surprising the city of Sluys. The general pretended to adopt the
plan; and sent de Flers to Bournonville, with a request to give de Flers a body
of 5 or 6000 men and small train of artillery, to enable him to menace Dutch
Flanders. The request was complied with, speedily and completely.

The general had no design that de Flers should attack the D^^^h towns in
Flanders, which it was not possile for (...) to take; but he placed this small
body of men under his orders, to be ready to replace, on the side of Antwerp
and Breda, the forces that the general should march into Holland. And he knew
that the assembling this small army in the neighborhood of Bruges would still
aid in deceiving the Dutch respecting the general's designs, especially as de
Flers was himself deceived, and made serious preparations for his expedition.

General Dumourier had left all the officers of his staff at Liege, together
with his aids de camp, and was accompanied by his faithful Baptiste. He had
also left his equipage with the grand army, to favor the opinion that he
designed to return; and had only ordered a few horses to attend him at Antwerp,
under pretense of visiting the cantonments on the Meuse. To form his staff
therefore, he sent for four of his officers, at the head of whom he placed
Colonel Thouvenot, brother to the general of the same name. This officer, who,
under every circumstance, has been the zealous friend of General Dumourier,
abounded in courage, information, and resources of mind. He was in an an
eminent degree important to the general during the campaign in Holland; and
when they quitted the army together rendered the general every service in his
power.

The presence of General Thouvenot was necessary to the grand army. He was the
only officer that perfectly understood the details of duty in winter quarters;
and was the only one that had influence enough to heal the frequent quarrels
that happened among the generals. It was known that he possessed the entire
confidence of Dumourier, and also that his merit entitled him to that
confidence; and although he was not the better beloved on that account, it
obtained him a greater degree of respect; and, it being known that he was
perfectly acquainted with the general's intentions, his opinion was received
with the same deference that was paid to the general's orders.

There was no other commissary with the army, than Petit-Jean, to provide
magazines and every thing necessary for the siege of Maestricht, and for the
cantonments between the Meuse and the Roer, and the different quarters in
Belgium. It seemed imprudent to take him a moment from these multiplied
concerns, before the arrival of Malus, who was still detained at Paris,
although a promise had been made to the general that he should be sent to the
army.

Notwithstanding these reasons, Dumourier ordered General Thouvenot and
Petit-Jean to attend him at Antwerp; and, in two days, he settled with them all
the necessary engagements to enable his troops to take the field for the
expedition.

Dumourier at the same time sent to Liege for General La Fayette, and
Lieutenant Colonel La Martiniere, to form his train of artillery, which indeed
was very inconsiderable. These two officers served him with a zeal and
knowledge deserving of the highest eulogiums.

On the departure of Thouvenot and Petit Jean, General Dumourier gave them
instructions for a new levy of twenty-five battalions of Belgians, consisting
of, 800 men each, and he charged the generals and other officers commanding in
the different provinces with the execution of these order, and appointed
Thouvenot inspector general and Petit Jean commissary general; in pursuance of
a decree of the National Convention, which placed those troops on the footing
of French soldiers. Till that period, the Belgic Provinces had made levies of
legions, regiments, and corpse at their pleasure. These troops were filled with
a disproportionate number of officers, and were paid on the credit of the
Belgic military committee, the members of which were very ignorant and
dishonest, and were governed by General Roziere, who had formerly been an
officer in the service of France, and was neither a man of honor nor talents.

General Valence, on his route from Paris, passed through Antwerp to take
Dumourier's orders, Dumourier communicated his entire plan to Valence; and
informed him that he was to cover the siege of Maestricht, with the army under
his command, till Miranda should depart for Nimeguen, afterward to continue the
siege, if the town should not be then taken. He recommended to the general to
visit all the winter quarters of the army, to choose a proper position for the
covering army, to watch the motions of the enemy, and to hold himself ready to
engage them if they should endeavor to relieve Maestricht, which was
reasonably to be expected. Above all things, he recommended to him to act with
promptness and vigor; to concert measures sincerely and cordia, (...) General
Miranda; and to consult General Thouvenot, whose knowledge could not fail to be
of infinite service to him. At the same time he sent orders to Lanoue to obey
General Valence.

The Committee of Finance of the Convention, mistrusting the general, or being
desirous of counteracting and insulting them had ordered the treasury to
fu^^ish no more money to the troops than their pay, and not to appropriate sums
for the other expenses, although the troops were in want of shoes, clothes and
arms. The paymaster of the army supplied no more for the t^oeps destined
against Holland, than the pay of fifteen days, which amounted to only 240,000
livres; and the troops did not even cost the nation that sum, since they lived
at the expense of the country. The expedition however was attended with
prodigious incidental expenses.

Notwithstanding the rapacity and unjust conduct of the French in Belgium, the
whole of that nation rendered justice to the conduct of General Dumourier. In
no city of Europe are there a greater number of wealthy inhabitants than at
Antwerp. After the commerce of that city had fallen into decay, the inhabitants
had substituted the most rigid economy in the place of that resource. Their
expenses were usually confined within the bounds of a part of their revenues,
so that their fortunes could not but accumulate greatly. General Dumourier
assembled the magistrates and principal citizens, and opened a loan of
1,200,000 slorins. A merchant named Verbrouck was charged with the receipt of
the money, and the commissary Petit-Jean with the superintendance of its
expenditure. The loan produced 200,000 florins, which in the end was an
i^estimable resource. It served to cloth and arm the legion of the North, the
hussars of the Republic, and several other French and Belgic corpse. General
Dumourier, who never had leisure even to examine the accounts of the
expenditure, and who was in Holland while it was received and expended, has
been calumniated on this ground also. He was charged in the Jacobin Society,
and afterward in the Convention, with having appropriated this sum to his own
use. But he whose mind is occupied with great and interesting concerns, is not
liable to be greatly tempted by the love of wealth.

General Dumourier, before he entered Holland, published a mani^esto, with
which the House of Orange has been justly offended. That declaration, it is
true, in a war of ordinary circumstances had been very unjust and unwise,
although we have been accustomed to see hostilities between the most civilized
nations preceded by mutual abuse and accusations. But it would be a wrong done
to General Dumourier, to impute to his moral character, actions that were
imposed upon him by his public situation. -- He was called upon to give
encouragement to a very considerable party in the Dutch nation, who were
dispirited by former misfortunes; and to terrify the partisans of the
Stadtholder. -- It became him, in the station he filled, to separate the people
of Holland from the cause of the Stadtholder, since the Dutch nation, had it
been left to her to determine, would have avoided the war, dreading it as
altogether contrary to her interests. Dumourier's declaration resulted from
these circumstances; and beside, it was necessary to screen the general from
the censure and resentment of the National Convention, till he should be able
to penetrate with success into Holland.

The preparations of which we have spoken were made, and the army assembled
with every necessary, in ten days; and the advanced guard entered Holland, on
the 17th of February. The most important difficulty was, to conceal the
inconsiderable amount of this small army. And, in that, the general succeeded
so perfectly, that the troops themselves were persuaded that they were not less
they 30,000 strong; while the Dutch imagined they had to contend with an
immense army; in which opinion, they were confirmed by the inhabitants of
Antwerp, who extremely exaggerated the number of troops, which passed through
that city.

CHAP. III.
Assembling the Army. Its amount. First movements. General Dumourier's meeting
with the Swedish Ambassador. Taking of Breda, Klundert, and Gertruydenberg.
Siege of Williamstadt. Blockade of Bergen-op-Zoom, and Steenberg. Summons given
to Heusden. General Dumourier at the Moor Dyke. Preparations for passing to
Dort, by the Moor-Dyke and Roowaert. Second project of passing by
Gertruydenberg. The General receives Orders to join the Grand Army: Departs.
Instructions given to General de Flers.
THE greater part of the army entered the Dutch territories on the 17th of
February, and were stationed in cantonments, closely connected with each other,
and extending from Bergen-op-Zoom, to within a league of Breda. The artillery
was not yet ready; and the general, having various orders to give relative to
his expedition, to the army of the Meuse, and the affairs of Belgium, was
detained at Antwerp till the 22d, when he departed with the artillery and the
remainder of the troops.

The army was composed of twenty-one battalions, beside the cavalry and light
troops. These twenty-one battalions, if complete, would have amounted to near
14,000 men; but there were not above 10,000 under arms. Of these, there were
only two battalions that were troops of the line, the 20th regiment formerly
the regiment of Conti, which had never seen any service, and the National
gendarmerie.

Three battalions of the volunteers had served in the preceding campaign in
Flanders. The rest were new levies, the greater part of whom were boys of
thirteen and sixteen years of age. There were but eight battalions that had
cannon. The cavalry amounted to a 1000 men, consisting of a 100 excellent
troopers of the 20th regiment; 50 of the 6th regiment; the 8th regiment of
hussars, amounting to nearly 300 men, who were new levies, and were ill armed
and ill mounted; a hundred Belgic hussars, that were very good soldiers; eighty
Dutch dragoons; and 300 horse of the legion of the North, commanded by Colonel
Westermann. These last were new levies, and altogether undisciplined. The light
troops were, three Dutch battalions making about 1500 men, and who conducted
themselves with great bravery during the expedition; a corpse of 1000 Belgians,
raised at Bruges and Ghent, of which 200 were light horse dismounted; and the
infantry of the legion of the North, to the number of 1200, who were by no
means good soldiers, and were very much given to marauding. This army, which
amounted to 18,000 men, mustered no more than 13,700 men fit for service. The
artillery consisted of four 12 pounders, eight 8 pounders, four mortars of 10
inches, twenty hand-grenades, and four howitzers.

General Dumourier divided this little army into four divisions. The advanced
guard, commanded by General Berneron, was composed of two battalions of
National guards, two battalions of Dutch refugees, the Belgic corpse, a party of
the legion of the North, the fifty dragoons of the 6th regiment, the eighty
Dutch dragoons, and the cavalry of the legion of the North. The right division
consisted of nine battalions of National guards, and the two battalions of
Gendarmerie, (which could not be reckoned as making more than one battalion),
with the half of the French hussars, and was commanded by General d'Arcon,
assisted by Colonel Westermann. The left division, commanded by Colonel Le
Clerc, colonel of the regiment of Bouillon, was composed of nine battalions,
(one of which consisted of troops of the line,) and the remainder of the 8th
regiment of hussars.

It is to be observed that this regiment of hussars remained behind for want of
horses and arms, and afterward joined the army of Breda, in a state almost
unfit for service; and the general was obliged to break the colonel named
Dumont, who had been a tailor of Lisle, (a drunken, ignorant, and dishonest
man, but a vehement Jacobin) and to give the regiment to lieutenant colonel
Morgan, one of the general's aids-du-camp.

The rear-guard of the army was composed of a battalion of National guards; a
Dutch battalion; two hundred Belgians; a hundred troopers of the 20th regiment;
and a hundred of the Belgic hussars; and was commanded by Colonel Tilly, an
aid-du-camp of the general. A part of the artillery was attached to each of
these divisions.

With this small army the general undertook the conquest of Holland. But he had
a powerful party in the country, who expected him with impatience, and were
ready to declare themselves on his penetrating into the country. He had neither
time, on account of the necessary rapidity of his movements, nor means, for
want of good officers in the different corpse, to form and discipline these
troops. But they were ardent, courageous, and impatient for action; and the
enterprise they were undertaking had a boldness in it, that extremely well
suited the genius of the nation. The general informed this little army of the
rigor of the climate into which they were going; the number of strong places,
surrounded by inundations, to be taken; and the canals and arms of the sea to
be crossed. But while he told them of these obstacles, he declared to them
that, being once arrived in Holland, they would be joined by numerous friends,
and would find provisions, money and every thing they wanted, in abundance.

The French soldier possesses great sensibility and understanding; and is not
to be conducted with success by the ordinary means of military men. If his
general have the good sense to unfold to him the obstacles of an enterprise, he
thinks no longer of any thing but conquering them, and actually makes the
enterprise an affair of pleasure. But if the danger be concealed from him, he
is confounded in discovering it; and if he be once dispirited, or rather
disgusted with being led blindly to a desperate task, he gives way to mistrust,
and it becomes impossible to rally him; or afterward to control him This is a
divine pi^te of a soldier.
.

Damourier had caused General Berneron to march forward, on the 16th, with the
advanced guard; promising that he should be supported shortly by the rest of
the army. In written instructions which he delivered to General Berneron, he
ordered him instantly to send a detachment consisting of 800 infantry and 100
cavalry, commanded by lieutenant colonel Daendels, a Dutch refugee, to the

Moor Dyke, in order to seize upon all the vessels he should find there, or at
Swaluve, or Roowaert: to post the remainder of his division along the little
river of Merck, from Oudenbosch and Sevenbergen to Breda: and to throw a bridge
over the river Merck, in order to secure a communication with
lieutenant colonel Daendels, and to be able to support him against any sorties
that might be made by the neighboring garrisons.

In Bergen-up-Zoom, Gertruydenberg, and Breda, there were three regiments of
dragoons, amounting to more than all the cavalry of General Dumourier, and a
sufficient number of infantry to act with them. It is certain that if these had
been assembled together, and had been joined by the cavalry of Bois-le-Duc, and
Heusden, they would have been sufficiently strong to have compelled the
advanced guard to retire, and thereby to have ruined the expedition. But
Dumourier knew that there was not any one of the Dutch generals charged with
the defense of the country, or who had authority to draw all the cavalry
together; and he was certain that the officers who commanded in the different
towns, having no plan of general defense, would attend only to the danger which
threatened them respectively, and would not hazard any part of their garrisons,
against an army, which each of them believed to be very strong, and which
appeared, by the extent of its cantonments to menace several cities at once.
Beside, that the commanding officers of the garrisons were sufficiently
embarrassed in preparing means for their defense; not having expected so sudden
an attack, and in this early part of the season.

On the 22d, the general arrived at his first post; and was astonished and
afflicted to find that his orders had not been executed. No part of the
advanced guard had yet passed the Merck; by which neglect, time was given to
the Dutch to withdraw all their vessels from the Moor Dyke to the side of Dort,
and place them under the protection of three guardships, which were on that
station. This first error rendered the general's passage to Dort extremely
difficult, and almost impracticable, unless he could obtain other boats in the
place of these he had expected to seize.

He instantly commanded Berneron and Daendels to push forward; and General
d'Arcon to invest Breda with the right division; and Colonel le Clerc closely
to blockade Bergen-op-Zoom, and Steenberg, with the lest. The officers who
commanded in those two last places abandoned all their out posts. Colonel le
Clerk made himself master of the small sort of Blaw-sluys, at a little distance
from Steenberg, which place he summoned to surrender. The garrison of
Bergen-op-Zoom, made two or three inconsiderable fallies; which produced no
other effect than the desertion of some of their men, who entered into the
Dutch legion.

General Dumourier proceeded, with his rear guard, between the two divisions of
his army, to Sevenbergen; sending his advanced guard forward to Klundert and
Williamstadt, with orders to besiege those two places. And he commanded
Lieutenant Colonel Daendels to post himself at Nordschantz, in order to cut off
the communication between Williamstadt and Klundert. This officer seized three
vessels at Nordschantz.

The general appointed Messrs. Koch and De Niss to be colonels. The former of
them, who was an eloquent speaker, and a man of enterprising character, was
ordered to assist Daendels; and the latter, a man of information and temperate
courage, accompanied the general.

Dumourier did not conceal from himself the difficulty of passing to Dort, by
the Moor Dyke. The following was the plan first projected for that purpose.
Koch and Daendels, according to the instructions given to Berneron, were to
proceed by the 17th to the Moor Dyke with 900 men, supported by the whole of
the advanced guard, posted on the Merck. They were to collect all the vessels
they could find on that side; and, on the 21st or 22d at furthest, embarking
all the men they could crowd into these vessels, were to pass to Dort, which
they had reason to hope would join them; and, aided by the inhabitants, were to
disarm the garrison, consisting of 250 men, unless they should be willing to
incorporate themselves with the army. There were more than a hundred vessels
lying at Dort. These they were to conduct to the Moor Dyke; and, arming three
or sour with the largest cannon, were to send them forward to drive off the
three small guard ships. Indeed it was proposed to make themselves masters of
these vessels by boarding them, they being both ill-armed and ill manned.

The plan thus far accomplished, the main body of the army was to proceed to
Sevenbergen, Oudenbosch, Moor Dyke and Swaluve; and, from thence, to pass to
Dort, in one or two divisions; their embarkation being protected by the rear
guard, who were to destroy the bridge that should be thrown over the Merck, and
to prevent the garrisons, that might attempt to harrass the army, from passing
the river. The army being once arrived at Dort there was no longer any obstacle
to be feared.

On the evening in which General Dumourier quitted Antwerp, he met, at a little
village on his route, the Baron de Stael, who formerly had been Ambassador from
Sweden to France, and was now going to Paris. The Baron supped with Dumourier,
and informed him that every part of Germany and Holland through which he had
passed was friendly to the General's enterprise; and that at Utrecht he was
impatiently expected. He also confirmed the intelligence, which the General had
already received, that the party of the Stadtholder were in the greatest
consternation. Without endeavoring to discover the object of the Baron's
journey, the General counseled him to wait the issue of the present expedition
before he should explain himself confidentially to the French Ministry, that he
might not too hastily pledge his court to any certain line of conduct, or
expose his measures to be afterward disowned; and he advised him by all means
to be silent, at Paris, on any subject but such as he was willing should be
known to the whole world. This Minister assured the General that he was going
to Paris on his private concerns. Dumourier before his departure from Antwerp,
had given the same counsel to a personage from Poland, of very high rank and
consequence; who, being on his route, had paid a visit to the General at his
quarters. Indeed, the General's maxim uniformly was to take every opportunity
of preventing foreign courts from pledging themselves to a ministry, the slave
of an assembly of 700 men, without prudence, experience or honor.

Dumourier's original plan was totally deranged by the negligence of the
officers, to whom he had entrusted the advanced guard, and the execution of his
first operations. But he did not abandon his hopes of success. He concerted new
means. In the canals between Oudenbosch and Sevenbergen, he found 23 vessels
from 20 to 70 tons. He ordered one of his Commissaries, named Boursier, an
indefatigable and intelligent man, to make them fit to carry 1200 men; and to
mount four of them with cannon, (...) guard of this little squadron. He im(...)
small ports that are to be found in that part, and assigned them very
considerable pay, on the funds already raised by the Dutch Committee, on the
credit of the property of the Prince of Orange and his known partisans.

From the moment that Dumourier entered Holland, the army no longer cost the
French treasury any thing more than the daily pay. The inhabitants of their own
accord, furnished provisions and forage, as well as money to forward the
expedition. Never was an army received with such cordiality; nor ever did
soldiers less merit such reception; the Gendarmerie and light troops indulging
themselves in rapine and every species of oppression. But from the disgrace of
this conduct, the troops of the line, and national guards, are to be wholly
exempted; since, on all occasions, these conducted themselves with urbanity and
justice.

As it demanded time to prepare the vessels, the general made another important
change in his first plan. According to that, he meant to deceive and evade the
strong places; and, stealing as is were, between them, to embark directly at
the Moor Dyke. After that he would have had time to harrass those places; and
relying on the weakness of the garrisons, and inexperience of the commanding
officers, he calculated on making himself master of at least one of them, which
event would give great relief to his army, and furnish him with artillery and
ammunition, in both of which he was extremely ill provided.

He resolved to undertake no one siege in form. -- To press a regular siege
forward with vigor, he must have assembled his little army in one point, and
thereby have given the enemy an opportunity of knowing its weakness; and, being
no longer master of the country, it would have been easy for the garrisons that
were not attacked to recover from their surprise, assemble troops to cut off
his communication with Antwerp, drive away his workmen, and destroy his little
fleet, without which he had nothing to hope. Wherefore, while Colonel Le Clerc
continued to blockade Bergen-op-Zoom and Steenberg, he ordered General d'Arcon
to attack Breda, and his advanced guard at the same time to fall upon Klundert.

Breda is a town celebrated for its strength. It was furnished with two hundred
pieces of cannon, was well palisadoed, and protected by an inundation. Twelve
hundred infantry, and a regiment of dragoons, garrisoned the place; but the
Governor, the Count de By land, was a courtie^, and had seen no service. The
troops bought their bread at the bakers, their meat at the butchers, without
having any magazines. The Dutch towns are most of them well protected by
inundations, and abound with strong exterior works; but are greatly deficient
in casemates, and the inhabitants are greatly disaffected to the government.

General d'Arcon, without opening any trenches, erected two batteries of four
mortars and four howitzers, extremely near the town, on the side of the village
of Hage. The enemy answered by a very brisk fire, during three days; on the
fourth, General d'Arcon had no more than sixty bombs left, and must have been
under the necessity of raising the siege after throwing them into the place. At
this moment, Colonel Philip de Vaux, an Aid-de-Camp of General Dumourier,
entered the place to summon it for the second time, and represented to the
Count de By and, that General Dumourier was on the point of arriving with his
whole army, and that then no quarters would be given to the garrison, which so
a^armed the Governor that he capitulated with the consent of his officers. The
honors of war and all the Governor's demands were granted him. The French
entered the place; which, excepting some few houses, was not at all damaged.
They found two hundred and fifty bouches a seu, The translator does not knew
wh^^ those are.
near three hundred thousand weight of powder, and five thousand fusees, of
which they were in great want. This siege did not cost more than twenty men on
each side. The French carried their temerity so far as to dance the Carmagnole
on the glacis, on the side which was not inundated. Thirty dragoons of the
regiment of Byland sallied out upon these men, killed some and returned with
six prisoners, having lost two or three men and some of their horses.

The besieging army amounted to no more than five thousand men; and, of these,
twelve hundred were detached to seize upon sorts on the sluices, on the side of
Huesden.

Klundert was taken in two days after the surrender of Breda. The works of this
small sort were extremely regular, and the place was protected by inundations
that entirely surrounded it. It was defended with great vigor, but with little
judgment, by a lieutenant colonel in the Dutch service, who was a Westphalian.
He had no more than a hundred and fifty men in the place. General Berneion had
erected a battery of four cannon and a number of small mortars close behind the
dyke, at a hundred and fifty toises from the place; so that the houses of that
small1 city were almost entirely destroyed. The commanding officer, after
keeping up an almost incessant fire during several days with little effect, and
having no longer any shelter for his troops, resolved to spike his cannon, and
to endeavor to retreat with the remainder of his garrison to Williamstadt. He
was intercepted by a detachment of the Dutch refugees, commanded by Lieutenant
Colonel Hartmann, whom he shot dead, receiving at the same time a ball which
killed him on the spot, and his men were made prisoners. The French carried the
body of this officer to Klundert, after having taken the keys of the town which
were found in his pocket.

In this place were found fifty-three pieces of cannon, some mortars, a great
quantity of bombs and shot, and about eighty thousand weight of powder.

General Dumourier lost no time in sending Berneron to besiege Williamstadt.
And it was wi^^ the ammunition and artillery of Klundert that the new siege was
undertaken.

Dumourier also ordered General d'Arcon to commence the siege of
Gertruydenberg. This small town was ill defended on the side of Ramsdoneck,
having in that quarter only a slight pallisadoe along the river, and being
commanded by neighboring heights. But on the left side of the Donge, it was
protected by an extensive inundation, and by two lines of extremely strong
outworks, which could not have been carried in three weeks, had they been ably
and vigorously defended. The garrison was composed of the regiment of Hertzel,
amounting to between eight or nine hundred men, and of a fine regiment of
dragoons belonging to the Stadtholder's guard. The governor, named Bedault, a
major general in the service, was an old man of eighty. General d'Arcon began
the attack with cannon, and mortars that he brought from Breda. All the
outworks were carried, or abandoned by the enemy on the second day. D'Arcon
erected batteries on some of them; and after a few shot were exchanged, Colonel
de Vaux entered the place, the capitulation was settled, the honors of war
were granted, and General Dumourier, who had arrived meanwhile, dined with the
old General Bedault, who acknowledged to him that he had surrendered because he
had been disappointed in his expectations of receiving vessels from Dort to
Gorcum, to enable him to evacuate the place. A few bombs had fallen on the city
and one on the general's house.

During dinner, a messenger came to inform the governor that the terms of
capitulation had been violated by a lieutenant colonel of the National guards,
who, being drunk, insolently insisted on entering the city in spite of the
sentinels; and had attempted to discharge a pistol at the lieutenant colonel of
the regiment of Hirtzel. General Dumourier ordered the drunkard to be brought
into the room, tore the epaulet from his shoulder, and reduced him to the
ranks, to the great astonishment of the officers of the garrison. who
interceded for his pardon.

General Dumourier conversed much with this garrison, which consisted of
exceeding fine troops. He has frequently since thought of an expression of the
lieutenant colonel of the regiment of Hirtzel, who walking with him on the
ramparts, said Hodie mihi, cras tibi. The honest Swiss spoke prophetically.

This new conquest gave us a hundred and fifty bonches a feu, two hundred
thousand weight of powder, a quantity of bombs and ball, twenty-five hundred
new fusees, and what was most essential an excellent port, and more than thirty
vessels of various sizes. We had also taken five vessels at Breda.

This was in the beginning of March. While these sieges were carrying forward,
the general passed the greater part of the time at the Moor Dyke, whence, it
being in the center of his operations, he directed the sieges on his right and
left, and superintended the fitting out of his squadron. His commissary
Boursier having, with incredible exertions, found means to arm twenty-three
vessels, and to victual them for twelve hundred men, the general sent them down
the canal of Sevenbergen to Roowaert, which is a small creek, lying a quarter
of a league west of the Moor Dyke.

On the day the general established his quarters in this village with an
hundred Dutch chasseurs and fifty dragoons, he was cannonaded the whole day, by
three guard ships. Having posted his chasseurs along the Dyke, by which two men
were killed on board the vessels, he compelled them to abandon their situation.
A few hours after, he ordered twelve twenty-four pounders from Breda, together
with ammunition, and constructed several batteries, one of which was at
Roowaert, to protect the sailing of his squadron, and the rest at the Moor Dyke
to cover his embarkment. He was there persuaded that his cannon would carry
more than half way over the canal; and indeed the enemy's armed ships did not
again approach the side occupied by the French.

He caused huts covered with straw to be raised along the sands from Roowaert
to Swaluve. There the soldiers amused themselves and were extremely happy, but
impatient to cross to Dort. Dumourier jestingly told them that they resembled
beavers; and he named this aquatic cantonment, the camp of Beavers. Provisions
were in plenty; the water was not bad; and brandy was distributed to the troops
every morning. The general gave his troops an example of firmness; and was
lodged and lived like the rest.

In this expedition, the general chalked himself out a system for carrying on
war in countries overflowed by water. It would not be impossible, by means of
dykes, to march over any part of Holland, to conduct artillery, and establish
batteries at pleasure: excepting in the case of being opposed by gun-boats,
when it would be necessary to have an adequate force of the same nature.

General Dumourier had, among his battalions of volunteers, several men from
Gascony, Brittany, Normandy, and Dunkirk. Of these men he formed a body of from
four to five hundred sailors, giving them twenty sols per day in addition to
their pay. The general's squadron at Roowaert was designed to carry his
advanced guard, and he appointed an English naval officer, and a lieutenant of
the Dutch navy to command it; with the assistance of some pilots belonging to
the country. But the necessary delays had given time to the Dutch to augment
considerably their squadron in the Bisbos, which is the small sea of the Moor
Dyke. That squadron consisted already of twelve armed ships, one of which
carried twenty. guns; and these vessels were disposed of with great judgment
for opposing the general's passage, and acting in concert. But Dumourier
calculated, in case the wind should be settled, that not more then half the
squadron could engage him, as those which should be to ^eeward of him would
not, in that case be able to rearh him.

The Dutch had also erected batteries at Stry, and all along the coast of the
island of Dort; which it was said was reinforced by 1200 of the English guards,
who had landed since the declaration of war at Helvoet Sluys. The general
however was convinced that the enemy had no certain intelligence of his plan,
because the Prince of Orange was making his greatest preparations for defense
at Gorcum, and had assembled an army there to oppose his march: this army was
yet inconsiderable; the reinforcements of the English and emigrants augmenting
it to no more than 4000 men.

Dumourier, still to deceive the enemy respecting his real design, continued
the blockade of Bergen-op-Zoom and Steenberg. General de Flers was returned
from Paris, and had obtained the reinforcement that he demanded, which arrived
with great dispatch. Dumourier ordered him to occupy the cantonments of Colonel
Le Clerc at Rosendael, and round Bergen-op-Zoom with 6000 men, which orders
were rapidly executed. He ordered the left division to approach Oudenbosch, and
Severnbergen. He sent the national gendarmerie, with some cavalry, from his
right, to show themselves on the side of Heusden. A lieutenant colonel of the
gendarmerie summoned that place; and, ridiculously enough, addressed the
governor by the phrase of citizen governor, instead of the usual appellation.

General Berneron continued the siege of Williamstadt; but with very ill
success. He had commenced his attack at too great a distance; and consumed a
great quantity of ammunition, without making any progress. There was but one
front of this town which was open to attack, and that was extremely narrow: and
the Dutch had thrown re-inforcements into the town by sea. Dumourier sent to
the assistance of General Berneron, Dubois de Crance, (an engineer of great
merit, and very different in character from his unworthy brother, the member of
the national convention) and another engineer named Marescot. These two
valuable officers resolved to draw nearer the town; and while they were
erecting a battery at the distance of 200 toises from the place, they were
abandoned by their soldiers, and were slain in a sortie, that the enemy made on
the workmen. General Berneron, notwithstanding, continued the siege
obstinately, which was not raised till after the departure of General Dumourier
for the grand army.

The general having found a considerable quantity of shipping at
Gertruydenberg, he resolved to use them in facilitating his passage to Dort. He
had a sufficient number of vessels at Roowaert for his advanced guard. Master
of Breda, Klundert, and Gertruydenberg, and leaving the corpse under General de
Flers to continue the blockade of Steenberg and Bergen-op-Zoom, he had secured
his rear guard from being harrassed. He therefore caused his rear guard to
advance to Swaluve, at which place there were vessels for its embarkation; and
he resolved to embark his right division in the vessels of Gertruydenberg.

The passage from Gertruydenberg to the island of Dort is somewhat longer than
that from the Moor Dyke. To the right, and even in front of this port, the
Bishos is filled with sand banks, and numerous small islands detached from the
main land of Gorcum; most of which are covered with trees and underwood. The
armed ships of the enemy drew too much water to approach these islands. There
were however, three barks each carrying four cannon, and thirty men, stationed
at different points to guard the passage. Beyond these small islands many of
which are covered by the tide at high water, was situated an island much more
elevated above the water than the rest, on which was a small farm belonging to
an inhabitant of Gertruydenberg. This island, which the enemy's largest vessels
could not approach within seven or eight hundred toises, was separated from the
island of Dort only by a space of six hundred toises, which was guarded by a
battery mounting six cannon, standing on a low and muddy soil on the island of
Dort, and by a frigate of fourteen guns, stationed under the battery.

The general resolved to land two battalions, with six four and twenty pounders
in this island; and to erect a battery to drive off the frigate, whose guns
appeared to be small. Having done this, he designed to embark with his right
division in the smaller vessels belonging to Gertruydenberg and to pass over in
the same route.

As he might be compelled to engage one of the vessels of four guns, in his
passage to the island, he designed to fill several large shallops with chosen
men on board that vessel, and ordered two vessels each carrying two cannon to
be ready to precede him, giving the command of one to an English naval officer
named White, and of the other to Lieutenant Colonel La Rue, an aid-de-camp of
the general, who had been in the sea-service. Every preparation was made with
such celerity that it was the general's design to have attempted the passage on
the night of the 8th or 10th. But events of a very different nature were
arriving, and the rapidity of his first success was followed by a still more
rapid succession of evils which decided the fate of the war.

Dumourier in the midst of his plans, and notwithstanding his successes, had
for some days been a prey to the greatest uneasiness. The siege of Maestricht
had been commenced on the 20th of February; but although General Miranda had
set fire to several quarters of the city, it was defended it with extreme
obstinacy, by reinforcements of the emigrants, who assembled there in great
numbers, headed by M.d'Autichamp, a lieutenant general in the army of the
Prince of Conde, and an excellent officer; to whom it is said the Dutch owe the
safety of the city of Maestricht.

General Champmorin had, without any opposition made himself master of the fort
of Stevenswaert, on the Meuse; and also of fort St. Michael, which commands the
entrance, the left side of that river, of the bridge of Venloo. But he had not
been able to take possession of Venloo, the Prussians having already entered it.

General Valence, although he possessed military talents, had not acquired
sufficient authority over the troops effectually to compensate for the absence
of Dumourier. He remained at Liege; and had neither raised the winter quarters
of the troops, nor drawn them closer together. And great misunderstandings
existed among the generals.

General Stengel occupied the quarters round Aix-la-Chapelle. He was an officer
well versed in the discipline and duties of light troops, and was excellently
calculated to command an advanced guard.

General Dampierre commanded in Aix-la-Chapelle, where he was entirely taken up
with his pleasures, and the means of gratifying his rapacity. He was a man of a
fierce, and ambitious spirit, rash in the extreme, but was without talent, and
was even timid at times through his excessive ignorance. He hated his
superiors; and machinated with the Jacobins of Paris, for the fabrication of
calumnies, by which he aimed at the command of the armies.

The Prince of Coburg, who had arrived at Cologne, was acquainted with the
misunderstandings of the generals, and the injudicious, and seeble disposition
of the troops. Assembling his army he marched to Aldenhoven, where he
penetrated into the French quarters without obstacle. The French instantly
abandoned all their posts, without making the least stand against the enemy;
and fell back upon Liege in the greatest confusion. General le Veneur, who
commanded the attack of Maestricht on the side of Wyck, had the good fortune to
have sufficient time to pass the Meuse with his cannon. The Imperialists
entered Mastricht. Miranda, notwithstanding ought to have continued the
bombardment from the left side of the liver; and, collecting his army between
Tongres and Maestricht, which was a tolerable position, he might then have
prevented the further progress of the Prince of Coburg.

These were the orders given to Miranda by General Dumourier, on his receiving
news of the disaster. This was also the advice of General Valence. That General
a few days after saved a column consisting of twenty-seven battalions on their
retreat from Liege, by making a vigorous charge on the enemy, at the head of
his cavalry on the plains of Tongres: and Lieutenant General Lanoue displayed
the greatest bravery, in his retreat from Aix-la-Chapelle.

But Miranda was disconcerted, and lost all presence of mind. On his own
authority, he ordered the troops to abandon the Meuse. The Imperialists
followed up their victory, passed the Meuse, entered Liege, and took possession
of the French magazines, which were considerable, especially in the article of
clothing. So great was the consternation in the French army, that, excepting
the heavy artillery which was carried off to Louvain, and from thence to
Tournay, every thing was abandoned, including even the baggage of the troops.

The two generals, Miranda and Valence, assembled their forces in the camp of
Louvain. Champorin, who could no longer maintain his position on the left side
of the Meuse, evacuated Stevenswaert, and Fort St. Michael, (in which places he
ought to have left garrisons) and retreated to Die. General la Marliere, who
was at Ruremonde, fell back to the same place. This retreat left the Prussians
masters of the Lower Meuse. They had it in their power instantly to have
crossed the country of Campine; and, by the route of Antwerp or Bois-le-Duc,
might have fallen on the rear of the French army in Holland. Prince Frederick
of Brunswick lost this important opportunity; and General Dumourier, availing
himself of the neglect, afterward placed his army in security.

The troops under Miranda and Valence, were utterly discouraged. They openly
blamed and menaced their general officers, more especially Miranda, who was in
considerable danger of his life. At length however General Valence, aided by
the prudence of General Thouvenot, restored some degree of order in the army.
But the desertion of the army was enormous. More than 10,000 men absolutely
returned to France. The army loudly demanded the presence of General Dumourier.
The commissioners of the Convention dispatched courier after courier, urging
his departure for Louvain. The general constantly answered them, that they
might maintain the army in its present position; and that still there was
nothing to be feared if they gave him time to accomplish his present object.
This was true. General Valence, and General Thouvenot were of the same opinion.
But Miranda now betrayed terror altogether proportionate to the rashness which
had hitherto governed him, which justified the dispatches of General Valence,
who from the first predicted this check, while Miranda's letters uniformly
asserted, that the army of the Imperialists was not to be feared. And certainly
his opinions would have been just, if the French had taken a judicious
position, with an equal force, which they might and ought to have done. It was
to be presumed that the Prince of Cobourg would not have chosen to hazard a
battle; or, if he had, the French had no reason to fear the issue.

The commissioners of the Convention hurried precipitately to Paris. They made
a report so alarming, and painted the consternation of the soldiers in such
strong colors, that it was universally acknowledged that General Dumourier
could alone stop the progress of the disaster, and save the army. He was
commanded in the most absolute terms, to abandon the expedition of Holland, and
instantly to put himself at the head of the grand army. He received the orders
on the evening of the 8th of March, and departed on the 9th, in a state
bordering no despair.

Dumourier gave the command of his army to General de Flers. He knew the
capacity of this general to be inadequate to the task; but he had not another
general officer he could put in his place. General d'Arcon was extremly
afflicted with the go^^, and could not keep the field, and had even refused the
rank of lieutenant general, which Dumourier would have obtained for him, sa a
reward for the taking of Breda. He retired to Antwerp. Lieutenant General
Marasse, an old soldier, who commanded at Anwerp, could not on account of his
great age, be entrusted in an active situation, although he was a man of
courage and experience. And it was Dumourier's design to send General Miranda
into Holland, on his arrival at the grand army.

Dumourier left Colonel Thouvenot, who was the soul of his little army, with
General de Flers. He gave the colonel a copy of the instructions he had
delivered to General de Flers, whom he recommended to undertake no enterprise
without the concurrence of Colonel Thouvenot. He ordered him instantly to
attempt the passage of Gertruydenberg; and, in case of success, to forward
dispatches to Dumourier, and to remain at Dort till he should receive his
further instructions.

But the departure of General Dumourier, utterly dispirited this army. Those
who had been most forward, impatient, and daring, on every occasion, now
considered the undertaking to be impracticable. In truth, it became such shortly
afterward. The Dutch squadron being reinforced, and the Prussians being on
their march by Bois-le-duc, de Flers, in pursuance of his instructions in the
case of the passage to Dort not taking place, threw himself into Breda, with
six battalions and two hundred horse, Colonel Tilly into Gertruydenberg, with
three battalions, and fifty horse, The remainder of the army returned safely to
Antwerp, owing to the good conduct of Colonel de Vaux, and Colonel Thouvenot.
Those officers withdrew from the batteries of the Moor Dyke, with the greatest
prudence, and constancy; and although the army was thrown into disorder, they
effected the retreat without loss. The fortifications of Klundert were blown up
by Thouvenot, who had not time to put that small sort in a state of defense.

And thus terminated Dumourier's enterprise against Holland. An enterprise,
projected and begun in ten days, which did not burden France with the
additional charge of one sol, and which probably had succeeded but for the
unfortunate retreat of Aix-la-Chapelle.

Two strong places were acquired in this expedition, by which the progress of
the enemy might have been arrested; and which might serve as magazines, and a
place of arms, if the design of entering Holland had been resumed. In a word,
France reaped no disgrace in this quarter. But now Dumourier's projects were
once more changed; and he was again compelled to form new plans, as well
respecting the interior situatian of France, as with respect to her enemies.

CHAP. IV.
The General arrives at Antwerp. Sends the Agents of the Executive Power from
that Town. Arrives at Brussels. Addresses the Representatives of the People.
Writes to the Convention. Arrests Chepy, and Estienne. Several Proclamations.
Arrives on the 13th of March at Louvain. The Commissioners of the Convention
come to that City to meet the General.
NOTWITHSTANDING the importance of the concerns which had occupied General
Dumourier's mind, since his departure from Paris, he had not overlooked, nor
failed to lament as much as the Belgians themselves, the detestable tyranny
exercised over them by the National Convention, and by the agents of the
Executive Power. The insolence of these latter, the Satellites of a varice and
oppression, was not exceeded even by their atrocious villainies. -- Their
conduct was a tissue of ridiculous circumstances. Most of them assumed the
military honors, and never walked the streets without a guard. They set all
rules at defiance; and, finding that they were not sufficiently numerous to
spread their extortions through the whole extent of those rich provinces, they
augmented their means by issuing commissions to other persons like themselves.

In passing through Bruges the General was invited to a ball. One of these
gentlemen, who was dancing, accosted the General on his entering the room; and
announcing himself as a Commissioner of the Executive Pow er, he acquainted the
General that he was on his road to Oftend and Nieuport, to put those places in
a proper state of defense. The General sternly commanded him to confine
himself to the functions of his office; to execute those with modesty, and
thenceforward, to forbear intruding himself into military concerns.

Another of these personages, named, as I think, Lieutaud, who was stationed at
Ruremonde, as a talk-master to General la Marliere, wrote a long letter to
Dumourier, Thouing and Theeing him throughout, and commanding him to abandon
every other enterprise, in order to march to the assistance of Ruremonde. The
General sent this letter to Le Brun, contenting himself with adding by way of
postscript, This letter ought to be dated, CHARENTON.

A third, named Cochelet, who resided at Liege, having received notice of the
declaration of war decreed on the first of February, ordered a detachment of
troops to attend him, and, marching on the Dutch territory before Maestricht,
proclaimed the war, tore up the posts on which were the arms of the States
General, and took possession of the Seven United Provinces, in the name of the
French Republic.

This impertinent parade served as a warning to the Governor of Maestricht to
withdraw his cavalry cantoned round the city, (together with a considerable
quantity of forage) which General Miaczynsky was on the point of surprising.
General Miranda naturally condemned this conduct, because he was not yet
prepared to act against Maestricht. Cochelet sent the General a written order
to take Maestricht before the 20th of February, on pain of being denounced as a
traitor; and he sent a copy of the letter to the National Convention, who
applauded his Roman firmness. Cochelet, however, was recalled; because,
intoxicated with the honors of his proconsulship, he had treated contemptuously
the authority of the deputies of the Convention.

When General Dumourier arrived at Antwerp on the second of February, he found
that city humiliated and terrified by the presence of one of these subaltern
tyrants, whose name he has forgotten, and whom he caused to be recalled. Every
city in Belgium was governed by one or more of these execrable Proconsuls. They
entered on their office by sequestering the silver of the churches, the
revenues of the clergy, and the estates of the nobility. They then pillaged, or
sold to their accomplices at an excessively inferior price, the furniture of
the nobles and elergy. They suppressed the national imposts to flatter the
people, degraded the magistrates from their seats, erected clubs, and exercised
an arbitrary authority, by the ald of the military, who blindly obeyed them.

Throughout the provinces of Belgium this wild tyranny was become
insupportable. Dumourier had made reiterated complaints of this tyranny to the
Convention, as well as to the Commissioners of the Convention, Camus,
Treilhard, Merlin and Gossuin, whom he met at Ghent; but these latter either
were not willing, or had not authority to redress the evil. He represented to
them, that on the Prince of Coburg's appearing in force on the frontier, a
general insurrection of the Belgians was to be expected, that our weakened
garrisons would be massacred, and our crimes punished by the hands of those we
had oppressed; and that this war was, in a manifold degree, more dangerous than
the war with the Imperialists.

The route of the troops at Aix-la Chapelle, their precipitate flight to
Louvain, their consusion, terror, and desertion, greatly increased the danger,
which Dumourier had foreseen, of a general insurrection in Belgium.

The danger was aggravated by the conduct of the Commissioners of the
Convention. They called on the provinces to express their resolution of being
united to France. The people were assembled in the churches without any order
or decency. A French Commissioner, supported by the commanding officer of the
place, by soldiers, and by French and Belgic Clubists, read the act of union,
which seldom was understood by any person present, any more than the harangue
made on the occasion; the act was notwithstanding signed by the audience,
generally with trembling hands; reports of the proceedings were printed, and
sent to the Convention, who forthwith created another department.

These fraternal proceedings were often effected by violence. At Brussels and
at Mons, muskets and sabres were employed in the assembly, and several persons
were wounded. Protests were formally made against the union. Partial
insurrections took place at Wawres, Hall, Brain, and Soignies. The most
dangerous was at Grammont. Ten thousand peasants assembled in arms, and had
possessed themselves of several cannon. They imprisoned the Commissioners, and
drove back detachments of the garrison of Ghent. These tumults increased
hourly. The French army, scarcely in force to resist the Imperialists, could
not spare troops so put an end to these cruel contests, which were spreading
over the whole of Belgium; and it had been easy for a few Flenish officers
belonging to the Imperial army, with some chosen soldiers, to have insinuated
themselves into the French quarters, by means of their knowledge of the
language, and ^o have given a regular form to this intestine war.

Dumourier hated the injustice of the National Convenvention, and resisted
every attempt to make him the instrument of its tyranny and the scourge of
Belgium. A twofold interest therefore directed his conduct at present. His
objects were to deliver this unhapy country, and to save his army. As to his
success in the former, he invokes the testimony of the Belgians, from whom he
received the most honorable marks of esteem and gratitude, in traveling
through that country, when he no longer possessed the influence of station.

Arriving at Antwerp on the 11th, he found that city in the greatest confusion
and alarm. A Commissioner of the Executive Power, named Chaussart, who modestly
surnamed himself Publicola, had recently removed the magistrates, and had
issued orders to arrest them and the other principal citizens, to the number of
sixty-seven. General Marasse eluded the execution of this order, with which he
was charged by Publicola; but the bishop of Antwerp and the other proscribed
persons were either fled or had concealed themselves. Dumourier sent a written
order to Chaussart and his colleagues, to quit Antwerp, and to go to Brussels
instantly, declaring, in case of disobedience, that he would give orders to
General Marasse to take them there by force. Chaussart came to the General with
much dignity, or insolence, and complained of this order, saying, that it
seemed to be dictated by a Vizir. The General answered with good humor, I am
certainly as much of a Vizir, as you are of Publicola.

General Dumourier compelled Chaussant to quit the town immediately. He
reinstated the magistrates, and restored the peace of that important city. He
issued an ordinance, prohibiting the Jacobin club in any degree to interfere in
public affairs. He commanded General Marasse to wall up the door of the hall
where the club assembled, to imprison every member that disobeyed this
ordinance, to print the order in both languages, and to post it up and publish
it throughout the city.

Dumourier afterward departed for Brussels. Having received complaints from
that city of the attrocious conduct of General Moreton, he had a few days
previous to his departure removed him from the command; which he had conferred
on Lieutenant General Duval. Moreton at first refused to obey the General; but
in consequence of an order from the minister at war, he took upon him the
command at Douay, where he had an opportunity of pursuing his former system of
conduct till his death.

General Duval was an extremely good officer, and it was the ill state of his
health alone which prevented his being with the army. He had served the
preceding year with great reputation and success. His judgment was clear, he
abounded in the qualities that beget esteem, and was perfectly calcutated to
heal the wounds inflicted by Moreton's tyranny.

Duval gave the general a more particular account, than he had hitherto
received, of the disorder and consternation that reigned among the troops
assembled at Louvain, from which place Duval had recently arrived. Almost all
the tents had been lost in the retreat. There was not left a sufficient number
to encamp half the army; yet it was impossible to restore any degree of courage
to the troops, or to make any movement with safety, without encamping them for
a while. A great part of the field pieces had been also lost.

The general officers commanding the artillery, receiving no orders during the
confusion of the retreat, nor indeed demanding any, held a council of war among
themselves, in which it was resolved to carry off the whole park of artillery
and conduct it into France. All the twentyfour pounders, the sixteen pounders,
the mortars, and pontoons, were already at Tournay, on their route to France;
fortunately, however, the heavy artillery, and the howitzers, were still at
Anderletcht. These latter the general ordered to join the army at Louvain; and
those at Tournay not to proceed on their route to France.

Brussels was filled with officers and soldiers of the army, who were on their
return to France. The general sent them back to the camp at Louvain; and
dispatched orders to Tournay and Mons, and the cities in the department of the
north, to arrest and send back to the army all the fugitives returning into
France.

Dumourier ordered General Stengel, who had retired to Namur, and two squadrons
of hussars, to join the army. General Neuilly, who was in his winter quarters
in the country of Stavelo, with the half of the advanced guard of the army of
the Ardennes, at the time of the flight from Aix-la-Chapelle, had also retired
to Namur, and the general ordered him to post his troops at Judoigne, to secure
the communication between the grand army, and the corpse commanded by
Lieutenant General (...) ville. To General d'Harville, he sent rep^^ted order
^ward^ encamp his troops, or, if he had not a sufficient nu^^er of tents for
the purpose, to make his cantonments as connected and compact as possible, in
order to prevent the Prince of Hohenloe and General Beaulieu, from forcing the
passage of the Meuse, or turning the right of the army, and so falling upon
Brussels and Mons. The garrison of Brussels was by no means strong, yet the
general was obliged to select some of its best battalions to reinforce the army.

Ten thousand men bastily raised in the department of the north were sent to
the army. This reinforcement was greatly boasted of. The name of centurions had
been given to these troops. They consisted of companies which were nominally a
hundred men each, but were, in fact, much below that number, composed of old
men and children, armed with pikes, culasses, fowling pieces, and pistols. They
had been promised twenty sols per day, and were designed to garrison the towns
of Belgium, but not, as they themselves said, to defend them, or to fight -- de
garder les places de la Belgians, mais ^o^ ^^^ disa^ent ^ls, de les defendre,
ni de fai^e Lague^^^
. This militia, the offspring of a plan of Gossuin and Merlin, served only to
heighten the embarrassment, confusion, and want of discipline, which already
prevailed, and the general was impatient till he had sent; them back to France.

But an object even more important to General Dumourier, than these concerns,
was to calm the minds of the Belgians and to restore public confidence
throughout the country, by putting a final period to the system under which
they had suffered. He was not ignorant that in this attempt he should excite
the Jacobins, and the convention, to proceed to extremity with him. The time,
however, for conciliatory measures, as well as for deliberation, was entirely
passed: so great were the evils to be remedied, so enormous the wrongs that had
been done to the Belgians, and so immediately was the danger of vengeance being
taken by that people.

A few days before Dumourier arrived at Brussels, Chepy had urged General Duval
to order several executions. He threatened to fire Brussels, or to put it to
the sword. He had arrested several of the wea^^hiest citizens, and sent them to
be confined in the fortresses of the department of the north. General Dumourier
now arrested him, and sent him under a guard, to Paris.

The legion of Sans-Culottes, raised by General Moreton, and composed of the
lowest of the populace, held the city in awe, and daily committed unheard of
cruelties and extortions. A Frenchman, a man of abandoned character, named
Estienne, commanded it, with the title of General. Dumourier threw him into
prison, and published an ordinance, breaking this corpse, and forbidding all
persons to distinguish themselves by the name of Sans-culottes.

He assembled the magistrates of the city. He besought them before all the
people, not to attribute to the French nation, crimes committed only by
individuals. He solemnly promised to punish the guilty, and to restore to their
families, peaceable citizens, who had been torn from them, under the pretense
of serving as hostages to France. The representatives of the people shed tears
of gratitude, and caused accounts of these interesting proceedings to be
published.

General Dumourier issued a proclamation to authorize the citizens to deliver
complaints to the magistrates, respecting vexations committed by the French,
and empowering the magistrates to verify and give a legal form to these
complaints. By another proclamation, he prohibited the clubs from interfering
in public affairs, and by another, he commanded all the sacred vases, to be
restored to the churches, enjoining the magistrates and military officers to
aid in restoring them.

These proclamations were printed in both languages, and sent into every part
of Belgium. Their effect was immediate. The inhabitants of Grammont wrote to
the general, that they laid down their arms. Peace was restored between the
French and the Belgians. These worthy people forgot the evils they had
suffered, and again embraced the French as their brethren and defenders. Indeed
it is but just to say, the garrisons had always conducted themselves in a
manner no ways discreditable, especially in the great cities; and, had it not
been for the decree of the 15th of December, and the conduct of the agents of
the executive power, the French character would have been esteemed and beloved
in that country.

On the 12th of March, Dumourier wrote a letter to the National Convention,
which appeared so deplorably true in its contents, that the President and
committee to which it was referred, did not dare to read it in the Tribune. A
copy of the letter stole abroad, and was printed at Antwerp. In it the general
frankly stated to the convention, the measures he had been compelled to pursue
in order to save Belgium and the French army. He referred the Convention, for
minute information on each point, to the minister, to whom he sent copies of
the proclamations, and an account of his proceedings, demanding of him, that he
should produce the whole to the convention, without reserve or disguise.

He sent for the commissary Petit-Jean, and, assembling all the administrators
of provisions, etc. he informed them, that he was on the eve of making a great
movement, with the army, and in a few days would engage the enemy; and he made
such arrangements with them as were necessary to his purpose. He almost
immediately procured provisions for fifteen days, and prepared his traveling
hospital to attend the army.

The play master of the army had retired to Lisle, with two millions of Livres
in specie, and the general wrote to the commandant of Lisle, to send him back
to the army with a strong escort.

General Dumourier harranged the garrison at Brussels, with such effect, that
the different corpse demanded leave to follow him against the enemy. He departed
on the evening of the 12th of March, for Louvain.

Before we enter on the history of the military operations that follow, and
that we may not be obliged to interrupt them, it wiil be necessary to speak
here of the visit which the general received at Louvain from the commissioners
of the National Convention. When the disaster besel the army, Camus, Treilhard,
Merlin, and Gossuin, retired to the frontiers of France, while La Croix and
Danton, went to Paris. When the former knew of the general's arrival from
Holland, they proceeded to Louvain to meet him, having missed him at Brussels.

Camus, and Treilhard complained of the general's proclamations, especially
that which ordered the silver to be restored to the churches. They told the
general that he ought not to have acted with such precipitation, but have
waited their arrival, and that it was beyond the bounds of his authority to
interfere with the administration of the civil government. The general answered
that the first of all duties was that of attending to the public safety; that
the convention might be deceived, as indeed they had been, by their emissaries;
that the whole weight of the war, the honor of the nation, and the
preservation of the army, rested upon him; that for these he was responsible,
not only to his superiors, but to posterity; that he had undertaken no measure
inconsiderately, but after the maturest deliberation; that, had they been
present, he should not have consulted them, although he should have endeavored
to have won them to act with him, in putting an end to the crimes, which had
long oppressed the Belgians and dishonored France; and, had they opposed his
intentions, he would notwithstanding have issued the proclamations.

He appealed particularly to Camus, who was religious, and superstitious, on
the proclamation that respected the churches. He expressed his surprise, that a
man, who prosessed a zeal for religion, should be the advocate of a sacrilege
committed on a people, whom the French considered as allies and friends. Go to
the church of St. Gudule, Dumourier said to him, see the host trodden under
foot, and wastea on the pavement; the altars broken: and paintings, the master
pieces of art, torn into shreds; and justify these profanations, or rather own
the necessity of punishing the agents of your criminal orders. If the
Convention applaud these crimes, if she have no feeling of their enormity, she
is to be pitied; and, still more, my unhappy country. Know, that if my country
cannot be saved without the commission of crimes, I will not commit them. But
here the crimes of France are ready to turn upon herself; and I serve her in
endeavoring to destroy them.

Camus observed the great difficulty there would be in restoring the vessels to
the churches, since they had been broken, to be heaped in Coffers. No matter,
the general said; since the metal remains, it will not cost us much to have
them remade.

Camus and Treilhard persisted in saying that the general had failed in respect
and obedience due to the Convention. Merlin and Gossuin, more reasonable,
acknowleged that the general's conduct had been just, and a violent altercation
arose between the two parties. Camus said, that it was a duty he must not
decline, to report the general's conduct, to the convention. The general
exhorted him to do so, and said that he had already, himself rendered an
account of his conduct. The general produced his letter of the 12th, which
became a new subject of contention.

It was during this interview that Camus, the most irascible of men, said with
an air, partly smiling, and partly serious, General you are accused of
designing to become Caesar: and I design to become Brutus. The general
answered, Dear Camus, neither am I Caesar, or you Brutus, and your threat is
the best assurance I have of immortality.

These commissioners, after three or four hours conversation with the general,
departed the same night for Brussels. Camus was faithful to his promise. He
drew up his report to the Convention, with all the bitterness of a perfidious
and malignant mind; and, thenceforth, he became the decided enemy of Dumourier.

The general, on his part, returned to the consideration of the means left him
to repair the faults of his officers, and to restore vigor to an army that no
longer possessed the spirit which conducted them in the former campaign.

CHAP. V.
State of the army. Its position. The General's orders to the different
divisions. He resolves to give battle to the enemy.
THE troops appeared to resume all their courage at the sight of their general.
Joy and confidence shone in the eyes of the soldiers. They embraced the
general. They called him their father. They discovered shame and sorrow for
their disgrace, and loudly demanded to be led against the enemy.

Dumourier reproached them with their want of discipline, but above all with
their mistrust of generals, who, till this fatal disaster, had conducted them
to victory, and who were his scholars and companions. He represented to them,
that their impatience, their want of subordination, and the fatal consequences
of these in their retreat, had wrested the conquest of Holland from his hands,
and perhaps had determined the fate of the campaign. They appeared extremely
affected by their disgrace, and disposed to repair their faults, on condition
that he would not abandon them, but would instantly lead them to recover their
honor.

This disposition greatly aided the general in restoring order to the army. But
he was greatly assisted by General Thouvenot, who, with every other military
talent, had that also of conciliating the minds of the soldiery, and infusing
order into all the parts of a great army. With great pleasure, Dumourier
renders this testimony of the merit of his friend, who may one day become one
of the best generals in France, if he should return to the service of his
country, and prejudice do not prevent his rising to the command.

The army amounted to near forty thousand infantry, and near five thousand
horse; and this was exclusive of the garrisons of Belgium; of a division of
5000 men (800 of whom were horse) under the orders of General la Marliere; the
division of Namur, under General d'Harville, consisting of 12,000 infantry, and
1500 cavalry; and of the corpse of the army employed in the expedition against
Holland, which amounted to 18,000 foot, and 2,000 horse, after the junction of
General de Flers.

The infantry, consisting of sixty-two battalions, were formed into four
divisions. The right was formed by General Valence; the center by the Duke de
Chartres, who at that period, was named Egalite; and the left by General
Miranda. Each of these divisions consisted of eighteen battalions, and amounted
to seven thousand men. The reserve consisting of eight battalions of
grenadiers, commanded by General Chancel, was placed under the orders of the
Duke de Chartres.

Miranda had under his orders General Miaczinsky, who commanded the left flank
of the army, consisting of two thousand infantry, and one thousand horse; and
General Champmorin, who commanded a body of four thousand foot and one thousand
horse. General Valence had under his orders General Dampierre, who commanded
the right flank, consisting of an equal force with that of General Miaczinsky;
and Generel Neuilly, who commanded a body of three thousand foot and one
thousand horse.

The advanced guard was composed of six thousand men, fifteen hundred of which
were horse, commanded by General la March. He was an old officer, who had seen
a great deal of service, and had been an excellent colonel of Hussars. He was
forward to undertake an enterprise, but easily discouraged. He was assisted by
two excellent officers, although they were very young, who counseled him with
great success, when he would suffer himself to be counseled. These were
Colonel Montjoye, who was adjutant-general, and Lieutenant Colonel Barois, who
commanded the horse artillery. But the ill-health of this old general, and
still more his want of capacity, rendered him very dangerous.

The rapidity with which in this war, officers rose to the highest rank in the
army, inverted the order of every thing. The corpse and regiments lost officers
that commanded them with effect, and the army acquired inexperienced generals.
Yet the army was really in want of generals. At this period it had no more than
five lieutenant-generals, and twelve major-generals, six of which commanded
detached corpse: so that there were but six remaining to command in the line.

When general Dumourier arrived at Louvain, on the morning of the 13th, he
found that the three divisions of his infantry were encamped on the heights
behind Louvain, having the canal of Malines in front. The reserve, with a small
body of horse, was at the distance of two leagues, beyond Bautersem; and the
advanced guard at more than two leagues beyond the reserve, at Cumptich, having
a small force of four hundred men in Tirlemont.

The enemy advanced and occupied all the villages between Tirlemont and
Tongres. The design of the enemy was to turn our right on the 16th; and if that
had been executed on the 1^th or 14th, the advanced guard would have fallen
back on the reserve, and the reserve on the main body, and the whole army would
have been defeated and dispersed, having no known point at which to rally.

On the 14th Dumourier visited his advanced guard; and he instantly ordered
several movements, by which the position of his army was much more firm and
secure. He placed General Dampierre, with the troops under his command, at
Hougaerde to the right of Cumptich, and ordered General Neuilly to advance from
Judoigne to Lummen, in order to strengthen this right wing of the army, and to
extend the line beyond that of the enemy.

He commanded General Miaczinsky to take a position to the left, between Die
and Tirlemont, on the side of Halen, and having the river Get in front of
him. He ordered General Champmorin to occupy Die, with his division. This
general, having informed him that Die was a small city with walls, which
might be made a strong post, Dumourier ordered him to add as much as possible
to its strength, and to leave in it two battalions and fifty horse, when he
should receive orders to march forward with his troops.

He commanded General la Marliere to leave a small body of troops at
Aerschette, in order to keep open the communication with Die; and to proceed
with the rest of his troops to Liers to overawe the country of Campine, to
check the Prussian column who might advance in that quarter, and to cover the
retreat of the army of Holland, whom Dumourier concluded had abandoned the
project of passing to Dort, and which indeed was the case.

He sent orders to General de Flers to throw himself with all possible dispatch
into Breda; to send Colonel Tilly to Gertruydenberg, with the garrisons named
in the orders, and to send back the remainder of that army to the lines of
Antwerp, to be placed under the orders of General Marasse. Dumourier ordered
Colonel Westermann to take post at Turnhout, with the gendarmerie and the
legion of the north, in order to protect this retreat, to check the enemy in
that quarter, and to keep open the communication with General la Marliere, and
by his division, with the grand army.

On the morning of the 15th of March, the advanced guard of the enemy attacked
Tirlemont, and the 400 men who were posted there fell back, without engaging
but with a loss, having suffered themselves to be surprised. General Dampierre,
accustomed to retreats, took upon him, on hearing the firing at a distance, to
abandon his post of Hougaerde, where he guarded one of the passages of the
Get, and fell back upon Louvain, at the same time ordering General Neuilly to
retire on his side to Judoigne. Dumourier had not time to examine whether it
were fear or treachery which caused this dangerous movement on his right. Had
it been known to the enemy, the French army might have been overthrown,
Dumourier contented himself with repairing this fault, which was so much the
more weighty, as it accustomed the troops to give way on the first appearance
of danger; and on the same night he caused these two divisions to return to
their former posts.

It was very singular, that on the left General Miaczinsky committed the same
fault, and withdrew into the wood near Louvain, and was not to be found for two
days. But the position he had quitted was occupied by the body of troops under
General Champmorin, whom the General ordered on the 15th to proceed with the
greatest dispatch to occupy the heights of Oplinter, on the left of Tirlemont.
Champmorin took that position on the evening of the 16th.

Fortunately the enemy, who had fixed the 16th for their march, discovered
nothing of the retrograde movements of the 15th, and were not prepared to
profit by them. On the same day, the General advanced with the whole of his
army beyond Bautersem and near to Cumptich, to prepare for his revenge on the
following day, and not to leave the enemy the advantage they had gained. It was
absolutely necessary for him to take Tirlemont; since, otherwise, he must have
fallen back, and again have subjected his troops to be discouraged and
terrified.

The Imperialists, with a considerable advanced guard, occupied Tirlemont, and
the space lying between the two Gettes, from the causeway of St. Tron, to the
ground opposite the post of Hougaerde.

On the morning of the 16th, the General made a vigorous attack upon the
Imperialists. As the heights of Oplinter commanded the high road of St. Tron,
when the General had made himself master of Tirlemont, (which he gained after
some resistance) the Imperialists finding their right flanked by the troops
under Miranda on the heights of Oplinter, made a precipitate march, to pass a
small arm of the Get, to retire to the heights of Neerlanden, Nerwinde,
Middlewinde and, Oberwinde.

Between the two Gettes, at a league and a half on the right beyond Tirlemont,
was a village named Gotzenhoven, which commanded the whole plain. It stood on a
small hill; having hedges along the front, and ditches filled with water on the
right and in the rear.

The Imperialists did not appear to perceive the importance of this post, till
Dumourier had sent General la March, with his advanced guard, supported with
cannon, to tak^ pos^^^on of it. At that time the Imperialists were fill in
poss^^on of the two villages of Mere and Hattendover and Dumourier caused these
to be attacked by his column as quickly as they could form after filing through
Tirlemont. The Imperialists committed a great error in not occupying
Gotzenhoven in sufficient force, as that post might have defended, or might
have laid in ashes, the two villages of Mere and Hattendover. The Imperialists
collected a strong body of infantry and horse, to endeavor to dislodge the
French from Gotzenhoven. -- They performed prodigies of valor in this attack,
although without success. The cuirassiers charged the French infantry with the
greatest intrepidity, even among the very hedges of the village, and their loss
was very great. The attack was recommenced several times. The enemy attempted
in vain to turn Gotzenhoven on the right, for General Neuilly, having passed
the greater Get at Dummen, had opportunely arrived in this quarter, with his
division to take the position of Neerhelyssen. The engagement did not finish
till four o'clock in the afternoon, when the Imperialists were in full retreat.
It lasted at least eight hours between the advanced guards of the Imperialists
and the French, which were nearly of equal force, and were both of them
supported by the main bodies of their respective armies. The loss of the
Imperialists was much greater than that of the French. The advantage remained
with the latter, but they were on the point of losing their general at the
attack of Gotzenhoven.

This engagement, which cost the Imperialists mere than 1200 men, entirely
restored the courage of the French troops. Dumourier formed his army into two
divisions, extending from Gotzenhoven to the high road, among the villages,
which had been the field of battle. -- General Neuilly, stationed near
Neerhelyssen supported the right. General Dampierre, having arrived on the
evening of the engagement, was posted at Esemael, in front of the center.
General Miaczinsky arriving with his cavalry (his infantry consisting of eight
battalions being left near Louvain, was posted at the bridge of the lesser
Get, opposite to Orsmael. A part of the division of General Miranda remained
behind the great Get, to the left of Tirlemont, extending to Oplinter; at
which last place General Champmorin arrived with his troops during the night.

After this first success, Dumourier saw that it was necessary to take a
decisive step. Troops were continually on their march to reinforce the
Imperialists, and the French army had very inconsiderable or no reinforcements
to expect. The Imperial cavalry was double the number of that of the French,
and in every respect greatly superior. It was impossible for the French to
contend with a disciplined army, for the possession of the Netherlands, foot by
foot; being in want of generals, incapable of executing prompt marches of bold
important maneuvers, in face of a numerous and experienced cavalry, and having
behind them no strong and fortified places.

There was, however, a necessity for stopping the progress of the enemy, which
could not be done without hazarding a battle. Under these circumstances sound
and true prudence called on Dumourier to risk every thing, before the Prince of
Cobourg should have received the remainder of the reinforcements for which he
waited to begin the campaign. The two armies were of equal force. That which
should attack would have the advantage in spirit and confidence, which always
belong to the party beginning the attack. This advantage had, during fifteen
days, been in the hands of the Prince of Cobourg; but General Dumourier had
regained it by the issue of the engagement of Tirlemont.

If General Dumourier should have the good fortune to gain a decisive battle
and such he resolved this to be, his situation would be entirely changed: for
first, it would restore him in the opinion of his army to his former
superiority, and would intimidate the enemy; secondly, it would have secured
the Belgians in his interest, and would have greatly forwarded the levies of
twenty-five battalions which the nation had undertaken, and so would have
strengthened his army by the acquisition of twenty thousand infantry, at the
least; thirdly, he would have regained the ground lost on the side of Liege,
for the Austrians would not have been able to have held that city, nor even
Aix-la-chapelle and would have been compelled to have entrenched themselves
under the protection of Maestricht; and lastly, it would have compelled the
Prince of Cobourg to have repassed the Meuse, and would have so greatly
weakened his army, as to prevent his retaking the field before the month of May.

General Dumourier's design was, in ^^se of success, to have formed an
entrenched camp, in a ^trong position, between the two Gettes, under the
command of General Valence, who in that situation might have watched the enemy
and might have received the different reinforcements arriving from France and
Belgium; while General d'Harville might have been equally reinforced on the
side of Namur. General Valence would have been master of the country, and would
have held the Prince of Cobourg in check, Miranda would have been posted with
an army at Antwerp, and General Dumourier advancing with 30,000 men, against
Bois-le-duc, would have resumed his project against Holland, and would at once
have forced the passages of the Moor Dyke, and Gorcuin. But if he could not
have penetrated into Holland, he might at least have made himself master of
Dutch Flanders, by which means he would have covered his left, and would have
procured arms, clothing, money, and provisions.

In that case, he would have been independent of the National Convention, and
probably might have been able to give it law, for the repose of his unhappy
country, for the avenging of Lewis XVI. and for the re-establishing of the
Constitutional Monarchy.

On the contrary, should the general be defeated, he designed, in the first
place, to take a position behind the canal of Louvain, in order for a while to
cover Brussels, and to reinforce his army; secondly, to maintain the position
of Namur, raising the corpse of General d'Harville to the amount of 25,000 men,
and to place the division of General Neuilly at Judoigne, to coves Dumourier's
retreat by the forest of Soignies, for the purpose of supporting Brussels;
thirdly, to assemble a body of 25,000 men near Antwerp, and, still holding
Breda and Ge^truydenberg, to keep the communication open to these places by
means of the posts of Liers and Die; fourthly, to assemble a body of 14 or
15,000 men on the side of Bruges, to cover Maritime Flanders; fifthly, to
negotiate with the Imperialists for a suspension of arms, and mean while to
endeavor to convince the troops in the different camps, that their want of
subordination, together with the disasters resulting from it, was one effect of
the absurd government of the convention, hat it was high time to put an end to
the anarchy which would otherwise cause the entire ruin of France, and that on
the army alone rested the hopes and sat of the Country. When the minds of the
troops should have been sufficiently prepared, his next design was to reinforce
the army with battalions of Belgians, who held the Convention and Jacobins in
abhorrence, to declare openly in favor of a limited Monarchy, to lay hold of
hostages for the security of the prisoners in the Temple, and to march to Paris.

These were General Dumourier's objects previous to the battle of Nerwinde, and
it will be seen how urgent his motives were for risking a decisive battle, and
for using every effort to gain the victory. He never had the baseness to wish
to be beaten. He earnestly strove to master events. Although he held the
Tyrants of France in detestation, although he viewed with horror the cruelties
that dishonored France, he was not the less solicitous to maintain the honor of
his country, and to prove himself worthy of her confidence. In every case, and
in every moment till the last, the end of his measures was to prevent a foe
from giving law to France, and to save his country from insult or injury, and
it is this which has drawn upon him the ill founded reproach, from misinformed
persons, and in particular from the Elector of Cologne, of having changed his
party only when he was vanquished.

Had he not previous to the loss of the battle of Nerwinde openly declared his
hostility to the Jacobins by his proclamations at Antwerp and Brussels? Had he
not imprisoned or driven out of the country the rapacious agents of the
Convention? Had he not written his letter of the 12th of March? Had he not
compelled the silver of the churches to be restored? Had not his correspondence
with Pache, Bournonville and Le Brun, (which was printed and which appeared
also in the Monitors of March and April) declared the firmest truths and the
freest opinions, respecting the authors of the miseries of France. If in those
he did not speak of the royal family, it was that he feared his mention of them
would become a signal for their death.

He who reads these Memoirs, and calls to remembrance the circumstances and the
public documents of those times, will see that the opinions of General
Dumourier have been consistent. He has been the zealous defender of his
country. Her enemies have been his enemies, but the war he has made upon them
has been open and generous; for his love of his country was neither fanatical,
unjust, nor savage. The Emigrants, by whom he is detested as greatly as by the
Jacobins, have, on all occasions, found him humane and liberal. In a war,
differing from all others in character, a war of opinion, in which instability
of principles and conduct might find excuse, he has no shifting of opinion
wherewith to reproach himself, no perfidy, no cruelty, no insolence in success,
nor weakness in misfortune and disgrace. In a word, moved only by humanity, he
restored the Netherlands to the Emperor, as was acknowledged by the Archduke
Charles, by the Emperor's Ministers and Generals, by his army, and by the
people of the country. Nor did he make conditions or reserves for himself. He
did not demand an asylum in the Emperor's dominions. He demanded nothing of the
Prince of Cobourg but his marching to Paris, with the object, and in the hope,
of delivering his country.

Basely misrepresented to the emperor, denied a place of safety in the
Emperor's dominions, which ought to have been free to him, though all others
had been shut against him, he expects justice from time, which unveils the
truth; and consoles himself in saying with Valerius Maximus, -- Perfecta ar^,
fortunae lenocinio defecta, fiducia justa non exuiter quamque s^it se laudem
mereri, eam etsi ab ahis non impetrat, domestico tamen acceptam judicia refert.

CHAP. VI.
Battle of Nerwinde.
THE Prince of Cobourg advanced between Tongres, St. Tron, and Landen; and the
two armies were in sight of each other. General Dumourier passed the day of the
17th in reconnoi^ring the position of the enemy, in forming his troops in order
of battle, and in preparing his plan of attack. He had, in his front, the
Lesser Get, which rises in the township of Jaudrain, and runs almost parallel
with the greater Get, into which it falls below Leaw. This river ran between
the two armies. Both sides of the river were extremely hilly; and the ground,
on the side occupied by the Imperialists, formed an amphitheatre rising from
the river to the more elevated situations of Landen and St. Tron.

Dumourier judged that the position of the Prince of Cobourg was by much the
strongest on the side of Tongres and St. Tron; because of the necessaty of his
drawing his provisions from Maestricht and Liege; and that consequently his
left, which was considerably extended on the side of Landen, must be more weak,
and more liable to be turned, or broken.

Dumourier knew also, that the Prince of Cobourg had neglected to occupy the
little city of Leaw, which was a very important post, and which might either
serve as a center to the motions of the army making the attack, or a point of
resistance for the army that should be attacked.

In the front of that part of the enemy's line, which extended from Landen
toward Leaw, were the three villages of Oberwinde, Middlewinde, and Nerwinde.
-- Near Middlewinde was an eminence, called the Tomb of Middlewinde, which
commanded the three villages, and a valley which separates them from the city
of Landen. He, therefore, who should occupy this place, must be master of all
the plain, and must necessarily, in case of an attack, repulse his enemy.

On these facts, Dumourier laid down his plan for the battle, which was as
follows: The first column, forming the right flank of the army, composed of the
advanced guard, under General la March, proceeding by the bridge of
Neerhellyslen, was to enter the plain between Landen and Oberwinde; and to
extend itself beyond the left of the enemy, in order to harrass that flank. The
second column, composed of the infantry of the army of the Ardennes, commanded
by Lieutenant General le Veneur, and supported by a strong body of cavalry,
entering the plain by the same bridge, was to gain the Tomb of Middlewinde by a
rapid movement, and to attack the village of Oberwinde, which could not
withstand a discharge of 12 pounders that were to be planted on the Tomb. And
while this attack should take place, the third column under the command of
General Neuilly, entering the plain also by the same bridge, waes to fall on the
right of the village of Nerwinde.

These three columns formed the right wing of the army, commanded by General
Valence, who, in case of success, wheeling to the left, and driving the left
wing of the enemy before him, was to continue his march in order of battle,
leaving Landen behind him, and having his front facing St. Tron.

The center, commanded by the Duke de Chartres, was composed of two columns.
The first, (which was the fourth column in the order of attack) commanded by
lieutenant general Dietman, passing the river by the bridge of Laer, and
rapidly crossing the village of the same name, which was only occupied by a few
indifferent troops belonging to the Imperialists, was to press forward, and
fall directly upon the front of the village of Nerwinde. The fifth column,
commanded by Genesis Dampierre, was to pass by the bridge of Esemael, and to
attack the left of Nerwinde. These two columns were afterward to follow the
right wing, forming a diagonal line with the point of their departure.

The left wing, under the command of General Miranda, was composed of three
columns. The first (being the sixth in the order of attack) under General
Miaczinsky, passing the river at Over-helpen, was to charge straight forward
proceeding toward Neerlanden, but being careful never to press beyond the head
of the fifth column. The seventh column, under General Rualt, was to pass the
river at the bridge of Orsmael, and engage the enemy by the high road of St.
Tron. The eighth column, under Genesis Champmorin, was to pass the river below
Neerlinter, at the bridge of Bingen, and to throw itself into the Leaw, which
it was to occupy till the end of the battle.

In case of complete success, the army at the end of the action would be ranged
in order of battle, with the left wing at Leaw, and the right at St. Tron, and
having its front toward Tongres: which was the only point by which the
Imperialists could retreat. And batteries were erected on the banks of the
Get, within reach of the bridges, to protect the retreat of the columns, in
case of their being repulsed.

On the morning of the 18th of March, between seven and eight o'clock, the
several columns began to move in the same instant, in great order, and passed
the river without obstacle. General la March committed the first error of that
day. He entered the plain of Landen according to his instructions, but finding
no enemy there, he made a movement: to the left, to fall upon the village of
Oberwinde, and thence was thrown into confusion by the second column. Although
the troops of the second column were retarded in their march by their
artillery, yet they attacked the village of Oberwinde, and the Tomb of
Midldewinde, with such vigor, that by ten o'clock they had carried those
pasts. -- But General le Veneur did not take sufficient precautions to
strengthen himself in the latter post. -- It was soon after re-taken by the
Austrians, and the possession it disputed the whole day. General Neuilly
briskly entered Nerwinde with the third column, and drove out the Imperialists;
but, almost immediately abandoning the village, he advanced into the plain
toward the second column. General Neuilly asserted, that he received an order
to that effect from General Valence, who on his side declared, it was a
misunderstanding of Genesis Neuilly.

In a short time, the Imperialists re-entered Nerwinde; from which they were
again driven, by the fourth and fifth columns, under the command of the Duke de
Chartres. In this attack General Desforets, an excellent officer, received a
wound in the head with a musquet-ball. This part of the army fell into
confusion. The infantry crowded in too great numbers into the village, and were
in such complete disorder, that on the appearance of a second attack from the
enemy they abandoned the place.

General Dumourier arriving in this moment, caused the village to be once more
attacked. It was again carried; but the troops presently quitted the village
again, and all the efforts of Genesis Dumourier prevailed no further than to rally
them at a hundred paces from Nerwinde, which was filled with the dead and
wounded of the two parties. But the Imperialists did not re-enter the village
until the evening.

It was during the disorder in this quarter, that the Imperial cavalry rushing
into the plain between Nerwinde, and Middlewinde, charged the French cavalry;
at the head of which was General Valence, who fought with great intrepidity,
was wounded, and obliged to retire from the field of battle to Tirlemont. The
Imperial horse were, however, repulsed with great slaughter.

While the horse were thus engaged, another body of cavalry entered the plain
on the left of Nerwinde, and threw themselves with great fury upon the infantry
of the fourth column. General Thouvenot, who was at the head of that column,
opened his ranks to the Imperial horse, and immediately caused the regiment of
Deuxponts to make so timely and well-directed a discharge of grape-shot and
musquetry upon that body of horse, that almost the whole of it was destroyed.

From that instant, the fate of the battle seemed determined in favor of the
French, on their right and in the center. The troops were again in perfect
order, were full of confidence and courage, and passed the night on the field
of battle, preparing to complete their victory the following: morning. The
Imperialists have acknowledged that they were on the point of retreating, and
that orders had been actually given to their baggage to retire to Tongres.

But it was quite otherwise with the French troops on the left. The sixth and
seventh columns had attacked the enemy with great vigor; but, when they were
already masters of Orsmael, a panic seized upon the battalions of Volunteers,
and they fled, leaving the troops of the line exposed. The Imperialists, seeing
the disorder, charged the two columns with their horse, which put it entirely
to the rout. Guiscard, Major General of the artillery, was killed, as well as
great numbers of the Aids-de-camp and officers of the staff; and General Ruault
and General Ihler were wounded.

Still, however, great opportunity remained of restoring the fortune of the day
in that quarter. It was not more than two o'clock in the afternoon, when the
columns fled. They repassed the bridge of Orsmael, and were not pursued further
by the Imperialists. At that moment, General Miranda was informed, that the
eight battalions of Miaczinsky's corpse were arrived at Tirlement. These troops
were quite fresh, and General Miranda might have reinforced himself, by placing
them on the heights of Wommersem, on the side of the Get next Tirlemont. But
General Miranda, either being disconcerted, or, which is more probable, seeing
the success of the right wing, commanded by his rival General Valence, he
yielded to his resentment, and resolving to sacrifice him, ordered his troops
to retrea^^; and retired behind Tirlemont, at more than two leagues distance
from the field of battle. Whatever be the case, his conduct was perfidious in
sending no advice of his retreat to General Dumourier, which exposed the right
and center of the army to the whole weight of the enemy. But the enemy did not
avail themselves of this cowardly retreat; either to cut off the left wing,
which they might have completely done by continuing the pursuit to Tirlemont,
or to renew the attack upon the center and the right, whose flank was entirely
exposed to them.

General Champmorin, who had made himself master of Leaw, and had remained in
that position, till he saw the retreat of General Miranda, did not abandon it
till late in the day, when he repassed the river by the bridge of Bingen, which
he cut down after him, and returned to his former position of Oplinter. And,
perhaps, it was owing to the possession of this post at Leaw, that the
Imperialists did not pursue their advantage against the left wing of the
French, on the retreat of Miranda; since, in that case, General Champmorin
might have taken their right in flank.

General Dumourier passed the whole time of action in regarding the movements
of his center and right wing, in re-establishing order in the different parts
that gave way, and ensuring success in that quarter, which was the more
essential, as it was charged with the whole weight of the maneuvers. At two in
the afternoon, he observed that the firing on his left, which till then had
been very brisk, had ceased; but he attributed this silence to success. -- The
nature of the ground prevented his seeing the sixth and seventh columns; and,
during the firing of these columns, he could perceive they were advancing
forward. He had, therefore, reason to suppose that, the enemy, being driven in
that quarter, had halted, that they might not overrun the head of the columns
on their right. But no circumstances could lead him to conjecture the
incredible retreat of General Miranda: and he was, perhaps, happy in being
ignorant of it, while he was repairing the disorders of his right and center.

Toward the close of the day, he observed, that several columns of the
Imperialists moved from their right to reinforce their left, which led him to
suspect the truth; but, it was as yet only suspicion, having received no
message from General Miranda. In this situation, he passed the greater part of
the evening before the village of Nerwinde. At length, his suspicions, which he
had communicated to no other person than General Thouvenot, were succeeded by
the liveliest inquietude. He departed for his left, accompanied by General
Thouvenot, two aids-de-camp, and two domestics. Arriving at the village of
Laer, at ten at night, he was utterly astonished to find that it had been
abanded by order of General Dampierre, who after conducting himself with great
valor during the engagement, had in the close of the evening without orders
repassed the Get with his division, and retired to his former position at the
village of Esemael.

General Dumourier, continuing his route, arrived near the bridge of Orsmael,
which he supposed to be occupied by Miranda's troops, but found it was in the
possession of the Austrian Hulans, by whom he was on the point of being taken.
He turned back; and proceeded, by the high road of Tongres, and Tirlemont:
astonished with the silence and solitude that reigned around him, till he
arrived within half a league of that city. He then learnt from three or four
battalions, that were scattered in disorder, without cavalry, along the side of
the high road, the disaster and disgrace of his left wing.

In Tirlemont, he found General Miranda writing to his friends with great
composure. General Valence had already used every effort to induce Miranda to
return to the attack, assuring him that the French were victorious on their
right, and in the center; and that, by his return, success would be altogether
insured. General Dumourier commanded him, in very severe terms, to assemble his
troops immediately, even during the night, and to post them on the heights of
Wommersem, on the high road, and on the bridge of Orsmael, as well as that of
Neerhelpen, for the purpose of, at least, securing the passage of the Get,
and the retreat of the right and center, now in the midst of the enemy's army,
with a river behind them.

Such was the sat of the battle of Nerwinde; which had been entirely
successful on the part of the French, if General Miranda, instead of
retreating, on perceiving the first disorder in his two columns, had lined the
Get with his troops, and had maintained the two bridges of Orsmael and
Neerhelpen. This retreat was the more unsortunate, as the two columns lost
above two thousand men, white the rest of the army did not lose more than six
hundred men. The French had about three thousand killed or taken, and more than
a thousand wounded, and lost great part of their cannon.

In this engagement faults were committed on both sides. The French did not
attack the town of Middlewinde, which was the decisive point of the action,
with sufficient vigor, and afterward abandoned that post without any visible
necessity. General Neuilly, after the first success, put every thing to hazard,
by abandoning the village of Nerwinde, on an uncertain order. Miranda, having
already made himself master of the village of Orsmael, turned the fate of the
day, by yielding to the terror of his troops, and commanding a retreat that
became an absolute flight.

The Imperialists committed several errors: in not disputing the passage of the
Get; in not falling upon the three columns of the right, both in front and in
flank, while they were marching forward to the attack, and were exposed to the
fire of the villages of Laer, of Nerwinde, Middlewinde, and Oberwinde; in
abandoning the elevated and advantageous post of the tomb of Middlewinde, and
in not erecting a battery on it previous to the engagement; in neglecting to
occupy Leaw, on their right; and, finally, in not having availed themselves of
Miranda's retreat, either in falling upon his troops, or attacking the left
flank of the columns belonging to the center of the French army, that were in
the heat of the action before Nerwinde, by the whole of their right wing which
no longer had an enemy in front of theirs.

CHAP. VII.
Retreat of the 19th of March. Action of Gotzenhoven.
GENERAL DUMOURIER now saw the necessity of securing his retreat. The post of
Leaw, on which the possession of the field of battle depended, was abandoned by
his troops; and, in the dismay which had seized upon the other two columns of
his left wing, the most he could hope was to lead them back to the banks of the
Lesser Get; to induce them to pass the river, and to return to the field of
battle, was impossible. These two columns had lost part of their cannon in the
flight; the Generals, and superior officers of these troops, were in no
condition to undergo a fresh combat; and, independent of the real loss of these
columns by the sword of the enemy, more than 6000 men had deserted, and were on
the road to Brussels and France.

Dumourier passed the remainder of the night in giving orders for the retreat
of his center, and right wing, which was then commanded by the Duke de
Chartres, who conducted himself with coolness, courage, and judgment.

The Imperialists had in truth gained a great victory, but they were not
certain of their situation. They had been so disconcerted with the important
advantages gained by the right and center of the French army, that they made no
attempt to pursue their advantage over the left. They saw the French still in
order of battle and ready to recommence the action, and they really imagined
that the lest wing of the French was about to return to its former position.
Hence they threw no more obstacles on the French in their retreat, than the day
before on their advancing to the attack.

This retreat was effected in open daylight, the columns repassing the river
in the order in which they advanced, and altogether with the same steadiness.
Dumourier sent General Thouvenot to the right, to receive the columns, and
place them in the order of battle from Gotzhenhoven to Hackendower, while he
took upon himself to assemble the columns of the left wing, and to post them on
the heights of Wommersem, and at the bridge of Orsmael. The enemy's troops were
already master of this bridge; and Dumourier, to prevent their advancing
further on the causeway, sent orders to General Dampierre, posted at Esemael,
to make a movement to the left with half of his division, for the purpose of
flanking the causeway, and to maintain that position till the center should
have repassed the river, and then to retreat slowly to the new position that
the troops were taking, with their right at Gotzenhoven, their left at
Hackendower, and having the Lesser Get in their front.

This order, completely executed by General Dampierre, preserved the army from
destruction; for the two columns that had fled had acquired such apathy from
the shame of the preceding day, and were so scattered, that it was ten in the
morning before Dumourier could form them, so as to march with good order to
take post at Hackendower, on the right and left of the high road.

The first column of the Imperial army had passed the bridge of Orsmael, and
had already formed with its artillery in the heights of Wommersem. But
Dumourier could never prevail on his troops to attack that post, which
commanded the ground on which they had formed, although they were extremely
harrassed by the artillery on those heights, and sustained this incessant
firing with unshaken constancy.

On this occasion Dumourier had nearly fallen. His horse was killed under him
by a cannon ball. The readiness with which he recovered from this situation was
the means of preventing new disorder, and probably a second flight which this
circumstance was on the point of occasioning.

The troops, which in the action of the preceding day, had fled with such
precipitation, now endured the terrible discharge of the Imperialists, with
great intrepidity. But in this conduct General Dumourier perceived nothing more
than a blind obstinacy, altogether destitute of the daring courage that he
wished to excite in them. He exhorted them to charge with bayonets the enemy on
the heights of Wommersem, and several times he put himself at their head,
without being able to make them advance; too happy, indeed in seeing them
continue firm in their position, which was imminently more dangerous than a
vigorous attack on those troops, who being separated from the rest of the
Imperial army, and having the river in their rear, might have been totally
overthrown.

The left wing of the Imperialists betrayed the same disposition, occasioned by
the same cause, as that of the French. These troops suffered the right and
center of the French to repass the river without molestation, and even to range
themselves in order of battle in the position of Gotzenhoven, before they could
resolve to pass the river in order to attack them. Thus, the whole day passed
on both sides in manocuvring, with the exception of some canonnading and
discharge of muskets, The two armies rested on their arms, in order of battle,
the whole night, very near to each other.

This cool and steady retreat was the more admired by the Imperialists, because
the troops did not fall back more than three quarters of a league, and seemed
only to be returning in great order to the ground they occupied before the
battle. During the evening of the 10th, however, General Dumourier perceived by
the epathy which pervaded his troops, that, should he make a ^^^^d the next
morning against the enemy, he would be insall^^ly beaten.

There has been no period when the French soldiery could be conducted
successfully without great regard being paid to their temper and their
feelings; and the importance of this circumstance in conducting them to battle,
has been eminently heightened by the revolution, which, having entirely
destroyed military discipline, has increased the force of the intractable and
capricious spirit belonging to the national character. The active and impetuous
disposition of the French is calculated to carry them forward to coquest, and
not to preserve conquests. A defensive and methodical war does not diminish
their bravery, but it wearies and contradicts their impatient spirit, When once
wearies and dispirited, the French troops being no longer restrained by the
severity of military laws, abandon their leaders and their colors, and desert
without the least thought of the consequences.

The troops of the line, still influenced by a remnant of their former military
spirit, an attachment to their colors, and the fear of disgrace, continued
firm, and were yet to be relied on by the General; but the national-guards,
composing three-fourths of the army, declaring loudly that it was fruitless to
lavish their lives in Belgium, and that they ought to return and defend their
own frontiers, departed by whole companies and battalions. To have attempted to
retain them by force would have been ineffectual, as well as dangerous.

No course was now left to Dumourier but to retreat with the troops, in good
order, for the purpose of concealing their defections, and to prevent their
being massacred by the Imperialists and the peasants of the country. In this
sad condition the General was constrained to pass the Greater Getto during the
night, and to retire to the heights of Cumptich, behind Tirlemont. All his
movements for this purpose, being performed with a precision that scarcely
could have been expected from more disciplined, and even victorious troops,
were attended with the greatest success. The Imperialists, deceived by the
fires that were carefully kept up, and restrained by the vigor of the rear
guard, did not put themselves in motion till the 20th, when they reconnoitred
Tirlemont, from which the French had had time to withdraw their magazines.
However, General Miaczinsky, who was charged with the evacuation of that city,
lost one of his cannon by the precipitation of his retreat.

CHAP. VIII.
Retreat of the 20th and 21st of March. -- Engagement of Neerwelpe -- La Croix
and Danton at Louvain. -- Engagement of the 22d of March.
DUMOURIER's position at Cumptich had the advantage of being considerably
elevated above the Get. In this camp his front faced Tirlemont; his left was
secured by the river Welpe, which turning short ran upon his rear, by Bautersem
and Wertryk; his right, posted behind Hougaerde, was not so well defended. The
General, however, could not maintain himself long in this position, nor was it
any protection to Louvain if the Imperialists should pass by Die; nor to
Brussels if they should turn by Judoigne. He therefore availed himself of the
20th of March, while the enemy were before Tirlemont, to pass the Welpe, and
encamp near Bautersem, having his right at Op and Neerwelpe, and his left on
the heights and in the woods in front of Zuellenberg.

He sent General Neuilly, with his division increased to 6000 men, toward
Judoigne, with orders to prevent detachments of the Imperialists from
penetrating on that side, to watch their motions, and, if they should appear
with a force greatly superior, to fall back to Brussels by the forest of
Soignies. Dumourier gave General Neuilly instructions respecting the means of
defending this forest, and wrote to General Duval, to reinforce Neuilly with as
many men as he could spare from the garrison of Brussels, and the new levies
which might arrive there. He also ordered General Duval to arrest the deserters
and send them back to his army.

He commanded General d'Harville to place a garrison of 2,500 men in the
citadel of Namur, and to hold himself in readiness to march with the remainder
of his troops, either toward Brussels, or in such other direction as should be
necessary by the motions of General Beaulieu, who was advancing with 8000 or
10,000 men by the route of Huy

Dumourier threw into Die a garrison, which appeared to him to be sufficient;
General Champmorin having inaccurately reported this place to be stronger than
in fact it was. He posted General Miaczinsky at the abbey of Gemps, in
communication with Die. He reinforced the garrison of Malines, He sent
General Ruault to Antwerp, to assist Lieutenant General Ma^asse, and to take
the command of the army in that quartet, which reinforced by the division of
General Marliere, amounted to more than 20,000 men. He recommended to General
Ruault to hold the post of Riers as long as it was possible, and to fall back
within the lines of Antwerp, if the Prussians and Dutch should advance upon him
in too great force.

On ths same day, on the 20th of March, a detachment of the enemy without
cannon, and inferior in numbers to the garrison of Die, appearing before that
place, the garrison fled in a cowardly manner as far as Malines. But the
advanced guard of the Imperialists making an attack upon the villages of Op and
Neerwelpe was repulsed.

While Dumourier was engaged in repulsing this attack, the commissioners of the
Convention, La Croix and Danton, arrived in his camp, but he sent them to
Louvain, where he followed them on the evening of that day. They appeared
extremely affected with the recent defeat of the army, but in a still greater
degree with the desertion of the troops; having met at Brussels and in various
parts of their route, entire corpse returning to France. But, whatever was their
concern on these subjects, their minds were much more engaged, as they said, in
the execution of the commission with which they were charged: to prevail on the
general to retract his letter of the 12th of March; which, by its too great
frankness, had stirred up the bitterest resentment of the convention against
him.

Dumourier answered that he had expressed no more in his letter than his real
sentiments; that the disasters to whichthey were witness were the necessary
consequence of the evils of which he had complained; that he sought only to
remedy those evils by putting an end to the tyranny and injustice exercised in
Belgium; that the necessity which they must perceive of his retiring from a
country in which he had no means of defense ought to convince them of the
prudent tenor of his proclamations, against which, the convention were
prejudiced, only because they were misinformed and betrayed; that those
proclamations had induced the peasants of Belgium to lay down their arms, and
had restored a degree of confidence between the French and Belgians, and were,
herefore, the means of saving the troops, who disorganized, beaten, disgusted
and dispirited, were altogether incapable of defending themselves against the
Imperialists, more numerous than themselves and flushed with victory, and at
the same time against the people of the country, should the resentment of the
latter be again excited.

The commissioners were constrained to acknowledge the justice of these
representations; but still continued to insist on the general's retracting his
letter. The general, after reviewing before them all the subjects of his
complaints, and setting forth in the strongest manner, the misfortunes that
were on the eve of resulting from the unwise and unjust conduct of the
convention, made a positive declaration to the commissioners that he would in
no part retract his letter, since the loss or the gain of a battle could not
effect any change in his principles, opinions or character. The Commissioners
conducted this conference with much address and energy, and endeavored to win
Dumourier by the most flattering considerations. At length, after a very long
contest, the general consented to write a few lines to the president of the
convention, in which he requested, that the convention would postpone their
judgment on his letter of the 12th of March, till he should have an
opportunity of sending them an explanation of the reasons of that letter. The
two deputies departed with this unimportant declaration.

On the 21, the general being informed of the loss of Die, resolved to take a
position nearer Louvain, lest the enemy, passing the canal; should cut off his
communication with Malines, or fall upon Louvain itself. He posted the division
of General Champmorin on the heights of Pellenberg, flanking his lest by that
of Miaczinsky, posted at St. Petersroede: General La March with the advanced
guard on the heights of Corbec, skirting tHe high road: eighteen battalions of
the army of the Ardennes, commanded by General Le Veneur, on the heights, and
in the woods of Mezendael: and the division of General Dampierre at Florival,
in communication with General Neuilly's division, which sell back toward
Tombeck, at the entrance of the forest of Soignies.

During these movements, the troops were harrassed by the Imperialists, who
cannonaded them the whole day. On the morning of the 22d, the enemy made a
general attack on the posts of Pellenberg, Corbec and the woods of Mazendael.
Blierbeck was between the enemy and General Le Veneur, and he had thought
proper to occupy it. A column of Hungarian grenadiers made themselves masters
of this village but were driven out with great slaughter, and with the loss of
two pieces of cannon, by the regiment of Auvergne, commanded by Colonel Dumas.
The attack on the advanced guard was less vigorous, but that on the post of
Pellenberg was extremely bloody, General Champmorin defending himself with
equal courage and ability. He received a strong reinforcement during the
attack, and the enemy were unable to make any impression on his lines. This
action was extremely hot, and lasted the whole day. The Austrian columns
suffered great loss, and were compelled to retire.

On the evening preceding this brilliant action, General Dumourier had occasion
to send Colonel Montjoye to the headquarters of the Prince of Cobourg, to
treat respecting the wounded and the prisoners. He then saw Colonel Mack, an
officer of uncommon merit, who observed to Colonel Montjoye, that it might be
equally advantageous to both pairties to agree to a suspension of arms.
Dumourier, who had deeply considered the dangerous situation of his army, sent
Montjoye again to Colonel Mack on the 22d, to demand if he would come to
Lovain, and make the same proposition to Dumourier. Colonel Mack came in the
evening. The following articles were verbally agreed to; First, that the
Imperialists should not again attack the French army in great force, nor
General Dumourier again offer battle to the Imperialists. Secondly, that on the
faith of this tacit armistice, the French should retire to Brussels slowly and
in good order, without any opposition from the enemy. And lastly that Dumourier
and Colonel Mack should have another interview after the evacuation of
Brussels, in order to settle further articles that might then be mutually
deemed necessary.

This stipulation, the first that was entered into between the two generals,
became hourly of more importance to Dumourier. His army was greatly diminished,
especially in officers. He had scarcely ammunition for a battle^ and
unfortunately, he was well persuaded that, in case of a serious attack, he
should be abandoned by his army.

He had sufficient proof of this on the following day. The Imperialists thought
themselves so little bound by the articles agreed to by Colonel Mack, that
General Clairfait (who was ignorant of these articles) fell upon the advanced
guard and the troops posted at Pellenberg. The action became general along the
whole front of the army. Champmorin defended himself with the same obstinacy as
before; but toward the close of the action, when the Imperial infantry were
actually retiring, and there was no longer any enemy before the army, excepting
some light troops, old General La March became suddenly terrified; and,
notwithstanding the entreaties of Montjoye, De Barois, and other officers of
distinction, he retired in great confusion, first to the abbey of Dupar^, and
afterward to the other side of the river Dyle, behind Louvain.

The Imperialists, who acknowledged a loss of 700 men, (that is to say 2000 in
both actions) were so much discouraged that they took no advantage of this
cowardly retreat, which left a very dangerous interval between General Le
Veneur and General Champmorin.

General Le Veneur had fought with great vigor during the whole of the action,
but, seeing himself abandoned by La March, he also passed the Dyle, without
waiting for any orders, and posted himself between Coorbeeck and Heverle.

After the defection of these two divisions, Dumourier was compelled to order
General Champmorin to abandon Pellenberg, and to retreat also behind Louvain,
passing through the city, and by the abbey of Vlierbecke.

General Miaczinsky retired by a bridge on the high roa^ of Die, being
protected by a battery of cannon placed on the heights above.

Dumourier availed himself of these two days, to remove his wounded, and the
flour for his army, in boats, to Malines. Other articles belonging to the
troops were thrown into the river; but the confusion attending the evacuation
of Louvain, and the avarice of individuals, caused a great quantity of these
articles to fall into the hands of the enemy, who entered Louvain that very
evening, as the general retired with the garrison, consisting of five
battalions, which formed his rear guard. -- The Imperialists also took some
boats laden with wounded, which the escort abandoned on sight of a few hussars.
These wounded soldiers were treated with great humanity, notwithstanding the
atrocious calumnies of the Jacobins, spread with a design of irritating the
French troops, and of instigating them to make war without quarter, and with
greater barbarity.

The disgraceful retreat of the French from Louvain, is among the instances
that prove how delicate and dangerous is the situation of the generals
commanding the French armies. Having determined on their plan of attack or
defense, and having given orders for its execution, they will be continually
subject to defeat and ruin, if they have not other plans in reserve to stand in
the place of orders ill executed or disobeyed: they can have no reliance on the
generals under their command, who are frequently the first to give the example
of disobedience, and sometimes of cowardice: they can never depend for a moment
on the real strength or position of the corpse that are not in their sight,
since officers, as well as men, desert or change their position at pleasure:
they have no means of remedying these ills, since they dare not punish, being
certain of making most dangerous enemies of those whose faults they do but
reprove: they are ever in danger of wanting even food for their troops, because
the ancient system of providing necessaries for the army has been changed, to
serve the purposes of ignorant and selfish men: and, they will seldom dare to
hazard the great movements that decide the fate of war, with soldiers, who,
though presumptuously brave, are destitute of good officers, are ill armed,
inexperienced, easily discouraged, mutinous, fond of reasoning, and altogether
let loose from military law.

But, if a General be notwithstanding successful, the calumnies of the Journals
and Clubs await him, and he is sure of being accused before the suspicious,
blind, and imprudent Convention. If he be unfortunate, the whole weight of
responsibility is thrown upon him, and he is branded with the name of coward or
traitor.

Such is the situation in which the Republic of France places her generals in a
war, on which depends, not only the political existence of the nation, but the
individual liberty of every citizen. Dumourier has been replaced by Dampierre,
who had the good fortune to be killed in battle; Dampierre by Custine, who
perished on a scaffold; the latter by Houchard, who was disgraced the moment
that he had defeated the Duke of York, and raised the siege of Dunkirk; and it
is the detestable Jourdan We are assured by emigrants, arriving here from the
army, that it is not Jourdan, of Avignon, who commands the armies. -- Note of
the Editor By the above note it appears that Dumourier had mistaken Genesis
Jourdan who defeated the barbarians of Maubeuge, for Jourdan the a^sassin of
Avignon.
. who now commands the army, which alone stands between Paris and the vengeance
of the powers of Europe.

In Alsace, on the southern frontier, and in the interior part of France, we
have seen the same succession of generals. Every old and experienced officer
has been driven from the service; and physicians, painters, and postililions
command armies. It is said that Caligula made his horse consul. People of
France, become as degenerate as you are cruel, you yourselves prepare the
instruments of your destruction!

CHAP. IX.
Retreat to Brussels. -- Evacuation of Brussels. -- Camp of Enghien. -- Camp of
Ath. -- Conference at Ath with Col. Mack. -- The Arrest of Genesis Miranda.
THE disorder accompanying the retreat from Louvain utterly checked the energy
the army had displayed in the two preceding combats. Happily, night concealed
this universal defection of the troops from the enemy, who, notwithstanding the
verbal stipulations agreed to by Col. Mack, would probably have seized upon
this opportunity to destroy or entirely disperse the French army.

Dumourier with great difficulty prevailed on the troops to halt on the heights
of Coztenbergue, half way on the road to Brussels. And this new calamity
induced him to make an entire change in the disposition of the several corpse
under his command. He sent an order to General Duval to prepare for the
evacuation of Brussels. He removed old General la March from the command of
the advanced guard, which he gave to General Vouille. He formed this advanced
guard, which was now become the rear-guard, of a strong body of the artillery,
of all the cavalry of the army, and of twenty-five battalions, almost the whole
of which were troops of the line. He himself took post in this rear guard,
which amounted to near 15,000 men, and which indeed might be said to be his
army. The other part of the troops marched under the protection of this chosen
body, which behaved in a manner worthy the importance of its station.

Dumourier established his camp under the walls of Brussels, by the side of the
little river of Woluwe, having his right at San-peters-waluwe, and his left at
Vilverde. -- Having taken the precaution of transporting his park of artillery
to Anderlecht, he sent it off on the 23d to Tournay, by the road of Enghien and
Ath, keeping only the cannon necessary for his rear guard.

The Prince of Cobourg, who was ignorant of the deplorable condition of the
French troops, no doubt deemed himself happy in the suspension of arms, which
procured him possession of the Netherlands, without further combat. But
resistance on the part of Dumourier could only have tended to lay waste the
country, without enabling him to keep his footing in it. -- Since the Emperor
Joseph demolished the strong places of those Provinces, they are destitute of
any point that can resist an invading army; a battle gained gives the conqueror
fifty leagues of country, or perhaps drives the vanquished to the extreme
frontier.

The engagements entered into by Colonel Mack were faithfully observed by the
Prince of Cobourg, who remained three days at Louvain, sending only small
detachments to hang upon Dumourier's rear guard. The General was therefore at
liberty to provide for the safety of Brussels, and of the other great cities
through which the French army were compelled to pass on their retreat. Justice
and humanity demanded that the Belgians should not be pillaged, and it was
essential to avoid every means of irritating them. They had pardoned the
excesses committed by the French, and had rendered them new services, and it
was a duty to avoid opening the recent wounds of the country, since in that
case despair would have again driven them to arms, and the French, surrounded
by the Austrians and Belgians, had been entirely saCrificed.

On the 25th, the army passed through Brussels, observing the greatest order
and good conduct, and proceeded to Hall, from whence the General designed they
should march in two columns to the frontiers of France. No pillage was
committed by the troops, nor were any insults offered, or reproaches made on
either part. The inhabitants of Brussels did not forget this service rendered
them by General Dumourier. They have expressed their remembrance of it by marks
of public esteem Dumourier will ever be loved and respected by the Belgians. It
was in the attempt to save them from the decree of the 15th of December that he
fell. They will never forget the courage and humanity that he exerted in their
behalves. The EDITOR ventures to make this pr^mise in the name of his country.
Note by the British Editor.
. Dumourier reflects on the justice they have done him with pleasure, and he
would not have been proscribed, and a fugitive, had he every where found equal
justice.

The General's object now was to provide for the safety of the different
detached forces, and to concert such movements as that their retreat might keep
pace with his.

While General Beaulieu was penetrating with seven or eight thousand men by
Huy, the Prince of Hohenloe was advancing by the province of Luxemburg against
Namur, which was occupied by 15,000 men, under the command of General
d'Harville. But this division had been formed at the expense of the garrisons
of Givet and Maubeuge; and the Prince of Hohenloe, turning by one of these
places, might make himself master of it, and penetrate into France.

Dumourier commanded General d'Harville to leave 2,500 men with provisions and
ammunition in the citadel of Namur; and, dividing the remainder of his troops
in two columns, to send one to Givet under the command of Lieutenant General
Bouchet, and to retire with the other toward Maubeuge; halting first at
Charleroy, and afterward posting himself on the heights of Niny above Mons. In
this position General d'Harville would cover Maubeuge, la Quesnoy, Conde and
Valenciennes; and, as he would then be reinforced at Mons with the division of
General Neuilly, consisting of 6000 men, his division would be augmented to
12,000 men, beside the reinforcements daily arriving.

In answer to these instructions, General d'Harville informed Dumourier, that
he had neither provisions, ammunition nor money sufficient to provide for the
citadel of Namur scarcely for fifteen days order; that he must either abandon
the citadel or defend it with the whole of his division; and demanded of
General Dumourier determinate orders in what manner to conduct himself. With
these dispatches from General d'Harville, came also letters to the same effect
from General Bouchot, and documents from the Commissary Barneville that
justfied his statements.

Dumourier had no need to deliberate upon the orders it was necessary to give
General d'Harville. To leave this division at Namur, was to risk the loss of
Givet or Maubeuge, both in want of troops, and had either of them fallen into
the hands of the enemy, the division of Namur would have been easily
surrounded; and to leave 2,500 men in the citadel, without money and
ammunition, was in effect to deliver them to the Austrians. He therefore
ordered General d'Harville entirely to evacuate Namur, and retire in good order
to Givet and Maubeuge.

Dumourier considered the six battalions posted in Breda, and the three in
Gertruydenberg, as lost, yet their having provisions for four or five months,
and great store of ammunition, would, he knew, enable them a considerable time
to stop the progress of the Prussians and Dutch. In order to keep open a
communication with this division of his army, Dumourier saw it was necessary to
secure the citadel of Antwerp, and commanded General Berneron to post himself
in that citadel with 2000 men, and six months store of provisions.

Dumourier appointed Lieutenant General Omoran to the command at Dunkirk, and
along the seacoast of the department of the North; and ordered him to repair
the lines and sorts of the entrenched camp between Dunkirk and Bergues; to form
an entrenched camp on Mount Cassel; to go in person to Courtray to take upon
him the command of the army of Holland, and to post it in the camp of
Haerlebecke, having the Scheldt in front.

He sent orders to General Marasse and General Ruault, to make their retreat,
passing the Scheldt by the extremity of Flanders through Ghent, to the camp of
Courtray, or Haerlebecke, while the garrison of Malines should retire to the
same place by Dendermonde along the Scheldt; being careful not to precipitate
their retreat, and to cut down the bridges after them.

General Dumourier's design was, if he could have held the citadels of Namur
and Antwerp, to have formed a strong line, without the territory of France,
running from the right to the left by Namur, Mons, Tournay, Courtray, Antwerp,
Breda, and Gertruydenberg. In this situation, if the suspension of arms should
have continued, he hoped to have greater influence on the re-establishment of
order in France. In the case of the suspension of arms being broken, the
Imperialists finding themselves in the center of a semicircle, would be
compelled to commence their attack at the two extremities to proceed with
safety, which would turn the campaign into a war of sieges on their part,
carried on at the expense of their own territory. Thus Dumourier would have
gained time to reorganise and reinforce his army: which, having the strong
places of France behind it, might have been restored to its former confidence.

On this supposition Dumourier would have occupied the city of Tournay, and the
camp of Antoing; from which place if the enemy had been greatly superior, he
could have retired to a very strong position in his former camp of Maulde.

In pursuit of this plan (which had undergone no other change, than that of the
evacuation of the citadel of Namur) he marched on the 26th to Enghien, and on
the 27th to Ath, while the division of General Neuilly marched to Mons by Hall
and Brain.

At Ath, he received orders from the Convention to arrest the colonel of the
73d regiment of infantry, (who had abandoned the army without orders, taking
with him his two battalions, and returned to France,) and also General Miranda.
Dumourier executed the order that respected General Miranda with regret, since
he was persuaded, that this rigorous measure was less an act of justice than
the effect of the hatred of the Jacobins against Pethion and the Girondists,
who were the friends and protectors of Miranda. This General found means to
escape the danger in accusing Dumourier, after his quitting the army; an event
which was extremely favorable to Miranda.

On the same day Colonel Mack arrived at Ath; a verbal agreement was again
entered into between that officer and Dumourier; but this was in much more
formal terms than the former. The colonel began by expressing the
acknowledgments of the Imperialists, for the peaceable manner in which the
retreat of the French troops was conducted, in consequence of the prudence of
General Dumourier's orders; by which means the country was spared the most
frightful disasters. On the other hand, he noticed the moderation shown by the
Imperial general, who, while he forbore to harrass the French ^^oops on their
retreat, took care, nevertheless, to conceal from both armies the connivance
between the two generals.

It was agreed upon by Dumourier, and Colonel Mack, that the French army should
remain some time longer in the position of Mons, Tournay, and Courtray, without
being harrassed by the Imperial army; that General Dumourier, who did not
conceal from Colonel Mack his design of marching against Paris, should, when
their designs were ripe for execution, regulate the motions of the
Imperialists, who should only act as auxiliaries in the execution of their
plan; that, in the case of Dumourier's having no need of assistance, which was
to be greatly desired by both parties, the Imperialists should not advance
farther than the frontier of France, and that the total evacuation of Belgium
should be the price of this condescension; but if Dumourier could not effect
the re-establishment of a limited monarchy, (not a counter-revolution,) he
himself should indicate the number and the kind of troops which the
Imperialists should furnish, to aid in the project, and should be entirely
under Dumourier's direction.

Dumourier made Colonel Mack acquainted with his design of marching the
following day to Tournay, with the march of General Neuilly to Mons, and of the
army of Holland to Courtray.

It was finally decided that in order to combine the operations of the Imperial
troops under the Prince of Cobourg, and those under the Prince of Hohenloe, at
the time when Dumourier should march to Paris, Conde should be put into the
hands of the Austrians, as a pledge; that the Austrians should garrison the
town, but without any pretensions to the sovereignty, and on the condition that
it should be restored to France, at the conclusion of the war, and after an
indemnity should have been settled by the two parties; but that all the other
towns belonging to France, should, in the case of the constitutional party
needing the assistance of the Imperialists, receive garrisons, one half of
which should be French troops, and the other half Imperialists, under the
orders of the French. General Valence, General Thouvenot, the Duke de Chartres,
and Colonel Mountjoye, assisted at this conference.

CHAP. X.
Camp of Tournay.
ON the 28th, Dumourier marched to Tournay, and took the position of Antoing,
having his advanced guard in Tournay, and the flanking corpse of the left,
commanded by General Miackzinsky, on Mount Trinity. He sent General le Veneur
with the army of the Ardennes, to occupy the camp of Maulde.

In this was Madame de Sillery, with Mademoiselle d'Orleans, whom the general
had never till then seen. -- These ladies had taken up their residence at
Tournay, on the advice which Dumourier had before this given to
Lieutenant General Omoran, who then commanded in the Tournaisis; because
Mademoiselle d'Orleans, who was no more than fifteen years of age, was
proscribed in France by the decree against the Emigrants. This young Princess
(who as well as her brothers, the Duke de Chartres, and the Duke Montpensier,
is perfectly well bred, and well informed) is an example of virtue, resignation
and constancy.

The Duke de Chartres, who had served the preceding campaign with distinguished
valor, and a pure and disinterested patriotism, and who had recently displayed
a degree of courage, and civism, reflecting honor on the French name, was
included in the decree of banishment, rendered against the house of Bourbon and
would have been subject to the cruelest voxations the moment that he should
enter France.

Dumourier, during the two days that he passed at Tournay, testified by every
circumstance in his power the lively concern that he took in the fate of this
unfortunate and amiable princess. As both she and Madame de Sillery were
greatly in dread of falling into the hands of the Imperialists, because of the
influence which they supposed the emigrants to possess with Emperor, Dumourier
on his departure from Tournay, caused them to be conducted to St. Amand. When
the general's protection, far from serving, might have been fatal to those
ladies, they accepted of an asylum in Mons, offered them by the Imperia1
generals. If the virtues of Mademoiselle d'Orleans do not find their
recompense, at least, may she find protection from the hands of a beneficent
Providence.

While Dumourier remained in the camp of Tournay, he received intelligence,
that General Neuilly's division, on ariving at Mons, instead of encamping on
the heights of Nimy, had pillaged the magazines, and afterward fled in total
disorder (without however, being attacked by the enemy,) to Conde and
Valenciennes. The Cavalry only remained with General Neuilly, and Dumourier
commanded him to retreat with those to Conde, spreading over as much ground on
his march as he could between Binche, Roeux, Soignes, and Leuse; carrying off
with him the forage, horses, and carriages, and cutting down the bridges behind
him.

The evacuation of Mons rendered Dumourier's situation at Tournay very
dangerous, his right being altogether unprotected; but, independent of the
suspension of arms, his knowledge of the country made him secure of his
retreat, which he was unwilling to undertake, till he should have known what
movement was made by his left. He, therefore only took the precaution of
commanding General d'Harville to confine himself within the camp of Maubeuge
and Givet, in order to prevent the enemy from penetrating on the French
territory, on that side.

On the 29th of March, three deputies from the Jacobins arrived at Tournay.
They introduced themselves to the General by saying, that they bore a
commission from Le Brun; and, presenting a letter from that minister, conceived
in vague and uncertain terms; they declared they had communications to make to
him respecting the affairs of Belgium. These three men were Proly, a
contemptible adventurer, born at Brussels; Desjardines, a writer of little
note, who had formerly been driven from Brussels; and Pereira, a Portuguese
Jew. The first of these we have seen was already known to the general; the
second called himself a man of letters, and the third was a furious Jacobin.
They were offended that the general refused to enter on the subject of their
embassy, before Mademoiselle d'Orleans, to whose apartments they had expressly
come to utter a Philippic against the general. He made an appointment to meet
them at his own quarters.

The conversation that took place between Dumourier and these men, is pretty
nearly such as they have reported it to be. They agreed with him in his opinion
of the imbecility of the convention, and on the necessity of dispersing that
assembly, and establishing some other legislature. After that, they sounded the
general respecting the persons who should succeed the convention in their
authority; and one of them ventured to say, that the Jacobins had their
president, registers, tribunes, orators, as well as the habit of discussing or
determining great concerns; and that therefore, there was no need to look
further. Dumourier, in his usual sincere and decisive manner, utterly rejected
this idea; grounding his objection on the immorality, rashness, cruelty, and
inconguous qualities of that society; to which all the misfortunes of France he
declared were to be attributed.

Proly said, how then will you be able to replace the present representatives
of the people, and at the same time avoid the delays and other defects of the
mode of election by primary assemblies? The general answered, no hing is more
simple, or more easily accomplished. The patriotism of the administrators of
the departments and districts is, at present, well tried and approved. For this
one time, it is but to take all the procureurs-general of the departments and
districts; and to complete the number by members of the departments and
districts. These will form a very competent legislature: they will re-establish
the constitution of 1789: all divisions will be healed in France: the Royalists
will lay down their arms: foreign powers will no longer have any color for
carrying on the war, and France. having a solid government with which they can
treat, will listen with readiness to terms of peace. For do not you imagine,
the general added, the Republic can continue to exist: your crimes and your
ignorance have destroyed its possibility.

These three men made some objection to the general's propositions, but they
listened very tranquilly to those blasphemies of the general, of which they
afterward gave so dreadful an account. Desjardines, who proceeded further than
the rest in his address and artifice, said that he should return to Paris to
give an account of his mission; and that he hoped soon to see the general
again. They took their leave of Dumourier without molestation; and certainly,
he never thought of arresting emissaries of such little consequence.

General Dumourier has no doubt that, had he seconded their idea of replacing
the National Convention by the society of Jacobins, he had entirely gained the
confidence of that society; but he acknowledges that his temper, perhaps too
sincere in this instance, robbed him of the possibility of seeming to yield to
their measures. He instantly perceived that he could not turn this instrument
to his purposes, but by plunging into a series of horrid crimes: and the events
that have succeeded, have proved to him that his judgment was not erroneous.

On the same day, he received a letter from the seven commissioners of the
convention, met at Lisle, who commanded him to appear in that city, to answer
to the charges alleged against him. He answered, that being in sight of the
enemy, employed in re-organizing his army, and in restoring its courage, (which
was indeed true) he could not quit the army for an instant; but if the
commissioners would come to him at Tournay, he would answer every accusation
with his usual frankness; that When he should have accomplished his retreat,
and the army should be safe in the French ^^^ritory, he would have more leisure
to take into consideration his personal affairs; in a word, that he would never
enter Lisle, excepting it should be with troops to punish cowards, who had
abandoned their colors and calumniated the most intrepid defenders of their
country.

CHAP. XI.
Retreat to the Camp of Maulde.
GENERAL DUMOURIER was extremely uneasy respecting the fate of the troops at
Antwerp; having received no intelligence from that quarter, and fearing indeed,
that General Rualt who bore his orders to General Marasse, had fallen into the
hands of the enemy.

The retreat from Antwerp across the Scheldt, by the extremity of Flanders, was
long and difficult. But Dumourier knew that the enemy were less numerous in
that quarter than the troops at Antwerp. The Prussians and Dutch were before
Gortruydenberg and Breda; and Colonel Mylius, who presented himself before
Antwerp had not more than 2000 men, and those were irregular troops of the
Imperial army.

But the French troops at Antwerp had fallen into still greater disorder than
any other part of the army. They were seized with panic, and the generals were
no longer masters of them. On the 26th, Colonel Mylius had the audacity to
summon the city. Part of the French troops had already crossed the Scheldt,
but, instead of waiting for the remainder, they precipitately retired by Bruges
to Dunkirk, excepting a small body of them, which Colonel Thouvenot prevailed
upon to halt at Ghent. General Marasse had sunk the Ariel frig^ to according to
Dumourier's instructions, after sending away her masts, rigging and guns, by
the canals to Dunkirk. He had also sent away part of the magazines of the
garrison, but a great part still remained, and more than 8000 men.

As the terror and confusion which before had spread among the troops redoubled
on the approach of Colonel Mylius, a council of war was held, in which it was
unanimously decided, that it was more prudent to save this part of the army
together with the magazines and other effects belonging to the French nation,
than obstinately to risk the loss of the whole.

It is impossible for Dumourier to form a candid judgment of this capitulation,
since the rapid succession of important events that followed, prevented him
from any perfect knowledge of the circumstances of the garrison. The
Imperialists are extremely dextrous in the disposition and conduct of their
advanced guards, multiplying them to the eyes of an enemy, and misleading the
enemy respecting their real force. It is also to be presumed, that the French
generals, embarrassed and disconcerted by the disorder prevailing among the
troops, imagined the whole Prussian and Dutch army to be before the place. No
excuse, however, is to be made for their having surrendered the citadel, which
was altogether independent of the city, and in no one case ought to have been
included in that capitulation.

On the 27th or 28th of March, the French troops quitted Antwerp. None of them
passed by Courtray, and they were not at liberty to encamp at Haerlebeck, as
had been designed. They entered the French territory in different bodies, and
at different times, and part of them were disposed of by General Omoran in the
camp of Cassel and the lines of Dunkirk, and the remainder helped to form the
camp of Madelaine, near Lisle.

It was not till the 29th that Dumourier received intelligence of this
dispersion of more than 20,000 men of his army, and even then his intelligence
was unaccompanied by any detail. The dispersion of the body of troops under
Neuilly, and the evacuation of Mons, had exposed his right, and that of
Courtray now exposed his left to still greater danger, which the enemy might
turn, approaching by the left of the Sehelt, and if he should be compelled to
retreat before the enemy in the present disposition of his troops, he had
nothing to expect but to be completely routed.

For these reasons, he resolved to raise the camp of Tournay in the morning of
the 30th. He and before this, sent General le Veneur to occupy that of Maulde.
He sent the army of the North, by the bridge of Mortagne, to encamp in the
strong position of B(...), which he ordered to be joined by three bridges to
the camp. He sent General Miaczinsky with 4000 men to ^^upy O^^ chies, to
secure a communication with Lisle, and he established his head quarters with
his park of artillery at St. Amand.

By the unexpected surrender of the citadel of Antwerp, the garrisons of Breda
and Gertruydenberg Were entirely cut off from all communication with the army.
They amounted to near 6000 men, that were on the point of being sacrificed
without the hope of assistance, and without any service to ensue to France.
Dumourier, therefore, sent orders, through the medium of Colonel Mack, to
General de Flers, and to Colonel Tilly, who commanded in those two places to
capitulate, on condition of being at liberty to maro^ to France with arms and
baggage. This was accordingly done; and was an important service rendered
France, since one half of the army had already deserted.

At this period the safety of the frontier towns in France was entirely owing
to the suspension of arms; for had the Imperialists pressed forward, such was
the disorder prevailing in the French army, they must have penetrated the
frontiers.

In the midst of this chaos of things, and of the discontents and disorders
that resulted in the French army, the troops never ceased to express an
attachment to their general, rendering justice to his efforts to preserve them
from ruin. The rear guard, and the troops of the line especially, who had
always seen him the last in every retreat, in the day or at night, and always
exposed to the greatest danger, were moved with respect, and even compassion
for the general, and with extreme resentment against his enemies, the Jacobins
and the National Convention. A wish for the re-establishment of a limited
Monarchy was almost general in the army. A few of the battalions of volunteers
only dared openly to espouse the Republic. The cavalry, and the troops of the
line were altogether decided; and the artillery declared that in every case,
they would defend their general. It was openly proposed to march to Paris, and
to overthrow the Anarchists, to whom the army justly attributed the whole of
their disgrace and misfortunes. It being said that the general was to be
commanded to appear at the bar of the National Convention, their constant
language was, that they themselves would conduct the general to Paris, and
would share his fortunes.

Dumourier attentively observed this disposition in the troops, which he saw
was supported by the complaints of the generals, and of the greater part of the
other officers. These latter, seeing the generals under whom they had been
conducted to victory, outraged in the Jacobin Journals, accused of treachery,
arrested, and treated without regard to decency or justice, naturally
concluded, that their own elevation to the superior ranks, would but expose
them to the same disasters. Some of the generals, however, among whom was
Dampierre, kept up a perfidious correspondence with the leaders of the
Anarchists; and, hoping to supplant their superiors, by the aid of the present
disorders, they loudly proclaimed the same doctrines as their colleagues of
Paris, and by their false insinuations kept alive the Jacobin phrenzy that
infected part of the army.

The two parties were now in the greatest fermentation, and the contest tended
to an issue which could not but be prompt and violent. Three Commissioners of
the Convention, Lequinio, Cochon, and Bellegarde were in Valenciennes; these
already treated the army and its generals as rebels, would not permit any
communication between them and the garrison, and stopped their convoys of
provision and money. They were bold enough to hazard a manifesto against
Dumourier, which they sent to the army, and the garrison of Conde.

The garrison of Conde, consisting of four battalions and a regiment of
cavalry, under General Neuilly, were extremely divided in opinion, but they
seemed to incline to support Dumourier, to whom General Neuilly was a1together
attached.

At Lisle the contest was still more marked and more violent. The Comissioners
of the Convention, who had made this place their point of union, and the
Jacobin Club instigated an extremely numerous populace against the higher rank
of citizens. On the other hand the soldiers, especially the troops of the line,
broke our into tumults, and spoke loudly in behalf of their general, and
against the Anarchists. But they were without leaders, and their measures were
void of plan and conduct. Asfignats were also successfully distributed among
these troops, and the same means were employed in the army under the general's
immediate command, and even with those nearest to his person.

The Commissioners of the Convention also endeavored to accomplish their
designs by assassination. On the 31st of March, fix volunteers, of the third
battalion of La Marne, demanded leave to speak to the general, who ordered them
to be introduced. They entered with their hats on, the back part being placed
in the front, having the word Republic chalked on them. They made a long and
fanatical harangue to the general, the purport of which was, that they, and
many others of their comrades, had sworn to send him to the bar of the National
Convention, or, in imitation of Brutus, to stab him. Dumourier answered with
great composure and gentleness, that they were blinded by a mistaken zeal; that
they could not, but perceive the unfortunate condition of France; and that the
rage with which remedies were applied, served only to prove the impossibility
of maintaining the republic, since an unjust and unrestrained government could
not long exist. While the general spoke, they approached with a design of
surrounding him, which, perhaps, would have been effected, but for the
intrepidity of the faithful Baptiste, who seized upon the foremost, and called
the general's guard to his assistante. The volunteers attempted to resist, but
they were overpowered; and the general not only saved their lives but prevented
their being ill treated. He contented himself with securing their persons in
prison.

The indiguation of the army was general; and on the same day the different
corpse presented adresses signed by individuals of every rank, prosessing an
inviolable attachment to their general; and the greator part of them expressing
their desire of marching to Paris to reestablish the constitution.

After hostilities had been thus commenced by the Commissioners of the
Convention, and after the troops had thus declared their wishes, Dumourier set
about the means of making himself master of Valenciennes, Conde, and Lisle;
without which he could strike no blow of importance.

He now readily acknowledges that, although he did not for a moment lose sight
of his object, he failed in neglecting means which, doubtless were necessary at
that period; but which he was induced to reject by his aversion to persidy and
cruelty. He relied too confidently on the strength of his legitimate means, and
on the good says and conviction of his troops; and he neither counteracted his
enemies by corruption, nor destroyed the more inveterate of them when it was in
his power. A measure was proposed to him that was probably essential to his
interest. It was to assemble the troops of the line in a camp apart from the
rest and to disarm and disband the national guard. But this could not be
accomplished without a dreadful effusion of blood; for there had long existed
an extreme animosity between the national guards, and the troops of the line.
There were many of the battalions of national guards, who had served under his
command with great valor, and had lately presented addresses to him, couched
in loyal and strong turms; and he could not prevail on himself to recompense
them with disgrace, or perhaps, with death. And, ^ he should make exceptions in
the execution of the plan those might include disguised anarchists; and he
could no longer rely with safety on his troops.

History presents no example of opinion having agitated the passions of men to
so excessive a degree, of having so greatly disfigured their characters, and
having so completely bereaved them of all the social affections, as in the
French revolution. The love of liberty was a noble passion in 1789. It became
licentious in 1790 and 1791. By the successes of the year 1792, the love of
freedom, instead of being exalted into heroism, degenerated into a blind,
insolent, and barbarous phrenzy; and the period that we are reviewing in these
memoirs added to the ferocity of its spirit.

The struggle for ascendancy was not equal between Dumourier and the Jacobins.
His means were enfeebled by his scruples. The crimes of the Jacobins were not
to be crushed but by crimes more incredible than these; corruption was to be
opposed by corruption, and treachery and cruelty to the attrocities and horrors
of the Jacobins. The sect of the Jacobins was not to be annihilated but by a
monster more frightful than itself; or by a foreign sword. And hence the sequel
of this history is no more than an account of the mistakes of Dumourier; who
embraced the incompatible designs of preserving his own esteem, and purging the
nation of her crimes. In a conversation he had formerly held at Louvain with
Danton and La Croix, on a proposal made by those Commissioners relative to a
conduct they wished the general to adopt in Belgium, by no means very
reputable; the general observed (and he has since repeated the observation to
Camus) that he would never commit an action which he regarded as a crime, even
for the salvation of his country. He has since been told that Danton said
General Dumourier wants energy; his mind has never risen to the true
revolutionary pitch. The revolutionary pitch rose after that period; and,
Dumourier, who has not changed, could not but fail in the struggle, since to
succeed it was necessary to display crimes greater than those with which he had
to combat.

Dumourier sent orders to General Miaczinsky, who was at Orchies, to march with
his division to Lisle; to arrest the Commissioners of the Convention, and the
leaders of the clubs; to proceed from thence to Douay and remove General
Moreton from the command of that town; to proclaim there and at Lisle the
unanimous resolution of the army to restore the Constitution: and asterward to
proceed by Cambray to Peronne, where he was to take post. This unfortunate
General did not sufficiently perceive the importance of his charge. He spoke of
it to various persons, and among the rest to St. George, the celebrated
Mulatto, Colonel of a regiment of Hu^^rs, who betrayed the general and drew him
into Lisle with a very small escort. The moment Miaczinsky entered the town,
the gates were shut upon him. He was arrested, conducted to Paris, and brought
to the scaffold. This officer was a native of Poland, and was one of the chiefs
of the confederation, at the time that Dumourier was charged by the court of
France to direct its operations, Miaczinsky had been made prisoner in an
engagement with the Russians; and afterward, claiming an indemnity from France,
in which the general could not find means to serve him, he had obtained for him
the rank of major general, and permission to raise a free corpse, and had
afterward employed him with great utility in France and the army. Miaczinsky,
brave in war, did not display the same courage in his personal defense when he
was taken, nor at his death. He accused Dumourier of various crimes against the
nation; and even of some g^^ss frauds, that were no doubt suggested to him by
the enemies of Dumourier. He also accused La Croix, which was the cause of his
ruin.

Miaczinsky's troops, after they were quitted by that officer, wandered on the
Glacis of Lisle, into which place the garrison would not admit them. Dumourier,
receiving intelligence of this, sent one of his aids-de-camp, Colonel Philip de
Vaux, to put himself at their head, and to conduct them to Orchies and Douay.
De Vaux was arrested through the treachery of a brother officer, taken to
Paris, and executed. He died with great courage and constancy.

Philip de Vaux was born at Brussels, had served in Austria, and had afterward
taken part against the Emperor in the revolution of his own country. Dumourier
had known him at Paris, and appointed him his aid-de-camp. He was a man of
capacity, of great courage, and of an exalted and feeling mind. In fine, he
possessed the qualities necessary to make a general officer.

The garrison of Valenciennes was commanded by Major General Ferrand, whom
Dumourier had raised to the rank of Colonel, and afterward to that of
major general; and whom he believed to be attached to his interests. This
officer was of an age not very liable to be heated with opinions; and, till
this period, had appeared to be well informed and moderate. But characters
moulder away before opinions, and Ferrand became one of the most intemperate of
Dumouriers accusers, and one of the firmost supporters of the anarchists.

The grand provost of the army, namest l'Ecuyer, demanded of Dumourier as a
favor, the charge of arresting the Deputies at Valenciennes. He was no sooner
in that city, than he became their confident, and instrument: although by a
strange accident he perished afterward on the scaffold. While he was in
Valenciennes, he had written a circumstantial letter to the general, respecting
the arrangements he had made for arresting the deputies, and this letter was
found in the pocket of the general's greatcoat on the 4th of April.

These two men, Ferrand and l'Ecuyer, undermined the general's plan for making
himself master of Valenciennes; these being at first confidentially
communicated to them; and they effected an entire change in the disposition of
the troops which he had contrived to send there.

Dumourier's design. List and Valenciennes, being thus suddenly defeated, he
had no other resource than to make himself master of Conde. The situation of
the army, on the extreme frontier of France, was become altogether
embarrassing. The army depending upon the strong towns for subsistence,
Dumourier was compelled either to disband them, or to join the Imperialists,
unless he could obtain possession of one of the strong towns. The first of
these measures would have deprived him of all resource, and given a decisive
victory to the anarchists. The second was repugnant to the feelings of the
general, and the troops, inspired by the laudable principle of national honor;
and he could not have obtained the universal consent of his army to this
measure, since the opinions of the troops were divided, and since the
indefatigable intrigues of the Jacobins had wrought such a change in the
disposition of the soldiery. And the latter was impracticable, because the
General had no artillery to undertake a siege; his artillery being sent to
Lisle when he retreated from Belgium. The third of these measures also, must
have produced a civil war. A regular siege would have demanded great length of
time, during which the soldiery would have made the same reflections that
operated on the mind of Dumourier, and which continually restrained him in the
plans that seemed necessary to his object: these reflections regarded the
horror of seeing Frenchmen combat each other, having foreigners for spectators,
to whom both parties would have become a prey, when they should be mutually
incapable of further resistance.

Dumourier therefore thought of leading his army to Paris. But he could succeed
in that, only in having a majority of opinions with him. Every other expedient
was at once painful and uncertain, Every day, every hour diminished his hope.
He beheld his situation, without deceiving himself, and being subdued by his
difficulties. He regarded them under every aspect, and he cannot now recollect
the first five days of April without horror.

CHAP. XII.
Arrest of the Commissioners of the Convention, Camus, La Marque, Bancal, and
Quinette; and of Beurnonville, Minister of War.
ON the first of April, General Dumourier, in order to be nearer his army, and
to favor a project of surprising Valenciennes, (which had been proposed to
him, and which failed by the misconduct of the general officer who was charged
with its execution,) removed his head quarters from the city of St. Amand to
the suburbs; where was stationed a chosen body of cavalry, and where he was
also nearer Conde. Various circumstances had prevented his proceeding in the
first instance to the latter city, but in that neglect he committed a great
error, and perhaps it was the cause of completing the ruin of his affairs.
Perhaps it had been better if he had at first established his headquarters at
Conde; but the events that passed in that period were so sudden and unforeseen,
he was so effectually shut out from intelligence, and was so completely
ignorant of all that passed beyond Valenciennes and Lisle, and he was so
entirely occupied in observing and moulding to his purpose the dispositions of
his army, that to blame or justify the conduct into which he was driven by this
strong chain of circumstances, it is necessary to have been in his situation.

Perhaps even it is well for him that he did not make himself master of Conde,
for if the inconstancy of the French character had then caused a strong
defection in his army, being in the center of that strong city, he had been
de^vered up to his enemies, or massacred by his own troops.

The commissioners of the Convention availed themselves of Dumourier's
hesitation in this respect to visit Conde, and to issue proclamations,
circulate assignats, and fill the town with emissaries of the Jacobins, The
sixth regiment of infantry, the only corpse of troops of the line which had
discovered a decided spirit of Jacobinism, and a battalion of National Guards
of Versailles, struck terror into the mind of General Neuilly, who
thenceforward was no longer master of the place; although he persuaded himself
that he was, and continued to assert it to Dumourier, who too long relied on
his ill founded confidence.

In this battalion of Versailles, was a captain of the artillery company, named
Le Cointre, son of the celebrated deputy of that name of Versailles. This young
man declaimed vehemently against the advocates of the constitution; and, being
rudely handled on that account by some dragoon officers, he quitted the
garrison to lay his complaints before Dumourier, who caused him to be arrested,
that he might have an hostage for himself, in the person of the son of one of
the most furious among the members of the Mountain. Dumourier also caused to be
arrested a lieutenant colonel, an officer belonging to the staff of the army,
who declaimed openly and vehemently against him: and having no secure place in
which he could keep these prisoners, he sent them together with the six
volunteers, who had attempted to assassinate him, to Tournay; requesting
General Clairfait to keep them as hostages in the citadel.

Lieutenant General le Veneur, who at the time of La Fayette's desertion had
followed that officer, and who was indebted to Dumourier for his pardon, and
his reestablishment in his rank, now came to Dumourier to demand permission to
retire from the army, on the pretense of being in an ill state of health. His
object was, to obtain the command of the army of the Anarchists. Dumourier
granted him permission to retire, and also to a general named Stetenhoffen, a
foreigner whom Dumourier had made major general. Dampierre was at Quesnoy with
his division, and carried on a treaty with the commissioners of the Convention,
as did also General Chancel, who was cantoned at Fresnes. And their example was
followed by General Rosiers, and General Kermorvan, who had the command of the
Belgians in the camp of Bruille.

Dumourier was the more affected by these instances of treachery, because all
those officers had been indebted to him for their rank, had complained more
loudly than any others against the Anarchists, and had pressed with more
seeming impatience the execution of his design of restoring order. Excepting
Dampierre who died in the command of the army, and Chancel who replaced Neuilly
at Conde, and was obliged to surrender after a long siege, these officers have
been punished for their ingratitude, by the suspicions and disdain of their
patrons, and the loss of their employments. This unhappy example of treachery
of superior officers, who were in appearance most attached to the cause of the
general, could not fail to produce a pernicious effect on the soldiery, and add
strength to the party of the Jacobins.

Dumourier now saw that he could no longer hope to march to Paris without
opposition from his army, as the temper of his troops at first seemed to
promise. He saw that he would have to commence by a civil war, which he had
always thought of with repugnance; and to compel one part of his troops to
combat the other, a dreadful extremity for a general who regarded his soldiers
as his children, and who had never conducted them but by his kindness, and the
influence of a mutual affection.

Another circumstance rendered him timid, and deprived all his measures of
energy. This was, the danger of the prisoners in the temple. It was to be
feared that the Jacobins would instantly sacrifice the unfortunate victims,
whom they already treated too unworthily to afford any hope that they would
spare them in the first moments of their fear and resentment. Had those
prisoners been sacrificed in consequence of Dumourier's march to Paris, he
would have incurred the reproaches of Europe, and history would have consigned
him to infamy; while he would have prepared for himself an anguish, that would
have endured through the remainder of his life.

General Dnmourier from the time of his being at Tournay, incessantly meditated
on this dreadful circumstance. Beside General Valence, the Duke de Chartres and
General Thouvenot, who partook of his councils, he also confided his thoughts
on this subject to Colonel Montjoy, and Colonel Nordmann, colonel of the
regiment of Berchiny. He proposed to send those two officers with three hundred
hussars to Paris, on the pre text of arresting deserters, and sending them back
to the army. He meant to have given them dispatches to the minister of war,
which would have justified their going to Paris, and would have given it a
natural air, in the case of their being interrogated. They were to proceed as
covertly as possible by the forest of Bondy; and afterward, reaching the prison
by the Boulevard of the temple, were to force the guard, making false attacks
in several different points, carry off the four illustrious prisoners, placing
each of them behind an hussar, and having a voiture ready in the forest, to
push forward with the utmost speed to Pont St. Maxence, where another body of
cavalry were to be posted to meet them.

But to this end it was necessary to be in possession of either Valenciennes,
or Lisie; and the circumstances that followed defeated the project, to which
those two worthy officers whom we have just named, were altogether devoted.
There remained no means of saving the illustrious prisoners from the rage of
the Jacobins. To form a conspiracy in Paris demanded time, and the emigrants
had so ill succeeded in attempts of that nature, that it had been madness in
the general to have placed any confidence in such a plan. Deprived then of all
hope of delivering the prisoners, the general had no other resource in their
behalf, than to possess himself of hostages for their safety. Hence he had so
anxiously sought to feize upon the Commissioners of the Convention at Lisle,
and Valenciennes; and he was now determined to detain such as might put
themselves into his power.

On the morning of the 5th of April, a captain of Chasseurs, whom Dumourier had
posted at Pont-aMarque, on the road between Lisle, and Douay, with fifteen
trusty and resolute men under his command, with orders to arrest any couriers,
but above all the Commissioners of the Convention, if they took the road from
Lisle to Paris, brought him advice that Beurnonville the minister of war had
passed them on the road to Lisie, and had informed him. (the captain of
Chasseurs) that he should afterward proceed to the head quarters of his riend
General Dumourier. The intimacy that subsisted etween this minister and the
General was known. Dumourier was astonished that he had received no courier
from Beurnonville, nor any manner of advice respecting his journey, at a time
when the General could no longer doubt of his being proscribed, and when the
Rubicon was already passed. This was the first and the only intimation which
Dumourier received to prepare him for the important scene that followed.

About four o'clock in the evening, two couriers came to the General to
announce the arrival of the minister of war with four commissioners of the
National Convention. Terror and despair were painted on the countenance of
these messengers. Interrogated by some of the staff officers respecting the
cause, they did not hesitate to say that General Dumourier was utterly lost,
that the commissioners came to conduct him to the bar of the Convention in
virtue of a decree, but that the general would never reach Paris, since
assassins were planted on the road by bands of twenty and thirty, at Gournay,
Roye, and Senlis, in order to murder him. They even indicated who these
assassins were, being soldiers belonging to two new regiments, called the
Hussars and dragoons of the Republic. The general had broken a ^quadron of the
Hussars. for having refused to obey their colonel, and had sent them back to
France on foot and without arms, which the Jacobins had restored them in order
to assassinate their general. The regiment of dragoons consisted of men who had
committed numerous crimes at Paris, from which they had been sent with great
difficulty to join the army, where they attempted to repeat their crimes. Their
conduct was cowardly and attrocious, and the general was compelled to act with
severity toward them on his retreat from the Netherlands. They afterward
deserted and fled to Paris. when they were now dispatched to be the accomplices
of the Hussars.

Immediately afterward the minister of war appeared, followed by the four
commissioner, who were Camus, La Marque, Bancal, and Quinette. The minister
after embracing the general with expressions natural to their mutual
attachment, Informed him that the commissioners came to notify to the general a
decree of the National Convention. General Valence was already with Dumourier,
and the rest of the staff officers now crowded into the apartment. Partaking of
the opinions of their general as they had partaken of his fatigues, dangers,
victories, and defeats, his fate was not to be separated from theirs; and
indignation rather that inquietude was expressed in their looks. Dumourier saw
that this temper of mind might break out into violent consequences, which
induced him the more to preserve the composure with which he was determined to
act in this critical moment.

Dumourier would be unjust if he did not offer the homage of his esteem and
gratitude, to those generous men, who in the midst of his disgraces preserved
the constancy of their friendship to him, and their attachment to principle, by
sacrificing emolument and honors, to follow him in his retreat. Nor can he
forbear here to record the magnanimity of General Valence, who being offered
the command of the Armies on condition of arresting Dumourier, not only spurned
at the offer without hesitation, but concealed the dangerous temptations laid
before him by the commissioners of the Convention from the knowledge of
Dumourier.

Camus spoke for the members of this deputation. In a manner that expressed
some degree of irresolution, he requested the general to go into another room
with the deputies, and minister of war, in order to hear a decree of the
Convention respecting him. The general answered, that as all his actions had
ever been public, and as the subject of a decree passed by seven hundred
persons could be no mystery, he saw no reason for complying with the request,
and that the officers who were present ought to be witnesses of whatever should
pass in this interview. Beurnonville, however, as well as the deputies, urged
the request with such appearance of respect that the General went with them
into an inner room, but his staff officers would not permit the door to be
closed, and General Valence entered the room with him.

Camus presented the decree to Dumourier; who, having read it with perfect
composure, returned it, and observed, that forbearing within certain limits to
condemn a decision of the National Convention, he could not but judge this
order to be untimely, since the army was disorganized and discontented, and
since his quitting it in that condition would be followed by its total
dissolution; that it would be prudent to suspend the execution of the decree,
till he should have restored the army to its proper footing, when he would be
ready to render an account of his conduct; and when it might be decided whether
circumstances required or permitted his appearance at Paris; that he read in
that decree, an article empowering the Commissioners to suspend him from his
functions and appoint another General, in the case of his disobeying the order;
that the Convention having charged them with a commission including such
severity toward the general, and of so delicate a nature with respect to
themselves, had certainly relied no less on their prudence than on their
firmness, that therefore he would throw himself on their discretion, and would
not positively refuse obedience, but merely demand a delay in the execution of
their order: that, in fine, being now judges of all the circumstances, they
could easily resolve on the conduct that became them, and if they were
determined upon suspending him, he would meet them half way, by himself
offering his resignation to them, which he had so often tendered during the
last three months to the Convention.

Camus replied that the deputies had no authority to receive the General's
resignation; and then said, But if your resignation were accepted of, what
would be your conduct afterward? I should act as became me, the General
answered; but I have no hesitation in declaring to you, I will neither by going
to Paris subject myself to be treated unworthily by fanatics, nor to be
condemned to death by a revolutionary tribunal. -- Then you do not acknowledge
that tribunal, said Camus. -- I recognize in it, replied the General, a
tribunal of Blood and of Crimes, to which I never will submit while I have a
sword that will not deceive me. I moreover declare, that had I the power I
would abolish it, as being a dishonor to a free Nation.

The other three deputies who were men of much more temper and moderation than
Camus, perceiving that the conversation became intemperate, interposed, and
endeavored to convince the general that the Convention had no inimical designs
against him; that he was loved and esteemed by every one, and that his presence
in Paris would destroy the calumnies of his enemies; that his absence from the
troops would not be long, and that the deputies and minister of war would
remain with the army till his return. Quinette offered to accompany the general
to Paris to be the pledge of his safety, and to return with him, making the
most fervent protestations that he would personally expose himself to all
danger in the general's defense. After this the conversation became more cool
and temperate, Bancal, a man of reading and talent, endeavored to win the
general by his regard for his name, and cited examples of obedience and
resignation to the laws of the Greeks and Romans. Let us have done with
mistakes, Sir, said the general; we degrade the Roman history; and disfigure
the Roman virtues, that they may serve as an excuse for our crimes. The Romans
did not massacre Tarquin. The Roman republic possessed a stable government and
just laws. They neither had a Jacobin club, nor a revolutionary tribunal. We
are in a state of anarchy. Ferocious men thirst for my blood, and I tell you
that I have often acted the part of Decius but never will that of Curtius.

The deputies assured Dumourier that he had formed an unjust idea of the state
of Paris; and that indeed he was neither called before the Jacobins, nor the
revolutionary tribunal, but to the Bar of the National Convention, and that he
would speedily return to his post.

I passed the month of January at Paris, said the general, and surely that city
has not become more reasonable since, especially in the moment of public
danger. I know by the most authentic of your journals, that the Convention is
governed by Marat, the Jacobins, and the tumultuous tribunes filled with the
emissaries of the Jacobins. The Convention has not the power of saving me from
the fury of these men; and, if it became the respect that I ow^ myself to
appear before such judges, even my deportment would provoke my death.

Camus then returned to his categorical question. You refuse to obey the decree
of the Convention? The general answered that he had already stated to the
deputies his view of the subject. He urged them to take a moderate course, and
exhorted them to return to Valenciennes, and from thence to make a report to
the Convention, setting forth the general's reasons, and supporting those by
showing the impossibility of taking the general from his army at this instant,
without incurring the greatest risk of disbanding it.

Dumourier acknowledges that, had they yielded to these counsels, he should
have been imprudent enough to have permitted their departure. The colleagues of
Camus appeared by no means unwilling to listen to reason, although on his part he
rudely repulsed every conciliatory measure. Call to mind, said one of them,
that your disobedience in this case will cause the ruin of the republic. Cambon
said in your tribune amidst bursts of applause, answered the general, that the
sat of the republic rests not upon any one man. I have, beside, to observe
that the name of the republic does not belong to us; our condition is absolute,
anarchy. I swear to you that I have no desire to elude enquiry. I promise you
on my honor, a pledge that is inviolable with military men, that when the
nation shall have a government, and laws, I will give a faithful account of my
actions and motives. I will myself demand a trial. At present, it would be an
act of insanity in me.

The conference lasted more than two hours, but that which has been stated was
the exact purport of it. The deputies retired into another chamber, to decide
on the course they should pursue.

Dumourier was at this period deceived respecting the designs, and the conduct
of Beurnonville; in consequence of which he has made unjust complaints of that
minister. He learned afterward from a virtuous and impartial man, that
Beurnonville was constant in his friendship to Dumourier; and the gross
accusations of Marat against that minister is an additional proof of the fact:
and Dumourier is eager to make this public avowal of his error.

It is certain that Beurnonville, being several times appealed to by Dumourier
respecting the conduct he would observe in this case, constantly said. I cannot
advise you. You know what it becomes you to do. As soon as the deputies were
withdrawn, the general complained that Beurnonville had forborne to give him
intelligence of the approach of this important event, at the same time however
requesting him to join the army, and again to take upon him the command of the
advanced guard. Beurnonville answered, I know that I shall fall a sacrifice to
my enemies, but I have resolved to die at my post. My situation is terrifying.
I see you are decided, and that the step you will take is of the most desperate
kind. I demand as a favor at your hands that you will not separate my fate
from that of the a^^^ties. -- Be assured that I will not, answered the General.
Dumourier was at that moment unjust to the magnanimity of Beurnonville, whom he
considered to be persidious, or at the best unworthily carried away by
circumstances. May he receive some consolation in this justice rendered to him
by Dumourier. And may his heart, justly offended, be open to receive the
atonement of his friend!

Beurnonville, Valence, and Dumourier returned to the officers, who impatiently
waited the result of this long Conference. But their inquietude was not
entirely dissipated, for the general did not then acquaint them with the
resolution he had taken. These officers have since told him that, had he
consented to go to Paris, they would have prevented it by violence.

When the deputies first arrived at the general's quarters, the regiment of
Berchiny was drawn up in the court yard; and the general had commanded Colonel
Nordmann to select an officer on whom he could rely, together with thirty men,
and to hold them in readiness to execute his orders. The passions by which the
troops were agitated were forcibly expressed in their looks, and the general
exerted his influence to moderate them.

In this interval while the Deputies were deliberating, Dumourier in walking
met doctor Menuret, surgeon to the army, and said to him, Well doctor, what
remedy shall we apply to this wound? Menuret answered quickly, the same as in
the preceding year at the camp of Maulde, a grain of disobedience.

In about an hour the deputies returned to the General's room, Camus much
agitated, said harshly, Citizen General, are you ready to obey the decree of
the National Convention, and go with us to Paris? The General replied, Not in
this instant. -- Then, said Camus, I susp^nd you from your functions. You no
longer command the armies. I forbid all persons to obey you, and command every
one to assist in arresting you. I will go myself and place the seals on your
papers.

A murmur of indignation was heard. Give me the names of those persons, Camus
cried out rudely, pointing to the officers around him. They will themselves
give you their names. -- I have now other employment, replied Camus, who no
longer knew what he said: I demand your papers.

Dumourier now saw that the emotion of his officers was at its height and on
the point of producing some rash action. He said, in a firm tone, This is
insufferable. It is time to put an end to such insolence. And, in the German
language he commanded the Hussars to enter. He then ordered the officer of the
hussars to arrest the four deputies and the minister of war, but not to do them
any personal injury, and to leave Beurnonville his arms.

Camus then said, General Dumourier, you are about to destroy the Republic. --
Say rather it is you, old madman, the General replied to him.

They were conducted into another chamber; and after having dined, were
conveyed in their own carriage to Tourmy, escorted by a squadron of the hussars
of Berchiny. Dumourier sent a letter to General Clairfait, saying that he sent
him hostages, who would be responsible for the excesses that might be committed
at Paris. He requested General Clairfait to treat the minister of war, with
more distinction than the rest.

Such were the facts relative to the arrest of the Commissioners of the
Convention, which was a measure forced on the General by circumstances. As to
the act of delivering them into the hands of the Imperialists, it is to be
remembered that Dumourier had no fortress in which he could keep them in
safety, and that the Imperialists being as deeply concerned as himself in the
fate of the prisoners of the Temple, they could not be placed in any hands so
sure. They could be detained merely as hostages, nor was there any danger to
their personal safety, their detention being simply an act of precaution on the
part of Dumourier. Besides, it is to be recollected, that the Prince of Cobourg
consented to act on the footing of an auxiliary to General Dumourier, in this
war, for the overthrow of the Jacobins, and for the re-establishment of the
Constitution. Hence these hostages were not really prisoners of the
Imperialists, but those of General Dumourier, for whom they held them. The
deputies and the minister of war were sent to Maestricht, where they were kept
till a change of circumstances required their removal.

This event is one more instance of the blind precipitation attending upon all
the measures of the National Convention. It is to be remarked also, that Camus,
who went post from Liege to vote for the death of Louis XVI. had in this, last
instance, suddenly quitted the frontier, to procure the arrest of General
Dumourier, had himself dictated the decree, and had demanded to be charged with
its execution. It was therefore that he was so unreleuting during the
conference, lest his colleagues should have yielded to persuasion, and should
have returned to Valenciennes, as they were counseled to do by the General.

CHAP. XIII.
Attempt to assassinate General Dumourier on the 4th of April. Events of the
5th of April. Departure of General Dumourier.
IMMEDIATELY after this important event, Dumourier sent Colonel Montjoye to
acquaint Colonel Mack with the circumstance; and to appoint a time and place,
for a conference between the General and Colonel Mack, for the purpose of
finally concluding upon the terms of their treaty, and for settling the
measures that should be reciprocally taken, according to the conduct that
should be adopted by Dumourier's army after this decisive period. Being
informed that a congress of the Ministers of the Combined Powers would speedily
be held at Antwerp, Dumourier sent General Valence to Brussels that he might be
nearer the neighborhood of the Congress. During the night, Dumourier composed
a short manifesto, which was digested and put into form the following day. In
this, he drew up a recital of the facts of that day, and exposed his motives
for arresting the Commissioners of the Convention. He particularly insisted on
the necessity of possessing hostages, a regard for whose safety might prevent
the crimes in which the Jacobins might otherwise indulge on learning the event.

On the morning of the 3d of April, the General went to the camp, and addressed
the troops on the part he had acted, who appeared to approve of it with
enthusiasm. He afterward went to St. Amand, in which place were the corpse of
artillery, who testified the same approbation of the General's conduct, as the
troops in the camp, although the most indefatigable zeal to seduce this corpse
was employed by the emissaries of the Jacobins of Valenciennes, and especially
by two of Dumourier's superior officers, one of whom, a Lieutenant Colonel
named Boubers, had received very particular obligations from the General.

Dumourier deemed it prudent to sleep at St. Amand, for the purpose of marking
his confidence in the troops there; and at this place Colonel Montjoye brought
him the answer of Colonel Mack. It was agreed that the following morning the
Prince of Cobourg, the Archduke Charles, and the Baron de Mack should meet
General Dumourier, between Bossu and Conde, for the purpose of resolving on the
movements of the two armies, and respecting the direction of the succors that
should be granted of Imperial troops in the case of Dumourier having occasion
to demand them.

The whole day of the 3d of April passed with as great success as the General
could expect. The army appeared of one mind, with the exception of some murmurs
that were heard among some of the battalions of volunteers: and a movement
which the General prepared to make on the 5th, was calculated to banish the
secret means of intrigue. The General designed to take a new position with the
greater part of his army near Orchies, by which means he would remove the
troops from the dangerous neighborhood of Valenciennes; would destroy the
leisure that belongs to a permanent camp, and in which intrigues have the
greatest scope for action; and would be able to menace Lisle, Douay, and
Bouchain. He acknowledges that, had he adopted this plan immediately on his
entering the territory of France, he would probably have been more successful.
But, at that period he relied on Valenciennes and Cond^; and, perhaps, it is to
this error that the sequel is to be attributed.

It is, however, difficult to determine at present what would have happened in
that case. The character of the events of that period, is such as no prudence
could foresee; sines they were the sudden acts of the caprice of the people,
which were subject to no calculation, and that followed each other with a
rapidity to which neither foresight nor talent could oppose any obstacle. And
it must be acknowledged that the principle which so abruptly detached the
French soldiers from a General whom they had previously adored, has an aspect
that cannot be regarded without aprobation. They were in arms for the liberty
of their country. They saw their General treat with the enemy. They thought
themselves betrayed, and they passed from an esteem for their General to the
hatred of him. They were not informed of the purport of his negotiations, nor
of the care the General had taken in that treaty, of the interests, and honor
of his country. He had not been able to do more, with respect to his troops,
than to state to them in general terms the necessity of changing the
government, and putting an end to anarchy. They applauded the design; but, as
the General had not aided his plan by seductions, nor by terrors, the first
impression wore casily away; and the activity of the Jacobins, more constant,
more vigilant, and of a nature much more adapted to make impressions upon them,
was employed with the utmost success.

The grossest calumny takes root speedily in the minds of men; but more than in
any other time, in a period agitated by the doemon of anarchy. Suspicion ripens
in times of revolution, The word Traitor being once pronounced, the multitude
endeavored to find, in the definition of this word, the exact portrait of the
General, whom proclamations, but still more the baser intrigues of corruption,
devoted to disgrace. His prudence was now artifice; his love of the public
welfare, personal ambition; and a silence dictated by his judgment, knavery.
One quarter of an hour employed in the concealed labor of falsehood, supported
by the powerful engine of corruption, effaced all sober reflection in men,
whose condition precludes them from much thought, and who delight in barbarous
and bloody scenes.

If we cooly examine the progress of the revolution, we shall see that the
activity of the Gu^llotire is the motive of the high patriotism of the French.
The spectacle of severed heads, of torn limbs, carried in procession throughout
Paris and other cities, has begotten a terror in some, and in the rest an
audacious barbarity; and in both cases has produced a decisive effect, leading
the former by fear, and the latter by the necessity of providing for their
impunity, to the endless multiplication of murders. The consequence is that the
blood spilt by this dreadful engine has converted the nation into a mass
capable of effecting astonishing objects.

Frenchmen, do not be led to suppose that the indulgence with which Dumourier
judges you, is an eulogium on your conduct! He detests your crimes. He regards
the species of liberty you enjoy, as wild and incompatible with the interests
of society; and he would rather perish on your unjust and permanent scaffold,
than be the apologist or partaker of your phr^nzy!

This digression faithfully paints the feelings of Dumourier's mind, at the
dreadful period which perhaps decided the fate of France. Agitated by the
various passions springing from his situation, but still directed by
principles, he resisted the temptations of ambition. His justice would not
permit him to be Cromwell, nor Monk, nor Coriolanus. His power was extreme, but
his wishes moderate. And it is now a consolation to him that he is unfortunate
rather than criminal.

Dumourier received various reports every instant, respecting the disposition
of the garrison of Conde. Previous to his moving with his army to Orchies, he
saw the necessity of assuring himself perfectly of Conde; in order to arrange
the movements of the Imperialists, his treaty with whom he dated not avow, till
he should have made a declaration to his troops of his ultimate views, and
should have commenced his march to Paris.

On the morning of the 4th, he departed from St. Amand for Conde. He had left
General Thouvenot at St. Amand, to regulate various details relative to his
projected movement, and to watch the public temper. An escort of fifty hussars,
which he ordered to attend him, not arriving as he expected, and the time for
his conference with the Prince of Coburg approaching, he left one of his
aids-de-camp to follow him with the escort, and departed with the Duke de
Chartres, Colonel Thouvenot, Colonel Montjoye, some aids-de-camp, and eight
hussars; forming together a company of about thirty persons.

Dumourier proceeded toward Conde without any apprehension, his thoughts being
deeply engaged on subjects far different from the fatal event which was about
to arrive, and of which he had not the least presentiment. Being within half a
league of Conde, between Fresnes and Doumet, he met an officer dispatched by
General Neuilly, to inform him that the garrison were in the greatest
fermentation, and that it would not be prudent for him to enter the place, till
the commotion should have ended, whether it should be in his favor or against
him. Dumourier sent back the officer with an order to General Neuilly, to send
the 18th regiment of cavalry to Doumet to escort him.

He had a little before overtaken a column of three battalions of volunteers
marching toward Conde, with their baggage and artillery. Surprised at this
march, for which he had given no orders, he demanded of the officers where they
were going. They answered to Valenciennes, and he observed to them that they
had turned their back on Valenciennes, and were proceeding to Conde. At this
time he was in the midst of them, and had stopped by the side of a ditch to
suffer them to pass. He does not conceive why they did not then arrest him.

While they were yet in fight it was that General Neuilly's messenger arrived.
Then comparing in his mind the tum^lt of the garrison of Conde, and the
unexpected march of these three battalions, he withdrew an hundred paces from
the high road, with a design of entering the first house in Doumet, for the
purpose of writing a formal order to these three battalions, to return to the
camp of Bruille, to which they belonged.

At this instant, the head of the column suddenly quitted the high road, and
ran toward him, uttering dreadful cries. He then remounted his horse, and
proceeded at a moderate pace toward a broad ditch, on the other side of which
was a marshy ground. Shouts, insults, reproaches, and above all the words, stop
stop, forced him to pass the ditch. His horse having refused to take it, he was
obliged to clear it on foot. He was no sooner on the other side, than a
discharge of muskets succeeded the former tumultuous cries. The whole column
was instantly in motion; the head and center endeavoring to overtake him, and
the rear quitting the high road with equal rapidity, to get between him and the
camp of Bruille, which he was endeavoring to regain.

He was now in the most imminent danger. He was on foot. The Baron de Scomberg
threw himself from his horse, and insisted on the general's mounting, though
with the certain sacrifice of his own life. The general refused. At length he
mounted a horse belonging to a domestic of the Duke de Chartres, who, being
extremely active, fled on foot. Dumourier's horse was taken and led in triumph
to Valenciennes. Two hussars were killed, as well as two of the general's
domestics, one of whom carried his great coat. Colonel Thouvenot had two horses
killed under him, and saved himself at last by mounting behind the faithful
Baptiste, who also lost two horses. The unfortunate Cantin, the general's
secretary, was taken and perished on a scaffold. This young man possessed great
understanding, courage, fidelity, and patriotism. The three battalions fired
more than ten thousand ball.

The general, unable to regain his camp, proceeded along the Scheldt, and
arrived, still pursued, though not so closely, at a ferry, a little distance
from the village of Wihers, which was situated on the Imperial territory. He
passed the river, accompanied by five other persons. The remainder gained the
camp of Maulde, through a discharge of musquetry. As soon as the general had
passed the river he proceeded on foot through a morass, to a neighboring house
^ where, at first he was refused admittance, but on announcing his name was
immediately received by the worthy owner. Thence he continued his route on foot
to Bury, where was quartered a division of the Imperial regiment of dragoons of
la Tour. Here he wrote to Colonel Mack, and took some refreshment, of which he
stood greatly in need. He was already joined by the faithful Baptiste, who,
passing through the whole of the camp, had turned by Montagne, and had every
where spread an alarm.

Dumourier learnt from Baptiste, and other persons during the course of the
day, that the designs of the three battalions were entirely unknown to the
troops; that, on the news of their desertion and attempt to murder the general
being spread, the strongest indignation was expresed by the soldiery; and that
the escort of hussars and some other horse had pursued the three battalions,
who suddenly wheeling, had fled to Valenciennes, Baptiste added, that the whole
camp was in a state of the greatest inquietude, and importunately demanded the
return of the general.

It was now too late to rejoin his army, and it was necessary that he should
wait for Colonel Mack, to whom he owed an account of the reason of his failing
in the appointment in the morning. That officer arrived in the evening; and
Dumourier having recited to him the attempt which had been made on his person,
observed, that this was the crime of individuals, which far from corrupting the
disposition of his troops, would necessarily strengthen their attachment to
their General. and destroy all their remaining connection with the anarchists;
that consequently, far from being discouraged, his design was to return to his
camp by daybreak the following morning, to put himself at the head of his
soldiers who loudly demanded his return, and to pursue his plan openly and with
the utmost vigor.

Colonel Mack, to whom the military virtues were familiar, has since
acknowledged that this species of courage then appeared to him more astonishing
than that which is displayed in the dangers of a battle. Had he then seen all
the soul of Dumourier, he would have found this apparent security mingled with
apprehension, excited by the example and fate of La Fayette. But the general's
resolution was taken. He resolved to sacrifice himself throughout; and would
not give his army occasion to say, that the desertion was on his part, or that,
being recalled by his soldiers, he had resisted their wishes.

Dumourier passed part of the night in digesting, with Colonel Mack, the
proclamation of the Prince of Cobourg, which appeared on the 5th of April, with
that of General Dumourier. The Imperial General in his proclamation declared,
that he was now no more than an auxiliary in the war, against the anarchists of
France; that it was not the intention of his sovereign to make conquests, but
to cooperate, in restoring peace and order to France, with General Dumourier,
whose principles, as they were expressed in his proclamation, he adopted.

It was again agreed by Colonel Mack, and Dumourier, that, as soon as the
latter should be master of Conde, he should deliver it to the Austrians, in
order to serve as a magazine and place of arms for the Imperial army, in the
case of aid being demanded by Dumourier; that he should be instantly furnished
with such succors as he should demand; that he should specify the number of
infantry and cavalry to be granted him, the mode in which these should serve,
whether by a junction with his troops, or by making one or more separate
diversions in behalf of the cause; that, however, Dumourier should not call for
succors, but in case of absolute need, it being more agreeable to the mutual
object of the parties, that he should endeavor to accomplish it by his own
troops only; and that, in case of his being able to do so, the Imperialists
should remain neuter, and should not pass the frontiers of France.

The proclamation of the Prince of Cobourg, made in consequence of this
negotiation, has been condemned but unjustly. Of what real advantage had it not
been to the Imperialists, and what solid glory had they not acquired, if, by
enabling Dumourier to march to Paris, they could by this noble moderation have
spared the blood and trea^^^ that will be wasted in this quarrel, for which the
towns that may be acquired with infinite difficulty will be no manner of
compensation.

It is to be feared that an avidity for conquests among the belligerent powers
is the real obstacle to the termination of this destructive war. By this
passion they were prevented from seizing upon the occasion offered, by the
departure of General Dumourier, and the consequent annihilation of his army, of
pressing forward to Paris. The combined powers have since lost their time in
making a methodical war, while the French have been able to recover themselves,
and their armies have become more numerous, and better disciplined.

On the 5th of April at daybreak, Dumourier proceeded with an escort of fifty
Imperial dragoons to the advanced guard of his camp at Maulde, where he was
received with the greatest joy. He harangued the several corpse, by whom he was
answered with expressions of affection. Notwithstanding, he remarked that there
were some indications of a contrary spirit, and several factious groups
assembled in different parts.

His next design was to go to St. Amand, to prepare for the movement of his
troops to Orchies, according to his former plan. As he was entering the city,
one of his aids-de-camp came toward him on the full gallop, and informed him
that during the night the corpse of artillery, excited by the emissaries of
Valenciennes, who had spread the report that the general was drowned in the
Scheldt in flying to the enemy, had sent a deputation to Valenciennes, and that
on the return of their deputies they had instantly rose upon their generals,
driven them from the place, and were preparing to march to Valenciennes.

Dumourier had with him, two squadrons of the regiment of Berchiny, a squadron
of the hussars of Saxe, fifty curiassiers, and a squadron of the dragoons of
Bourbon. Yielding to his emotions of passion, he resolved to fall upon St.
Amand with this body of cavalry. His officers, however, represented the danger
and inutility of this step, as he had no infantry at hand, and would subject
his escort to be mown down by the artillery. He gave way to their reasoning. He
learnt shortly after that the corpse of artillery went to Valenciennes. The
money belonging to the army and the equipages of the officers remaining in the
city without guard, he commanded them to be conducted to Rumegies, at the
distance of a league from his camp, on the road to Orchies, that village being
protected by a part of his advanced guard cantoned there.

The corpse of artillery was the slower and strength of the French army. Feeling
its importance, it abounded more than the others in clubs and orators, and
indeed, might pass for the Pretorian guard of the revolution. When its
desertion was known in the two camps, part of the troops followed, and
confusion and dismay were spread among, the rest. Several of the general
officers who waited for the opportunity were eager to lead entire divisions to
Valenciennes. Those who still remained attached to the person, or principles of
Dumourier, instead of showing themselves to their troops, and setting an
example of courage, were struck with terror, concealed themselves, or thought
only of their own safety. General La Marlier had been among the most forward of
the enemies of Anarchy, and possessed the entire confidence of General Valenec;
who, when he departed from Brussels, confided the whole of his baggage and
effects to him, with a request that he would send them alter Valence to
Tournay. La Marlier appropriated the money, horses, and property of his general
to his own use, and deserted to Valenciennes.

Dumourier was at Rumegies, dictating, orders to be issued to the different
parts of the army, when he heard of the defection of the troops in camp.
Nothing was left him now but to provide for his personal safety. He mounted his
horse, attended by General Thou^^not, and his brother the colonel, the Duke de
Chartresy Colonel Montjoye, and Lieutenant Colonel Barrois, two or three others
of his staff, and some Aids-de-camp, having no escort; and retiring to Tournay
alighted at the quarters of General Clairfait. He was followed in about an hour
afterward, by fifty Cuirassiers, half a squadron of the hussars of Saxe, and
the whole of the regiment of Berchiny. Those brave and worthy men, brought with
them the equipages belonging to the general and the staff officers, excepting
the saddle horses of the general, which were stolen by one of his grooms, who
joined the anarchists.

The troops of which we have just spoken and a few others that arrived shortly
afterward, amounting to about seven hundred horse, and eight hundred infantry,
followed the General without any solicitation on his part; and this
circumstance renders him the more anxious respecting the sat of those men, the
companions of his former glory, and of his last disgrace.

Dumourier in retiring from France invited no one to follow him. His plan had
totally failed, and a few men more or less on either side would not influence
events. The individuals attached to his cause had ties of family and of
interest in France, and he resolved not to multiply misfortunes without
benefit. Those who followed him, therefore, had the real merit of being guided
by principle.

In the confusion that succeeded the General's departure, none of the orders
that had been issued were executed. Lieutenant General Vouille, who commanded
the advanced guard, did not receive the order of withdrawing it within the camp
of Maulde till the 6th, when it was no longer in his power. The General retired
to Tournay, as did also Major General Neuilly, who had abandoned Conde,
Major General de Bannes, Second, and de Dumas, and some of the principal
officers of the battalions of Volunteers; where they were afterward joined by
Lieuitenant-general Marasse, Major Generals Rault and Berneron, and Colonel
Arnaudin.

The treasury of the Army contained two millions of livres in specie. It had
been carried from St. Amand to Furnes, between Conde and Valenciennes, by a
battalion of Chasseurs, who at first deliberated respecting the dividing of it
among themselves, but afterward being likely to quarrel, in order to avoid the
bloodshed that would ensue, made a merit of their patriotism and conducted it
to Valenciennes. Soliva, a commissary of the army of the Ardennes, pursued
these troops with a squadron of the dragoons of Bourbon, retook the money of
the Glacis of Valencienoes, and led it back to Furnas: but being pressed by new
battalions was again obliged to adandon it. Soliva and the dragoons retired by
Mons. They might have brought off the money had they passed by Bruille, and
Mortagne, but the confusion of the moment prevented recollection and foresight.
If the treasury of the army had been saved, the General's situation had been
very different; and the little army that followed his fortunes, would have
increased rapidly, being in a state to pay them, instead of being as he really
was, without money, This circumstance proves, that the pay of the army was not
embezzled by him, nor employed as a means of corruption. Dumourier placed
little confidence in means of corruption, in which as the leader of a party his
conduct was greatly erroneous.

Dumourier had not the qualities that were requisite for the leader of a party.
It is probable that he would have filled the station of a General or an
Ambassador with success, under a stable government, whether monarchical, or
republican. But the violent state of things in France, destructive of all his
pre-conceived ideas of justice, and injustice, threw him entirely out of his
sphere. His activity, so greatly spoken of even by his enemies, was repressed
by his dread of committing crimes; and he preferred his own esteem to success.
Thus in his first reflections, after his retreat among the Imperialists, he saw
the cause of his failure in himself, but he felicitated himself on the fact. To
have swayed the fortune of France, had undoubtedly given him a noble place in
history; but to have been indebted for it to the flagitiousness of his conduct,
was too severe a condition; and he was happy in resigning one to escape the
other.

He invites men of high stations to examine themselves with the same austerity;
and moralists, to study the influence which character has on events. Caesar and
Pompey, determined a noble quarrel by noble means, and on both sides were
displayed greatness of mind, virtues, and ^ents. Had those men been surrounded
with the lowest vices of the meanest classes in society, they would have fled,
or would have fallen victims. It demands a Maaniello to conduct the populace,
But when a great nation becomes an entire populace, neighboring nations are
thrown into the greatest embarrassment; because the electric spirit spreads
with more rapidity among the people, than among the higher orders of men.

CHAP. XIV.
Dumourier at Mons. -- Establishment of the French at Leuze -- Congress of
Antwerp, -- Second Proclamation of the Prince of Cobourg. -- Departure of the
General for Brussels.
GENERAL CLAIRFAIT gave orders for the reception of the French troops which
might arrive in the villages round the town of Le^^^, which was fixed upon for
the residence of the French general officers; and Dumourier departed for Mons,
accompanied by the Duke de Chartres, Colonel Thouvenot, Colonel Montjoye, and
Lieutenant Colonel Barrois, passing by Bury, to concert measures with the
officer commanding the Imperial advanced post, for protecting the retreat of
such of the French as should join the Imperialists.

The Imperialists were faithful to their truce. It is certain that had they
fallen on the French camp on the 5th of April, they might have utterly
destroyed the army. Their conduct was therefore highly honorable: yet, without
incurring the blame of persidy, perhaps on that day they ought to have made a
movement with their army, taking possession of the camp of Maulde, and showing
themselves at St. Amand: they not only would have found no resistance, but
probably would have been joined by several battalions of the French, which
during more than four-and-twenty hours, appeared by their movements to be
irresolute as to the conduct they should pursue. But however this may be, the
sidelity of the Imperialists to their engagements, is to be applauded. Their
motives were most worthy, as well as the generosity with which they received
the French refugees, who had certainly been among the bravest of their enemies.

Dumourier found Colonel Mack at Bury, from which place they departed together
for Mons, in the genaral's carriage. It was agreed between them, that the
Imperialists should instantly besiege Conde, and that the place should be
summoned in the name of General Dumourier, who accordingly wrote the summons
and sent it the following day to the Imperial head quarters. It was further
agreed that a return should be made of the officers and soldiers which
accompanied or followed Dumourier; that considering their having unfortunately
lost their military chest, they should receive the pay of their respective
ranks, at the rate that officers of the same rank in the Imperial service were
paid, and should be placed on the same footing; that a commissary of war
belonging to the Imperial army should be attached to these troops, together
with a French commissary, to certify the justice of the returns; that an
advance should be made from the Imperial treasury of 30,000 florins, which
should be put into the hands of the French staff officers for the pay of their
troops, that Dumourier should have the rank, and establishment of
Feld-zeugmeister (general of the artillery); and that finally, this pay and
advance should be regarded as a loan to the party of Dumourier, and that the
general should engage, as soon as any progress should be made in France.

It is a consolation to General Dumourier, that the companions of his
mifortunes continue to enjoy this establishment. Indeed they have, since that
period, been subjected to the condition of taking an oath, which was not in the
first instance required; but at that period they were the soldiers of a party
which no longer exists, and it has been since deemed necessary to demand that
security for their fidelity. Dumourier would himself become their pledge with
readinese, having throughout the war tried their fidelity, courage, and
resignation. Let them accept of this testimony of the esteem and affection of
their general, and may they be recompensed for their virtues in contributing to
the success of the power whom they will faithfully serve.

In pursuance of these arrangments, Dumourier caused, by the order of the
Prince of Cobourg, 10,000 florins to be advanced to the French troops at Leuze;
unwilling, through motives of delicacy, to take the whole of the money agreed
to be advanced, because in penetrating speedily into France this sum would have
served till they could have proceeded further into the interior part of the
country; and Dumourier appeals to the Prince of Cobourg, Colonel Mack, and the
other principal officers of the Imperial army, respecting the clearness and
disiterestedness of his conduct. It was further decided that the general, till
he should be employed with his troops, should be provided with quarters, near
those of the Prince of Cobourg; and the Imperial head quarters being
established at Boussu, General Dumourier's quarters were fixed at the abbey of
St. Ghislain.

Dumourier makes here an avowal of his gratitude to the general officers of the
Imperial army, by whom he was treated with distinguished marks of regard, and
more particularly by the Archduke Charles, and the Prince of Cobourg. At this
time was formed a friendship between Colonel Mack and Dumourier, which on the
part of the latter will never be diminished. Colonel Mack is an officer of
uncommon virtue, and military talents, and the unbounded confidence placed in
him by the Imperial army is the just recompense of his services. It is greatly
to be hoped, for the interest of the house of Austria, that the health of this
officer will be restored.

During two days that Dumourier was at Mons, he was treated by the inabitants
in a manner that is flattering to his own honor; and his reception was the
same at Tournay, Le^ze^ and indeed, throughout the whole of that cou^^ (...)
^^rthy people being sensible of the services he had rendered them, especially
on his return from Holland and during the retreat of his army to France.

It would be injustice not to name an instance of the delicate attention of the
Prince of Cobourg to Dumourier's situation. The General seeing a corpse of two
hundred chasseurs belonging to the emigrants, as they passed through Mons, on
their route to join the advanced guard of the army, represented to the Prince
of Cobourg, that this mingling of the emigrants with his troops could not but
produce fatal effects, especially on entering France; and the Prince of Cobourg
instantly gave counter orders to the chasseurs; sending them by Namur, to serve
in the advanced guard of the Prince of Hohenloe.

The Prince of Lambesc-Lorraine testified also to the general his gratitude for
the essential service rendered to his house by Dumourier when he was Minister
of Foreign Affairs, in preventing an unjust confiscation of his property, and
of that of the Princess of Vaudemont.

On the 7th of April, the Prince of Cobourg departed, with Colonel Mack, to
attend the Congress, held at Antwerp; from which place he returned on the
evening of the 8th. Dumourier passed those two days at Leuze, in the midst of
his comrades, whose uneasiness he dissipated by informing them of the
establishments made for them by the Imperialists. General Vouille took the
command of these troops; and Dumourier, assisted by General Thouvenot, began to
reform them, according to the regulations of the Imperial army; which was the
more necessary, as the refugees were composed only of fragments of the
different corpse; with the exception of the regiment of Berchiny. Dumourier
quitted the companions of his misfortunes on the evening of the 8th, and felt
some presentiment that he should not return to them. On the morning of the 9th
he arrived at Mons, where he found the Prince of Cobourg, setting off for his
head quarters. Dumourier went there also; and after treating further on what
regarded their mutual interests, he went in the evening to the quarters which
had been prepared for him at the abbey of St. Ghislain.

On the morning of the 10th of April, a proclamation of the Prince of Cobourg
was brought to Dumourier, dated the 9th, which entirely annulled the former
proclamation of the 5th; and expressly declared, that the Prince of Cobourg
would thenceforth carry on the war against France, (...) behalf of his
sovereign. (...) would hold such (...) ^

The emigrants have had the imprudence to rejoice at the issuing of this
latter, and to condemn the former. It might be demanded if these emigrants were
Frenchmen. But, setting aside the influence of passions, by which not only
individuals, but also the governments interested in this war are Influenced, it
will appear but too true, that the second proclamation of the Prince of Cobourg
in depriving Dumourier's party of all means of acting in concert, and in
setting forth the belligerent powers as rapacious conquerors, has attached the
whole of the French armies to the interest of the National Convention, which
the greater part of them had previously detested; has compelled the cause of
royalty to be forgot^en, in the danger of the country; has pointed out the
salvation of France as resting on the existence of the Republic; has rallied
the different parties round the standard of the national honor; and has
certainly been injurious to the success of the campaign, and rendered the issue
of the war extremely uncertain.

This second proclamation was issued at the conclusion of the Congress at
Antwerp, in consequence of the determination of the ministers of the combined
powers. Dumourier now saw that his treaty with the Imperialists was entirely
destroyed; and, without offering useless complaints of this sudden change in
the councils of the Imperialists, he consulted only his character, and
principles, and resolved to sacrifice all his personal interests.

He repaired instantly to the head quarters, and told the Prince of Cobourg
frankly, that he came to thank him for the personal kindnesses he had rendered
him, and that he hoped to continue to merit his esteem; that when he entered
into a treaty with the Prince of Cobourg, his object was the regeneraton of
France, and not its dismemberment; that he would not enter into any discussion
concerning the motives of the combined powers; but that for his part, he could
have no share in lessening the territory of France, or employ either his
influence, or his moderate talents, in that task; and that therefore he felt
himself obliged to withdraw from the coalition, and must beseech the Prince of
Cobourg to grant him a passport.

The Prince of Cobourg could not forbear to express his high esteem of his
delicacy. The Arch Duke Charles, and Colonel Mack, also expressed their esteem
for the general; and he departed for Brussels. Dumourier can have no doubt
that, after a direct violation of the principles of the treaty that had taken
place, and after an open disavowal of the proclamation issued in consequence of
that treaty, his presence must have been embarrassing to the Imperialists, and
that they regarded the resolution he took with pleasure. But it was not long
that he left them in any perplexity, his resolution was taken the moment he
perceived there designs.

Before Dumourier quitted the Imperial army, he had the satisfaction of knowing
that his former companions would be continued in their rank and employments.
They are well treated and serve in the Imperial army, where assuredly they will
support their reputation.

Being arrived at Brussels, he explained the motives of his conduct to the
Count de Metternich, the emperor's minister in the Netherlands, who received
him with the greatest friendship, and gave him a passport for Germany.

In this place the memoirs of the public life of General Dumourier are
concluded. The remainder of his life has been filled up with difficulties,
dangers, persecutions, and calumnies of every kind, of which he may one day
render an account to the public. But this history can only interest those who
are truly his friends, and they are not many: or, real philosophers, and such
are indeed ^^e.

CHAP. XV.
Conclusion.
SUCH is the series of events in three of the most disastrous months of General
Dumourier's life. In this short period he has experienced all the miseries, and
all the dangers, that the weakness and wickedness of man can inflict upon a
public character. Calumny and injustice form the outline of this dark picture,
which may serve as a lesson to men of every description, and from which
philosophy alone can extract those consolatory reflections which propriety of
conduct and rectitude of motive supply. He hates, neither those who have
defamed his character, nor those who have pursued his life, nor those who have
refused him an asylum, and whose ungenerous and ill founded refentment
persecutes him wherever he flies. The first, are ignorant of the true state of
those facts, which, from their very singularity, are exceedingly liable to
misrepresentation. The second, are actuated by that spirit of fanaticism, which
is reasonable proof. The third, are prejudiced by calumny, and consider him as
a dangerous character.

The Ministers of foreign courts have given it out, after the Emigrants, that
he is a proper object of suspicion, and that they can never be sure he will not
veer about and put himself at the head of the French. His proscription, and his
three declarations, ought to be a sufficient pledge of his firmness: those
three pieces have raised him many enemies by the perverse misconstruction given
to his expressions.

He avows that he passionately loves his country, and that he will never
hesitate a moment to sacrifice his life to its welfare; but he declares, at the
same time, that whilst it is polluted with crimes, and delivered over to the
horrors of anarchy, he will never enter it again: that, proscribed, as he is,
and an outcast of society, he prefers all the miseries and all the dangers he
may incur, to the most splendid situation in which the oppressors of his
countrymen, and the inciters of their mad excesses, could place him.

He has been the open enemy of those powers who wished to interfere in the
internal affairs of his country, both whilst he was a minister, and whilst he
was a general; because he was most firmly persuaded, that the Revolution which
was doubtless, expedient and inevitable, would have been accomplished, not only
with innocence, but glory, if foreign interference and the open encouragement
given to the emigrants, had not exasperated to madness a people by nature
impetuous and violent. After licentiousness and anarchy had destroyed every
thing in France, he wished to avail himself of the same foreign powers to
re-establish order, not merely without injury to his country, but with the most
tender regard for its interest and its glory.

When he saw that this became impracticable, he formed the plan of a diversion,
by which he conceived he might essentially serve the cause of his country and
of Europe. Distrust or other motives, prevented its execution. He grieves at
the protraction of the sufferings of human nature: he fighs impatiently for the
termination of this cala^itious war, without foreseeing the means of its
accomplishment, -- for nothing which now takes place in Europe, with respect to
France, can be reasoned upon after the common maxims of policy and prudence.

It has been said that he was bribed over by the Dutch Patriots, and afterward
sold to the Prince of Orange a list of the principal conspirators. This absurd
imputation appears in a German work on the French Revolution, called Minerva,
much esteemed for the beauty of its style. The author has certainly been
deceived in this as well as in many other cicumstances, of General Dumourier's
life, which the natural love of the mavelous has constantly magnified and
blackened. He declares, that he never possessed a list of the Dutch Patriots,
that he knew only a very small party of these refugees in France, that he knew
these only because they formed a Batavian Revolutionary Committee at Antwerp;
that he does not know the names of any of those who may entertain the same
opinions in Holland; that he has never had any communication, either before or
since, with the Stadtholder's party; that it is even impossible such a
communication should have existed, as that court never forgave the manifesto
which preceded his expedition into Holland; that he never received a bribe;
that he is poor, and glories in being so.

He will conclude these Memoirs with some observations on the three classes of
French emigrants. Foreigners are surprised, that they should not unite in their
distress, because they are unacquainted with their distinguishing characters.
Their divisions are a great misfortune, but they are almost without a remedy.

The first class, of which the Princes of the House of Bourbon are the leaders,
consists of the old court, the higher order of ecclesiastics, the parliaments,
and the principal financial department. Allured by the seductive influence of
this party on the one hand, and terrified by the extravagance of the Jacobins
on the other, the low noblesse have been induced to join them in military
array. This class is composed of pure Royalists: they wish and demand the
re-establishment of the ancient monarchy, and of course, of absolute despotism;
and regret the old institutions with all their abuses, institutions which it is
impossible should ever re-appear, since a new order of things has rendered
France no longer the France of former days, but a new nation, requiring as a
new nation, a new moral and political constitution, to re-establish on the
broad basis of general utility the security of the government, and the
confidence of the people.

The second class, of which Fayette is the apparent leader, consists of the
constitutional monarchists, men who desire a great reformation, or rather a
total reformation, in the principles and forms of the old government. The
greater part of this class were employed in the first National Assembly in the
great work of forming the New Constitution; but falling, as they soon did, a
sacrifice to the cabals of the people of Paris, and above all to the frantic
excesses of the Jacobins, paid dearly for the propagation of those principles
of Liberty and Equality, which, having been originally laid down by themselves
without any modification, and taken up by the people in too gross and literal a
sense, were pushed to that extravagant extent, which has brought about the
subversion of all the estates, and the general anarchy of France.

The third class, which is scarcely distinguishable from the former, but by the
later date of their defection consists of the military who followed General
Dumourier: and all the nobles proscribed on this occasion, who could escape
from their country. This class includes all those members of the National
Convention who had the courage to vote in favor of Louis XVI. and against all
the abominations which resulted from his execution; and who, having attested
their wishes in a protest had the good fortune to escape.

The first class, the most numerous, the most splendid, the most diffused over
Europe, and the most favored by its attentions -- by little effectual aid, but
great promises, and still oftener by humiliations and caprice, possesses the
most decided aversion to the two others; and confounds them in its ignorant
presumption with the Jacobins themselves. The unjust imprisonment of Fayette
excites in their bosoms no mercy for that unfortunate General. But against
Dumourier, they level all their rage: and the zeal with which they calumniate
his character, augment his distresses, and encourage his universal
proscription, is truly surprising.

This class has preserved all its pride and all its pretensions. It will have
every thing or nothing. The last success of the Combined Armies fills them with
frantic joy; and nothing is heard but offensive schemes of revenge and personal
ambition. If the operations of the same armies slacken for a season -- they are
betrayed ^ ^^^y are deserted, they are undone -- and this moment th^^^^ng of
Prussia and his Generals, and the next the Emperor's, are assailed with their
loud and (...) ^asonable reproaches. Always extravagant and always disgustful
to the people where they reside, who coolly observe their motions, and
conclude, with some plausibility, that selfishness is their sole leading
principle, they have the presumption to think that all Europe is only armed for
their sakes, and that when they re-enter their country, where they will
recognize nothing -- not even the vestiges of their demolished villas, they
shall take possession of their town-mansions, their country cottages, their
elegant luxuries, their domestics, their dependents, and above all their power,
and their credit.

The intolerance of this class of emigrants toward the two others precludes
that union which is so essentially necessary in their present unfortunate
situation, were it only to excite, the attention and compassion of the several
States where they have fled for protection, and rove without a settlement.
There are notwithstanding in this class, some few individuals of sense borne
away in the general mass by their unlucky situation, and the prejudices of
their birth, who from an exception to the general rule, and sincerely reprobate
the extravagance of the rest, but they are little attended to. This class is
divided too, within itself, into factions as active, as intriguing, as full of
bickerings and jealousies, as when it glittered at Paris or Versailles. It is a
court itinerant, which has lost nothing of its occupation, though deprived of
its stability.

The other two classes of emigrants are infinitely more moderate and
reasonable, and might soon be brought to coalesce. Fayette and Dumourier, if
they met in any other place than a prison, would soon understand each other;
and the shades of difference, which have hitherto only separated them, perhaps
for want of a due explanation, would melt away, and vanish before the common
interest of their country, and the common sufferings of themselves. For these
two chiefs, and these two classes have both been strenuous for the
establishment of liberty in their country, and the reformation of abuses. They
have supported with firmness the great cause of human nature, and, if they have
differed in the means, they have agreed in the principle.

General Dumourier declares to the emigrants of every description, whom force
or inclination, has separated from their country, that it is only by a well
cemented union they can acquire that consideration, which alone can better
their situation at the close of the war, whether they succeed in returning to
their country, or whether they are doomed to relinquish it forever: that it is
the advantage of misfortune to purify the mind, and to temper it for the
hardier virtues: that it is time to renounce the language of prejudice, since
it is no longer understood in France: that, that country is more different from
the France of 1788, than from Gaul in Julius Caesar's time; that it even
changes every six months; and, that unfortunately the Jacobins have been more
prudential in the gradations of their crimes, than the emigrants, who, without
giving themselves the trouble to examine the progress of the national genius,
build all their schemes on the state of France at the point of time that they
left it.

Their unfortunate situation may continue a long time, it may become utterly
without a remedy: the worst should always be supposed, that we may not be
misled by fallacious expectations. If they don't persist, in shaking off their
arrogance, their extravagance, their imprudence, their internal discord they
will soon disgust the people who give them shelter, and whose temper will
insallibly be soured on a thousand occasions by the war, their minds will not
be fortified to bear the triumphs of success, or the desperation of a failure:
in the first case, they will abuse their return, and be driven into a
banishment more hopeless than their present one; in the second, they will
become the most wretched men upon the face of the earth.

Banishment, like every other condition of human nature, has its advantages. It
gives us objects of comparison, of which we would never otherwise have an idea;
it gives us information; it calls forth our energies by its difficulties; it
renders us indulgent and sociable, it excites between ourselves and our
protectors a reciprocation of sensibility and benevolence. The upright man, the
man of wisdom and reflection, brings back from this involuntary pilgrimage, a
store of those hardy and of those gentle virtues, which qualify him better to
benefit his country, and lead to that universal philanthropy which dimishes the
dismal effects of national partialities.

General Dumourier gives them another piece of advice, which he carefully
observes himself -- to be indulgent to their countrymen, and not to revile a
whole nation by too indiscriminate reproaches. It is imprudent, at least, to
brand as rebels twenty millions of men who rise against a hundred thousand.
These twenty millions form such an immense majority, that the hundred thousand
are more deserving of the name of rebels. The emigrants of every description,
who love their country, and are worthy of returning to it, may fairly -- under
the dismal apprehension, left anarchy should produce the total subversion and
disorganization of the empire -- may fairly detest five or six hundred
scoundrels who lead that amiable people astra^, and hurry them beyond the
reasonable bounds of true liberty, of true patriotism, of feasible equality,
and of the possible means of public happiness and order; but they should surely
preserve, in misfortune especially, that love for their country which maintains
their title to its blessing.

They should never calumniate the nation at large: they may justly lament that
the French are blindfolded, and led through crimes into every extravagance. But
there is one point of view which is consolatory to every true Frenchman: he
sees through all this anarchy, a most determined courage, and the greatest
frankness of opinion. With these qualities the French may be brought back from
their errors; but it is by reason, and not by reproaches, that this can be
accomplished. Let those among the emigrants whose situation, whose influence,
and whose knowledge, may one day call them to the important duty of
reestablishing order in France, let these men fit themselves for reclaiming the
public opinion, by instantly sacrificing their resentment, of whatever nature,
or however just, and ceasing to exasperate by invectives the whole of, the
people of France. The character of that people may be eclipsed for a time, but
will never be entirely obliterated, and what is crime in some few individuals,
is energy in the nation at large.

The history of the world does not present an instance of a nation assailed by
so many enemies at once, less terrified at the thunder of the charge, or
keeping them at bay in every quarter with such obstinate resolution. The last
campaign, which was enough to have crushed them at once, only displayed one
general mass of valor; and if they yield, the next campaign, they will be
subdued, but they will not be degraded. It is greatly the interest of the
emigrants that the French should not be despised; for whatever their nation may
suffer in the estimation of Europe, will be a loss to themselves. They have
already, for the last two years, been guilty of a great mistake in representing
to foreign powers that the French armies were contemptible, and utterly
incapable of making any resistance. This mistake, which has proved so fatal to
the Prussians, has taken away all credit from their reports. Let us never hear
such misrepresentations again -- They are much too serious.

The French nation, collectively taken, will always be amiable. She is
laboring at this moment under a moral distemper, whose dreadful convulsions
only render her a greater object of alarm. Foreigners may employ the sword, but
her emigrant offspring should only approach her with the soothing accents of
persuasion: -- it is their interest to do so: their design of superinducing
order on that confusion which has driven them from their country, will,
otherwise, every month and every week, become more perfectly hopeless.

This advice is not the result of base compliance, or personal interest, or
ambition. General Dumourier declares, and his Memoirs will prove, that he
reprobates the present state of things in France; that he sees in them only the
subversion of every rational principle, and the utter impracticability of
promoting public happiness; he declares, that he will never warp to such an
order of things; and that he would choose beggary, proscription, wretchedness
and perpetual exile, in preference to any re-establishment in his country that
must be purchased by the sacrifice of his moral principles, -- but he declares,
too, that he loves his countrymen, and that were he poignarded in their
delirium tomorrow, he would breathe out his last accents, in a lamentation of
their errors, and a benediction to his country.

FINIS.
Monthly Review. SAMUEL HARRISON SMITH, SUBMITS TO THE PATRONAGE OF THE
CITIZENS OF THE UNITED STATES, THE RE-PUBLICATION OF THE MONTHLY REVIEW,
ENLARGED.
IN selecting this work for the press, the Publisher's candor obliges him to
say that views of a pecuniary complexion had a primary influence on his
conduct; but his feelings will not permit him to withhold the declaration that
a consciousness of the many advantages attendant on its circulation, if it did
not originate, at least, fixed his wavering resolution. Its subservience to the
leading principles on which our present prosperity depends, and on which alone
our future well-being can be secured, renders it an object worthy of public
regard. If the diffusion of the Monthly Review can be shown to carry with it
these important benefits, the Printer cannot hesitate a moment in the
assurance, that it will meet with a warm and general support. For the
satisfaction of those who may not have an opportunity of recurring to the work
itself, a short account of its nature, its tendency, and its execution, is
presented.

I. IT professes to be a review of all the original publications that appear in
Great Britain, and such of those written on the Continent as are deemed works
of merit. In this review, the author's principles, talents, and information are
tested by the rules of science and criticism, a decision is pronounced, which
if equitably made, either holds forth his offspring to cordial patronage, or
cold neglect. The reader of the Review is not dictated to by the writer of the
(...) and compelled (...) to his opinion, through a deficiency of materials
qualifying him to form a judgment himself; he is enabled to judge both of the
merit of the original, and the justice of the criticism, by copious extracts,
which are usually made from all works of an interesting nature.

IN these performances, information and criticism are happily blended. To
useful and improving narrative are added interesting argument and spirited
discussion; forming so pleasing an assemblage as to command the lively
attention even of those whose impatience revolts at the labor of perusing a
lengthy, systematic work. The review of any publication, may be considered, if
the phrase be allowed, as its kernel, presenting its hidden treasures, without
condemning the reader to the labor of exploring them. No evidence can be more
conclusive of the charms this periodical work possesses than the estimation in
which it is held in England. This estimation will be best understood by an
acquaintance with the encouragement it receives. This surpasses that of any
other issue of the press, except such as are intimately connected with
religious duties.

II. IT is conducted with distinguished ability, and unshaken impartiality. The
liberal patronage which sustains it, fosters the one, and insures the other.
More than twenty thousand disinterested persons cannot be supposed to unite in
the steady support of any object, without that object being both laudable and
desirable. By an cxtensive circulation and correspondent encouragement, the
proprietors are enabled to command the talents of men distinguished for their
acquisitions in the several departments of science and literature. The generous
reward which talents thus exerted receive, aided by that sprit of independence
which knowledge ever inspires, raise the writers for this work above those
paltry temptations which so often corrupt mean and unenlightened minds. These
remarks are strengthened in the highest degree, by a close attention to the
manner in which this performance has actually been executed. Few reflections
have been cast upon it, and of these few, most of them exhibit the traits of
mortified dullness. Those works which have received the lash of severity from
the Reviewers, have almost universally retreated into obscurity, while such as
have been crowned with the meed of praise, have gradually raised their heads
and flourished, in spite of prejudiced or interested opposition. It is not
contended, that this has been an universal effect; but it is averred to have
been a general one.

III. THE Monthly Review from its commencement to the present day, has
uniformly aided and supported the cause of civil and religious liberty. In
times, when freedom of expression apparently approached the verge of
destruction, when opposition to the infatuated councils of Britain, drew forth
the vengeance of government, and endangered the existence of the patriot, the
authors of this publication, instead of yielding to the power that menaced
them, summoned to their cause all the energy of indignant truth, and thereby
formed a barrier to that servile submission which had begun to spread itself
among the people. During the American contest, they boldly pronounced the
conduct of ministers to be replete with folly and depravity, and enjoyed the
ultimate satisfaction of beholding the nation proselytes to their sentiments.
At the present crisis, when in England liberty is in her last agonies, and
sudden ruin threatens every man who dares to doubt the infallibility of the
administrators of her government, we observe this work preserving its wonted
dignity: In some small degree, it is true, accommodating itself to the spirit
of the times, that prejudice may be more successfully eradicated by appearing
to yield to it. But never meanly applauding what reason must condemn, never
basely courting the favor of the powerful by panegyrizing their crimes:
Avoiding the imputation of a rash intemperate zeal, at the same time that no
sit occasion is suffered to pass without a clear exposure of those principles
which constitute the

THESE observations have been made in order to draw the attention of Americans
to a work, which, on account of its extent and the variety of printing in its
execution (almost every kind of letter occurring) requires an extensive
patronage to compensate the expenses of conducting it. They might be enlarged
to a much greater extent -- but every person whose curiosity is awakened, will
find no difficulty in obtaining satisfaction by an inspection of the work
itself, as it is much read notwithstanding the heavy charges of importation.

THE Printer has but two additional remarks to make. Should that encouragement
be received which the work is entitled to, he looks forward to the period as
not a remote one, in which the publication shall receive an accession of value,
by a review of such original works as appear among ourselves. -- The reduced
price which the following terms fix, below that of the English edition, as well
as the early and regular manner in which the American edition will be printed,
should be influential inducements, added to others too obvious to be mentioned,
to give a preference of our own manufactory to any foreign one.

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION.
I. One Number of the Monthly Review shall be published every month, and at the
end of every four months an Appendix. -- Each number to contain above 100 large
pages, in octavo, on a small type. II. The Annual Price will be Five Dollars.
At the close of one volume, its price to be paid, and an advance made of the
next. III. The work to be printed in a satisfactory manner, on a fine white
paper, and with a new type.
N. B. As it may be necessary to make arrangements involving considerable
delay, such of the Public as think these proposals merit encouragement, are
solicited immediately, to put down their names to subscription papers, lodged
with the several Booksellers in the city, or at the Publisher's Printing-office
in Cherry-street, above Fourth-street.

The First of January is considered as the period which will enable the
publisher to determine on the prosecution or relinquishment of the work.

In January will be Published, By SAMUEL HARRISON SMITH, No. I. of the American
Edition of the MONTHLY REVIEW, Enlarged.
TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION.
I. One Number of the Monthly Review shall be published every Month, and at the
end of every four Months an Appendix. -- Each Number to contain above one
hundred large pages in octavo, on a small type. II. The Annual Price will be
Five Dollars. At the close of one volume, its price to be paid, and an advance
to be made of the price of the next. III. The Work to be printed in a
satisfactory manner, on a fine white paper, and with a new type.
Subscriptions for this Work are received at the Printing office of S. H.
Smith, Cherry-street, above Fourth street, and by all the Booksellers of the
City.

N. B. With a view to render this Publication more useful and interesting than
any other of a similar nature, it is proposed to select the articles it shall
contain, as well from the Analytical and Critical, as from the Monthly Reviews,
published in England. The Editor will thereby be enabled to present his readers
with more useful, and less useless criticism, should his selection be
judicious, than is to be found in either of these Reviews: With the Monthly
Review, therefore, as his general guide, he shall occasionally extract valuable
articles from the other critical performances, and give a ready insertion to
such original, productions as may be entitled by their merit to impartial
approbation. The Editor earnestly invites the learned and ingenious of his
fellow-citizens to enrich with their labors, and make more worthy of American
patronage, this useful publication.

SAMUEL HARRISON SMITH Has just Published, To be sold by all the Booksellers,
Letters from a Father to his Son, ON VARIOUS TOPICS, RELATIVE TO LITERATURE AND
THE CONDUCT OF LIFE. By J. AIKIN, M. D.
The following account of this performance is extracted from the Monthly Review.

"The ingenious and judicious author of the work now before us is so strongly
convinced of the propriety of an extension of the current plans of education,
that, as we learn from the introductory letter, he has educated his son, to
whom the letters are addressed, on a broad scale, which has comprised many
changes of discipline, and has embraced a large field of instruction. By these
means, he has endeavored to give the young man a comprehensive view of the
objects before him, and to prepare him for the study of books, of men, and of
nature, as well as for the reputable and useful discharge of professional
duties. In giving the finishing stroke to this important work of educating a
son, he addresses him in a series of letters, supplementary to those
instructions, which he had received, in a systematic way, from books and
lectures. Presuming that his principles, in the course of a liberal education,
had been well established, he writes, 'rather with a view to place in a strong
and familiar light some subordinate truths belonging to the experimental
practice of life, which, though not of the same fundamental importance with
principles, are of no small weight in promoting a man's happiness and utility.'
At the same time he communicates to him various observations on points of taste
and literature, in which his chief aim has been to obviate prejudices, and to
give that turn to his son's thoughts which might enable him to judge and enjoy
for himself, without first appealing to the decision of a dictator. The
letters, throughout, encourage and recommend that freedom of discussion,
without which, as the author justly remarks, no difference exists between
opinion and prejudice.

The public is much indebted to Dr. Aikin for extending the utility of these
letters beyond his own family; for that young man must have been very
fortunately educated, and have made very extraordinary seize, who cannot
reap from them much improvement, as well as entertainment: nor is this
publication by any means considered as peculiarly appropriated to the use of
young men. The work being neither elementary nor systematic, brings before its
readers a great variety of pleasing and interesting subjects; on all of which
it leads them into important and curious inquiries, or induces a train of
useful or amusing reflections. In this view, Dr. Aikin's publication may be
considered as a valuable addition to the public stock of miscellaneous essays,
moral and critical; for (using the terms with some degree of latitude,) under
these two classes all the letters may be with propriety arranged."

After making several very lengthy extracts, the Reviewers observe: "I he
diversified entertainment, ^^ich this valuable production has enabled us to lay
before our readers, will be a sufficient apology for the length of the present
article. Writings so strongly marked by their good sense, correct taste, and
liberality of sentiment, carry with them their own recommendation."

The COMEDY entitled HOW TO GROW RICH, Performed with applause at the New
Theater.
Of which the Reviewers observe: -- "The unnatural alliance between avarice and
pleasure, which extravagance and folly have introduced into the world, is in
this play very happily ridiculed" -- "The moral conclusion is, that dissipation
and deception are less certain ways to grow rich than honesty and industry. The
principal characters, except some extravagance in that of Pave, are natural and
well drawn."

Also the COMIC OPERA of the WOODMAN, Performed with applause at the New
Theater.
Of which the Reviewers say: -- "It is an unequivocal proof of merit in
dramatic performance, if, after having entertained in representation, it
pleases in perusal. The Woodman is one of the few comic operas, which will
stand this test. The plot without being intricate through a multiplicity of
incidents, is sufficiently interesting. The language is clear without
insipidity; and sprightly without affectation; and the characters, if not
original, are however natural, distinctly marked, and well supported. Several
of the airs (which is saying a great deal for opera poetry) will bear to be
read."

Memoirs of GENERAL DUMOURIER, Written by himself.
"THIS narrative is full of interesting details; and, being written by one who
bore a principal part in the transactions he describes, and who, like some of
the most illustrious ancient heroes is well qualified to be his own historian,
it will doubtless be perused with great avidity at this present time, and will
become an important record to posterity. It ought, however, to be considered
throughout; and a very imperfect idea would be given of its contents either by
an analysis or extract. We must therefore satisfy ourselves with recommending
it in general terms to the general perusal of our readers.

[Monthly Review, Vol. XIV, page 405.

The TRIAL of THOMAS WALKER, OF MANCHESTER, For a Conspiracy to overthrow the
Constitution and Government of Great Britain.


