Mr. Emerson's DISCOURSE ON THE AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

At a meeting of the Militia Officers in the town of Harvard, July 4th, 1794,
IT WAS UNANIMOUSLY VOTED,

THAT Capt. Thaddeus Pollard, Lieut. Samuel Barnard, and Lieut. Benjamin
Robbins be a committee to wait on the Rev. William Emerson, and in the name of
the Officers and soldiers of their respective companies to thank him for his
discourse delivered this day, at their request, and to ask him a copy thereof
for the press.

Attest, JACOB ROBBINS, Clerk.

A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED IN HARVARD, July 4, 1794, AT THE REQUEST OF THE
MILITARY OFFICERS IN THAT PLACE, WHO, WITH THE MILITIA UNDER THEIR COMMAND,
WERE THEN ASSEMBLED TO COMMEMORATE THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY WILLIAM EMERSON, A. M. MINISTER OF THE FIRST CHRISTIAN CHURCH IN HARVARD.

PRINTED AT THE APOLLO PRESS, IN BOSTON, BY JOSEPH BELKNAP, No. 8, DOCK-SQUARE.

MDCCXCIV.

ON THE AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, AND THE MEANS OF PRESERVING IT.
GAL. v. ^. -- BE NOT ENTANGLED AGAIN WITH THE YOKE OF BONDAGE.


SLAVERY is one of the greatest calamities of human life. In a civil view, it
is extremely burdensome; as it respects religion, it is intolerable. It is
torture to the body; but it is death to the mind.

Liberty, on the contrary, is the light and life and happiness of mankind. It
opens to them all the valuable resources in creation. It originates their
enterprise, and stimulates their industry. It gives to the mind all its
improvements, to the manners all their independence. It is what constitutes the
sweets of toil, the alacrity of study, the charm of wealth, the consolations of
poverty, the endearments of friendship and social connections; what prepares a
throne for the exaltation and glory of religion; what diffuses cheerfulness
through the world.

So thought the noble spirits, from whom we boast our descent. Impressed with
these sentiments of freedom, and suffering, at the same time, the scourge of
ecclesiastic tyranny, in their native isle, they framed a purpose, whose
accomplishment is an event of no inconsiderable magnitude, in the history of
America. Our ancestors abandoned the shores of Britain: they sought the rights
of conscience and of man amid Columbian wilds.

In this country, they found in perfection that religious freedom, the want of
which, at the first, inspired them with the ardor of emigration, and which,
with aid from the divine providence, had continued to supply them with the
firmness, necessary for completing so hazardous a design.

Still, our progenitors, with their descendants, were subjects of the English
government. They were connected with it by ties of affection and loyalty, as
well as of interest. During the space of one century and a half, the colonies
of New England, together with the southern provinces of this continent, were
united to their mother country. The interest of America was that of Britain;
and Britain's sorrows drew tears from America. Conjoined they fought their
battles; together they shared the spoils of the common foe. England, like a
kind parent, long protected and fostered Columbia, who, in turn, like a dutiful
child, carried home the little earnings of its industry, and cast them into the
mother's lap.

The colonial population and wealth soon became considerable in the eye of
Great Britain. In time, they raised her pride; at length, they excited her
jealousy. Accordingly our taxes were gradually, but severely, augmented. She
proceeded to raise from us a revenue without our consent. A measure of this
kind was not to be tolerated. It subsided. The noted Stamp Act* which obliged
the colonists to pay a heavy duty on stamped paper, and to use that only for
bonds, notes, etc. was passed in Parliament, March, 1765, and repealed in the
same month of the following year. The repeal, however, was succeeded by a
Declaratory Act more subversive of colonial liberty, than the former. It said,
"That the Parliament had, and of right, ought to have, the power to bind the
colonies, in all cases whatsoever:
Yet other acts of parliament, The Tea Act of 1767, the Boston Port Bill of
1774, and the (...) Bill of 1775.
equally injurious in their tendency, shortly followed.

A panic of grief and disaffection had now stricken the breasts of Americans.
We groaned by reason of oppression. We unitedly formed the resolution of
supplicating the king. We petitioned. We petitioned in vain. We remonstrated;
but without effect. Our petitions were answered by frowns; our remonstrances,
with accumulated burdens.

THUS WERE WE ONCE ENTANGLED WITH THE YOKE OF BONDAGE.

But the time of trial and danger was nigh. Longer forbearance, on the part of
Britain, who had proceeded thus far, had been subversive of her control. Her
edicts must meet compliance. We steadily refuse it. She must then exercise the
usual engine of tyranny. She durst to do it; and, as if forsaken by the
guardians of her interest and her God poured into our metropolis her mercenary
legions, to enforce, with the ball and bayonet, the execution of those laws,
which could not receive our voluntary obedience.

The charm was now dissolved. The bond, which, by some nameless enchantment,
tied us to the feet of Albion, broke. The vizard had fallen from her face. Her
purposes of subjugation and vassalage were manifest. We, therefore, feared not
to examine the foundation of hereditary right, nor openly to question the
prerogative of kings. We found them a nullity. We named them harmless
creatures, that were born in the brains of despots only, and nursed by the
false fears of their flatterers. It was, thence, determined, they should no
longer affright us. We resolved on opposition to a monarchic claim, which,
hostile to the intentions of nature and nature's God, would enslave us and our
children forever. We would alienate ourselves from the crown; a crown, which
glittered, at the distance of three thousand miles, not, as formerly, with the
mild rays of apparent freedom, but with the fiery terrors of arbitrary power,
but too openly avowed. We swore no longer to crouch the involuntary minions of
a sovereign, whose corrupt ministry and venal parliament were wresting from our
possession the last remains of liberty. We grasped the sword. Fresh acts of
British insolence and cruelty forced it from the scabbard. We then appealed to
heaven for the justice of our defense. Our appeal was heard; and the cry, to
arms! with a pious enthusiasm, resounded throughout the cities and forests of
America.

I pass, in silence, the horrors of that memorable night, Between the 18, and
19, of April, 1775.
when the troops of Britain covered the plains of Lexington, encrimsoning them
with the earliest effusion of American blood, and uttering, from the cannon's
mouth, an unwelcome prologue to those sanguinary scenes, which were afterward
acted in all parts of the continent. I will not throw gloom on this joyous hour
by the description of that day of carnage, when the streams of Concord were
tinged with human gore, and first learned to flow in union with the life of
their countrymen.

It is enough, that hostilities were seriously commenced; that combinations,
spirited and effectual, for the prosecution of the war, were formed among the
provinces; and that we persisted in our righteous cause, with various success,
until the fourth day of July, in the year of our Lord one thousand, seven
hundred, amd seventy six, when, by our delegates, in congress assembled, we
declared ourselves, "united, free, sovereign, and independent States!"

WE ARE NOW DISENTANGLED FROM THE YOKE OF BONDAGE.

This is the day, my countrymen, and this the event, we now celebrate. This
act, at once, and forever, dismembered us from Great Britain. It shivered to
atoms an accursed yoke, which neither we, nor our fathers, were able to bear.
In this one day, our nation was born; and modestly assumed rank with the old
empires of the world.

Hail, happy day! (...) epoch, hail! Since which, our earth has twice times
nine performed her annual courses round the orb of day, and at each revolution,
seen her favored country independent. Thrice hail! most auspicious era, whose
genial light discovered a path to the posterior victory and peace of the United
States. Yes, friends, it was the prototype of the present anniversary, that
formed the characters in which your national felicity has long been so fairly
written. It is hence, I am enabled, at this time, to gratulate you, as having,
for eighteen years, eaten the bread, drunkken the waters, spoken the language,
worn the habits, of sons and daughters of liberty. The Almighty forever grant,
that ye

BE NOT AGAIN ENTANGLED WITH THE YOKE OF BONDAGE!

This, Americans, is not, however, to be expeced by miraculous interpositions
of the divine providence. To preserve yourselves free and independent, the same
efforts, in kind, must be employed, which first unbound your millions from the
tyranny of England. To this end, in particular, two things must principally
conduce. They are a due cultivation of useful and religious knowledge, and some
very considerable attention to the military art.

Of the importance of the former, toward attaining the object proposed, all
history is a full eviction. That of the Jews, though their government, for the
most part, was monarchical, is instanced. This nation never enjoyed their
immunities in a higher degree, than under the reign of King Solomon. It was
because he taught them the arts and sciences of life, and gave them lessons of
religion and virtue. Both before this time, and in subsequent periods, while
they understood and kept their law, they maintained their freedom from foreign
thraldom. As soon, as they became careless of their scriptures, and idolatrous
in their practices, they lost their Canaan, they were carried into captivity.
And why were they so long in bondage? Why, for four hundred years, previously
to the advent of Messiah, were they favored with neither message nor
deliverance from on high? Was it not because, O Jerusalem, thou killedst thy
prophets, and stonedst them, who were sent to instruct thee?

What raised the states of ancient Greece to the possession of such perfect
liberty, except learning? What, if not their virtues, so long preserved their
noble independence? It was the literature of the Romans; it was their regard to
the gods, and their virtuous principles* which, for ages, gave to them the
sovereignty of the earth. But when ignorance succeeded to the learning of these
mighty republics; when a sense of moral obligations ceased to be cherished
among them, then their freedom was exchanged for servitude; their independence,
for vassalage.

I point you to more modern times. Look into the extensive realms of Asia. Look
also into Africa. See those most ancient quarters of the globe overspread with
despotism. At the same time, know, that want of good and general education is
the melancholy cause.

Survey that part of the world, which has sometimes prided itself, as
containing all the knowledge and all the virtue of the present age; survey
Europe. Ye shall there find, I may say, millions of human beings. Known to be
such only by their countenance and form. What is their political condition?
Very little better, than that of downright slavery. To the ignorance and
consequent vices of the commonalty of Europe is it owing, that they are so
universally the submissive subjects of monarchies completely absolute, of
monarchies but too unlimited, or, at best, of aristocracies, where the nobles
are like mountains, which, though they prevent not the sun from shining, yet
effectually engross its influence from the vales below. Hence multitudes of
Europeans have scarcely the shadow of liberty. Hence, their countless hosts,
are now forced into war, in opposition to their will, and are at this moment,
butchering, in cold blood, their brothers of the human race, whom they never
saw, and, therefore cannot but love, solely to gratify the ambition and avarice
of some few despots, or some dozens of aspiring demagogues. These are thy
trophies, ignorance!

It is but just to acknowledge, that the republic of France now makes an
exception to these remarks. It is to be hoped, she wages war with tyranny, not
with men; that she fights for freedom, not for conquest; that her soldiery
carry with them their hearts to the battle; and that her cause is that of all
mankind. May God blot out her crimes, and establish her liberties!

I cease referring you to remote proofs of the truth, I would impress upon your
minds. Within the compass of your own unavoidable observation, freemen, ye have
plenary evidence, that national freedom and independence cannot be propagated
and supported, except by the means of national knowledge and religion. To the
succesful operation of these means, ye are vastly indebted for the glorious
event, which is this day celebrated. It was your universities, your accademies,
your schools, those nurseries of learning; it was your churches, those
nurseries of virtue, that prepared the way for your independence, and directed
you to the measures of effectuating a revolution, which has astonished the
universe.

Let those seminaries of science, then, be still the objects of your regard and
charity; let your temples continue to command your reverence and love. Thither
conduct your youth and children. Teach them knowledge, and they will, probably,
preserve their freedom; teach them religion, and they will be sure to use
rightly that inestimable blessing.

Notwithstanding the due cultivation of useful and religious knowledge, among a
free people, has a direct tendency to the maintenance of their liberties, it is
not, yet, alone, invariably, effectual to that end. The present corrupted state
of civil society seems to render other means of self defense, than just
reasonings and upright conduct, often necessary.

A principle of self preservation is the first principle in nature. It was
implanted there by nature's author. Self preservation is then a part of natural
religion. And if so, it is not repugnant to revealed religion. On the other
hand, we know, that personal defense, and the preservation of political rights,
were not only, by means of arms, permitted, but enjoined on the Jews. They
oftentimes, indeed, waged war, by the divine command, for the sake of conquest.
It is true, our Savior introduced a new dispensation among men. He came not to
destroy, but to save, the lives of mankind. He confessed on a remarkable
occasion, ^
that his kingdom was not of this world; and at the same time, expressed his
pleasure, that his servants should not fight to defend it. But Jesus neither
thou, nor ever, forbade his servants to preserve with the sword their natural
rights and political governments, when to preserve them, other means of defense
became insufficient.

In order, now, that arms be successfully employed, when an assumption of them
against an enemy shall be justifiable on the principles of reason and religion,
it is evidently proper, that an acquaintance with them be obtained, when no
immediate necessity for them is apparent. Else the sudden invasion of a country
will be the destruction of its liberties. And such an invasion, by the
rapacious and tyrannical, may always be expected from a people, who, rising in
the scale of wealth and national importance, are yet in the habits of ease, and
in utter neglect of the warlike arts. So that, as long, as principles of
injustice and disorder maintain any authority over the kingdoms of this world,
so long must even a christian nation, to preserve their independence, train
their bodies to the exercise of arms, as well, as their mind to knowledge and
virtue.

America, however, especially this commonwealth, has tasted the too bitter
effects of standing armies, in time of peace. From what other quarter, then,
are we to expect that skill and the military art, which forms the seeond mean
of preventing future subjection to a yoke of bondage? From the brave and well
disciplined militia of the land. It is from you,

Gentlemen officers and soldiers, who compose a part of the militia of the
United States; it is from you we expect that theoretic acquaintance with the
art of war, which, when occasion presses, will enable you to be our sure
defense, and which your profession, and the love of glory will incite you to
obtain. Your daily culture of the arts of peace, and the sweets of domestic
repose, must not cause you to forget, that ye are soldiers, and that ye affist
to form one strong and beautiful pillar of your country's freedom. Amid your
agricultural pursuits, the acquisition of some knowledge in tacticks will
certainly claim a portion of your time; nor will your arms be permitted to rust
through an uninterrupted attention to mechanic employments. Frequent exertions
in the line of military duty will serve, as an agreeable relaxation from
severer occupations, will feed the flame of patriotism in your souls, and
gently inure your bodies to the fatigues of a camp.

In proportion, as a prospect of war, at any time, increases, your exercise of
arms will be more solemn and vigorous. Would! I were permitted to tell you,
that the politics of our nation now wear no threatening aspect. I am forbidden
to suppress my fears in this respect.

Men in arms! The present day is pregnant with events of uncommon magnitude.
War blows his clarion among the nations. The temple of Janus is opened in all
the world. The battle of the European warriors is indeed with a confused noise.
It is the bruit of a war, which originated, on the one hand, in the too
sanguine hope of planting the tree of liberty in every clime, and is
prosecuted, on the other, with an unwarrantable acrimony against a mighty
nation, struggling to be free, if not in direct repugnance to the natural
rights of mankind, and the laws of eternal justice. If, in this huge contest
between the sentiments of equal liberty, and the unnatural systems of arbitary
power, the latter should prevail, America, in tears, will behold the triumph.
It is even possible she may be called to defend anew her present claim to the
joys of independence. Should such an event, in this age of war, betide us,
which God avert! to you, as to the supporters of your country's rights, shall
we look for protection. If ever called to the field, we trust, ye will remember
from whom ye descend. Ye will recollect, that ye are no other, than the pure
progeny of those rare heroes, who preferred the horrors of a wilderness, with
liberty, to the refinements of civilized life, with an abridgement of their
native rights; who braved the dangers of an untried ocean; hazarded the
barbarity of savages; endured the whole of toils, incident to the planters of a
new world. Ye will feel, that ye are the brethren, and the sons, of men, who,
in our late glorious conflict, won wreaths of laurel on the plains of Mars; men
who almost worshipped liberty; who relinquished all they dearest held to fight
her cause; who, in the moment of encounter, made bare their bosoms to the
sword, and received a copious death. The same cause, the same motives, will
swell your breasts, and urge you to like valor. Already we own your guardian
power. To you, your fair wives and smiling children, your paternal houses and
your grounds, your hearths, your household goods, to you, the religion of your
country, and the tabernacles of your God, to you all these even now look up for
safety. Again, I say, should ye be summoned to their defense, may ye seek its
glory at the very point of the sabre! And may the God of armies, the Lord of
hosts, he who led our Washington, with the troops of Columbia, to former
victories, may that God cover your heads in the day of battle! May he teach
your hands to war, and your fingers to fight; enable you to be of good courage,
to play the men for your people, and the cities of your God; and return you to
the embraces of your fond friends, and your loved firesides, loaded with the
spoils of righteous conquest, and your temples filleted with garlands of well
earned fame!

Christian friends and fellow citizens! It is beautiful to behold the mingled
pleasure and devotions, with which ye honor this national festival. Would ye
annually bring like offerings to liberty? Cultivate the means, by which she was
first won. Unite in cherishing every species of useful and religious knowledge,
and to their literary and humane acquirements, let your sons add hardihood and
skill in the arts of war. Thus shall ye be properly prepared to defend your
valuable soil. Thus shall ye testify your justi^^ attachment to the FEDERAL
CONSTITUTION, that prodigy of human wisdom, and glory of your land; reward the
services of your old and faithful rulers; keep inviolate the rights of
conscience, and the voluntary worship of God; and, in fine, ye may thus
rationally hope, that the raptures of independence, which now thrill your
veins, will circulate with the blood of all your descendents

In giving these mixed exhortations, let it not be thought, that I deviate from
the path of a christian minister. Christianity is a religion full of truth, and
full of reason. And the knowledge of truth, and the exercise of reason, as they
constitute the greatest individual freedom, so they impel to the devising and
recommending of all lawful means for the security of freedom among communities
and nations.

Let it, nevertheless, be seriously remembered, that, apart from temporary and
political considerations, we are, in a peculiar sense, the scholars, and the
soldiers of Jesus Christ. We are taught in his school; we are enlisted under
his banner. It is true, none of us has ever been entangled with the yoke of
Jewish ordinances, nor been bound to the observance of mosaic rites. But we
have all, alas! been too much enslaved by bad passions, too much under the
dominion of evil habits. Let us break the yoke of this unnatural and worst kind
of bondage from off us, and never again be entangled with it. Through the
knowledge of our Lord and his gospel, let us conquer all our vices, and
surrender ourselves to the possession of those virtues, which, it is designed,
shall give the truest liberty to the human race. For however numerous the
present captives of sin, rejoice in this, ye followers of Jesus, christianity
shall yet emancipate the world. It shall do more. It shall enfranchise the
prisoners of the tomb. The time shall come, when* loosed from the bands of
death and the grave, the disciples of virtue, universally, shall own your
Master, as the Captain of their redemption, who, putting palms of victory in
their hands and crowns of glory on their heads. shall lead them away into a
land of everlasting freedom, and make them kings and priests unto God, even his
father, to whom be glory for ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS

