DR. EDWARDS'S ELECTION-SERMON. MAY 8th, 1794.

The Necessity of the Belief of Christianity by the Citizens of the State, in
order to our political Prosperity;

ILLUSTRATED IN A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY SAMUEL HUNTINGTON,
ESQUIRE. L.L.D. GOVERNOR, AND THE HONORABLE THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF
CONNECTICUT, CONVENED AT HARTFORD ON THE DAY OF THE ANNIVERSARY ELECTION. MAY
8th, 1794.

BY JONATHAN EDWARDS, D. D. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN NEW HAVEN.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN. MDCCXCIV.

At a General Assembly of the State of Connecticut, holden at Hartford, on the
second Thursday of May, A. D. 1794.
ORDERED, that the Hon. JONATHAN INGERSOL, and DAVID DAGGETT, Esqrs. return the
Thanks of this Assembly, to the Rev. Doct. EDWARDS, for his Sermon deliverd on
the Anniversary Election, and desire a Copy thereof, that it may be printed.

A true Copy of Record, Examined, By GEORGE WYLLS, Sec'ry.

ELECTION SERMON.
PSALM CXLIV. 15. Yea, happy is that people whose GOD is the LORD.
IN this passage of sacred scripture, that people is pronounced happy, whose
God is the LORD. But what is the meaning of the expression, "whose God is the
LORD?" or when may it be truly said, that the God of any people is the LORD?
The answer is, when they believe, worship and obey the Lord or Jehovah, as the
only true God, and that according to his revealed will. The Lord was the God of
the Israelites, when they complied with the dispensation, under which they
lived; and he is our God, when we cordially believe and comply with the gospel.
If we do so, the text pronounces us happy; and it plainly implies, that we
cannot be happy on any condition short of this.

THEREFORE the subject, which I beg leave to propose from our text for present
consideration, is this, The necessity of a belief of christianity by the
citizens of this state, in order to our public and political prosperity. This
proposition is plainly implied in the text. For if that people only be happy or
prosperous, whose God is the Lord; and if to believe and comply with
christianity be implied in having the Lord for our God; it follows, that the
belief of christianity by the citizens of this state, is necessary to our
political prosperity.

POLITICAL prosperity requires the general practice of a strict morality. But
this cannot be so well secured by any other means, as by a belief of
christianity. Motives of a religious kind appear to be necessary to restrain
men from vice and immorality. Civil pains and penalities alone are by no means
sufficient to this end; nor are civil honors and rewards sufficient
encouragements to the practice of virtue in general. The civil magistrate does
not pretend to reward virtue in general according to its moral excellency. He
does indeed reward some particular acts of virtue, which are highly beneficial
to the public. But the many virtues of private life pass without any other
reward from him, than the bare protection, which is afforded in common to the
persons who practice those virtues, and to all who are free from gross crimes.

NOR does the magistrate pretend to punish vice in general. He does undertake
to punish those gross vices, which consist in the violations of the perfect
rights of men, and in those cases only, in which the violations are both
manifest and are manifestly proved before a proper tribunal. But all violations
of even these rights which are perpetrated in private, or which, though
perpetrated publicly, are not legally proved, pass entirely free from civil
pains and penalties. The same is true of all violations of the imperfect
rights, as they are called, which are violated by ingratitude, selfishness,
neglect of kind offices, etc. Yet these vices are in their consequences, often
as hurtful to the public good, as injustice, fraud or robbery; and indeed the
former are the source of the latter. Now to restrain from vices of this latter
description, from all vices practiced in private, and from vice in general,
nothing is so useful as a full belief of a final judgment, and of a subsequent
state of rewards and punishments, in which all sin not renounced by sincere
repentance, shall be punished, and every man shall receive according to that
which he does in the body, whether it be good or evil.

LET us suppose a citizen restrained from vice by the fear of civil penalties
only. Such a person will feel himself under no obligation to pay either public
or private debts, unless he expects legal judgment and execution; and under no
obligation to speak the truth, unless he fears a prosecution for fraud or
defamation. He will feel himself at liberty to live in idleness, profusion,
intemperance and lust, and to take every advantage consistent with law, to
defraud and oppress his fellow citizens. He will requite no kind offices, as he
has no motive to gratitude. He will have no motive to the greater part of his
duty to his own children, and in a thousand instances may neglect them, when he
is bound by the strictest moral obligation, to assist and do them good. He may
indulge himself in passion and ill nature, in contention and violence, so far
as not to expose himself to the law; and of course will take no pains to
preserve peace among his neighbors; but will rather, as his humor happens to
be, foment by words and actions, animosities, lawsuits and contentions in
every form. Ever complaining under the mildest and justest government, he will
in numberless ways oppose measures, and especially expenses, subservient and
necessary to the public good; and will excite and spread discontent among
others. Now is this a good citizen? What if the whole state consisted of such
citizens? Could it enjoy political prosperity?

THE best and perhaps the only remedy for such diseases, is a full belief of
the divine universal providence, of the accountableness of all men to God for
all their conduct, and of a future equal retribution.

SOME religion then, and some belief of a future state is necessary to our
political prosperity. But what religion shall we adopt? and what system
concerning a future state is most useful to the state? It is not possible to
introduce and give a general spread through the state, to Mahometanism or
Paganism; and it would be a work of time and of great difficulty, to lead the
citizens in general into the belief of Deism or what is called the
philosophical religion. Therefore we seem necessitated to have recourse to
christianity: and this is most excellently adapted to the ends of restraining
men from vice and promoting that general practice of strict morality, which is
so essential to the political prosperity of any people. It is adapted to these
ends by its precepts; by the moral character of the author of those precepts;
by his absolute supremacy and sovereignty; by the motives of reward and
punishment with which those precepts are enforced; by the facts which it
relates, and by the examples which it exhibits. It is enforced not by the bare
authority of our feeble reason, but by the authority of our Creator, our Judge,
and our all-perfect God. It depends not on the obscure investigations, subtle
refinements and uncertain conclusions of human intellect; but on the
omniscience, the veracity, the justice, the goodness and the will of God: And
thus it is excellently adapted to the principles and feelings which are common
to human nature, and which exist in the weakest and most ignorant, as well as
the most intelligent and learned. A man who cannot follow the shortest and most
easy chain of reasoning on the nature of things and the tendency of human
actions, and who will not from such reasoning feel his obligation to virtue in
general or to particular virtues, will at once feel the force of the positive
and authoritative declarations and requisitions of the Almighty: and where is
the man, learned or unlearned, of weak or strong powers, who does not see and
feel the difference between the advice and directions of some learned and acute
philosopher, and thus says the Lord? Above all, the motives arising from the
doctrines of the final judgment and a future state, lay an inconceivably
greater restraint on the depravity of human nature, than any thing that is or
can be suggested by the philosophical religion.

LET us compare this religion with christianity in a few particulars, which
immediately relate to our present subject.

IT is a maxim of infidelity to follow nature. Now to follow her, is to follow
all the appetites and passions of which we are naturally the subjects; and this
will lead to all kinds of vice. But it is a maxim of christianity, to follow
the divine law, the precepts of the gospel and the example of Christ: and
whether these lead to vice or virtue, I need not inform you.

ANOTHER maxim of infidelity is, that man was made for his own happiness; that
is, that every man was made for his own individual happiness. This then is to
be the supreme object of every man; and this object is to be pursued, as
infidels themselves teach, by gratifying his natural appetites and passions,
which brings us just where we were before, to all vice and wickedness: And if
an infidel deny his appetites and passions, he must be governed by other
motives than any which his system of morality suggests. But christianity
teaches, that we were created for an end, which so far as we pursue, we cannot
fail of sincere piety and strict morality.

INFIDELS are divided into two classes, those who deny a future state of
existence, and those who allow such a state. The former deny all moral
government of God, and that we are at all accountable to him; and some of the
most noted among them deny any evidence of his moral perfections. Now it is
manifest, that according to this system mankind can be under no restraint from
vice, by the consideration of a future state of rewards and punishments, or by
the consideration of their accountableness to God, or of his commands or
prohibitions. Nor does this system admit of any motives derived from these
sources, to the practice of virtue. Yet these motives, with respect to mankind
in the gross, are the most powerful. The authors and abettors of this system
seem to rely on a sense of honor, as the great motive to virtue and restraint
from vice. And what is this sense of honor? If it be a sense of shame in doing
wrong, and a sense of the honourableness of doing right, it is a mere sense or
knowledge of right and wrong; and this so far as it is founded on truth, is
undoubtedly a proper rule of conduct, and a man who is disposed to virtue, will
practice according to this rule. But how are men in general, without the aid of
revelation, to attain, in all cases, to the knowledge of right and wrong, of
virtue and vice? It is manifest by abundant experience both ancient and modern,
that mere human reason is insufficient for this.

IF by this sense of honor be meant, as I imagine is generally meant, a sense
of our own supposed personal dignity, a pride naturally, arising from this
sense, and a disposition to resent and revenge every thing which is grating to
our pride; this in many cases is so far from a motive to virtue and restraint
from vice, that it is itself a vice. Let this sense of honor be ever so well
limited and explained, it cannot be a motive to virtue and a restraint from
vice to all men; because it does not reach and cannot influence all men. How
many are there in every nation and country, who have very little sense of their
own dignity, and very little elevation of soul in a consciousness of it? How
many are there, who in a prospect of gain, would not scruple to betray their
friends, to steal their neighbors property or to betray their country?

IT is manifest therefore, that this philosophical religion, could it be
generally introduced and established among us, would be a very great political
evil, as it would weaken and even annihilate those motives to virtue and
restaints from vice, which are most powerful on the minds of men in general.

BESIDES: this system so far as it denies the evidence of the moral perfections
of God, not only cuts off the motives to virtue, drawn from a future state and
from those divine perfections; but even suggests motives to vice. If it be a
matter of uncertainty, whether God be a friend to virtue or a friend to vice,
it may be, that we shall please him most by an unrestrained indulgence of vice,
and by the practice of virtue shall provoke his malice and vengeance. Nay, if
it be a matter of uncertainty, whether the Deity be a benevolent or malicious
being, we can have no certainty, but that he will give us an existence in a
future state, on purpose to gratify his malevolence in our everlasting torment.
And to be consistent, the advocates for the system now under consideration
should not say a word against the christian doctrine of endless punishment, on
the ground of its supposed injustice or opposition to grace and mercy; because
they acknowledge, that they know not, that God is just, gracious or merciful.

THUS this scheme, which was invented to avoid the fears of future punishment,
defeats itself; and while it attempts to deliver us from a just punishment,
leaves us exposed to any punishment ever so unjust, cruel and malicious.

As to that kind of infidelity, which allows the divine moral perfections and a
future state of rewards and punishments; though this is more plausible than the
former; yet the motives to virtue and restraints from vice, which it affords,
are not to be compared with those of the gospel. Agreeably to the gospel all
men are to be rewarded according to their works done in the body, whether they
be good or evil. Some are to be beaten with few stripes, some with many
stripes, according to their several aggravations of guilt. But in the future
punishment which infidels admit, there is nothing vindictive, nothing therefore
which is intended to support law and government. The only punishment which they
admit, is that which is designed for the good of the person punished; See
Blount and Tyndal.
and therefore as soon as the person punished repents, he is released. Now it
is manifest on the slightest reflection, that the motive to avoid sin and vice
on this plan, is exceedingly diminished from what it is on the plan of the
gospel. On the plan of the gospel the motive is endless misery, proportioned in
degree to the demerit of the person punished. On the infidel plan it is a
merciful chastisement, which is to continue no longer than till the subject
shall repent. And as every sinner will naturally flatter himself, that he shall
repent as soon as he shall find his punishment to be intolerable; so all the
punishment, which on this plan he will expect, is one that shall continue but
for a moment, after it shall have become extreme or intolerable. And whether
this momentary extreme punishment be an equal restraint on vice, as the endless
misery threatened in the gospel, let every man judge. It is plain, that in a
comparative view it is as nothing. Therefore as even this, the most plausible
scheme of infidelity, cuts the sinews of morality and opens the floodgates of
vice; the prevalence of it in our state would be a very great political evil.

IF we take the pains to compare christianity with ancient paganism, we shall
find, that the former has, even in a political view, the like advantage over
the latter, which it has over infidelity. -- If in the account, which I shall
now give of the pagan religion, some things shall be mentioned, which will be
grating to those of the most delicate feelings; I think I shall be entitled to
the pardon of my hearers, as otherwise it will be impossible for me to do
justice to this important subject.

PAGANISM, though it taught a future punishment of wicked men of certain
descriptions; yet indulged and even encouraged vice in a variety of ways. It
taught that there were many gods, some male and some female; some comparatively
good, others exceedingly evil; but all and even the chief god, on many
occasions acting a most wicked part and indulging the vilest lusts. Some of
their female deities were deceased women of most abandoned characters. Jupiter,
whom they called the father of gods and men, was himself the son of Saturn who
according to some, was king of Crete; according to others, was Ham the son of
Noah; according to others, was Adam; but on every hypothesis was a mere man.
This man, the ancient heathens believed, had a number of children, and was wont
to devour them as soon as they were born: but Jupiter was saved by an artifice
of his mother. He, grown to maturity, rebelled against his father, who till
then was supposed to be the supreme God, drove him from his throne, and seized
his authority and dominions. When Jupiter had by these means raised himself to
the place of supreme deity, he was wont to transform himself into various
visible shapes, to facilitate his designs of criminal intercourse with women
here on earth. Now how destructive of the interests of virtue and morality must
necessarily have been these ideas of the gods; and especially these ideas of
the character and conduct of the supreme god, Jupiter the greatest and the best!

IN like manner destructive to morality must have been almost all their other
ideas of their gods; as of their animosities and contentions among themselves;
of their intrigues and lusts* and the vicious and most abominable practices by
which, in many instances, they were worshipped. The goddess Venus was openly
worshipped by whoredom; Every woman among some nations was obliged, at least
once in her life, to prostitute herself to any person, even the greatest
stranger, who would accept her favor. This done in honor to Venus.
and the feasts called Saturnalia and Bacchinalia were celebrated by the
practice of every lewdness and debauchery. The vices of drunkenness and
whoredom in these cases were accounted, instead of moral evils, the highest
acts of virtue and piety.

Now as all these ideas and practices tended to a general depravity of morals;
so their effects abundantly appeared in the vicious lives of the heathen world.

I AM well aware, that it has been said, that christianity has depraved the
morals of mankind; that vice is far more predominant among christians, than
ever it was among the ancient heathens; and that therefore we may justly
conclude, that christianity is less subservient to virtue and a moral life,
than paganism. This has been urged as an argument against the divine original
and the truth of christianity; and may be urged as an argument against the good
policy of encouraging and supporting it in any state. The consideration of this
objection then is pertinent and necessary to the discussion of the subject now
before us.

IN answer to this objection I beg leave to observe in the first place, that if
vice were more predominant in christian nations, than it was among the
heathens, it would not certainly follow, that this increase of vice is the
effect of christianity. Christianity prevails in civilized nations only; and in
such nations there is much more opportunity for many vices and much more
temptation to them, than among those who are not civilized. Nay, in civilized
nations only, is there a possibility of the prevalence of many vices. In
proportion as civilization is promoted, the wants of men are increased. Their
food, their drink, their apparel and the education of their children, must be
more expensive, and more expense is in every respect required to their living
in fashion among their neighbors. And in proportion to the increase of their
wants, the temptation to covetousness, extortion, oppression, deceit and fraud,
is increased. Again, in proportion as civilization is promoted, the means of
luxury of every kind are increased, and with the means, the temptations to
luxury and luxury itself are increased. No wonder a savage, who wishes for
nothing more than what he may take in hunting and fishing, and who has
furnished himself with this, does not steal, rob or extort his neighbor's
property; no wonder he attempts not to obtain it by falsehood or fraud. Nor is
it any wonder, that living on such a low and scanty diet as he generally does,
he is very rarely guilty of a rape, of adultery or other lewdness. Nor ought it
to be matter of wonder, that all these vices are far more prevalent in
civilized nations, than among barbarians. But the prevalence of these vices in
such nations, is not owing to christianity, but to civilization and its usual
attendants. They were at least as prevalent among the ancient Greeks and
Romans, as they are among us. Persecution does not usually obtain among
heathen, because either they have no religion themselves to instigate them to
persecution; or there is no religion different from their own, to be the object
of their persecution; or if there be a different religion, it makes no
opposition to that which they have chosen, and therefore their religious zeal
is not excited against it.

THIS affords an answer to an objection to christianity much insisted on by
some, that the heathens do not persecute; but that christians do most
virulently persecute even one another; and therefore that christianity makes
men worse instead of better. The answer to this objection is, that the
different religious sentiments and forms of worship among the ancient heathens
did not in general oppose each other. They rather justified each other, as the
heathens maintained an intercommunity of gods and religions. Though every
nation had its own gods and religion; yet whenever the individuals went into
another nation, they joined in the worship of the gods and in the observance of
the rites of the nation in which they then were. Therefore there was no
opportunity for persecution. But the nature of christianity is very different.
It condemns and opposes all other religions as false and ruinous. Therefore as
it touches the pride of those whom it condemns, it provokes opposition and the
persecution of itself, merely because it tells the truth. And the professors of
christianity too, by a misguided zeal, have been often led into the spirit and
practice of persecution.

Now this persecution of christianity by those of other religions, is not the
effect of christianity, but of opposition to it; and the persecuting spirit
which has appeared in some christians, is not the effect of christianity, but
of the abuse and perversion of it; and for neither of these is christianity
itself answerable. The best institution in the world may be opposed and
persecuted; and the best institution in the world may be abused and perverted.
But christianity never gave any just occasion for either the persecution or
perversion of itself.

BESIDES, the charge of persecution may justly be retorted. For no sooner did
christianity make its appearance in the world, than it was violently opposed
and virulently persecuted, by those very heathens, who in the objection now
before us are said not to have been guilty of persecution. And as long as they
had the power in their hands, this opposition was continued or repeated, under
various Roman Emperors, for ten successive and bloody persecutions, in which
thousands and hundreds of thousands were martyred in various ways, the most
malicious and cruel.

NAY, the heathens showed a disposition to persecute not only christians, but
one another, whenever there was opportunity. No sooner did Socrates oppose the
religion and polytheism of his countrymen, than they began a persecution of
him, which ended in his death. And Cambyses, the Persian monarch, in contempt
of the Egyptian god Apis, not only stabbed him with his dagger, but ordered the
priests of Apis to be severely whipped, and all the inhabitants of Memphis to
be slain, who should be found rejoicing on the occasion of the appearance of
that god. Prideaux's connection.
These things demonstrate, that the ancient heathens did possess an high degree
of the spirit of persecution, and not only toward the christians, but toward
one another. The like spirit has been manifested by heathens of modern times.
Passing other instances, I shall mention one which took place in our own
country. By the exertions of our ancestors, the first European settlers of this
country, a considerable number of the aborigines were converted to the
christian faith. The pagan Indians were displeased with this, banished from
their society all the converts, and when they could do it with safety, put them
to death, and would have massacred them all, had they not been restrained by
the fear of our ancestors Neal's Hist. New England.
.

THE facts concerning Socrates and Cambyses, furnish an answer to that part of
the objection under consideration, which urges that christians persecute not
only heathens, but one another; whereas heathens did not persecute one another.
It appears by the facts just mentioned, that heathens have persecuted one
another. Besides, the same reason is to be assigned for christians persecuting
one another, as for the heathens persecuting christians. The protestants say,
that the religion of the papists is fundamentally wrong; on the other hand, the
papists assert the same concerning the protestants. Thus by a mutual
renunciation, condemnation and excommunication of each other, the false zeal of
these and other different sects among christians is kindled into persecution,
on the same grounds on which persecution is begun and carried on, between
christians and heathens. But by reason of the forementioned intercommunity of
gods and religions among the ancient heathens, these grounds of persecution did
not exist among them in general, though in some cases they did both exist and
produce their usual fruits.

LET us now more directly attend to the charge brought against christianity,
that vice is more prevalent among christians, than it was among the ancient
heathens.

CHRISTIANS indeed have no virtue to be the ground of boasting; on the other
hand they have great reason to be ashamed and humbled on account of their vices
and their depravity of manners. Still I maintain, that open vice is not so
prevalent in christian nations, as it was among the ancient heathens. Let us
compare those ancient heathens, of whom we know the most and who were the most
improved and polite, with the christians of whom we know the most; the ancient
Greeks and Romans with the citizens of the United States.

HERE it is to be observed, that we labor under great disadvantage. We know
our own country and its predominant vices, both public and private. In order to
this we need but open our eyes and look around us. We have not the same
advantage to know the ancients. We are entirely dependent on history for
information concerning them and their vices; and this generally relates the
public transactions of nations only, as their wars and treaties, their laws and
public judgments; but is mostly silent concerning the morals and private lives
of individuals or of the people considered collectively; and so far as we are
ignorant of the ancients we have no right to charge them with vice. However,
with all this disadvantage, I fear not to proceed to the comparison.

LET us then institute the comparison with respect to the principal moral
virtues, as temperance, chastity, truth, justice and humanity.

1. As to temperance; though this was reckoned among the virtues by the pagan
moral writers, yet it is plain from their writers in general, that drunkenness
was exceedingly common among them, and among all ranks, among magistrates,
philosophers and priests, as well as others. Their priests in some of their
religious feasts were always intoxicated. Even Cato, though a Stoic
philosopher, one of their strictest moralists and a principal magistrate, was
remarkably addicted to this vice. So was Zeno, the founder of the sect of the
Stoics; and Chrysippus, another Stoic philosopher died in consequence of
excessive drinking at a sacrifice. Priestley's Institutes.
The character of their principal magistrates, priests and philosophers, does
not appear to have suffered much, if at all, by this vice. It must therefore
have been considered by the people, as a very venial fault, if any at all.
Indeed this is evident by all their writers. But how it is esteemed among us,
and what would be the effect of it on the reputation of our principal
magistrates and divines, I need not inform you.

2. As to chastity, it is manifest from the whole current of pagan writers,
that they considered fornication as no crime, and therefore ran into it without
reserve. Not only is this observable of Homer's heroes, but even the modest
Virgil's pious Eneas, who was meant to be a perfect character, had an amor
with Dido, without the least shame or sense of indecency. Simple fornication
was not only commonly practiced without restraint; but was allowed by all their
philosophers, and was positively encouraged by some of them. "None of the
philosophers ever represented simple fornication, especially on the part of the
man, as any vice at all. Cato commended a young man for frequenting the public
stews; and Cicero expressly speaks of it, as a thing that was never found fault
with." Priestley's Institutes. All that was enjoined by Epictetus, who of all
the philosophers, is perhaps the most celebrated for his strict maxims of
morality, was, "that people should abstain from fornication before marriage as
far as they could; and that if they did not abstain, they should use it
lawfully, and not be severe in reprehending those who did not abstain."
Enchiridion, Chap. 47.
Many of the customs of the Greeks and Romans promoted lewdness. The manner of
the appearance of women in some of their public exercises, was such as directly
tended to that vice; and the ideas of the lawfulness and expediency of a
community of wives so far prevailed and had such an influence on practice, as
not only implied the violation of chastity, but had a most baleful general
tendency with respect to that virtue. "At Sparta, young women appeared naked in
the public exercises; and when married women had no children, their husbands
were encouraged to consent to a free intercourse between them and other men; a
custom which Plutarch vindicates. This was also agreeable to the doctrine of
the Stoics; and it is well known, that that rigid Stoic, Cato of Utica,
consented to such an intercourse between his own wife and his friend
Hortensius. Plato in his book of laws, recommends a community of women; and he
advises, that soldiers be not restrained with respect to any kind of sinful
indulgence, even the most unnatural species of it, when they are on an
expedition, Priestly.
Though it is hardly credible, yet unnatural vices had too much the sanction of
some legislators and philosophers, and were countenanced by many of them.
Xenophon informs us, that the sin of Sodom was encouraged by the public laws of
several of the states of Greece. It was more especially so among the Cretans,
in order to prevent too great an increase of the people. Solon, one of the
seven wise men of Greece, and the celebrated lawgiver of Athens, forbad this
practice to slaves, which necessarily conveys the idea of his thinking it fit
for free men only. According to Cicero, the Greek philosophers not only
generally practiced, but even gloried in this vice: And Plutarch informs us,
that many parents would not suffer their children to keep the company of those
philosophers, who pretended to be fond of them. Diogenes was remarkable for
indulging himself in the most abominable practices openly, and without a sense
of shame; affecting, according to the maxim of the Cynics, to live according to
nature. Does not the forementioned deistic maxim of following nature, directly
lead to the same abominable practices?
These unnatural vices were increased in a most astonishing manner, about the
time of the promulgation of christianity. Seneca says, that in his time they
were practiced openly and without shame at Rome." Priestly.
These accounts given by heathen writers, fully justify the charges thrown out
on this head against the heathens, by the writers of the New Testament,
especially by the apostle Paul, in his first chapter to the Romans: Though to
christians the inspired writers need no authority, but do of themselves
sufficiently prove the amazing depravity of the heathen world in this respect.

3. Truth is a moral virtue, the obligation and necessity of which are perhaps
as evident as those of any virtue whatever. Yet the Stoic philosophers taught
that lying was lawful, whenever it was profitable; and Plato allowed, that a
man may lie, who knows how to do it at a proper time.

4. LET us inquire how far justice was maintained and practiced among the
ancients. I now mean justice in matters of property. For that kind of justice
which is opposed to oppression and cruelty, will come into view, when we shall
consider the humanity of the ancients. It is well known to have been a maxim at
Sparta, that probity and every thing else was to be sacrificed to the good of
the state. The Spartans encouraged their children to steal, but punished those
who were taken in the fact, as not being dextrous in the business. "We may
judge of the state of Greece, with respect to the kind of justice of which we
are now speaking, from that passage in a dialogue of Xenophon -- in which he
humourously shows the advantages of poverty and the inconveniences of riches;
and by what Tacitus says, that the temples were full of debtors and criminals,
as churches and monasteries used formerly to be in Popish countries. Rome and
the neighborhood of it, in the most interesting period of its history, viz. in
the time of Cicero, abounded with robbers. Sallust says, that Cataline's army
was much augmented by the accession of highwaymen about Rome. Cicero observed,
that had Milo killed Clodius by night, it might have been imagined, that he had
been killed by highwaymen, and that the frequency of such accidents would have
favored the supposition, though he had with him thirty slaves completely armed
and accustomed to blood and danger. By the law of the twelve tables, possession
for two years formed a prescription for land, and of one year for movables; an
evident mark of frequent violences, when such a law was necessary to secure a
title to property." Priestley's letters on general policy.
How different our situation is from this, and how much more secure our persons
and property are, I need not mention in this auditory.

5. WE proceed now to inquire how far the ancient heathens practiced the duties
of humanity, and how far they violated those duties by outrage, oppression and
cruelty. The Stoics condemned all compassion. No wonder then that they imbibed
and practiced inhumanity. Some philosophers, particularly Democritus,
recommended revenge; and Plato owns that forgiveness of injuries was contrary
to the general doctrine of the philosophers. These ideas seem perfectly to
coincide with those among the moderns, who are the great advocates for a sense
of honor. And how far these ideas are consistent with scripture, with reason
or with humanity, I leave you to judge.

IT was common with the Romans to make war on other nations for the end of
enlarging their own dominions, and aggrandizing their empire. Generally they
had no better motive to their wars than this. But what is such a war, but a
complication of downright robbery, cruelty and murder? They practiced equal
injustice in the manner in which they carried on their wars. They enslaved
their captives or put them to death in cold blood, as they pleased. Their
triumphs were most oppressive and cruel. The conquered kings and generals,
loaded with chains, were driven into the city, and to the capitol before their
conquerors, and were followed by mimicks and buffoons, who insulted over their
misfortunes. When they arrived at the forum, they were led back to prison and
there strangled; and this under the pretense of taking full revenge of their
enemies. What better is this, than the treatment which our savage Indians give
their captives?

THE treatment which they gave those captives whose lives they spared, was
correspondent to this cruelty toward those whom they put to death. As has been
observed, they absolutely enslaved them; and by law, slaves were confided not
as men, but as mere things, the mere property of their masters, and were
treated, punished, and put to death at any time and in any manner, as their
masters pleased, whether by beating, starving, torture, or otherwise. "The
Spartans having conquered a neighboring nation, the Helots, enslaved them,
frequently butchered them in cold blood, and applauded their youths, when they
killed them by surprise." "The Romans were not ashamed to suffer their old and
useless slaves, when worn out in their service, to starve on an island in the
Tyber, as was their common practice. Vidius Pollio used to throw his slaves,
who had disobliged him, into his fish ponds, to be preyed upon by his mullets."
Priestly.


THOUGH to our shame, to the shame of humanity and the scandal of christianity,
a slavery and a treatment of slaves similar to what existed among the Romans,
exist and are tolerated in some parts of America; yet this scandal cannot be
thrown on christendom in general. Such a slavery did indeed once generally
obtain in Europe; but the benevolent and humane spirit of the gospel and the
principles of justice taught there, have long since generally abolished it from
that quarter of the world.

THE proscriptions and assassinations, which were so common among the ancients,
are a further proof of their injustice, violence and inhumanity. It is well
known that during the contests of Marius and Sylla, and during the triumvirate
of Octavianus, Anthony and Lepidus, nothing was more common than to advertise a
certain price for any man's or any number of men's heads; which was no other
than hiring any cutthroat, and even a man's own domestics, to murder him and
bring in his head. In this way the best men of Rome were murdered, and among
the rest Cicero the great orator, philosopher and ornament of Rome. Amidst all
the vices justly imputable to christians, they are not guilty of such barbarity
and outrage as this. Such is the salutary influence of christianity, that even
kings, who among the ancients no sooner fell into the hands of their rivals or
opposers, than they were assassinated, are now not put to death without a
formal trial; which is a clear demonstration among many others, of our
improvement in civilization and humanity, beyond any thing which existed among
the most enlightened heathens.

ANOTHER instance of the barbarity and inhumanity of the ancients, is their
treatment of their children. "The ancient Roman laws gave the father a power of
life and death over his children, upon this principle, that he who gave, had
also the power to take away. And a son could not acquire any property of his
own during the life of his father; but all his acquisitions belonged to his
father, or at least the profits, for life." Blackstone.
Thus children, during the life of their fathers, were perfect slaves, and in a
worse condition than the slaves in this state; for the master in this state has
not the power of life and death over his slaves. Nor were these mere
speculations of the Romans; but their practice was correspondent. Hence the
custom of exposing children; that is, of laying them, as soon as born, in the
streets, on the banks of rivers, or in other frequented places, and unless some
compassionate person should take them up and provide for them, leaving them
there to perish and to be devoured by dogs. The motive to this horrid practice
was, that the parents might be free from the trouble and expense of their
education. Both Plato and Aristotle say, that there should be laws to prevent
the education of weak children. Accordingly among the other Greeks, beside the
Thebans, when a child was born, it was laid on the ground, and if the father
designed to educate it, he immediately took it up. But if he forbore to do
this, the child was carried away and exposed. The Lacedaemonians indeed had a
different custom; for with them all new born children were brought before
certain triers, who were some of the gravest men in their own tribes, by whom
the infants were carefully viewed; and if they were found lusty and well
favored, they gave orders for their education; but if weakly and deformed,
they ordered them to be cast into a deep cavern in the earth, near the mountain
Taygetus, as thinking it neither for the good of the children nor for the
public interest, that defective children should be brought up. It was the
unhappy fate of daughters especially to be thus treated, as requiring more
charges to educate and settle them in the world than sons." Encyclopedia.


IN several nations, not only infants, but also the aged and the infirm, were
exposed and left to perish.

ANOTHER horrid inhumanity, prevalent among the ancient heathens, was the
practice of sacrificing captives and slaves at the funerals of the dead. Thus
Achilles sacrificed twelve young Trojans to the manes of Patroclus; and Eneas
sent captives to Evander, to be sacrificed at the funeral of Pallas. This was
first practiced with respect to persons of great eminence only, but at length
it was done at the funerals of all persons of property, and became a necessary
part of the ceremony.

ANOTHER practice as horrid as any I have mentioned, was that of exhibiting
gladiators trained to fencing and the use of the sword, spear, etc. on purpose
that they might fight and kill one another on the stage, for the mere
entertainment of the spectators, as some people now bait bulls and set dogs to
fighting. "These poor wretches were made to swear that they would fight unto
death; and if they failed of this, they were put to death by fire or sword,
clubs, whips, or the like," Chambers Dictionary.
"Those who have not attended to history, are apt to imagine, that the
exhibition of gladiators was a rare thing, and that when it happened, a few
pairs only were engaged. But it was far otherwise. Under the Roman emperors
this inhuman entertainment cost innumerable lives. Caesar when Edile, gave three
hundred and twenty gladiators. Gordian in the time of his Edileship, exhibited
twelve entertainments, that is, one in each month. In some of these were five
hundred champions, and in none of them less than one hundred and fifty. Taking
it at a medium, he must have exhibited at the very least, three thousand. Titus
exhibited these cruel shows for an hundred days together. The good and moderate
Trajan continued these spectacles for an hundred and twenty three days; and in
that time gave ten thousand. When we consider how many different ranks of
people gave these entertainments, Ediles, Pretors, Questors, Consuls, Emperors
and Priests, besides private persons at funerals (which become so common a
practice, that it was an article in a last will) we must be convinced, that the
numbers were vast. What adds to the inhumanity of this custom, is, that it was
designed for a gay entertainment and was attended as such. This horrible custom
grew to such an extravagance, that it was found necessary to moderate it by
law, in the time of the heathen Emperors. Constantine first prohibited it
altogether. But so violent was the taste for it, that it crept in again. The
Emperor Honorius entirely suppressed it." Doct. Leachman's Sermon 1. Cor. i. 21.


I SHALL take notice of only one more vice of the ancient heathens, that is
suicide. This was recommended by many philosophers, as an heroic act of virtue,
and was practiced by some of the highest fame, as by Zeno the founder of the
sect of the Stoics, by Cato of Utica, and by Brutus. No wonder if under such
instructors and such examples, suicide was very common among the ancients.
Beside the wickedness of this in the sight of God, the ruinous tendency of it
in a political view is manifest on the slightest reflection. By this one vice
not only any man may deprive the state of his aid and throw his family and
dependents on the public; but the most important citizens, by throwing away
their own lives in the most important and critical moment, may greatly endanger
and entirely overthrow the commonwealth. What if our Washington, or the most
wise and influential members of our Congress, had destroyed themselves in the
most critical periods of the late war?

FROM this brief survey of the vices of the ancient heathens, I leave my
hearers to judge how well founded the objection against christianity is, that
it has depraved the morals of mankind.

I HAVE now finished the observations which I intended, on the subject
proposed, which was, The necessity of a belief of christianity by the citizens
of this state, in order to our public and political prosperity. In subserviency
to this general design I have endeavored to show, that some religion is
necessary to our political prosperity; that no other religion than the
christian, can be generally received and established in this country; and that
if some other religion could be established among us, it would by no means be
so useful in a political view, as the christian. I have endeavored to
illustrate the last observation by a comparison of christianity with the
philosophical religion of infidelity and with ancient paganism. I now beg leave
to make two or three inferences from what has been said.

I. IF christianity be more useful than any other religion, even for political
purposes, we may presume that it is still more useful for the other purposes,
which are indeed its immediate objects, piety and true virtue, and peace and
comfort in them. The great foundations of religion and virtue are, the moral
perfections of God, his moral government, the rule of our duty, a future state
of retribution, the possibility of pardon and the end of our creation. Let us
in these several particulars compare christianity with the philosophical
religion, which is the only rival of christianity with any among us.

1. AS to the moral perfections of God, christianity certainly teaches them
more clearly than they can be learnt from any light afforded by the
philosophical religion. The scriptures assure us, that holy, holy, holy is the
Lord of hosts; that he is a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right
is he; that he is the Lord, the Lord God merciful and gracious, long suffering,
and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty.
Yea, they assure us, that God is love. They clear up the difficulty arising
from the evil in the world, by informing us of the end of all things, and that
all things shall finally be overruled for good. But the philosophical religion
gives no clear evidence at all of the moral perfections of God. This is
acknowledged by some of the principal writers on that system. Hume, the most
acute of all infidels, says we ought to infer from the works of God, intermixed
as they are with good and evil, that God is of a mixed character, partly good
and partly evil. Also Lord Bolingbroke, another principal deistical writer,
holds, that there is no evidence of the moral perfections of God.

2. THE like advantage have we by the scriptures as to the evidence of the
reality and nature of the moral government of God. On the pretense that we are
under the influence of a necessity of coaction, it is denied by some infidels
that we are moral agents, and that we are capable of either virtue or vice. Now
not only is this matter cleared up by revelation, but it is to be observed,
that to be consistent, such infidels ought also to deny, that we are capable of
any crime in civil society.

IF we be not moral agents, we are no more capable of murder, than a stock or a
stone; and a man who from malice prepense kills another, no more deserves
punishment, than the stone or the tree, which falls on a man and crushes him to
death; and the man who from a wish to introduce and establish arbitrary
government in his country, now a free and happy republic, betrays its ships and
fortresses, no more deserves punishment, than the tempests which sink the
former, or the fire which consumes the latter.

SOME deny, that God at all concerns himself with human affairs or actions. But
this is not only not reconcilable with the scriptures, but not with the moral
perfections of God. If we be capable of virtue, and yet he neglect us, so as
not to set before us proper motives to it, and not to show by proper rewards
and punishments his approbation of the virtuous, and disapprobation of the
vicious; this cannot be reconciled with his moral perfection.

IT is further urged, that we are not in any case punishable, as all things are
right, or as the poet expresses it, whatever is, is right. If by this
observation be meant, that things are by the all-wise and all-governing
providence of God, overruled to answer a good purpose, though in many instances
directly contrary to their natural tendency; this is granted. But if it be
meant, that all things in their own nature tend to good, this is not true.
Malice has no natural tendency to good but a natural tendency to evil. On the
other hand, benevolence has a natural tendency to good. Nor will it be
pretended, that if malice reigned through the universe, the universe would be
as happy, as if benevolence universally reigned. It is the natural tendency of
a rational action, which determines its moral quality, and not the consequence
produced by Almighty God, contrary to its natural tendency.

IF all human actions were in a moral view indifferent, we should no more
deserve punishment for murder, than we should for saving our country from ruin.

THIS scheme shuts all moral good out of the universe, as well as all moral
evil. For if all the tempers and actions of men, are as to morality alike, it
must be because there is no morality in any of them. If there be moral good in
any of those tempers or actions, there must be moral evil in the directly
opposite; and if there be no moral evil in the latter, there is no moral good
in the former: as if there were no natural evil in pain there would be no
natural good in pleasure.

BUT while infidels confound themselves and the principles of reason, in their
discourses concerning the moral government of God; the scriptures assure us of
the reality of that government, and of our accountableness to God.

3. THE scriptures give us a plain and excellent rule of duty, pointing out our
duty not only in general, but in all the most important particulars. How
extremely deficient in this instance also, is the philosophical religion? It is
indeed said, that the rule of our duty is right reason and the law of nature,
and that virtue is a conformity to them. But this is saying no more than that
virtue is virtue, and that the rule of our duty is the rule of our duty. For
right reason in this case means what is reasonable and right in a moral sense;
and duty and what is right in a moral sense are the same thing: and it is just
as difficult to find out the law of reason and of nature, as to find out our
duty.

4. THE scriptures give us the most positive assurance of a future state. But
the philosophical religion can never assure us of this, because it cannot
assure us of the moral perfections of God, by which alone he is disposed to
reward the righteous and punish the wicked. Therefore infidels are greatly
divided among themselves on this subject. Some as was before observed believe a
future state, some disbelieve it. Those who believe such a state, believe that
God made all men for their own personal happiness, and that therefore he will
make them all happy in the future world. But all this depends on the moral
perfections of God, of which they, as their principal writers confess, have no
evidence. And if there be no evidence of God's moral perfections, there is no
evidence, that he designs the happiness of his creatures either here or
hereafter: nor is there any evidence but that he designs the final misery of
all his creatures. -- Or if infidels had evidence of the moral perfections of
God, they would not have evidence, that God made every man for the end of his
personal happiness. The perfect goodness of God doubtless implies, that he made
all things with a design to promote good on the whole or on the large scale. So
that taking the system of intelligent creatures together, there shall be the
greatest possible happiness in it. But this does not imply, that every
individual creature shall be completely happy. There is no accounting for the
calamities and sufferings of this life on any other supposition, than that they
will all finally issue in the greatest happiness of the system: and to suppose
that they conduce to the good of the system, by making the persons themselves
who suffer them here, more happy hereafter, is a mere conjecture unsuppored by
any argument. Therefore to indulge it and to build upon it, is altogether
unreasonable and unphilosophical.

ON the whole, there is no evidence but that the good of the general system may
be promoted by the exemplary punishment of the wicked in the future world. And
if it would be promoted by such a punishment, infinite goodness not only admits
of it, but requires and demands it.

5. THE scriptures assure us of a way of pardon and acceptance with God; but
the philosophical religion gives no such assurance. Infidels do indeed expect
to be pardoned on their bare repentance. But the expectation of pardon on
repentance, implies an acknowledgment, that they deserve punishment even though
they repent, and that such punishment would be just: otherwise there could be
no pardon in the case. To pardon is to exempt from punishment not an innocent
man, but a guilty one: and to pardon a penitent implies that he deserves
punishment, and that his punishment would be just. But if the punishment of the
penitent would be just, the interest of the kingdom of God, the great community
against which he has sinned, requires his punishment. The very idea of a just
punishment is of one which, (there being no atonement or substitution,) is due
to the community or to the public good of the community, against which the
crime punished was committed. But if the public good of God's kingdom, which is
the universe, require the punishment of the sinner, it is not consistent with
divine goodness to pardon him. What ground then has the infidel to expect
pardon, when both justice and goodness require his punishment?

6. CHRISTIANITY informs us of the end of our creation. It is generally holden
by infidels, as was before observed, that we were made for our own personal
happiness. But if this were true, it would prove, that God does concern himself
with human actions, and that he aims to prevent those which tend to our
destruction. It would also prove, that those rational actions which tend to
destroy our happiness, are morally evil, and that all actions are not in the
same sense right. The evidence that God created us for our own happiness, must
depend on the evidence of God's moral perfections. But as has been observed,
the infidel has no evidence of these. Besides, if God really created us all for
the end of our own personal happiness, it seems that he has in this world
obtained his end, in a very imperfect degree only; and on the plan of
infidelity there is no evidence of a future state. Therefore on that plan there
is no evidence, that God will ever obtain his end in our creation.

OR if infidels should grant, that we were made for the general good of the
system of intelligences, this would be to give up the chief object of
infidelity; because the general good may admit of our misery in the future
world, as it does of our misery in this.

BUT christianity clearly informs us, that God made all things for his glory,
implying the greatest happiness and perfection of the creation as a system; or
for the glorious exercise and display of his power, wisdom and goodness in
raising his kingdom, which is the creation, as a system, to the highest degree
of perfection and happiness.

THUS we see in what darkness, as to the most essential principles of religion,
we should have been involved, had we not been favored with the light of divine
revelation, and in what darkness they are involved, who embrace the
philosophical religion of infidelity. And thus we have further proof how happy
that people is, whose God is the Lord, not only as this circumstance lays a
foundation for their political good, but especially as it lays a foundation for
true virtue and piety, for peace and comfort here and eternal happiness in the
favor of God hereafter.

2. A SECOND inference from this subject is, that since christianity appears to
be necessary to the public good of the state, it ought to be encouraged by
magistrates and rulers of every description. They are appointed to be the
guardians of the public good; of course it is their duty to protect and promote
every thing tending to it, and especially every thing necessary to it.
Therefore as christianity is necessary to the public good, they are bound to
encourage, promote and inculcate that, by their example and profession, by
speaking and acting in favor of it both in public and private, by supporting
christian ordinances and worship, and by promoting to places of trust and
profit those who profess it and live agreeably, and who are otherwise properly
qualified. Magistrates are called to do all this on the ground of the soundest
policy.

3. FOR the same reasons the citizens in general are obligated to encourage and
promote christianity, by being themselves christians and that not only in
profession, but in heart and life, and by giving their suffrages for those who
are of the same character. It is indeed to be confessed, that not all professed
christians are good men or real christians; yet among professed christians are
many men, who possess good abilities and a proper share of information, who are
strictly moral and upright, and who expect to give an account of their conduct
to God. Such are the men to be promoted in the state; and the citizens by
promoting such men, will encourage and promote christianity, and at the same
time promote the good of the state.

I BEG the further patience of the auditory, while I close the discourse, with
the addresses usual on this occasion.

IN the first place I beg leave to address myself to His Excellency the
GOVERNOR.

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY,
IN obedience to your command I appear in the desk this day; and I could think
of no subject more important and at the same time more suitable to the present
occasion, than the happiness of that people whose God is the LORD. I have
therefore endeavored to illustrate the necessity of the christian faith and
practice, to the prosperity of the state. I may appeal to your Excellency how
far this faith and practice have hitherto contributed to our political
prosperity. Had not our ancestors been firm and exemplary in this faith and
practice; had they not taken pains to hand them down to us; had they not in all
their towns and settlements instituted schools, in which the principles of
christianity, as well as other things were taught; had they not provided for
the support of public worship, for the due observance of the Lord's day and for
the public teaching of christianity on that day; had they not provided for the
support of a studious and learned ministry, who being themselves men of
knowledge, should be able to instruct others; I appeal to your Excellency,
whether our political affairs would not at present have worn a very different
aspect. And if our supreme magistrates had not been, both by profession and
apparent practice, christians, it would doubtless have had a very baleful
influence on the christian and moral character of the people at large, and
consequently on our political prosperity. But we are happy in that we have had
from the beginning, even to the present day, a series of Governors, who have
been not only an honor to the state, but ornaments to our churches. May such a
series be still kept up without interruption. This, as it will be a proof of
our christian character, will also be a proof of our public prosperity in every
successive period, and a pledge of our subsequent prosperity. May God grant,
that your Excellency shall effectually contribute to this prosperity in every
way, in which your eminent situation affords opportunity. And when earthly
states and empires shall be no more, may your Excellency, in that series of
excellent men and excellent Governors, and among all real christians, "shine
forth as the sun in the kingdom of your Father."

2. THE discourse addresses itself to his Honor the Lieutenant Governor, to
the Legislative Council of the state, and to the Representatives of the towns
in General Assembly.

HONORABLE LEGISLATORS,
SINCE the belief and practice of christianity are so necessary to the
political good of our state, and since you are appointed to be the guardians of
our political good, I thought it not impertinent to suggest to you some
important means, by which you may obtain the end for which you are appointed.
Opposition to christianity both in faith and practice was never, at least in
our country, so great and so increasing, as at the present day. It lies with
you, gentlemen, by a steady belief, profession and practice of christianity; by
your conversation and weight; by the appointments which you shall make to the
various offices, civil and military, and by all your public proceedings, to
withstand this opposition, and to guard against the danger to the public good,
arising from the depravity of manners which opposition to christianity
naturally induces. It is your province, in conjunction with his Excellency the
Governor, to appoint all our executive civil authority and to confer the
higher military honors. When men of licentious principles and practice are
promoted either in the civil or military line, it gives a dignity and an
influence to vice and irreligion. And "one sinner destroys much good,"
especially when exalted to a high station of honor and authority. Now, if you
give this advantage to vice, you will thereby injure the state; but more
immediately you will injure religion and the kingdom of Christ. And let me
beseech you to remember, that you also have a master in heaven, to whom you, as
well as the rest of men, must give an account. The only way to gain his
approbation is, to keep a conscience void of offense, and in your political
transactions not to act from party attachments and private connections, not to
practice intrigue to serve your own interests or those of your friends; but to
endeavor to serve the public in the best manner according to your capacity and
opportunity. In so doing you will appoint to the several executive offices, men
of knowledge and discretion; men that fear God and hate covetousness; men who
will be just and rule in the fear of God. By the promotion of such men, virtue
will be encouraged and vice will be restrained; by their official proceedings,
law and justice will be executed, and "judgment will run down as waters, and
righteousness as a mighty stream," even that righteousness which exalts a
nation." Then shall our political interests be in a prosperous state; then
shall we be that happy people whose God is the Lord.

3. THE Reverend Pastors of the churches, who are present, will suffer the word
of exhortation.

MY FATHERS AND BRETHREN,
WE who are employed in the work of the ministry, are deeply interested in this
subject. We are interested in the prosperity of the state, and are peculiarly
interested in this mean of prosperity on which I have been insisting. It is our
business to study and teach christianity, and thus to promote the political
good of the state, as well as the spiritual good of the souls of our hearers.
This is a noble employment, to fidelity and zeal in which, not only the motives
of religion call us, but even those of patriotism. Therefore if we have any
love to religion and the souls of men; nay if we have any public spirit and
love to our country, let us diligently study the evidences, the nature, the
doctrines and duties of christianity, and inculcate them with all plainness,
assiduity and perseverance, giving line upon line and precept upon precept.
This is to be done,

1. BY instruction. Without communicating instruction and information
concerning the truth, we can expect to do nothing in our work to any good
purpose. Knowledge and not ignorance is the mother of real devotion. The
rational mind is to be led by the exhibition of the truth only.

2. BY every motive to persuade, drawn from reason and revelation, from time
and eternity; and among others this motive of the public good of the state and
our general happiness, liberty and prosperity as a people, is not to be omitted.

3. BY a christian life and conversation. If we do these things; if we thus
instruct, persuade and live, we shall at last stand in our lot, and shall be
owned as his, when Christ our Lord and judge "shall make up his jewels."

4. I SHALL, in the last place, address myself in a very few words to this
numerous auditory collectively. Men and brethren, this subject nearly concerns
you all. How happy would you be, if the Lord were indeed your God? Nor can you
be truly happy on any other condition. However prosperous you may be in your
private concerns, in your property, your business and your reputation; yet
unless you are the objects of the favor of God and the heirs of eternal life,
you are truly in a miserable situation. You have not only the motive of eternal
happiness to choose the Lord for your God; but the motives of the peace, good
order, and happiness of the people as a body politic, and the general
prosperity of the state. You all feel a firm attachment to your liberties and
to the privileges of a republican government. Of all forms of government a
republic most essentially requires virtue and good morals in the great body of
the people, in order to its prosperity and even its existence. But the way to
virtue and good morals is to choose the Lord for your God. Nor is this all; you
not only have to choose and serve the Lord yourselves, but by the same reasons
by which you are obligated to choose the Lord for your God, you are obligated
to seek out and by your suffrages to promote to legislative authority, such as
are of the same character. In a republic all authority is derived from the
people: and such as they generally are, we may expect their representatives,
legislators and all their civil authority will be. If you have the Lord for
your God, you will elect those of the same character with yourselves, to to be
your legislators; you will encourage and support them and other faithful rulers
in the thorough discharge of their duties of civil government, and you will
withhold your suffrages from those who acknowledge not the Lord as their God
and regard not his law. Nor can you consistently and innocently give your
suffrages to men of this last description: for thus you would give a sanction
and influence to sin and vice, would be partakers of their wickedness and would
do an injury to the state.

BUT if you and the good people of the state in general shall unite to practice
virtue and christianity, and to promote the wisest and best men among us, we
shall doubtless be that happy people described in the text, and as so many
instances of our happiness "judgment shall dwell in the wilderness and
righteousness remain in the fruitful field. And the work of righteousness shall
be peace, and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever."

THE END

