Divine Righteousness in Salvation, AND Damnation of Sinners exhibited. Being a
brief reply to the Rev. Mr. Robbins' discourse on Romans ix. 18.

ENTITLED, "Divine Sovereignty in the Salvation, and Damnation of Sinners (...)"

IN WHICH IS SHOWN, I. What we are to believe concerning the ^^^^^eignty of
GOD. II. A brief explanation of the 9th Chapter of St. Paul's Epistle to the
Romans. III. Mr. Robbins mistake of what the Apostle means by election and
reprobation in that Chapter, shown by eight arguments. IV. Mr. Robbins'
arguments to prove his doctrine, examined and refuted. V. Mr. Robbins'
pretended answers to objections shown to be invalid. VI. Some remarks on Mr.
Robbins' improvement of his subject. VII. The whole concluded by a letter to
Mr. Robbins.


BY ISAAC FOSTER M. A. PASTOR, TO THE CHURCH OF CHRIST IN WEST-STAFFORD.

Shall not the Judge of all the earth (...):

ABRAHAM PRINTED AT Norwich, BY JOHN TRUMBULL. MDCCXCIV.

Divine righteousness in the Salvation, AND Damnation of Sinners exhibited.
MR. ROBBINS, has taken for his text Romans ix. 18. Therefore has he mercy on
whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens. And pursuant to his
design, to vindicate the Divine Sovereignty in the Salvation and damnation of
Sinners, he 1st proposes, To investigate the meaning of GOD's having mercy on
whom he will have mercy. 2. The meaning of the counter-part to this, and whom
he will he hardens. 3. Evince, and illustrate this great truth, that it
belongs to GOD -- is his essential prerogative, to have mercy on whom he will
have mercy, and to harden whom he will harden. Then, 4. Answer objections. And,
5. Improve the subject, by deduction, and application.

Under the first head, Mr. Robbins considers the latitude in which the word
mercy, when applied to GOD, is sometimes used in the Bible. And in page, 9,
comes to this conclusion, In the text, particular reference is had to saving
mercy. He explains himself more fully in page, 13, They on whom he has mercy
are regenerated, are united to Christ, are justified, and shall be saved:
Seeing, as has been observed, there is a particular reference, not to common
and promiscuous; but to special and saving mercy. Consequently, by the hardened
we are to understand these who are, or shall be left in an impenitent
unbelieving state to the last -- to their eternal ruin and destruction. In
page, 38, he says, Repentance is implied in GOD's having mercy on any, in the
sense of the text; and impenitence continued to the last is implied in his
hardening whom he will. In page, 39, he says, It belongs to GOD -- is his
essential prerogative to determine the character, and dispose of the eternal
state of men; in holiness and salvation, or in sin and damnation, according to
his own good pleasure. From these quotations, and others of like import that
might be made, it is p^ain to me, that when Mr. Robbins says, In the text,
particular reference is had to saving mercy. He means such mercy as is
inseparably connected with eternal life. And by hardened, to use his own words,
We are to understand those who are, or shall be left in an impenitent
unbelieving state to the last, to their eternal ruin and destruction. While
those on whom he has mercy, to use his own words, Are regenerated, are united
to Christ, are justified, and shall be saved. That the meaning of the text,
according to Mr. Robbins, is plainly this, I will have mercy, i. e. save
eternally whom I will, and harden, i. e. damn eternally whom I will. His own
words are, It belongs to GOD -- is his essential prerogative, to determine the
character, and dispose of the eternal state of men, in holiness and salvation,
or in sin and damnation, according to his own good pleasure.

Wherefore, if Mr. Robbins is right, the election and reprobation the Apostle
is arguing about in this chapter, is election by an absolute decree and purpose
of GOD to eternal life, with respect to some men: and reprobation by a like
absolute decree to eternal misery, with respect to others. But, that this is
not the meaning of the Apostle, in the 9th Chapter to the Romans; is what he
had no thought of, as it lay quite wide of his design, through this whole
Chapter, I think I can easily demonstrate. But as the sovereignty of GOD, is
one thing which Mr. Robbins designs, very specially to show by his discourse. I
shall therefore, reply to him in the method following, viz.

1. Show what we are to believe concerning the sovereignty of GOD. 2. Give a
brief explanation of the 9th Chapter of St. Paul's epistle to the Romans. 3.
Show Mr. Robbins totally mistaken as to what the Apostle means by election and
reprobation in that Chapter. 4. Examine Mr. Robbins' five arguments to
illustrate and prove his doctrine. 5. Consider Mr. Robbins' answers to
objections against his doctrine. 6. Make some remarks on Mr. Robbins'
improvement of his subject. 7. Conclude by a Letter to Mr. Robbins.
First, I am to show what we are to believe concerning the sovereignty of GOD.
Now it is very evident, both from reason and scripture; that Almighty GOD, as
the creator and governor of mankind, sustains a double character; as sovereign
benefactor and righteous judge. As creator and sovereign benefactor, GOD has a
right to be, and actually is partial in the distribution of his grace. But as
governor and judge, he is and ever will be impartial in the distribution of
justice. The doctrine of partial grace is held up to view, in Matthew xx. 15.
Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? And Chap. xxv, 34, 15.
For the kingdom of heaven is as a man traveling into a far country, who called
his own servants, and delivered unto them his goods: And unto one he gave five
talents, to another two, and to another one; to every man according to his
several ability. These scriptures hold forth a partial election, and a partial
reprobation; both flowing from a free, wise, and sovereign grace, which is
notoriously respective of persons.

By this partial election and reprobation of free grace, I mean, the choice
which GOD, as a sovereign benefactor, makes or refuses to make of some persons,
churches, cities and nations, to bestow or withhold favors from them. It is
the partiality, with which he imparts his talents, of nature, providence and
grace to his creatures; giving five talents to some, two to others, and but one
to others. This partiality of GOD, discovered in dispensing his favors to his
creatures, is doubtless in perfect wisdom: but by no rules or methods of
proceeding that we are acquainted with. The time when we shall exist, the
country where we shall live, our parents, our constitution of body and turn of
mind; these and numberless other circumstances are doubtless ordered wisely;
but by rules that lay quite out of our sight. Plain it is, that, GOD is good
and gracious to all men; but it is as plain that he is not equally gracious:
For he gives to some persons, families, churches and nations, more power and
opportunity to do and receive good, more means of grace, more excellent means,
more time to use those means, and more energy of the spirit in the use of them,
than he gives to other persons, famil^, churches and nations. And this great
partiality in God, which appears in the bestowment of his favors, is in no
degree caused by the works of the creatures; nay, so far from this, it, is
itself the first cause of all natural excellencies and evangelical worthiness.

Uncreated Adam, did nothing to merit that distinguishing election, which
raised him above the first Ox: nor did the first Ox, do any thing to deserve to
be reprobated from all knowledge of his maker, and everlastingly shut out of
the kingdom of heaven.

The Lark, did nothing to merit her election to tow^ring flight and sprightly
songs; nor did the poor Oyster do any thing to deserve such a reprobation, to
be shut up between two shells, without legs or wings. We may trace the
footsteps of an electing or reprobating providence all the earth over; with
respect to persons and places. We see one elected to sway a scepter, another
^bated to handle a spade. We see a rich glutton ^le^d to a plentiful fortune,
while poor Lazarus, a notorious reprobate of providence, lays starving at the
door of me^ess plenty. We see one elected to enjoy the blessing of the five
senses, the advantage of a strong constitution, and the prerogative of beauty;
whilst another is born blind or deaf, sickly or deformed; but the poor creature
has done nothing to deserve such a reprobation; nor the other to merit such
election. But with such apparent partiality does the great Lord of all
dispense, not only his providential blessings, but likewise his spiritual
favors: as every one may see who takes a view of the scripture account of the
covenants of promise, which GOD made at different times with savoured men,
families, churches and nations: peculiar covenants which flowed every one from
a peculiar election of grace; by which we may see the election and reprobation
of partial grace most clearly. But GOD Almighty has a throne of justice, as
well as a throne of grace.

The doctrine of impartial justice, is held forth in such scriptures as these,
Luke, ix. 26, I say unto you, that to every one who has, more shall be given:
and from him who has not, even that he has, shall be taken away from him.
Rev. iii. 4, Thou have a few names even in Sardis, which have not defiled their
garments; and they shall walk with me in white: for they are worthy. Here is
held forth an impartial election and an impartial reprobation; both flowing
from divine justice; which is always irrespective of persons. The impartial
election and reprobation of justice is the righteous choice, which GOD makes or
refuses to make of some persons, churches, cities and nations, to reward them
according to his promises, or punish them according to his threatenings.

St. Paul, has taught us, that GOD will render to every man according to his
deeds; to them who by patient continuance in well doing -- eternal life: but
unto them that obey unrighteousness, indignation and wealth. Romans ii. 6, 7, 8.
The same doctrine is taught by the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. iii. 10, 11; Say ye to
the righteous, it shall b^ well with him; for they shall eat the frost of their
doings. Woe to the wicked: it shall be ill with him; for the reward of his hands
shall be given him. The same we have in Ezekiel. xviii. 30; Therefore I will judge
you, O house of Israel, every one according to his ways, says the Lord GOD:
Repent, and turn yourselves from all your transgressions; so iniquity shall not
be your ruin. But this doctrine is taught by ^ne more clearly, than by our Lord
Jesus, in his last charge, Rev. xxii. 12; Behold I come quickly; and my reward
is with one, to give every man according as his works shall be. The election of
justice is then nothing but the impartiality, with which GOD makes choice of
his good and faithful servants, rather than his wicked and slothful servants,
to bestow upon them the temporal and eternal reward of goodness and
faithfulness, according to their works; when he comes and reckons with them,
about the talents which his free grace bestowed upon them. Nor is the
reprobation of justice any thing, but the impartiality with which GOD as a
righteous judge and dispensor of his punishments, reprobates from his rewards
of grace and glory, his wicked and unfaithful servants, who do not use, or who
vilely abuse the talents, which his free grace entrusted them with.

The full ^ide of scripture evidently flows in these two channels; an election
of partial grace, according to which GOD grants or denies original favors as a
sovereign benefactor; and an election of impartial justice, according to which
he bestows rewards and inflicts punishments as a supreme judge. And as from the
unconditional, personal, partial election of grace, there follows a harmless,
unconditional, personal reprobation; as in the case of Jacob and Esau, for
while Jacob and the Israelites were peculiarly loved, Esau and the Edomites
were comparatively hated, i. e. while the Israelites were greatly favored, the
Edomites were less favored. So likewise from the conditional impartial
election of justice; there follows an impartial reprobation; for when the
righteous are rewarded the wicked shall be punished; when the judge shall say
to those that have done well, come ye blessed, he will say to those that have
done ill, depart ye cursed.

Thus although GOD dispenses his favors as benefactor and Lord with a partial
hand, by rules that lay quite out of our fight; and according to the
inscrutable counsel of his own will: yet his method of dealing with us as
lawgiver, governor and judge, is perfectly known, being clearly revealed in the
word, namely, that he will render to every man according to his works. If any
would wi^ to see this subject more ^y ^ed, they may find it excellently well
done in the ingenious Mr. Fletcher's works, Vol. 3. p. 250.
Now, keeping in view the sovereign partiality; which the great Lord of all has
right to, and actually does exercise in dispensing, primiary and original
favors: and the righteous impartiality and exact justice, with which he as
lawgiver and judge forever rewards and punishes; we will try by this key to
open the ninth chapter in St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, which was the second
thing proposed to be done, and to which I now come. 2 To give a brief
explanation, of the ix chap. to the Romans It will doubtless be allowed that
before the coming of Christ, the Church, or peculiar kingdom of GOD's grace,
was confined to the Jewish nation; including only such heathen, as were
incorporated among them by becoming Jews and observing the whole Law of Moses.
And the Jews firmly believed it would always be so. Even the best men among
them, Christ's own disciples not excepted; appear to have no apprehension of an
alteration in this respect. Accordingly when our Lord came, and revealed this
mystery of God, which before was hid, both from Jews and Gentiles; namely, that
the Gentiles should be called by the gospel, and freely admitted into the
Church, under the Messiah, and upon the same terms that the Jews themselves
were admitted; it was universally opposed by the Jews. And although GOD's
owning the Gentiles; by pouring out the holy ghost upon them, in various
miraculous gifts, did satisfy in good measure the christian Jews at Jerusalem,
who were disgusted at Peter, for treating the first uncircumcised Gentile
converts, as members of the church of GOD, Acts, xi. 2, 3, And extorted from
them this confession, namely, Thou has GOD also to the Gentiles granted
repentance unto life, which they believed could not have been granted unto
them, without obedience to the law of Moses. But the unbelieving Jews paid no
regard to this, or any other argument in favor of the uncircumcised Gentiles.

The notion of admitting them into the church of GOD, only upon faith of
Christ, they opposed and persecuted every where, with great zeal and
bitterness. And it seems it was not long before good impressions wore off, and
old prejudices revived, even among the believing Jews.

Numbers of them very stiffly, and with much contention, endeavored to persuade
the Gentile converts, that except they were circumcised after the manner of
Moses, they could not be saved, i. e. admitted to the privileges of the kingdom
of GOD, and the hope of eternal life, Acts, xv. 1, 2.

But had the Jewish notion prevailed, that no part of mankind could have any
share in the blessings of GOD's most gracious covenant, the pardon of sin, and
the hope of eternal life, but only such as were circumcised, and brought
themselves under obligations to the law of Moses; the extensive scheme of the
gospel would have been ruined, and the gracious design of freeing the church
from the embarrassments of the law of Moses, would have been defeated.

The glad tidings of salvation by Christ, must, not only have been confined to
the narrow limits of the Jewish peculiarity, and clogged with all the
ceremonial observances belonging to it: but had the gospel been built upon the
foundation of the Jewish polity, it must have been totally destroyed when that
was demolished; and so the whole peculiar kingdom of GOD in the world would
have been overthrown and extinct at the same time: and all the light it was
calculated to diffuse throughout the world, would have been quite extinguished.

This was therefore a matter of the greatest importance to be clearly and fully
determined and settled, namely, whether the Jewish pale should stand or not, or
whether, the Gentile converts might be trea^d as members of the church of GOD
without becoming Jews, and observing circumcision and the law of Moses. And as
St. Paul was commissioned to preach the gospel to the Gentiles, it became his
duty, to prove, that we Gentiles are the children of GOD, interested in his
covenant, and all the honors, blessings and privileges of his family and
kingdom here upon earth, only by faith in Christ, without coming under any
obligations to the law of Moses, as such, which is the main drift and subject
of this Epistle; which the Apostle begins, by showing, Jews and Gentiles to be
equally sinful and obnoxious to wrath; and therefore, there was no way for the
Jews to be continued in the kingdom of GOD, but by grace, through faith; and by
grace and faith the Gentiles might be admitted into it. But as this would of
course overthrow the Jewish peculiarity; so likewise it would from hence
follow, that all those Jews, who do not embrace the faith of the gospel, are
cast out of the pale of the visible church, and the kingdom of GOD taken from
them.

Now as nothing could be more disagreeable to the Jews than this doctrine; they
accordingly levelled all their artillery against the Gentiles being called, or
invited into the church or kingdom of GOD; and labored every argument to
unhinge the believing Gentiles, and persuade them, that they were not duly
taken into the church. Therefore, to prove, that the Jews, by rejecting Christ
and the gospel, were themselves cast out of the church, consistantly with the
truth of GOD's promise to Abraham, was a matter of the greatest moment, to
convince and confound the unbelieving Jews, and establish the Gentile believers.

And this the Apostle sets himself, more especially to do in the ix chap. to
the Romans Which he begins by declaring that it was the truth, that compelled him
to the execution of this part of his commission, as Apostle of the Gentiles;
and not ill will to his countrymen; in whose rejection, he was so far from
taking pleasure, that it was a continual grief and sorrow to him; and the
rather so, he, having had an experimental acquaintance, with the prejudices
they were under, with respect to Christ and the gospel, ver. 1, 2, 3. In the
4th and 5th ver. he recounts the honors and privileges, which his countrymen
the Jews, as the church of GOD had long enjoyed. Then ver. 6, proceeds to
answer an objection that might he made against the rejection of the Jews;
notwithstanding the infidelity of the greatest part of them, grounded upon the
promise of GOD to Abraham, Genesis xvii. 7, 8: I will establish my covenant
between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, for an everlasting covenant; to
be a GOD unto thee, and thy seed after thee.

Now if the Jews were reduced to a level with the nations that lie out of the
church, and excluded from the commonwealth, to which they once belonged, will
it not follow; that GOD has failed in the performance of his promise to
Abraham? To this the Apostle answers ver. 6: That they are not all Israel which
are of Israel, i. e. the Jews are not the whole of the Israel of GOD
comprehended in the promise. For Abraham is the father of many nations; and his
seed is, not only that which is of the law, but that also which is of the faith
of Abraham. Ver. 7, 8, 9, He observes they had no right to conclude, that,
because they are the natural descends ^ts of Abraham, therefore they are all of
them, without exception, the children in whom the promise is to be fulfilled.
For the promise never was confined to natural descent, but may be accomplished
in any part of Abraham's seed, as GOD in his sovereign pleasure shall see sit;
as appears from the rejection of Ishmael and the election of Isaac.

And lest it should be said, that Ishmael was rejected not by the sovereign
will of GOD, but because he was the son of the bond woman, and therefore
unworthy to be the peculiar seed. Therefore the Apostle instances in another
limitation of the seed of Abraham, namely, the twin children of Isaac by
Rebecca, before they were born, or had done either good or evil, that the
purpose of GOD according to election might stand; it was said, the elder shall
serve the younger, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. In this case it
cannot be said, that Esau was reprobated because profane and wicked, or Jacob
loved because he was righteous, for they had not done either good to deserve,
or evil to forfeit the divine favor: See ver. 10, 11, 12, 13. -- This plainly
demonstrates; that the purpose and intention of GOD, according to his own free
choice, is the only rule and standard of bestowing priminary and original
favors: on men and nations; not of works, but the good pleasure of GOD alone
that called Jacob and the Jews to be his peculiar people, while Esau and his
posterity were reprobated, from the peculiar privileges of the church of GOD.
And none may conclude, that GOD's bestowing religious privileges in such an
unequal manner upon those, who otherwise are in equal circumstances, is
contrary to equity and right; as the Apostle observes, ver. 14. For surely GOD
may do what he will with his own.

GOD did no wrong to man, because he made Angels; no wrong to the mouse,
because he made the elephant: no wrong to the herring because he made the
whale, nor any wrong to Esau, because he gave his brother five talents, when he
gave him but two.

Justice is not concerned in bestowing original favors; but GOD as sovereign
Lord and benefactor, dispenses these, with the most notorious partiality,
without any wrong or injustice to his creatures. Here let it be noticed, that
the instances alleged by the Apostle, wherein the great Lord of all had
discovered his sovereignty, in the choice of persons to enjoy peculiar
privileges, does not respect the persons themselves so much as their posterity.
And it has no respect to the eternal state of either. This will appear plain to
any one that looks into the texts in Genesis from whence they are quoted.

Of Ishmael it is said Genesis xvii. 20: Twelve Princes shall he beget, and I will
make him a great nation. So of Jacob and Esau, it was said to Rebecca, Genesis
xxv. 23: Two nations are in thy womb, two manner of people shall be separated
from thy bowels, the one people shall be stronger than the other people, and
the elder shall serve the younger; which says the Apostle, was said that the
purpose of GOD according to election might stand, ver. 11.12. So that this must
be an election of people and not of particular persons, for it never was fact
in the persons themselves. So likewise the next words, Jacob have I loved and
Esau have I hated, quoted from Mal. 1, 2, 3, are manifestly to be understood of
the nations that were to descend from these persons, and not the persons
themselves.

For ought that appears Esau had as many talents as Jacob. The words of the
text in Mal. are, I loved Jacob and hated Esau, and laid his mountains and
heritage waste for the dragons of the wilderness; whereas Edom says, we are
impovershied, etc. This is evidently spoken of the people, and solely with
regard to their condition in this world. -- Let it be further noted here, that
by GOD's ha^g the posterity of Esau, we are not to understand absolute ^tred,
for they had a good blessing; though not (...) good a one as the posterity of
Jacob. Yet it is certain GOD loved them, and blessed them; and hatred is no
more intended, than when our Lord says as in Luke xiv. 26: He that hates not
father and mother etc. cannot be my disciple: where he cannot be understood to
mean hatred, unless he contradict himself -- but means what is expressed, Mat.
x. ^7. He that loves father and mother more than me is not worthy of me. So
GOD's hating Esau's posterity and loving Jacobs, means nothing more than this,
namely that he bestowed less talents and privileges on the one, than on the
other. Such a highly figurative way of speaking, distinguishes the Hebrew
language from all others, that I am acquainted with; and which if not attended
to, we can never understand the scriptures.

We should ever remember, that as all creatures are equally related to GOD by
creation; so they are equally loved by him. And if any creature has a greater
share in the Creators love than another, it is wholly owing to the improvement
the creature has made of the grace the Creator bestowed upon it. The Lord
loves the righteous, because they do right: And he hates the wicked because
they do wrong.

We have now considered this chapter, to the 15 ver. so far as we have gone,
the Apostle, has considered GOD's choosing or refusing any body of men in
general, without supposing them to be wicked, or to have forfeited the divine
favor by sin. But it is evident from the scriptural quotations, that from ver.
15 to 23, he considers them in quite another light; namely, as corrupt, wicked
and deserving destruction; and as such respited and conditionally pardoned, by
the pure mercy of GOD, or ruined by his righteous judgments. Which brings his
argument to the very case of the Jews.

In order clearly to understand the Apostle in these verses next to be
considered, it must be remembered, that the Apostle in the quotations he makes
from the Old Testament; does not give the whole of the text, but only a hint or
reference to the passages, to which they belong, directing us to recollect,
peruse the whole passages, and there view and judge of the force of his
arguments. This is evident from the Apostles having words in his conclusions
ver. 16 and 18, which are not in his arguments; as any one may see that reads
with attention. --

This promised we will attend to the Apostles argument, by which he proves that
GOD is sovereign, in taking forfeited favors from a wicked person or people;
or in mercy continuing them according to his own good pleasure. For this he
quotes the words of GOD to Moses, recorded Exodus xxxiii. 19, I will have mercy
on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have
compassion. Now in order to understand the Apostles argument from these words
quoted by him, we must read and consider well the xxxii and xxxiii chapters of
Exodus. And here we find, that while Moses was in the mount, receiving the law
from God, a tumultuous address is made by the people to Aaron, up, make us
GOD's, etc. In consequence of which, a molten calf is made, and worshipped by
the people. Upon which GOD acquaints Moses, with the idolatry of the people,
expresses his displeasure against it, and the resolves of his justice to cut
them off. Then Moses becomes an intercessor; and obtains a reprieve. -- And GOD
promises to go on with his kind intention of giving them the land of Canaan for
all this: Yet he threatens to remember this sin against them, when hereafter he
should see cause to punish them for their other sins.

This, as Mr. Henry observes, occasioned this saying among the Jews, that from
hence forward no judgment fell upon Israel, but there was in it an ounce of the
powder of the golden calf. And even now immediately GOD plagued the people,
because of this.

Thus much we find in the xxxii chap. In the xxx^i chap. we have a further
account of the mediation of Moses between GOD and Israel. Moses had obtained
see them a promise that the covenant with Abraham should be made good, in
giving them the land of Canaan; yet they are denied the extraordinary tokens of
GOD's presence, hitherto enjoyed, and they left to the conduct of Moses, and
the convoy of an Angel. But Moses intercedes for the divine presence, and
obtains a promise of that also, see ver. 14, And upon Moses' requesting a sight
of the divine glory; GOD said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee,
and will proclaim the name of the Lord before thee, and will be gracious to
whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show mercy. As if
he had said; my goodness is my glory, and I will make such a display of it
before thee, as fully to convince thee, that I am of a kind and beneficient
nature. But know thou, that I spare this stiffnecked people, not because either
you, who intercede for them, or they themselves, have any claim upon my favor:
but of my own free and sovereign grace, I choose to show them mercy and
compassion; and not at this time bring that ruin upon them, which their sin
justly deserves. From hence the Apostle concludes, as in ver. 16. So then, it
is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of GOD that shows
mercy, i. e. the making or continuing any body of men the peculiar people of
GOD, after they have by sin forfeited the divine favor, is determined, not by
the desires and wishes of men, but by the good pleasure of GOD alone.

For Abraham desired this blessing for Ishmael, and Isaac for Esau, but Abraham
and Isaac who willed, and Esau who run for this mercy of being GOD's peculiar
people, GOD of his mere good pleasure, originally intended first for Isaac, and
then for Jacob and his posterity, and to them it was given. And when, by their
apostasy, they had forefited this privilege, it was not Moses' willing, nor any
obligation God was under, but his own sovereign mercy which continued the
enjoyment of it to them. For instead of showing the Israelites mercy, and
continuing to them the peculiar privileges of his church and people, he might
have signalized his anger, power and justice in their destruction; as he did in
the case of Pharaoh and the Egyptians.

To whose case the Apostle alludes in the 17th ver. And observes that although
Pharaoh was made to stand through ten plagues, yet was treated with much
greater severity then the Jews were, whom God conditionally pardoned, and
continued to be his peculiar people, notwithstanding their rebellion. But the
first good opportunity, to make Pharaoh and the Egyptians an illustrious
example of the divine vengeance is taken. Thus it appears that God treats not
all sinners alike, for while with some he waits long, on others he brings a
swift destruction; according to his own good pleasure. From hence the Apostle
concludes as in v. 18. Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and
whom he will he hardens. By mercy here, the Apostle means nothing more, than
GOD's respiting a wicked people from deserved ruin, and continuing to them the
blessings of providence and the enjoyment of visible Church privileges; is too
evident to admit of proof. And that by hardens, he means nothing else, than
bringing deserved ruin upon a wicked person or people, is equally plain; as the
Apostle evidently alludes to the story of Pharaoh and the Egyptians. To this
the Apostle was aware, the Jews would object as in v. 19. Why does he yet find
fault? for who has resisted his will; i. e. If GOD, according to his own will,
thus differently treats criminals, sparing some and bringing ruin upon others:
why does he yet find fault with, and hold guilty those he spares? for if it be
his will to spare them, yet hold them guilty and liable to punishment when ever
he pleases; they must remain guilty, for who has resisted his will? To this
the Apostle replies v. 20, by showing that its quite unfit for weak and
ignorant man, to retort upon GOD his maker.

In v. 21, the Apostle alludes to the parable of the Potter, Jere. xviii. 1. to
illustrate the sovereign right that Almighty God has, to exalt one and depress
another. To make one more honorable and another less honorable, according to
his own pleasure. This premised, the Apostle comes more directly to answer the
objection of the Jew, v. 22. What if GOD willing to show his wrath, etc. i. e.
what can any object against GOD's choosing a time to punish the wicked,
according to their wickedness; when it will most redown to his own glory; and
suspending their destruction till that time comes? For instance, in the case of
the Jews; what wrong is it to them? If GOD designing more signally to display
his vindictive justice, and Almighty power, in overthrowing their constitution,
nation, and temple, that all may see, and be sensible; that rebellion against
him was the cause of their dreadful overthrow, has thought fit to forbear them
with much patience, even when they were proper subjects of punishments, and to
respite the destruction they had long deserved, to such a period, as would
effectually do this; as he did in the case of Pharaoh and the Egyptians. In the
23d and 24th v. the Apostle, suggests another reason why the Jews were spared
so long, namely, that he might display his glorious grace, on those, who before
that Judgment was executed on them; were prepared for the honor of being his
church and people, in stead of the Jewish nation, i. e. all Christians whom he
had called to the faith and privileges of the gospel, not only from among the
Jews, but also from among the Gentiles. For although the Jews were fit for
destruction long before, they were destroyed, yet the fitest time to destroy
them, was, after he had prepared the believing Gentiles unto the glory of being
his church and people. The Apostle nextly proceeds, by two quotations, from the
prophet Hosea, in the 25th and 26th v. to show that GOD intended to make the
Gentiles his people, and declared it by that prophet. Then in, v. 27, 28 and
29. He shows by quotations from the prophet Isaiah, that it is no new thing for
GOD to abandon the greatest part of the Jewish nation, when corrupt, and to
confine his favor to a righteous, believing few. Thus having vindicated the
rejection of the Jews, from visible Church privileges; and the calling of the
Gentiles thereto, with regard to the divine veracity and justice; the Apostle
proceeds, v. 30, 31 and 32, to give the reason, why the Jews were cast off from
being GOD's people, and the Gentiles admitted to that privilege. The Jews for
rejecting, the scheme of life, published in the Gospel, are shut out from
visible Church privileges; and the Gentiles by embracing it are adopted ^o the
family and Church of God. Then v 33, by a quotation from the prophet Isaiah he
shows this rejection of the Jews, and the cause thereof, as he had stated it,
was long ago foretold.

Thus I have brie^y explained this chapter, about which so much difficulty has
been made. And I give it as my opinion, there is not a chapter in the Bible
more easy to understand than this, if men would read it without bias, in favor
of preconceived opinions.

But as all depends upon the kind of Election and Reprobation the Apostle is
arguing about; mentioned v. 11, That the purpose of GOD according to election
might stand, etc. If it be election, by the absolute decree of GOD, to eternal
life; and reprobation, by a like absolute decree, to eternal misery: Mr. R. is
perfectly right. But if it be only election to some present privileges and
external advantages, to be enjoyed in this world; and reprobation, or
rejection, as it signifies the not being favored with those privileges and
advantages: Mr. R. is wholly wrong, and has totally mistaken the Apostle in
this chapter. Wherefore, I come as proposed.

3. To show that Mr. R. is totally mistaken, as to what the Apostle means by
election and reprobation in this chapter. And this I shall do by the following
arguments.

ARGUMENT 1. If the subject of the Apostles argument, is only such privileges,
as were enjoyed by the Isralites in this world; while they remained the church
of GOD: Then the election spoke of by the Apostle in this chapter, is not
absolute election to eternal life. But, etc. -- Ergo.

The major, is evident from the enumeration the Apostle had made of the
Israelites privileges, v. 4 and 5. Who are Israelites, to whom pertains the
adoption, etc. And these privileges were enjoyed by them in this world, while
they were the Church and people of GOD. And it is solely with reference to
their being stripped of these privileges, that he vindicates the truth and
justice of GOD, it the following verses. Therefore it is not absolute election
to eternal life that the Apostle here treats of.

ARG. 2. If the election spoke of in this chapter respects all Jacob's
posterity, or the whole nation of Israel, then it is not absolute election to
eternal life: But, etc. -- Ergo --

That the election spoke of in this chapter is rational, is, evident from Genesis
xxv. 23. The LORD said unto her, two nations are in thy womb, and two manner of
people shall be separated from thy bowels, and the one people shall be stronger
than the other people, and the elder shall serve the younger. These are the
words which signify the purpose of GOD according to election. Therefore the
election refers to the whole nation of Israel. But all the nation of Israel
were not absolutely elected to eternal life. Therefore, etc.

ARG. 3. If to serve, which was to be the condition of the elder, in scripture,
never signifies to be eternally damned in the world to come; then the opposite
blessing bestowed upon the younger, could not be eternal salvation. But, etc.
-- Ergo. --

THAT to serve, was to be the condition of the elder, is plain from the text
above quoted, namely, Genesis xxv. 23. But this in scripture never signifies to be
eternally damned. -- Therefore etc. --

ARG. 4. If the election the Apostle speaks of in this chapter, excludes all
works, and is of the mere will of GOD, it is not election to eternal life.

But etc. -- Ergo --

That the election spoke of in this chapter, excludes all works is evident from
ver. 11. -- That it is not election to eternal life is evident, because eternal
life is always in scripture said to be of works, though not of works alone.

The argument therefore is conclusive. --

ARG. 5. If the election the Apostle speaks of in this chapter, took place
first in Abraham and his seed, before his seed were born; then in Isaac and his
seed before they were born; then in Jacob and his seed, before they were born;
it is not absolute election to eternal life.

-- But etc. -- Ergo --

That the election the Apostle speaks of in this chapter, took place as above,
needs no proof. -- But the scripture no where represents eternal life, as
bestowed upon any family, or race of men in this manner.

Therefore etc. --

ARG. 6. If by vessels of mercy, the whole body of Jews and Gentiles, who were
admitted into the kingdom of GOD under the Gospel; is intended, and the whole
body of unbelieving Jews intended, by the vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction: it is not absolute election to eternal life, that the Apostle
treats of in this chapter.

But etc. -- Ergo --

Vessels of mercy ver. 23 as manifestly opposed to vessels of wrath ver. 22.
But the vessels of mercy are, the whole body of Jews and Gentiles, who were
called into the kingdom of GOD under the Gospel, as is evident from ver 24.

Consequently, the vessels of wrath are the whole body of the unbelieving Jews.
But men shall not be received to eternal life, or subjected to eternal
damnation, at the last day, in collective bodies; but according as particular
persons, in those bodies, have done well or ill.

Therefore etc. --

ARG. 7. If the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, spoke of in this
chapter, shall hereafter obtain mercy, and be saved; then it cannot be
reprobation to eternal damnation that the Apostle is here arguing about.

But etc. -- Ergo --

That in this chapter the Apostle is arguing about the unbelieving nation or
people of Israel, and vindicating the truth, and justice of GOD, in their
rejection; will be allowed by all. But concerning these reprobates, he heartly
desired and prayed that they might be saved, chap. x 1. Affirms that they had
not stumbled so as to fall finally, chap. xi. 11. That they should all be
saved, ver. 26. That they was still beloved of GOD, ver. 28. That they should
at length obtain mercy ver. 31. etc. etc. --

Therefore etc. --

ARG. 8. If the election the Apostle speaks of, and is arguing about in this
chapter, may through unbelief and misimprovement be rendered totally void and
useless, it is not absolute election to eternal life.

But etc. -- Ergo --

That the election the Apostle is arguing about in this chapter may, be made
void is evident from chapter xi. 20, 21, 22. Well, because of unbelief they
were broken off, and thou stand by faith; be not highminded but fear. For if
GOD spare not the natural branches, take heed left he also spare not thee.
Behold therefore the goodness and severity of GOD: on them which fell severity;
but toward thee goodness, if thou continue in his goodness: otherwise thou
also shall be cut off. Thus evident it is that the election the Apostle here
speaks of may be made void and come to nothing.

Therefore etc. --

I think it now appears most plain, that Mr. R. has wholly mistaken the meaning
of the Scriptures, he pretends to predicate his discourse upon. And likewise,
that what Mr. R. pretends to be the Apostles meaning, is something that lay
quite wide of the subject the Apostle was discussing, and could not therefore
come into his mind. The ground of Mr. R's mistake is also evident, namely, his
not considering the double character of the Deity; as sovereign benefactor and
righteous judge; as has been briefly considered above. Mr. R's foundation being
now wholly removed, his superstructure must fall to the ground. But as he has
advanced several arguments to prove his opinion, so very ill founded upon
scripture, or reason: which may be thought, by the less discerning, to have
some weight in them, I shall now as proposed proceed.

4. To examine Mr. R's arguments, to evince and illustrate what he calls an,
"important doctrine."

ARG. 1. GOD has an original inalienable right and property in all things.
Therefore it belongs to him -- is his essential prerogative to have mercy on
whom he will, and to harden whom he will. Let it be remembered here, that
according to Mr. R. eternal salvation is connected with GOD's having mercy, and
eternal damnation with his hardening. So that the argument stands thus, GOD
has an original inahenable right and property in all things; therefore it
belongs to him to save whom he will and damn whom he will. The property of GOD
in all things will be allowed by all. But such a use of it as Mr. R. makes is
quite new. Holy Job comforts himself with the thought of his being the property
of GOD: Job, xiv. 15, Thou will have a desire to the work of thine hands. And
the Psalmist grounds his plea for mercy on the property of GOD in him: Psalm.
cxix. 94. I am thine, save me. But Job and the Psalmist lived before Mr. R.
doctrine was known; they supposed that GOD's tender mercies were over all his
works. But Mr. R. has discovered, that free wrath makes as large, or much
larger part of the divine character than free grace!

The ground of Mr. R's mistake is manifest, he did not consider, that saving
and damning, rewarding and punishing, belong not to GOD as sovereign Lord and
proprietor; but as righteous lawgiver and judge. We allow the premises, but
deny his conclusion, as totally void of truth.

ARG. 2. Justice and mercy are essential to the divine character, a character
complete in all perfection. Therefore it belongs to GOD to have mercy on whom
he will have mercy, and to harden whom he will harden. Reply, neither justice,
no^ mercy as it respects misery, are exercised or discovered, by withholding or
bestowing original favors but these only are given by the mere will, of GOD.
We allow the premises, and from thence conclude, that, it belongs not to GOD to
have mercy on whom he will, and harden whom he will harden.

ARG. 3. GOD actually has mercy on some, and hardneth others. Therefore it
belongs to him to have mercy on whom he will and to harden whom he will. Reply,
both premises and conclusion are false; for GOD never had mercy on any nor
hardened any, in Mr. R's sense of having mercy and hardening. And his will is
not the rule by which he proceeds, in saving and damning men; but his law The
obedient shall be rewarded bu^ the disobedient shall be punished. But as Mr. R.
ha^ under this argument had recourse to the instance of Pharaoh, to prove that
GOD hardneth some; I will, for the sake of some who may be imposed upon, by the
bare sound of words, attend a little to the scripture account of this matter. I
have already observed, that by hardening in Romans ix. 18. We are to understand
ruining.

We will now inquire, what GOD actually did to Pharaoh, previous to his
bringing ruin upon him. It is true, we are told by Mr. R. that GOD hardened his
heart; and we read Exodus vii. 3, that GOD said unto Moses, I will harden
Pharaoh's heart. Now if we turn to Exodus viii. 15, we shall gain a just notion
in what manner GOD hardened his heart, for it is there written, But, when
Pharaoh saw there was respite, he hardened his heart, and hearkened not unto
them, as the Lord had said. And again chap. ix. 34, 35, When Pharaoh saw that
the rain and the hail and the thunders were ceased, he sinned yet more, and
hardened his heart, he and his servants; and the heart of Pharaoh was hardened,
neither would he let the people go; as the Lord had spoken by Moses.

GOD had said, he would harden Pharaoh's heart, and Pharaoh is, in these two
places, said to harden his own heart; as the Lord had said. Therefore what the
Lord had said, is to be explained, by what is here said, (chap. ix. 34, 35)
concerning the hardening of Pharaoh's heart. But it is here said that Pharaoh
wickedly took occasion, from the respite, which GOD granted him, to harden his
own heart. Consequently all that GOD did, toward hardening his heart, was
granting him respite, from one plague after another; which indeed, should have
softened his heart. GOD therefore, hardened his heart, only as what GOD did was
by him wickedly made the occasion of hardening his own heart in disobedience.

Our Lord tells us Mat. x. 34, 35, I came (...) to ^d peace, but a sword; for I
am come to set a man (...) variance against his father, etc. Now what did
Christ do, to destroy the peace of the world, and the peace of families? Why
nothing but publish the glad tidings of salvation, and set up his peaceable
kingdom in the world. Neither did GOD do any thing to harden Pharaoh's heart,
but what should, and would have softened it, had it not been his own fault.

ARG. 4. The potte^ has power over the clay, of the same lump to make one
vessel unto honor, and another to dishonor. Therefore it belongs to GOD to have
mercy on whom he will, and to harden whom he will. Reply, I deny the
conclusion; for rewarding and punishing belong not to creating will and power,
but to remunerative justice. GOD may without any injustice, make one vessel
more honorable than another; give five talents to one and but two to another,
according to his own sovereign pleasure. But his own pleasure is not the rule,
by which he will proceed, in rewarding and punishing, but the improvement, or
the misimprovement of the talents freely given to each one, to occupy withal.
The parable of the potter, Mr. R. calls an illuminating proof suggested by Paul
himself. It is true, it was a good proof, and quite applicable to the subject
St. Paul was upon, in the 9th chap. to the Romans, namely GOD's giving, or
refusing to give, certain privileges in this life. But Mr. R's subject, is
quite different from the Apostles, as it solely respects the distributions of
the life to come; a subject totally foreign to the Apostles in the 9th of
Romans. The parable of the potter is, therefore totally misapplied by Mr. R.
and so likewise the words he has taken from the prophet Isaiah; and fixed as a
motto to his discourse. I am sorry to see the scriptures perverted and abused
in such a manner, by means of men's mistaking their true meaning.

ARG. 5. Every possible hypothesis respecting the determination of the
character, and disposal of the eternal state of men, except that which is
resolved into the wisdom, and good pleasure of the deity, is weak and
insufficient if not impious and absurd. Therefore, it belongs to GOD -- is his
essential prerogative to have mercy on whom he will, and to harden whom he will
harden. Reply, this argument is wholly false; both premises and conclusion. I
will attend upon Mr. R. in his fruitless endeavor to support it. He begins, by
blotting a little more than two pages, in a pretended scuffle with men, angels,
and devils, for no purpose that I can see, unless, to show how easy a victory
may be gained, where there is none to oppose.

In page 34 he says, In the last place, shall we say this great affair is left
to men themselves? Each one is to determine and ascertain his own character and
eternal state? This indeed is not merely supposed: but asserted, as strenously
insisted upon by many. It is not as GOD wills and disposes; but as men
themselves will and order. There are who say, men shall be blessed as far as man
permits; a nature rational implies the power of being blessed or wretched as we
please; Heaven wills our happiness, allows our doom; Heaven but persuades,
almighty man decrees; man is the maker of immortal fates.

If this supposition should fail; I apprehend it will be allowed that every
other hypothesis must be given up. Concerning what is now before us, it may be
proper to mention several things and proceed by steps. I will attend to the
things which Mr. R. mentions, and the steps by which he proceeds; to prove that
it is not left to every man to determine his own character and eternal state.
And then, prove the contrary.

Mr. R. proceeds, It may be granted, that it was referred to Adam (as far as
any such thing could be referred to a creature) to determine his own, and the
character and state of his posterity. And again he says, It may be granted;
that in a low qualified sense it was referred to Adam to determine his own, and
the character and state of his posterity, p. 35. In p. 28 Mr. R. tells us, That
the determination of the character, and disposal of the state and circumstances
of creatures, particularly the eternal state of men, is GOD's peculiar
province, and essential prerogative. That it belongs to him originally and
independently; is what he cannot be divested of by any; and indeed is that of
which he cannot divest himself; it being essential as absolute perfection,
involving justice and mercy, is essential, and the denial of it, infering the
denial of divine existence^ Is it possible for Mr. R. to reconcile the 28 and
35 pages, in his discourse? Will these saving words, As far as any such thing
can be referred to a creature, or, In a low qualified sense. Save him from an
open contradiction? especially when according to him, it was granted to Adam,
not only to determine his own state, but the state of his posterity; which if
true, does not look as if he had it in a 'low qualified sense.' It is much more
than I claim for any other man, or believe that Adam ever had. And how Mr. R.
will reconcile such an extensive grant, to the wisdom and goodness of GOD, I
know not.

Mr. R. says, that in a low qualified sense it was referred to Adam, etc; and
then adds, And we well know the issue of that trial was sin and ruin. It is
evident now from Mr. R's own acknowledgement; that this incommunicable
prerogative of Deity, which Deity cannot divest himself of, without denying his
own existence; was actually so transferred to Adam, as that he by the trial,
determined his own character, to be that of a sinner, and his condition to be
ruinous. And as it must be cruel in his maker, to give him power only to
destroy himself; and withhold from him power to save himself; we may fairly
conclude, that he had, full and complete power given him, by his maker; to be
happy or miserable according as he should choose.

It is very unlucky for Mr. R. that at his first setting out to disprove a
quotation from Dr. Young, he should by his own acknowledgment, so fully prove
it. Men shall be blessed as far as man permits; a nature rational implies the
power of being blessed or wretched as we please. We have now Mr. R's testimony to
the truth of these lines. Great is the truth and will prevail! But we may not
leave Mr. R's first step yet, there is one thing further, which demands our
notice; namely, what Mr. R. says of Adam, after allowing, that it was referred
to him, to determine his own character, etc. he adds, It is certain, however,
that Adam had not that liberty of indifference, that self determining power,
that power of originating volitions, which is urged by many as being essential
to moral agency, and necessary to render the volitions and actions of men
worthy of praise or blame. Because such power and liberty is no where to be
found, in men, Angels or the Deity; the very notion being absurd. Reply, Who
determined Adams will to eat the forbidden fruit? If he did not determine it
himself he is most unjustly charged with sin. If he did determine it himself,
he had a self determining power. Is it indeed absurd to say, that Deity has a
self determining power? I verily thought all who, believe there is a GOD; would
allow him such a power. For if he be the first cause, how can his volitions, be
determined by any cause antecedent or extrinsic to himself? and of divine
volitions, are not determinmined by an extrinsic cause, as they cannot be in
the first cause; then Deity; if he be the first cause, has a self detering
power. And this power GOD has given to me, and every other man; by which I and
all other men, determine our own volitions, i. e. we ourselves will, or choose,
we are agents in choosing, and not mere passive beings. On second thought, Mr.
R. may think best to allow a self determining power in the Deity. And I do now
tell him, that I claim this power for myself, in common, with all other men;
and shall do so, until he shall prove it an incommunicable attribute in the
Deity; and when ever he shall do that, I shall be quite able to prove, that
there is no second being that is an agent. I come now to take notice of Mr. R's
second step.

2. The work of redemption by CHRIST has opened the way to prevent the
destruction of the human-kind. But it is ever to be remembered, that the work
Christ finished on the cross, in it self considered, does make no alteration in
the state of men's minds. Reply, it is not reasonable to think that it should;
but when this work, with the design and end thereof, came to be published and
made known to men, by the preaching of the gospel; it was reasonable to believe
it would make an alteration in the state of men's minds; and the history of the
acts of the Apostles informs us that it did so. Mr. R. says, The bias of their
minds while unregenerated is only in favor of sin. Reply, by unregenerate, I
suppose Mr. R. means men in their natural state; and would be understood to
affirm with regard to all such, that the bias of their minds is only in favor
of sin. But what is this, but to slander human nature? Will Mr. R. say, that
there are in the nature of man principles of sin? It so, they must be created
in and with our nature by GOD; or the production of some evil being, who is in
part the author of our nature; which is no other than the Manichean mistake.
How contrary is Mr. R's proportion now under consideration, to St. Paul's
doctrine, Romans ii. 14, 15. For when the Gentiles which have not the law, do
by nature the thing contained in the law, these having not the law, are a law
unto themselves: which show the work of the law written in their hearts, their
conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing, or
else excusing one another. Here the Apostle shows, 1. That those who are
without the written law, have a law written in their hearts, which is a self
law, or rule of action to them. 2. That this self law, agrees with those
things, written in the law of GOD; so that men naturally do the things
contained in the law. The spark of reason in man, showing the same light, in
its narrow sphere, as the immense ocean of intelligence in the father of
Lights; the mind of man naturally harmonizing with the mind and will of GOD.
The Apostle demonstrates this by three arguments, 1. The virtuous actions of
some heathen, who have no guide but nature, prove, that by nature they know
what is right. 2. The force of conscience in them, secretly reproaching them,
for their wicked actions. 3. Their debates among themselves, and mutual
accusations, or vindications of their conduct. Mr. R. says of natural men, "The
bias of their minds is only in favor of sin." St. Paul says they do by nature
the things contained in the law. I prefer St. Paul's account of human naure, to
Mr R's. Mr. R. adds, certainly it is not in favor of holiness. "By holiness I
suppose Mr. R. means obedience to GOD's Law. Now, St. Paul says, in the text we
have been considering, that man do by nature the things contained in the law.
How then, can Mr. R. be certain, that men's minds naturally are not in favor of
holiness? The law is holy, and men do by nature the duties it requires. Why his
reason for this follows, in these words, For then there would be no need of
being born again. And our Savior did not preach and inculcate the truth when
he said, except a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of GOD. Reply, by
being born again, I suppose Mr. R. means what i^ commonly called conversion, or
a means being turned or turning from sin to holiness. And if so; I would ask
how our Savior's making this a necessary qualification for heaven obliges us
to believe, that the minds of unconverted men are only in favor of sin: and
certain that they are not in favor of holiness? He that came to our Lord to be
taught the way to eternal life, when directed to keep the commandments, could
say all these have I kept. Jesus beholding him loved him, Mark x. 17 -- 21. It
is true, Christ tells him, that he lacked one thing; but surely he did not lack
every thing.

I think it very reasonable to suppose, that the minds of those born in
christian countries, and favored with a religious education; from their youth
up, are averse to the ways of sin in general, and in favor of holiness. And
yet they may need conversion from some one way of sin in order to their
entering into the kingdom of GOD. Mr. R. concludes that, Were the decision,
left to men themselves, as the case now stands -- the consequence would be no
salvation: but destruction to the whole race: notwithstanding what Christ has
done. Reply, those who believe this conclusion, must necessarily look upon all
concern about their eternal state; as meddling with what belongs not to them.
If Mr. R's scheme is right, all instrumental religion is but a farce. What can
more effectually destroy religion, than such a conclusion, believed and
practiced upon? But when it is seen, that flander and misrepresentation, are
the grounds on which it stands, it is hoped that it will not have weight with
any.

We see now, that Mr. R. has gained nothing by his second step. His 3d and 4th
are so interwoven that we will take them together.

3. The way of recovery and salvation by Christ being revealed, offers made and
calls given to men: should it be conceded, that some may possibly be prevailed
upon to accept the proposals of the gospel; without any special supernatural
influence to change their hearts, and captivate them to the obedience of
Christ: yet it must be uncertain, whether any would comply, it might turn out
so in event, that Christ should not see his seed.

4. This will lay us under a necessity of maintaining that GOD (with awe may it
be spoken) has projected a vague plan -- a plan some of the most important
parts of which are undetermined -- a plan full of uncertainty -- the event of
which himself could not know beforehand; -- for if there is no certainty who
shall, and who shall not be saved, it cannot be known who shall share the
saving effects of divine mercy. Because the previous certainty of an event is
implied in the knowledge or fore knowledge of the event. For to know that an
event shall take place, when it is uncertain that it will take place, and may
never take place, is a contradiction in terms. Reply, If I understand Mr. R.
here, he means to affirm, that the suspension of special supernatural
influence, leaves it uncertain, even to GOD; whether any who enjoy the gospel,
would comply with its terms and be saved: to suppose therefore such a
suspension, is the same as to suppose, GOD's plan of salvation, to be vague and
unsettled, the event of which himself could not know beforehand.

Reply, I will a little examine Mr. R's notion of supernatural influence, and
then enquire how the suspension of this supposed influence, makes it uncertain
with GOD whether any among men would comply with the proposals of the gospel,
and be saved.

1. I am to examine Mr. R's notion of supernatural influence. Now as it is
supernatural; it must be something that does not belong to man's natural
composition, but is above that. Here it may be proper to ascertain the natural
state of man, and the powers he has given him by his creator; that we may the
more easily discern, what he wants of supernatural power or influence, or
whether any at all; in order to his doing his duty. By man in his natural
state, I mean, man considered barely as man, and as the kind has been
propagated down from Adam to this day; without any thing superadded. And the
term man, I think conveys an idea of a body fitly organized and formed as our
bodies in the general are, and that this body is actuated by a mind, whose
principle faculties are intelligence and activity. Intelligence, by which it it
capable of thinking or taking in ideas, of reflecting upon things past,
present, of to come; according as it has received information from abroad, and
of looking into the nature and the consequences of things, and so forming a
judgment of the fitness or unfitness of actions; and a faculty power of
self-motion or action, by which it moves and directs the body in that way, and
to serve such purposes, as it intends. And as this is an idea, which I suppose,
is fixed to the term man; and arises from the human composition; so that
composition is the effect or produce of nature, and not of any supernatural
influence, which operates above, or contrary to those laws. And as man is thus
naturally compounded, is he is hereby constituted a moral agent, i. e. he by
his natural composition, has power or is at liberty for the choosing or
refusing, for the doing or avoiding, either good or evil; and, as such he is
accountable for his actions, being capable of approving or disapproving himself
to GOD his maker; in the use of those talents committed to his trust.

Now as man is naturally thus fitted for actions, for what does he need
supernatural influence? Will any say that supernatural influence is necessary,
to enable man to perform the duty which GOD requires of him. I answer,

1. This is to reflect, and most severely censure the wisdom and goodness of
GOD, in giving laws to his creatures.

2. This is to destroy the binding force of the law, and fully justify the
transgressor, for no law can bind beyond the ability of those to whom it is
given; nor is any man to blame for breaking a law that he cannot keep.

3. Whatever is done by supernatural influence, is not ^f the nature of
obedience or virtue. The command is ^upposed to be given to man, but he has no
power to ^bey; obedience is performed by GOD; and to him that ^orketh is the
reward due; and consequently, it is not ^n, but GOD himself, which in the
fitness of things, is ^he proper object of reward, in this case. By a
supernatur^l influence B^alam's Ass spoke and reasoned; but will any ^mpute
virtue to the beast? I have ever supposed, that those who talk about
supernatural influence, use words without ideas. I never saw any that would
pretend, that, ^his supernatural influence they plead for, adds any new ^mber
to the body, or new faculty to the soul. Hence ^il the good or evil a man ever
does, he does it by that ^bility which arises from his natural composition.

Furthermore, this supposed supernatural influence, ^ither destroys man's
natural liberty or it does not: if it does not destroy natural liberty, men may
use it to bad purposes as will as their natural powers. If it does destroy
their liberty, then surely there is no more religion ^n any thing they do by
virtue thereof, than there was in ^he fishes swallowing up and vomiting out the
Prophet, ^y supernatural influence. I know some are fond of depreciating the
natural ability in man, and crying up that which is supernatural, ascribing all
the good man does to a supernatural power. But surely they forget that man's
natural powers are as truly derived from GOD; as any thing he can receive which
is supernatural. How then can men think that they give great glory to GOD, by
undervaluing the natural abilities of man? When we consider, that whatever is
done, by this supposed supernatural influence; as it is really above man's
agency, so he has no hand in it; it is done by another, and the man not one whit
the better, or more deserving on that account: But like the crow that fed the
Prophet, by supernatural influence, yet a stranger to christian charity, and
destitute of a gospel title to its rewards. I say, when we consider this, is it
not strange to hear men speak of supernatural influence, so very respectfully?
should any say that by supernatural influence, they do not mean GOD's acting
without the agency of man; but GOD's co-opperatin^ with man, and thereby
enabling him to perform the good, which without such a cooperation, he could
no^ do. I answer, that this has, I believe been the case i^ some instances; But
generally it is not so. Sampson b^ the co-opperation of GOD, broke his cords
and with the jaw bone of an Ass slew a thousand men; but such instances are
very fare.

Men do good generally by their natural ability, with out any such
co-opperation of GOD. And let it be remembered here, that if GOD does co
opperate with man at any time, yet this does not add to the virtue or goodness
of the being he co-operates with; because the virtu^ or goodness of any agent
arises from the right exercise o^ such power, as is exerted by his own will and
agency an^ not in the exercise of such power as is exerted by the will and
agency of another. If it should be urged, that, by supernatural influence, man
does not receive any new ability, strictly speaking; but he receives a
disposition, to make a right use of the ability that he has, which disposition,
he would not have, without a divine supernatural influence; but would be
disposed to the contrary. I answer, the strength of this objection lies in the
improper use of the word disposition; and in order to remove it I would
observe, that we have before shown, that intelligence and activity are
necessary to constitute a moral agent. And as motive, which takes place in the
understanding, and which is the product of intelligence, i^ necessary to
action, because the active faculty will not be exerted, without some previous
reason to dispose the mind to action: hence it appears, that, when a man is
said to be disposed, to one action rather than another, nothing is intended
thereby but the prevaling influence, that one motive has upon a man to produce
action, above what all others have to produce the contrary. For a motive is the
ground and reason of action, so the motive that prevails disposes the agent to
act. And every motive is what it is in its self, either good or evil,
antecedent to, and independent of any divine determination concerning them.
When therefore, it is said that man cannot make a right use of his ability,
except GOD by (...) supernatural influence gives him a disposition; the ^erm
disposition, must signify either, 1 The giving a power to distinguish betwixt
one motive and another, and so to judge of their moral fitness or unfitness; or
a A power to act from right motives, when such are present to the mind: or 3
The presenting such motives to the mind, as are necessary to excite to right
action.

Now if by a disposition is meant either of the two first, it is false to say,
that man would not have a disposition to make a right use of the ability he has
without supernatural influence, because what is here supposed to be given by
supernatural influence, is what man has by his natural composition; and that by
which he is constituted a moral agent, as I have shown above. Take away these
powers or either of them, and men are no more subjects of moral government, or
accountable for their actions, than the beasts of the field. But if by giving a
disposition is meant the presenting such motives to the mind, as are necessary
to excite to right action, and that such action cannot take place, except those
motives are thus presented. Then I answer, it is true that a good and virtuous
action cannot take place without a proper motive to excite to it, and that GOD
may, and I believe often does, kindly interpose, and by his holy spirit,
present proper motives to the mind, which motives so presented, become the
ground and reason of good action often times. But then it is to be remembered,

1. That such an interposition, of the father of spirits to assist our minds,
is not, always necessary to right action, because the fitness or unfitness of
our actions in general, is plain to be seen, without such help.

2. When GOD does at any time interpose and by his holy spirit present motives
to the mind, this divine opperation, is not the physical, nor the moral cause
of the right action that follows. For as the fitness of the action arises from
the nature of things; so our seeing that fitness, and acting agreeable to it,
is no other than the exercise of that ability, which arises from our natural
composition; and all that GOD does is only instrumentally making that motive
present to the mind, which is the excitement t^ right action: which motive
might have been presente^ some other way, and if it had, it would have produced
the same action. So that, strictly speaking GOD never gives any disposition at
all but it is wholly by the exercise of men's natural powers that they are
disposed this way or that.

Furthermore, should any say, that though man, i^ his natural capacity, is an
agent, yet his agency is confined to things natural and rational; but as to
things spiritual, he has no agency, until by a supernatural influence, he is
put into a capacity therefore. This I suppose is Mr. R's real sentiment, if I
can understand him; and in several parts of his discourse, more or less clearly
expressed.

See p. 18 and 19, In regeneration and sanctification the scriptures ascribe a
peculiar interposition and influence to God. -- According to scriptural
representation there seems to be a peculiar, and what has been called
supernatural influence, in producing holy peceptions and volitions, which
influence is over and above the general influence -- extrinsic exertion,
necessary to prepare the way for perceptions and volitions, to take place in
creatures, i. e. to enable them to understand and choose. -- Sinful exercises
may be conceived of as taking place, without any other kind of influence --
extrinsic exertion, than what is necessary to enable men to understand choose
and act.

If I understand Mr. R. he means to hold forth, that over and above that
general influence of GOD, by which all men are able to understand, choose and
act; there is a special, peculiar, supernatural influence necessary, in order
to men's converting from sin, or becoming holy. By a general influence men can
understand choose and act; as Mr. R. tells us; but they can only understand,
choose and act in the common affairs of life. He does not mean to extend this
power, to religious, holy actions; for with regard to these he tells us, that
supernatural influence is necessary to produce them. So that I think it is
plain, that Mr. R. considers the agency of a natural man to be confined, to
things rational and natural; but as to spiritual things men have no agency,
until by a supernatural influence they are put into a capacity therefore. To
this, I shall in this place, only say, that if Mr. R. and others of his opinion
are right, there must be two sets of powers in man, for the performance of
good, one for temporal and the other for spiritual good. But, to me, this
appears a mere fiction, both reason and scripture agree, that it is by one set
of powers, namely, the human composition, that we perform all good, whether it
relates to this life or a better, and by which we please either man or GOD. The
same tongue with which we bless GOD, we curse men, out of the same mouth
proceeds blessing and cursing, James iii. 9, 10. It is by the same passion of
fear, that men are lead to guard against the evils of this life, and of another.

It is the same natural passion of hope, which excites men to prosecute there
present and future happiness. It is by the same natural power, that a man loves
GOD and his neighbor; which is the fulfilling of the law, and which will
render him acceptable to his maker, and by which he loves any thing, that
renders this life agreeable to him. Only the affection is exercised on
differen^ objects, and to a different degree, and it becomes either virtuous or
vicious as it is exercised upon a proper, or an improper object; or as it is
kept within, or is indulged beyond its due bounds. It is the same natural
active faculty, or power of self-motion, by which a man uses the members of his
body, to commit murder or to save from death. The case is the same with regard
to all the parts of our composition, and with regard to all the good which is
performed by us.

And I do hereby call upon Mr. R. to give a case, in which it will appear, that
the natural man, has not ability to perform any one branch of goodness, that
will render him acceptable to his maker. Our understandings may be enlightened,
by truths brought to their view by the holy spirit of GOD; which otherwise they
might have remained ignorant of, or might not have attended to, and truth thus
presented, may become the ground or reason of action. And if Mr. R. chooses to
call this by the name of supernatural influence, I will not contend about
words. Yet let it be remembered, that this does not in the least affect our
liberty, nor give us any new agency. But man is just the same nature he was
before, in that respect: his actions are performed in the same way, by the same
natural faculties of intelligence and activity, as they were, antecedent to
that illumination. How different soever the ways are, by which man's
understanding receives information, the faculty remains the same, being no more
than a natural faculty. And if action follows a judgment, made up by means of
truth suggested by the holy spirit; that action is performed by men's natural
faculty or power of self motion, exerted and directed by his intellectual
faculty.

Thus I have a little examined Mr. R's. notion of supernatural influence, and
to it appears a mere fiction: As it must, I think be evident to every
discerning person, that it is by man's natural agency, he performs all the
actions which are performed by him. And if he is ever, by another made an
instrument, in matters wherein he has no agency, or that are above his agency,
he is certainly nothing the better for that; there being nothing of the nature
of virtue in it.

2. I come as proposed to enquire, how the suspension of this supposed
supernatural influence, makes it uncertain with God, whether any among men
would comply with the proposals of the gospel and be saved. Were it uncertain
only with men, there would be no inconvenlency in it; as it would be equally
uncertain, whether any one would fail of a compliance and salvation. But if it
be as Mr. R. says, an event which God himself could not know beforehand; God's
plan is vague and uncertain.

Mr. R. tells us p. 37. It is no limitation of divine knowledge to say, GOD
cannot know that which is unknowable. But how does it appear, that, it is a
thing unknowable how men under the gospel will choose and act, without
supernatural influence to assist them? Mr. R. has offered no evidence of this,
only saying, "It must be uncertain," which is far from being satisfactory to
me. Is it not true, that the knowledge of the Deity is uncreated, underived,
self existing, independent of any cause or medium whatever; essential to the
very existence of Deity, and necessarily implied in the very idea of GOD; who
by one simple eternal act of his understanding, knows all things that have
been, that are, that ever will be, and that never will be.

It is evident to me, that Mr. R. supposes that GOD cannot know things properly
contingent, that may or may not be, for ought that he has decreed about them.
Such as the choice, and actions of voluntary agents. And this false notion has
doubtless misled him. If the above definition of the divine knowledge is just;
his mistake is thereby detected. But as this is a matter of the greatest
importance, I will take it up a little more largely. And the contingency of
some events in respect of GOD, may be proved thus; GOD has decreed, that all
his creaturs should ordinarily work according to their several kinds and
endowments, by which he in the creation distinguished them. For illustration,
they may be ranked into three several forms. In the lowest stand the mere
natural agents, inanimate and senseless creatures. To these God has given
certain instincts and inclinations, by which they are determinately swayed to
these or those certain effects and operations, unless they are outwardly
hindered; for heavy bodies cannot choose but defend, fire cannot choose but
burn.

In the second stand the sensitive creatures, beasts, sowls, fishes, etc. to
these GOD has given sense and knowledge to discern what is good for their
nature, and what is bad; and among many goods, to prefer that which is best, he
has given them also a free appetite, or a kind of sensitive will, by which
they may either freely prosecute, or avoid, such objects as they like or
dislike; not determinately tied to this or that operation, as the other were. A
stone cannot but descend, but a beast may as well go up hill as down. In the
upper form are men, reasonable creatures, whom GOD has made more voluntary
than the other, by giving them greater freedom of choice, and presenting unto
their more elevated knowledge, a greater variety of objects. Now, without
doubt, GOD has distinguished his creatures in abilities and faculties, that
they might operate in their several kinds; that the natural agents might work
naturally, the voluntary, voluntarily. The truth of this I think no man will
deny explicitly; but see the consequence which follows most undeniably.

If GOD has decreed, that many things should be done voluntarily by his
creatures; then has he decreed that many things should be done contingently in
respect of him: but the first is granted, therefore the second must. The
connection I prove thus. All things are done contingently in respect of GOD,
which for ought he has decreed, might with as much possibility not be as be.
But all things which are done by the creatures voluntarily, may as well not be
done as done: therefore, if he has decreed, that many things shall be done
voluntarily, he has also decreed, that they should be done contingently. The
minor is evident; because if the creatures may not as well omit them as do
them, they do them not voluntarily, but necessarily. Hence we see, that
contingency is necessary in respect of GOD's will, who will have many things
done voluntarily; otherwise he would never have given his creatures wills. Now
to say, that GOD cannot know things that are contingent, that may be, or may
not be, according to the will of the creature; is the same as to say, that
GOD's knowledge is but finite. For infinity of Knowledge must respect either
the number of objects, or the manner of comprehending them. But as no number
can be infinite, since it may be doubled and trebled: knowledge in this respect
can be but finite. But when we believe, that GOD from eternity decreed that
voluntary agents should have liberty to do, or not to do, and after what manner
they pleased; so that for any necessity imposed upon their actions by him,
whatsoever they omit was as possible to be done, as what they did -- And yet
from eternity knowing whatsoever his creatures would do, or not do, his
knowledge must be infinite, and most admirable. Infinite, not in respect of the
number of objects, for so no knowledge can be: but in respect of the boundless
manner of actual comprehending those things with an infallible foresight,
which in respect of GOD were contingent, their not being as possible as their
being. This is the royal prerogative of divine knowledge: and hence in the 41st
of Isaiah, GOD upbraideth the Pagan deities with this privilege peculiar to
himself. -- From what has been observed, is it not apparent, that there is no
previous or antecedent certainty in the things themselves, upon which the
divine prescience is founded. -- This shows us the weakness and fallacy of Mr.
R's reasoning, when he says, as in p. 37, If there is no certainty who shall,
and who shall not be saved, it cannot be known who shall share the saving
effects of divine mercy, because the previous certainty of an event, is imp^ed
in the knowledge, or fore knowledge of the event.

By certainty here, Mr. R. must mean some medium distinct from the event, and
by which it is made known. But had Mr. R. considered, that the knowledge of the
Deity is an essential attribute; independent of his decree, or any other act of
his own, much less the actions of any finite or created being, he would never
have reasoned thus. I would ask Mr. R. how the Savior knew, that Sodom would
have remained to his day, if the mighty works had been done in it, which were
done in Capernaum? Will he say, the event was certain previous to its being
known! It is very evident to me, that Mr. R. does not consider the difference
between the knowledge of Deity, and our knowledge. It is readily granted, that
such finite imperfect creatures as we are, cannot possibly know that any future
event will certainly take place, unless it be necessarily connected with
something that has a present existence; for all we know, must either be self
evident, or evident by proof, i. e. It must be connected with some cause or
medium known to us at present, from which we can with certainty infer its
future existance. Our knowledge is thus limited and confined, because wholly ^b
extra. We having no innate stock of knowledge. But if Deity cannot know things,
but only in this way, how came he by the idea of possible existence? Upon the
whole it now fully appears, that Mr. R. is greatly mistaken, in saying, "GOD
could not know what would be the event of things in the system." Upon the
suspension of supernatural influence. All therefore, that he infers from hence
about the plan of GOD, as vague and full of uncertainty, is without the least
foundation. Thus I have followed Mr. R. four steps, without geting any nearer,
the point he set out for.

His 5th and 6th steps, have not so much as the shadow of an argument in them,
being wholly recapitulatory, and anticipating a conclusion, from premises that
are doubtful, not to say openly false. His 7th step is introduced thus, p. 38.

7. This dilemma is unavoidable. Either the Deity has no will, no pleasure
respecting the salvation, and damnation of the individuals of the human race,
or his counsel does not stand; unless it be true that he has mercy on whom he
will have mercy, and hardens whom he will, as fully and definitively as has
been mentioned. Reply, GOD has a will and pleasure respecting the salvation
and damnation of men, and has revealed and published it in his word; namely,
that the righteous shall be rewarded, and the wicked punished: for he will
render to every man according to his works. Which revelation, of GOD, is openly
contrary to the sentiment advanced by you, and if true yours must be false. Now
Sir, what becomes of your Crocodilinus? But it seems you were aware of the
weakness of your dilemma; for a little below you say, And for any to urge, that
the divine will is conditional. There is nothing definititvely fixed in the
divine mind respecting the individuals that shall be saved, or that shall
perish, only this in general: He is resolved to have mercy on all that repent,
and to harden and destroy all those who remain impenitent. And this being the
sum of his will and counsel: he not only has a will in the matter; but his
counsel must stand, let it fall as it may with the individuals of the human
race. I say to urge this, will afford no relief.

But pray why does it not afford relief? Why does it not destroy your dilemma?
You have a pretended reason ready, we will attend to it. Because repentance is
implied in GOD's having mercy on any in the sense of the text. Reply, Unhappy
for you Sir, that you had not known the meaning of your text, before you
undertook to preach from it; and I fear it may be so to some of your readers.
But as I have fully proved, that the text has no such meaning as you give it;
that it was what could never come into St. Paul's mind when he wrote it; as it
lay quite wide of his subject: you must look up some better reason in future,
or people will think that the divine will may be conditional. Thus we have
followed Mr. R. seven steps, and are quite as far from the point, as when we
set out. His eighth and last step follows.

8. Therefore on the whole, since a denial that it belongs to GOD -- is his
essential prerogative, to have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and to harden
whom he will; is so full of weakness and absurdity. Since there are no other
beings to whom it does or can belong. And since the admission of this sets GOD
upon the throne; subjecting the materals of the intellectual world, to his
authority and will. And in fine leads us to see how his own, which are the
wisest and best ends, may be certainly and infallibly accomplished. We ought to
be established in a clear conviction, and full persuasion of this great truth:
that it belongs to GOD, is his essential prerogative, to determine the
character, and dispose of the eternal state of men; in holiness, and salvation;
or in sin and damnation according to his own good pleasure. As here is no
argument offered, I shall reply by only saying. Therefore on the whole, since
we see a gentleman of fine learning, of good discerning, of mature age and
judgment, devoted to study and find out truth, and discover it for the benefit
of others; and under the best advantages so to do: so completely baffled, in
his endeavors to prove, that it does not belong to men, to determine their own
state and condition in the world to come. We ought to be established in a clear
conviction, and full persuasion, that this good Gentleman did really undertake
a forlorn hope. And have our minds prepared to receive evidence to the contrary
to which I shall now proceed as proposed. I have attended Mr. R. in his
struggle, to prove that it does not belong to men, to determine their own
character and state in the world to come; and find him wholly failing. But this
is not to be wondered a^, since what he undertook to prove is against both
reason and scripture; and renders them both wholly useless unto men as bound
for eternity.

I will now undertake to prove the contrary; a task I should not have thought
of undertaking, had not Mr. R. denied it. But I am apprehensive of no
difficulty, but what will arise to me, from the propositions being to near a
kin to a self-evident one; that it may be difficult to find proof clearer than
the thing to be proved. However I will try with Mr. R. help to set this matter
beyond dispute. I am greatly obliged to Mr. R. for saving me the trouble, of an
enquiry into the liberties and privileges of the first man; by freely
acknowledging, that what he calls an essential prerogative of Deity; and what
Deity could not divest himself of, was actually transfered to him; and that in
a more full, ample and extensive manner, than I could desire.

Now that it does belong to men themselves to determine their own character and
eternal state; I offer the following arguments as proof.

ARGUMENT 1. If the divine favor and acceptance depends wholly upon what men
do: It belongs to them to determine their own character and eternal state. But
the divine favor and acceptance depends wholly on what men do -- Ergo --

Mr. R. has made it unnecessary for me to say any thing about the first man;
but if we may receive for truth what Moses has related, concerning GOD's
treatment of the second man, my argument is fully established, from one single
text of scripture; namely, that in Genesis iv. 7, If thou do well, shall thou
not be accepted? and if thou do not well, sin lies at the door. The context
tells us that Cain and Abel brought their offerings -- That GOD had respect
unto Abel and to his offering: but unto Cain, and to his offering he had no
respect. This made Cain very angry, and his countenance fell, upon this
therefore Almighty GOD condescends to reason with him as in the text. -- Here
the great GOD lays down the rule of judgment, that rule by which he would
proceed in distributing rewards and punishments to men. And it is done in such
a way as to show that Cain was fully acquainted with this before, and knew well
the terms of acceptance with GOD; for it is put by way of question, which is a
pointed way of speaking, and suppose the case to be quite plain. If thou do
well, i. e. If thou had brought such an offering, as thy circumstances
enabled thee, and as might be justly expected from thee; and with such a temper
of mind, as thou might and ought to have done, and as thy brother did.
Should thou not be accepted? Yes, surely, it would have been wrong, unjust
and unequal in me to have rejected thee and thy offering; and this thou do
fully know. And if thou do not well, i. e. do evil, when thou hadest
power and wast at liberty to do the contrary, Sin lies at the door. Thou
ought in all reason to expect to reap the fruit of thy folly and wickedness;
thy resentment therefore is most unreasonable.

I ask now, why Almighty GOD made this difference between these two brothers
and their offerings? The answer must be, because one did well and the other
ill. I therefore say, if we may receive for truth what Moses has here related,
it is certain that it did belong to Cain and Abel, to determine their own
character and eternal state. And consequently to the whole posterity of Adam,
to the end of the world. The divine favor depending wholly on the improvement
men make of the talents committed to their trust; it belongs solely to them to
determine their eternal state.

ARG. 2. If GOD sets life and death before men, and leaves it to them to choose
either: it belongs to men to determine their own character and future state.

But etc. -- Ergo --

If we may credit the writings called sacred, this argument may be fully
supported from many passages in them; particularly Deuteronomy. xxx. 15, 16, See I
have set before thee this day life and good, and death and evil; in that I
command thee this day to love the Lord thy GOD, to walk in his ways, and to
keep his commandments, and his statutes, and his judgments, that thou may
live. Verse 19, I call heaven and earth to record this day against you that I
have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore choose life
that both thou and thy seed may live.

ARG. 3. If GOD promises life to the righteous, and threateneth death to the
wicked: it belongs to men to determine their own character and future state.

But etc. -- Ergo --

The sacred writings are full of promises to the righteous, and threatenings to
the wicked. One instance may suffice. See Isa. iii. 10, Say ye to the righteous
it shall be well with him* for they shall eat the fruit of their doings; v. 11,
Woe unto the wicked; it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands
shall be given him. But none can be righteous but by doing right, or wicked but
by doing wrong. 1 John. iii. 7, He that does righteousness is righteous. It is
men themselves therefore, that determine their own character and eternal state;
and none other can do it for them.

ARG. 4. If GOD requires obedience of men, as a condition of his favor and
eternal happiness, it belongs to men to determine their own character and
eternal state.

But etc. --

The sacred writings assure us that GOD does require obedience of men in order
to happiness. Acts xvii. 3. GOD now commands all men every where to repent.
Romans ii. 6, 7, 8, GOD will render to every man according to his deeds: to them,
who, by patient continuance in well doing, eternal life; but unto them that do
not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath. Therefore
it belongs to men to determine their own character and eternal state.

ARG. 5. If men will be finally justified, or condemned by their works, it
belongs to men to determine their own character and eternal state.

But etc. -- Ergo --

If the draught and scheme our Lord has given of the judgment of the great day,
in Mat. xxv. 31 -- 46 may be relied upon for truth my argument is fully
supported. I have founded all these arguments, upon scripture; thinking it
would be more agreeable to reading in general; as the scriptures are by most
people, in our country, considered as a good history of divine revelation. But
it is quite as easy to demonstrate from reason, without the aid of scripture;
that it belongs to men to determine their own character and eternal state. That
it is utterly unfit, yea, in the nature of things impossible, that the
character and state of men should be determined by any other than themselves.
As must appear I think (...) every one, that considers what is meant by the
term man. I come as proposed, 5 To consider Mr. R's answers to objections
against his doctrine.

OBJ. 1. The preceding representation must necessarily be contrary to truth,
and is really chargeable with blasphemy: for it makes GOD the author of sin.
Mr. R. allows that if by author of sin, is meant acting, loving sin, or being a
sinner, to say that GOD is the author of sin would be full of blasphemy. And
any scheme any sentiment fairly implying this, ought to be rejected with the
greatest abhorrence. That the preceding representation is contrary to truth I
have proved already. That it is full of blasphemy and ought to be rejected,
according to Mr. R's own confession, I will now prove. By making it fully
appear, that Mr. R's scheme, does really make GOD the actor or doer of all sin.
And that it does so, all must see, when they take into view the whole quantum
of liberty that Mr. R. allows unto men. This we find in p. 43, 44. Men are not
machines, are not acted like machines when they are hardened in sin: for they
are voluntary, they move and act of choice, whereas in a mere machine there is
no volition. It is acted upon but does not act, does not put forth any
exertion. There is then an essential difference. A mere machine cannot exercise
liberty, cannot be to blame, because it has no design, no volition. But GOD in
hardening sinners does not influence them in any such manner, as to prevent sin
being their own act, or to prevent their acting of choice, and because they act
voluntarily, respecting that which is evil and and make the evil their own,
they are to blame, are wholly without excuse, sinners are not compelled to do
wickedly, whatever extrinsic influence there is in the production of volition
it is not of the nature of compulsion. For we mean by compulsion, that power
which effects a thing against or at least without our will or consent. The most
hardened sinners are, to all intents moral agents and accountable because they
act freely.

According to Mr. R. all the difference between men and machines, is, that men
choose, or act of choice, but a mere machine does not. He tells us that men are
not acted like a windmill, because they act of choice, and the whole amount of
liberty he allows men is liberty of choice; and because they act voluntarily,
he says, they are to all intents moral agents and accountable; and because they
choose that which is evil, he fixes blame upon them.

But are any so blind as not to see that the beasts of the field, and the birds
of the air, enjoy liberty in as full, complete, and ample a manner as men,
according to Mr. R. for they will and choose what they do as really as men; and
it may with as much truth, be said of them, as of men, that they do as they are
pleased to do. That they act freely, voluntarily and with liberty. But I never
supposed until I read Mr. R's discourse, that they were accounted by any to be
moral agents. But supposed that they were considered as without blame, because
they had no power over their volitions. They being effects produced in them by
the operation of causes, not within their governing command. So likewise mad
men, their actions are voluntary, they do nothing but in consequence of
previous will and pleasure; but who, except Mr. R. ever thought they were moral
agents, and their actions morally good or evil! Now what is the reason that
men, 'till Mr. R. appeared in print, have thought so differently of the actions
of distracted men, and others who have the full use of their mental powers? ^hy
the true and only reason is, the former are hurried on to volition by a wild
impetuous, over which they have no power; but the latter have it in their power
to restrain and govern their wills and choices.

We feel in ourselves, not only a power to will, but a power over our
volitions; and such an one as enables us to direct, suspend, overrule, or put
an entire stop to them: nor, unless we were possessed of this dominion, could
we be agents; however great liberty might be allowed us in bringing into event
what we have previously willed. It is essential to free agency, and such a use
of it as to make us capable of good or ill desert, that our volitions upon
which our actions follow, should be within reach of our command. The plain
truth is, such a power in men as will make them causes, real proper causes of
their volitions, and the effects consequent upon them, is the grand supporting
pillar of the world considered as moral. Take this away, and it at once falls
into desolation and utter ruin. If men's volitions, and their consequent
effects, are the result of invariable necessity, in virtue of exterior causes
so inviolably connected, as that they will and must come to pass, the author of
this connection, which, according to Mr. R. is GOD, is the only agent in out
world, and the only efficient, and real author, of whatever has been, or shall
hereafter be brought into event; not excluding any of the most complicated
villainies that have been, or may be perpetrated by any of the sons of Adam.

Thus plain it is, that Mr. R's scheme makes the ever glorious GOD, the actor
of all sin and wickedness that ever was, or ever will be in our world. It is
therefore according to his own acknowledgment, blasphemous and ought to be
rejected with the greatest abhorrence.

Mr. R's scheme makes it necessary that GOD should some how or other, be the
author of sin, and hence he labors this, to the utmost of his ability; and
even quite beyond his ability. In p. 41 he says, Certainly, it is too much for
any to say he (GOD) could not possibly have prevented it. Lest some, less
discerning, should be misled by this, and too easily go into the opinion, that
sin does belong to GOD's plan, is really agreeable to his dec^tive will, as Mr.
R. says. I would in the first place observe. That moral evil as distinguished
from natural, is essentially connected with free agency, in the beings upon
whom this guilt is fastened. It Is nature consists in wrong determinations, and
disorderly conduct, which yet are voluntary, and argue a wilful misapplication
of moral and rational powers. Free agents therefore, themselves, and not GOD,
are the sole and proper authors of it. It takes rise entirely from them, and
would never have been but for their corrupt choices, and voluntary perversion
of faculties, which they might have employed to wise and good purposes. And
shall a production wholly owing to creatures, and which never could have
existed, had they not abused their powers, be charged to the ever glorious GOD!
How surprising, that it should ever enter into the heart of any man, that sin
belongs to GOD's plan, is agreeable to his decretive and providential will!
Secondly, I would observe, that since GOD is a being of infinite purity and
holiness, I think he must have prevented sin if he could have done it. Yet let
it be remembered that I have not so much respect to a natural, as to a moral
ability; an ability invariably, guided, in all its exertions, by present
wisdom, and the reason and nature of things.

I think in this sense, it was not in the power of the great first cause, to
have prevented moral defection. If it was, why was it not done? and in what
possible way can the now prevention of it be reconciled with infinite holiness
and goodness? whereas if GOD could not prevent it, in consistency with wife and
fit conduct, it is a good reason why he did not do it. And this I verily
believe to be the case; and therefore differ from Mr. R. as certain as he is,
and think that it is not too much for us to say, that GOD could not possibly
prevent sin. I will give my reasons for differing from Mr. R. in this point;
and submit them to the judicious. If GOD could prevent sin it must be one of
these ways, viz. Either by not giving free agents a place in the scale of
beings; or by making them so perfect as to be incapable of any wrong conduct;
or by interposing at all times, as occasion might require, to hinder the misu^e
of moral powers, in beings that possess them, either in a higher or lower
degree. Now, as to the first, ^h^ (...) agents (...) place in the s^ale of be^,
(...) w^d n^ (...) have reduced the communicative goodness of GOD to a very
pittance, comparatively speaking: and the good enjoyed must have been of the
lowest kind too, for there is no pleasure like that which is intellectu^ and
moral, none so noble and divine in its nature, none so satisfying to the
subjects of it. Further were the^ no mortal agents, there would be no way for
the Deity to manifest his moral glory, which is his greatest. No manifestation
of holiness, justice, goodness, mercy, forbearance, long-suffering,
forgiveness. If no free agents, there could be no virtue, in a word, there
could be no such thing as moral government, without which, the richest displays
of the most amiable perfection could have no place in the creation. This
considered, will it not be thought quite unfit that the blessing of moral
liberty should be withheld. As to the second, viz. by making free agents so
perfect as to be incapable of wrong conduct. But is not this impossible in the
nature of things? As creatures with all their perfections, would yet be finite,
and how intelligent moral beings that are finite should be wholly incapable of
becoming faulty, in any kind, or degree, is beyond all conception, to me it
appears reasonable to think, that the infinitely perfect Being is the only one
that can be absolutely impeccable. But should it be supposed naturally possible
in consistency with wise and fit conduct in the Deity? Perhaps thus speaking it
is not possible. So far as our knowledge extends, it is certain, that
intilligent moral beings are not when they first come into existance, either so
perfect or happy as they may be. But are so formed as to be capable of
progress, both in perfection and happiness; which progress depends much on the
use they make of their implanted powers. Their faculties at first are feeble,
but capable of gradual enlargement, and their enlargement in a great measure
depends on themselves. Neither perfection nor happiness, is communicated to us
independent of our own choice and conduct, but in connection therewith, and in
consequence thereof, and as a reward therefore. And as this is the way that GOD
has chosen to communicate happiness, and we have good reason to believe, that
he saw it the fittest and best way, and being so it was not possible for him,
acting morally, or as an intelligent wise agent, to communicate it any other
way. And I think this appears to an attentive mind, the fittest method of
communicating good to reasonable moral beings. And this reasoning holds good
with regard to all ranks of moral agents. In the scriptures we read of Angels
which sinned, and of Angels which kept not their first estate; which supposes
they were not made happy independent of their own virtuous conduct, but were
made as men are, capable of happiness but liable to voluntary self corruption.
And all ranks of moral beings must be created so, if this was most wise, and
fit, and we have good reason to think it was so. It does not seem meet and fit,
that happiness should be conferred on moral intelligent beings; until they have
gone through some state of trial, wherein they have made the happiness proper
to their natures their own choice.

This is certainly consonent to the notions we most readily and naturally form
of right and fit. And doubtless it did appear to the infinite and supreme mind,
to be the fittest way to communicate happiness to moral beings; and if this was
the real truth, it could not be within the moral power of the Deity, to have
created free agents, and put them at once, without previous trial or
improvement, in a state of full perfection, and confirmed happiness. And if so
they could not have been made impeccable. As to the third and last way possible
to prevent moral defection, viz, by Deity's interposing at all times, as
occasion should require, to keep free agents from misusing their liberty. And
this looks like a moral impossibility, as utterly unfit; in the reason of
things, not being suited to the nature of such kind of beings. Such a kind of
government is well suited to the unintelligent part of the creation, but
unsuitable for moral agents, as it renders their moral agency wholly useless
and and leaves no room for virtue, destroys the moral government of the Deity,
and leaves no difference between them, and mere inanimate beings as to the
Deity's exercising rule over them. And why then should such powers and
abilities be given men, if they were by the interposition of the Deity thus
tendered useless? These things considered, I think it not too much for us to
say that GOD could not possibly prevent sin; since it appears fit that moral
agents should have a place in the scale of beings, and this must be with powers
so imperfect as to import a possibility of their erring, without interpositions
of the Deity to prevent it: which interpositions, could not consist with wise
and fit conduct, because in true construction they would destroy the very
notion of free agency, and with it all foundation for any distinction between
moral right and wrong.

These thoughts accrued to my mind, long since; when studying how to reconcile,
the being of sin in the world, with the wisdom and goodness of GOD, and were a
relief to me, when I knew not as any other person ever thought in such a track.
But upon consulting antiquity I found several among the ancients, who in their
writing have suggested nearly the same thoughts. Among moderns Dr. Chauncy on
the benevolence of the Deity is the best I have read, on the subject; I am much
beholden to him for that ingenious work. And when Mr. R. shall have considered
this subject a little more, he may be less certain that GOD could prevent sin,
or that it does belong to the divine plan.

In p. 40, Mr. R. says, Will the objector insist, that sin in event was not
comprehended in the divine plan. And that GOD meant, every way as much as
possible, to guard against and prevent such an effect? Reply, surely I will
insist upon this. But I cannot admit your consequences, when you say, He may as
well say there was no plan, and there is no divine disposal; and de^y there is
any such thing as moral evil in the system. Gentlemen who undertake to correct
the mistakes of others, certainly ought to exhibit, close, clear and conclusive
reasoning, upon true and well disposed premises. But I am mistaken if Mr. R.
has done this here, I call upon him to show, if he can how these consequences
follow from saying that sin does not belong to GOD's plan. I am sorry any thing
so crude and indigested, should drop from the pen of a Clergyman.

OBJ. 2. According to what has been advanced it is necessary that some should
be hardened to their destruction. If so liberty is destroyed; men are mere
machines; and there can be no reason to impute guilt and blame to them.

Mr. R. allows, a necessity of being hardened but says it is a necessity of a
moral kind -- a certainty: yet this is no such necessity as is opposed to
liberty. It is necessary GOD should act in a holy manner; yet he acts with the
most perfect freedom. And there is a certainty that the glorified saints will
be holy and happy forever; by which their liberty, their moral agency will not
be destroyed or infringed; but confirmed and exalted. What an attempt is here
to reconcile the liberty of men in a state of trial with necessity!

I would ask Mr. R. whether GOD is in a state of trial, or can be tempted to do
evil? Surely this is the case with men. And as to what he says of glorified
saints it is openly false; for if they are now in a confirmed state of holiness
they have lost their liberty, which they had in their state of trial; when they
were not confirmed in holiness. I am ashamed, that such reasoning, if it may be
called reasoning; should drop from the pen of a gentleman of Mr. R's character.
But unlucky for the good gentleman he proposed objections, to his scheme, that
never can be answered. And to me it is wonderful that he did not see that this
objection was unanswerable. But we shall find upon examination, that this is
truly the case with every objection, that they cannot be answered upon his
principles; The first part of the objection respects the destruction of
liberty; and Mr. R. has done nothing to remove it. But before I pass to another
objection, I will attend to what he has to say to the other part of the
objection, viz, Men are mere machines; and there can be no reason to impute
guilt and blame to them. Mr. R. in reply says, Men are not machined, for they
move and act of choice, whereas in a mere machine there is no volition.

But why did not Mr. R. consider, that the cattle on a thousand hills act of
choice as well as men? Mr. R. tells us, If there is no liberty, and moral
agency men are not to blame. But all the liberty he allows men is liberty of
choice, if this makes them moral agents, all the fishes in the sea are moral
agents. Mr. R. insists upon it that, Sinners are not compelled to do wickedly;
and because they act voluntarily they are to blame, are wholly without excuse.
But is it not a truth, and plain to the understanding of every man, except Mr.
R. that, that which makes a man sin by way of necessity, with and not against
his will, is the cause of his sin in a worse manner, than that which
constrains him to sin against his will? I think it will be granted by all
men, that he who by wicked art, draws a man to stab, hang, or poison himself,
is in a grosser manner the cause of that evil action, then he that by force
compels him, because he makes him to consent to his own death. Now if GOD's
decrees do not only make men sin, but sin willingly too; not only cause that
they shall do evil, but will evil; GOD has a deeper hand in men's sins, than
if he forced them against their wills. It is in vain therefore for Mr. R. to
say, Sinners are not compelled to do wickedly, for according to him they are
much worse than compelled. He tells us that GOD has decreed sin, that his
providence orders the occasion; and he at the same time withholds that
influence necessary to prevent sin, so that the sinner is under a necessity of
fining, and in order to make him guilty, he is by the arts of providence
necessitated to will fin! This doctrine makes the sinners condition very sad;
but it is most dishonorable to Almighty GOD. We now see, that Mr. R. by
attempting to remove this objection, has only made bad, worse.

OBJ. 3. The sentence, whom he will he hardens, as it has been stated,
implies a denial of the divine holiness. For the moral law is a transcript of
the divine perfections; discovers the heart the will and pleasure of the Deity.
He there forbids sin upon pain of eternal displeasure, and represents it to be
that abominable thing which his soul abhors. But if sin was comprehended in his
plan and disposal of things, it must be agreeable to his mind that sin should
take place. And it is false to say, he is of purer eyes than to behold
iniquity: for he must according to this doctrine; behold it with complacency
rather than abhorrence; because it is his choice and the consequence of his
disposals.

Mr. R. allows, that if the sentiment advanced does really imply a denial, of
any repugnancy to the holiness of the Deity it ought to be rejected. And
further he allows that sin is diametrically opposite to holiness, is what GOD
must necessarily hate with perfect detestation. But insists upon it, there is
no denial of holiness in saying GOD wills the event. To clear this he proposes
a distinction to be considered, p. 45. A distinction is to made between GOD's
preceptive, and decretive providential will. The Bible teaches us to make such
a distinction. And it is necessary to reconcile what otherwise might appear to
be irreconcilable. A distinction of this kind is evidently implied in what is
said, respecting the conduct of Joseph's brethren, in selling him to the
Ishmaelites -- in what is said respecting the king of Assyria -- and the part
the Jews acted in the crucifixion of Christ. Now were sin in event as contrary
to the decretive and providential, as sin itself is to the preceptive will of
GOD, we may be sure it never would take place, on supposition there was a
possibility of preventing it. And to say there was no possibility is to limit
the divine power. But GOD certainly could prevent it, if no other way, by
withholding existance. And this he no doubt would do rather than sin should
take place, were sin in event, as contrary to his providential as to his
preceptive will.

On reading what has been said above, Mr. R. may think, that it is no
limitation of the divine power to say, that GOD could not possibly prevent sin:
and be less confident that if he could do it no other way, he would by
withholding existence. But in order to set the matter now before me in a clear
light, it seems necessary to look a little into the distinction, which Mr. R.
says is necessary to be made; between GOD's preceptive and his decretive
providential will. And likewise into the meaning of sin in event, as
distinguished from sin itself. And then bring up to view, the sentence, whom he
will he hardens, as it has been stated by Mr. R. and see whether there is in
it any opposition to the holiness of the Deity. I am sorry that Mr. R. has not
plainly told us what he means by these terms, then we should not be liable to
mistake him. However it is likely, he will agree with the Assembly of Divines,
that by the decree of GOD is to be understood, his eternal purpose, according
to the counsel of his own will, whereby for his own glory he foreordains
whatsoever comes to pass. As to GOD's providential will, it is likely he means,
the constant, wise, regular, powerful government of the world by GOD. By the
preceptive will of GOD, he may understand, those commands, laws and rules GOD
has given to men, in his word. As to the distinction, between sin in event and
sin itself, I am at a loss, respecting Mr. R's meaning; but I will venture to
suppose, that by sin itself, he means the sinful action, which the law forbids,
and so is against the preceptive will of GOD the lawgiver. And by sin in event
the result or issue of the sinful action.

As to the sentence, whom he will he hardens, Mr. R. often tells us what it
means, particularly, p. 15. The great question is what are we to understand by,
whom he will he hardens? or in what sense may it be truly said that GOD
hardens any man? This is a tremendously delicate subject. -- And there
seems to be danger on both hands; so that by steering beyond the proper point
to avoid Scylla, we may fall into Charybdis. And this I apprehend we shall do.
If on one hand, we wholly deny any interposition and divine disposal in respect
to the taking place of sin, and a continued series -- a confirmed state in
wickedness, ending in eternal ruin and destruction. p. 16. since GOD hardens
whom he will, it is certain his will, in some sense must be concerned in
hardening men; and the active verb hardens does import some divine agency and
disposal, so that without flat contradiction to the plainest assertion of the
pen of inspiration, we cannot wholly exclude the will and agency of GOD.

After a long discourse of several pages; in order to make out, that the event
called sin, may not require the same agency of GOD for the production of it, as
the effect called holiness, in p. 19. he comes to this conclusion. To sum up
the whole, I think it more safe, and does better accord with the scriptures to
say, that GOD orders the occasion, and for wise and important ends does not
interpose that influence, which in the given circumstances would be necessary
to prevent sin and impenitence; than that he causes sin and impenitence by his
own positive and immediate energy. According to Mr. R. sin, and impenitence in
sin, and the eternal ruin and destruction of sinners, is the effect of the will
and agency of GOD. And to deny this, is to contradict the plainest assertion of
the pen of inspiration. The reader will here take notice, how Mr. R's mistaking
the meaning of the scripture he predicated his discourse upon, has unhappily
lead him into this blasphemous opinion. But to soften the matter a little, he
is willing we should think, that GOD does not cause sin and impenitence by his
own positive and immediate energy; but by his providence orders the occasion,
at the same time withholds that influence, which in the given circumstances
would be necessary to prevent sin and impenitence. But does this at all help
the matter? Is it not true, that he that withholds light causes darkness? Is it
not true, that he that withholdeth a thing, which being present would hinder an
event, is the sole cause of the event? As he that withholds a pillar which
should support a house, is the true cause of the falling of that house. So GOD
by withhholding necessary influence from men, is the true cause of their sin.
It will not help the matter at all to say that GOD by withholding necessary
influence, becomes only an accidental, not a direct cause of men's sins. For a
cause is then only accidental in relation to the effect, when the effect is
beside the intention and expectation of the cause.

As digging in a field is then an accidental cause of finding a bag of gold,
when that event is not intended or expected by the husbandman in digging. But
when the event is looked for and aimed at, the cause (though it be the cause
only by withholding) is not accidental, as a pilot who withholdeth his care and
skill from a ship in a storm, foreseeing that by his neglect the ship will be
lost, is not to be reputed an accidental, but a direct cause of the loss of
that ship. Hence, if it be true as Mr. R. tells us, that GOD has decreed sin
in event, and by his providence orders the occasion, he at the same time
withholding necessary influence to prevent sin, not being ignorant of what will
follow, but knowing it infallibly, determining precisely that which does
follow, namely the impenitence and damnation of sinners, becomes the proper
and direct cause of their sins and their damnation.

That Mr. R. had quite as good affirm that GOD causes sin and impenitence, by
his own positive and immediate energy. Mr. R. tells us that a distinction is to
be made, between GOD's preceptive, and decretive providential will; that such a
distinction is necessary in order to reconcile what otherwise might appear to
be irreconcilable. But he has not applied it, and I know not how to do it. And
for my life I cannot see, either any ground for the distinction, or any help it
can possibly afford. And I do hereby call upon Mr. R. to explain himself fully
upon this head.

Mr. R. tells us, that whatsoever takes place through the system, from
beginning to end, takes place in consistence with the decretive and
providential will of GOD; but sin takes place in perfect opposition to his
preceptive will. But he denies that the decree is repugnant to the command. I
will try to illustrate this matter by what is recorded of David, 2 Samuel xi
chap. I have already observed that if I understand Mr. R. by what he calls sin
in event, and which he says is agreeable to the decretive and providential will
of GOD; he means the result or issue of a wicked action. Now the result of
David's act of adultery with the wife of Uriah, was that she was with child.
This event of David's sin made a part of the divine plan, was what GOD purposed
according to the counsel of his will and foreordained should be. And as GOD's
decrees are powerful and active, his counsel stands and his pleasure is done in
heaven and on earth, providence therefore we may be sure, will bring into event
whatever GOD has decreed shall be. Accordingly in this case providence orders
the occasion; David from the roof of his house, sees the woman, is struck with
her beauty, enquires her out, sends for her, and when they come together that
the eternal decree and purpose of GOD might not be frustrated; GOD withholds
from them both, that influence, which under these circumstances, was necessary
to prevent Adultery. Accordingly David lay with her, and she proving with
child, the eternal decree and purpose of GOD was fulfilled, the end of his
providence answered, and his will done, and David's prayers, if he prayed that
the will of GOD might be done, were now most happily answered. But there is a
precept forbidding this, under the name of Adultery, and threatening death to
the Adulterer; what shall we do with this? The will of GOD decreeing the event,
and ordering such a concurrence of circumstances, as to render the action
necessary to the event eligible, and at the same time withholding necessary
help against temptation, seems not to agree with his forbidding the action, and
under a severe penalty too. It is wonderful to me, that when Mr. R. was making
this discourse, he did not advert to what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. x. 13. GOD
is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what ye are able; but
will with the temptation also, make a way to escape, that ye may be able to
bear it. I hope those whose minds may be filled with horror and despair, on
viewing the character Mr. R. gives of our heavenly father, will advert hereto
and be comforted under all trials.

Mr. R. tells us p. 46. It does not follow, that the decree is in opposition to
the command -- it does not follow, that GOD's will in the former case, opposes
his will in the latter -- it does not follow that GOD has two wills, thwarting
each other. Were there a real opposition, insisting on the distinction would
run us into the Manichean heresy, or what would be as gross. And would even
amount to a denial of divine existence. What is there no opposition between the
will of GOD, decreeing sin, ordering the occasion for it, and withholding from
men that influence necessary to avoid it, and his will forbiding of it? Does
not GOD's will decreeing and ordering sin oppose his will in forbiding of it?
Does it not follow that GOD has two wills, thwarting each other, when he
decrees sin and by his all powerful providence renders it inevitable, and yet
in his law forbids it on pain of death? If GOD's will in all this is perfectly
concordant, as Mr. R. tells us it is; I would pray him to tell us what does
constitute opposition, or occasion things to thwart each other. I would pray
Mr. R. to consider how he will make it appear that David and Uriah's wife
sinned at all, since what they did was but fulfiling GOD's decree, and
complying with his providence, and as to them inevitable, they having no power
to do otherwise, or forbear doing as they did. Mr. R. has told us what he will
say to this, p. 43. And because they act voluntarily, respecting that which is
evil and make the evil their own, they are to blame, are wholly without excuse.
But surely they were not more to blame or inexcusable than Balaam's ass was for
falling down under him. Sin has ever been considered by men, the will to do
that from which we have freedom to abstain. But David and Uriah's wife had not
that influence which was necessary to prevent their doing just as they did, and
consequently necessary for them to do as they did, as necessary as for Balaam's
ass to turn out of the way and at last to fall under him, and as she was beat
most unjustly, so, according to Mr. R. to blame David and Uriah's wife for what
they did would be most unjust. They certainly wanted nothing but a righteous
Judge and they would be acquitted as well as the poor ass; unless men have
hitherto been mistaken about what sin is. Mr. R. tells us p. 46. Sin is
considered by GOD, in his decree and providence relative to it, as being
perfectly evil and hateful. And as such by him to be opposed.

Such a sentence as this, to fall from the lips of a gentleman of Mr. R's
sentiments, is most wonderful! If this be true, then when GOD willed to decree
sin he hated to will it, or willed what he hated! i. e. Choose what he did not
choose! And he must necessarily hate his own decree, and his own providence
that brings it unto event, yea, he must necessarily look upon his own decree
and providence respecting sin, not only as being perfectly evil and hateful,
but as what by him is to be constantly opposed! Mr. R. tells us, p. 45.
Whatsoever takes place through the system, from beginning to end, takes place
in consistence with the decretive and providential will of GOD; but sin takes
place in perfect opposition to his preceptive will. In this sentence these
three things are expressed. 1. That sin does take place. 2. That it is
agreeable to the decretive and providential will of GOD that it should. 3. That
it is yet in perfect opposition to his preceptive will. If this does not make
out two wills in GOD, continually thwarting each other, I think no words can do
it. Mr. R. tells us p. 46. That while the exercise of one and the same will of
the Deity is distinguished, it is and may appear, even to our understandings,
perfectly harmonious. Reply, It may appear so to Mr. R's understanding, but
certainly it does not to mine. How a will exercised in bringing into event
opposites, as sin and holiness, can be hermonious, is to me inconceivable. The
harmony of the will exercised upon opposites, must either destroy the
opposition, or the opposition must destroy the harmony. If the will of GOD
decreeing that Uriah's wife should be with child by David, is perfectly
harmonious with his will forbidding adultery, then when Uriah's wife was with
child by David according to the decretive and providential will of GOD, they
could not be condemned by the precept forbidding adultery, nor could there be
any reason for GOD's being displeased with David, for the thing that he had
done. For this would at once destroy the harmony of the divine will, exercised
in decreeing events and in giving laws; and clearly show that they were
opposite and did thwart each other. Mr. R. must now give up his distinction or
run himself into something more gross, than the mistake of Manes. In p. 47. Mr.
R. supposes, as well he might, that some would ask, Why may not GOD command his
creatures to sin with a view to his own glory, and the advancement of holiness,
as well as decree sin in event with such a view? (to which he answers) To all
that can be urged in such a line, this will be a sufficient rejoinder. That
Paul has obviated and repelled with indignation a similar insinuation, as if it
were a just consequence from the doctrine he had advanced, see Romans iii. 7, 8.
But Mr. R. ought to consider, that there is no similarity between the subject
Paul was discoursing and the subject of his discourse. And although the
objection the Apostle supposes the Jews would make against his doctrine was
without foundation, yet the objection against Mr. R's. doctrine is well
founded, and could he have answered it, I think he would not have made use of
such a mean evasion. Upon the whole, the objection as stated by Mr. R. stands
in full force against his scheme, not only as it implies a denial of the divine
holiness, but as it most evidently makes GOD the only sinner in the universe.
And what he has said under the objection and to remove it, really makes the
matter much worse, than otherwise it would have been. I have therefore his
consent for rejecting the sentence, whom he will he hardens, as stated by him.

OBJ. 4. If GOD has mercy on whom he will, and hardens whom he will, in the
sense that has been stated he is the most tyrannical being in the universe.
For it represents him as exercising an odious partiality in his treatment of
his creatures, as making a multitude of rational beings on purpose to damn
them. And as acting manifest injustice and cruelty in his disposal of things.

To this Mr. R. replies, 1st, by showing that sovereignty and tyranny are not
the same. That although GOD is a sovereign, it does not follow that he is
tyrant. But Mr. R. tells us that God withholds that influence from men, in the
hour of trial, which is necessary to prevent sin, who yet forbids it on pain of
death. Now what makes a tyrant if requiring brick without straw does not? 2d.
Mr. R. tells us that, In making one man unto honor and another unto dishonor,
there is not the shadow of injustice. This might be urged with good reason if
God had, or should devote men to, destruction without any consideration of
their demerits.

Let it be remembered here, that according to Mr. R. GOD not only decrees sin,
but by his powerful providence orders the occasion, at the same time
withholding from men necessary help against sin; so that it becomes absolutely
impossible, that men should do otherwise than they do. Now is it not a plain
case, that sin is an action from which the sinner might abstain. But according
to Mr. R. men can do no otherwise than they do; why then does he talk about
demerit? According to him it is impossible there can be any such thing. Three
things are necessary to make an action culpable. 1. That it be in our power to
do or forbear it. 2. That we be obliged to do or forbear it. 3. That we omit
what we ought to have done, or do what we ought not to have done.

If a tyrant should require me to tell whether the planet Jupiter is inhabited
or not, or to fly to the moon, as one is above my intellectual faculty to
discover, and the other above my active faculty to perform; neither of them can
be my duty. And to neglect them cannot be my sin. According to Mr. R. those
whom GOD hardens have no sin, and if damned as he says they will be; though
they will be most cruelly treated, yet they will surely have a good conscience,
and be eternally assured that could they but have a righteous judge, they
should be honorably acquitted.

3. Mr. R. tells us, No cruelty will be exercised. GOD will certainly inflict
endless punishment upon finally impenitent sinners; yet he does not delight in
the death of sinners. Reply, is it not cruel to inflict endless punishment on
men, for neglecting what they never could do; or doing what they never could
avoid? And does not he delight in the death of men, who damn's them for nothing
but his pleasure?

4. Mr. R. tells us p. 50 that, Hardening some, and saving others does not make
GOD to be a respector of persons, in the sense the scrip^ says he is no
respector of persons. The sentiment advanced is not denied by saying, in every
nation he that fears GOD, and works righteousness is accepted of him:
Because it is true, that they in every nation on whom GOD has mercy do, or
will fear him, and work righteousness. Reply, the sentiment advanced by Mr. R.
is that the exercise of mercy is wholly resolved into the will and sovereign
pleasure of the Deity, see p. 10. The saying refered to, makes the fearing God,
and working righteousness the ground of acceptance. The sentiment is therefore
denied by the saying. No says Mr. R. for In every nation they on whom GOD has
mercy do, or will fear him and work righteousness. Then they are not accepted
because they f^ GOD and work righteousness as the saying affirms, but they fear
GOD and work righteousness because they are accepted! How vain is it for Mr. R.
to try to reconcile his sentiments with scripture. The reader now sees, that
the objection is not in the least weakened by any thing that Mr. R. has said,
but stands in full force against him.

OBJ. 5. The subject, as it has been stated and defended, makes GOD to act in
a trifling insincere manner, and impose upon men in the calls and offers of the
gospel. Because he appears to express great kindness and tenderness toward
sinners, willing rather that they should turn and live; when he is determined
at the same time, to withhold his saving mercy from multitudes, and make them
monuments of his eternal wrath. What possible kindness and sincerity can their
be in offering salvation to any, except those on whom he will have mercy? And
why may it not with propriety be deemed ludicrous to invite and urge all to
come? Using language too which carries the appearance of pathos and zeal, and
proceeding so far as to beseech sinners to be reconciled; when by an
unfrustrable decree he has excluded from a share of his saving mercy, it may
he the greater part of those to whom he makes the proposal and gives the
invitations, so warmly and pathetically urged and enforced? And is determined
that they shall be hardened to their eternal destruction.

Mr. R. replies to this by saying, GOD is perfectly sincere in the offers he
makes and the invitations he gives to sinners. Is as willing all should comply
with his calls, as he is, that all should obey him. But pray Sir, is GOD
willing those should obey him, from whom he withholds that influence necessary
to enable them so to do? Is it not tantalizing men to clog the offers he makes
them with impossible conditions? Two ways Mr. R. attempts to vindicate the
divine sincerity. 1st. by saying, It is sufficient to vindicate the divine
sincerity, that GOD stands ready to fulfill and bestow what is set forth in
the calls and offers he gives and makes, on supposition they are complied with
by sinners: For this is clear and certain, whosoever will may come; and him
that comes Christ will in no wise cast out. There is no decree or divine
disposal to prevent their coming if they will. Here let it be remembered, that
Mr. R. affirms a divine decree and disposal respecting sin and impenitency
therein; and that GOD actually does withhold from men that influence necessary
to prevent sin and impenitency. Now that which disables a man from choosing
good or refusing evil, must destroy his liberty to choose good or refuse evil.
But GOD by withholding necessary influence renders men totally unable to choose
good or refusing evil, and of course wholly destroys all liberty of will. Hence
there is no need of a decree to prevent their coming if they will, for the
liberty of their wills is already totally destroyed; being determined by GOD's
decree, providence and withholding necessary influence. Will Mr. R. say, that
GOD does not take from men the faculty of willing, and therefore they are to
blame for not choosing good; since they attain the power. This is the same as
to say, a Bird retains the power of flying when I hold his wings; or that a man
changed, is free to walk, because he retains the faculty of walking. Mr. R.
must remove out of the way his decrees, before he can vindicate the divine
sincerity in making offers to men. The calls and offers GOD in his word gives
and makes to men, upon Mr. R's principles, appears not a whit better, than it
would in me, should I bind a man hand and foot, lock him up in a house, then
set fire to it, and ask him, why will you stay there and be burnt? As I live I
have no pleasure in your death. Come unto me and you shall not be cast out. But
would not such conduct in me be morking and insulting upon the misery of the
man? But not more so than gospel offers are upon Mr. R's principles.

2d. Mr. R. attempts to vindicate the divine sincerity by saying as in p. 53.
There is the same kindness and sincerity as if GOD knew the offers would be
most cordially accepted. And his having mercy on some by disposing them to
except, is a distinct thing, and superadded to the calls and offers themselves.
Therefore, although it is readily conceded, that much greater kindness is
exercised by GOD toward those on whom he has mercy by making them willing in
the day of his power, then toward those who are not made willing: yet this
greater mercy is not exercised in the calls that are given, the offers that are
made; but in respect to the offers and the arguments used to induce a
compliance, there is precisely the same kindness and sincerity toward all. i.
e. none at all. For if salvation depends on GOD's having mercy upon a person,
and GOD's having mercy on them be a thing distinct from the calls and offers of
the gospel; then GOD in the calls and offers of the gospel shows ^o kindness to
any, as I can see, The Angels quite misunderstood the gospel, and give us a
very false account of it, when they call it glad tidings of great joy to all
people! Mr. R. tells us, GOD might be sincere in making the offer to all on
supposition none did, and not one ever should accept. But your business Sir, is
to show that GOD is sincere in making offers to those he knows never can
accept, and whom he has determined never shall accept. Otherwise you do nothing
toward answering the objection. Mr. R. says, GOD is sincere, serious and
earnest in requiring the subjection and obedience of all those who are in a
state of unregeneracy; although none in that state do yield a cordial
subjection and obedience to his commands, and he knows perfectly well that they
will not. But does GOD know that they cannot? Has he predetermined that they
shall not? Do you mean to grant this in what follows? Also the not doing it,
is as much the result of the divine decree and disposal as hardening whom he
will to their destruction is the result of his decree and disposal.

That the destruction of men is the result of the divine decree and disposal,
you have before declared; here you affirm, that the disobedience of men to
GOD's commands is as much the result of the divine decree and disposal. But
this sir, is what is objected to, and which the objection says makes GOD to act
in a trifling insincere manner in the calls and offers of the gospel. Do
therefore reconcile the divine sincerity in the calls and offers of the gospel,
with such decrees and disposals, or own that you cannot answer the objection.
Your saying that GOD is sincere is not satisfactory to me, I call for proof.
You add, We may as well say GOD acts sarcastically, and tantalizes his
creatures when he requires their subjection and obedience, they being and
remaining indisposed to yield obedience, as that he does so, when he makes
offers, they being indisposed to accept them. Very true when creatures
disobedience is the result of GOD's decree and disposal, he does tantalize,
insult and abuse them by commands, offers etc. as I say; and you offer no proof
to the contrary; yet go about to stop my mouth by dint of authority, when you
say, Who art thou that thus reply against GOD? let thy mouth be stopped; or
surely, thou shall be most justly condemned. This sir, I despise in you, and it
convinces me that you felt yourself weak, or you would never take such a method
to silence objectors. I do not reply against GOD, but against the false
character you ignorantly or wickedly give of the ever glorious GOD. And call
upon you to vindicate yourself from the guilt of slandering the father of
mercies before the world, if you can. But ^as you have nothing to say for
yourself. This objection, therefore like others lies with all its force against
you.

OBJ. 6. This is a gloomy uncomfortable doctrine calculated to bad men;
especially awakened sinners to despair: or else to stif^le their convictions.
The natural tendency of it is to render means and endeavors vain and useless.
For if it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runeth: If the
unregenerate may not lay any claim to saving mercy after all their most painful
seekings and strivings: If there is a certain number on whom GOD will have
mercy, and a certain number whom he will harden to their destruction, to what
purpose can it be to seek and strive? each sinner may say, if I am to be saved,
I shall be saved, and if I am to perish I shall perish, let my exertions be as
they may. And since it is not left to men to determine their own character, and
ascertain their eternal state, but it hangs on a decree and disposal which they
cannot frustrate; let them stand still, and see what GOD means to do, whether
to save or damn; and give themselves no exercise and concern about that which
does not belong to them; and which to say it does belong to them implies a
denial of GOD's essential, inalienable prerogative.

Mr. R. has attempted five answers to this objection, without saying one word
that does in the least degree weaken it, but rather establish it; particularly
by his fourth answer, which is, There is not the least ground from the doctrine
to say, if we are to be saved we shall be saved, let us live as we may, and
whether we take any pains or not. Because repentance, faith, and obedience are
implied in, or will certainly follow the exercise of saving mercy, whenever it
is bestowed upon any.

The objection says, since there is a certain number on whom GOD will have
mercy and a certain number whom he will harden to their destruction; each
sinner may say, if I am to be saved I shall be saved etc. -- all exertions are
vain, especially since it is not left with men to determine their own character
etc. -- Mr. R. says, there is no ground for this objection, because repentance,
faith, and obedience are implied in, or will certainly follow the exercise of
saving mercy, whenever it is bestowed upon any. Now, according to Mr. R.
eternal salvation is connected with GOD's having mercy on any; but GOD's having
mercy on any, depends neither in whole nor in part upon any thing done by them,
or any state of mind they may be in. Therefore, if faith, repentance, and
obedience, do certainly follow GOD's having mercy on any, it is a good reason
why sinners should be unconcerned about faith, repentance and obedience, for as
these will follow mercy, but not at all further it, there is no reason why
sinners should be concerned about them. Every sinner may now say, not only, if
I am to be saved I shall be saved, and if I am to perish I shall perish; but if
I am to have repentance, faith and obedience. I shall have them, and if I am to
remain impenitent, unbelieving and disobedient I shall remain so. That upon Mr.
R's scheme, there is not one whit more reason for any man's concerning himself
about religion, than about the ebbing and flowing of the tide. All that Mr. R.
has done, in his answer to this objection, is to show that sinners have good
reason to be unconcerned about the means of salvation as well as about
salvation itself I Mr. R. says, he apprehends these objections to be the most
considerable that any can advance against his scheme. I do not think so of
them. However I have carefully attended the scuffle he has had with them, and
find them all standing in as good quality, condition and repair as before he
threw a snow-ball at them. And Mr. R. has greatly dishonored himself, by
attempting to answer, that, which upon his plan, is absolutely unanswerable.

6. I come as proposed to make some remarks on Mr. R's improvement of his
subject. The improvement begins, p. 57. And is as follows.

1. From what has been urged and illustrated in the preceding discourse we
may learn the vanity and futility of the objections, commonly advanced, against
the devine decrees. And that decree in particular, whereby a certain number of
mankind were from eternity ordained to everlasting life, called the decree of
election. The doctrine of an eternal decree, in a general view, is discarded by
many. Barely to mention in eternal irrevocable decree fires their indignation;
and more especially to mention and insist upon the decree of election. If GOD
according to the counsel of his own will from eternity, did choose a certain
number in Christ and appoint them to obtain salvation, and pass by the rest;
and that number will be saved and the rest perish. Then say they: He must be a
hateful respector of persons, one who exercises partiality, injustice and
cruelty: Must have a design to make creatures on purpose to damn them, and
sport with their misery and destruction: Must be the author of their sin and
destruction: Events are unalterably fixed beforehand; and being fixed, there
can be no liberty in respect to choosing and acting: men are machines, and
ought not to be blamed: The old heathenish doctrine of fate is palmed upon the
Bible: A great part of mankind have no chance for their lives: And it is as
much an vain for men to seek and strive and exert themselves, as it is to
attempt to alter immutability itself. In a word, men are chained down by
unfrustrable decree; the divine government is an exercise of the most obdious
tyranny: and it is not reasonable, nor possible to love a being of such a
character. It is in a miserable way of reasoning, that such consequences are
drawn, and turned into objections against the divine decree, in general, and
that of election, in particular, they are most not all of them illogical,
unfounded, vain and imp^ious.

Mr. R. has plainly told us his sense of the doctrine of election in these
words, GOD according to the counsel of his own will from eternity, did choose a
certain number in Christ and appoint them to obtain salvation, and pass by the
rest, and that number will be saved, and the rest perish. This I suppose to be
Mr. ^'s own sentiment, or that opinion of the decree or election which he means
to defend. He denies a conditional election, most expressly, p. 39, There
cannot be any conditional decree or determination in the divine mind,
respecting his having mercy on some and hardening others. Mr. R's. opinion then
is plainly this, namely, that GOD from eternity choose a certain number in
Christ, whom he by an absolute decree appointed to salvation; who shall all
infallibly be saved, all the rest be passed by, or left; and they shall
infallibly perish. That salvation was from eternity as certain to all chosen,
and damnation as certain from eternity to all passed by, as GOD could make any
thing.

I shall now undertake to show that all the consequences mentioned by Mr. R. as
drawn from the decree of election, do necessarily follow from his own opinion
of that doctrine as here set down by him. And in doing this, I will take them
separately as they follow.

1. Then GOD must be a hateful respector of persons. That GOD is the judge of
all the earth. That he has given his reasonable creatures a law, or rule of
duty: and required them to obey his commands, promising rewards to the
obedient, and threatening punishment to the disobedient. And has bound himself
to determine their character, reward and punish them according as they shall be
found, keepers or transgressors of the law, that they are under. These are
things which I suppose need no proof. But Mr. R. tells us, that GOD from
eternity did choose some in Christ and appoint them to obtain salvation,
leaving the rest to perish. But is this according to law? He further tells us,
There is a most wide and important difference in the exercise of saving mercy,
it is not bestowed upon all mankind; but upon some only even those upon whom
GOD is pleased to bestow it.

Now if men's characters are determined and eternal state fixed according to
the pleasure of the judge; the law is not the rule. But if a judge favors one
and frowns upon, another according to his own pleasure, is he not partial? Why
were some chosen, when others were passed by? all were equally near, equally
needy, and equally deserving or undeserving. Why then were some passed by and
left to perish? Mr. R. tells us it was the pleasure of GOD. But does not this
to all intents make GOD a respecter of persons? Mr. R. tells us p. 13, that, No
situation -- external circumstances, or even state of mind persons may be in
antecedently to regeneration, ought to be considered as having the least
influence in the divine determination, respecting the bestowment of his saving
mercy. Reply, if the objects of saving mercy were chosen from eternity and
appointed to salvation, as Mr. R. tells us; I can easily believe, that
repenting, confessing and forsaking sin, or any seeking or striving of sinners,
will have no influence on the divine mind to bestow mercy on any. But what does
influence GOD to choose some of his children to be happy and leave others to be
miserable? Their circumstances were exactly alike, and for a judge to favor
one and frown upon another, when in equal circumstances is to have respect to
persons; and what makes it hateful, is that it is contrary to equity. GOD as
benefactor, may give five talents to one and but two to another, without wrong
to any; but as a judge he has bound himself to do right. But to reward some
with life and punish others with death, who are in equal circumstances, must
make him a hateful respecter of persons.

Mr. R. p. 51, proposes the case of a person, Having an estate and no natural
heir, (who he says) might select one, or a few just as he should please, on
whom to confer his estate, and no one would have a right to tax him with being
a respecter of persons, because he did not bequeath it to all without
discrimination. And if such a prerogative is allowed to men, in respect to what
they possess and call their own, shall not GOD bestow his special favors on
whom he pleases, without the imputation of being an odious respecter of
persons? Reply, if the person holding the estate, requires of all, something to
be done, in order to their inheriting his estate, and he gives the necessary
aid to some to do what he requires, and withholds it from others, in like
circumstances he is an odious respecter of persons. And such a one Mr. R. makes
the ever glorious GOD to be, p. 12, 'And where there is a similarity of
circumstances, it is probable, some are saved, others not.'

According to Mr. R. those that are saved are not one whit better or more
deserving than those that perish. They were alike in eternity when the decree
was made; and as to any difference in time, according to him it (...) wholly
effected by a supernatural influence, in which they have no hand, as it is
quite above their agency, and for which they are none the better. That respect
to persons is the sole cause of the original choice and all succeeding favors.

The excellent Bishop Hoadly, on terms of acceptance with GOD, p. 302, has this
true observation, If virtue be nothing but the irresistible operation of GOD
upon us, there can be no reason in the world assigned why GOD should hate and
punish a wicked man and love and reward another: because as to themselves they
are exactly alike. The only difference here supposed is this, that GOD is
pleased after an arbitrary manner, to work upon one: and wholly to pass by the
other. If any parent should heap his favors upon one child, and then show the
greatest fondness to him, merely because those favors have been heaped upon
him, and absolutely refuse to bestow the least degree of the same upon another
of his children, and yet hate and punish him because he had not what he could
not have without his will; would not all the world condemn such a parent of the
most partial fondness, and the most arbitrary proceeding; and attribute it to
nothing but weakness of understanding, or strength of passion? And yet this is
what we are not afraid to lay upon Almighty GOD, when we represent him as doing
all for some, with an irresistible arm, and then loving them for what they have
no part in, and on the other side, as passing by others, and refusing them the
same strength without which they cannot move, and yet hateing and condemning
them for not being what they cannot be, and not doing what they cannot do.

2. 'Then GOD is partial, unjust and cruel.' And is not GOD more favorable to
those of his offspring that he choose, than to those of them that he passed by?
And what is this but partiality? And what is it but open barefaced injustice to
treat thus differently persons in equal circumstances? And what inexpressible
cruelty is discovered toward those passed by? A cruelty which the Devil never
can be justly charged with, for though he seeks to destroy men, yet they are
not his children, but we are the offspring of GOD.

3. Then GOD must have a design to make creatures on purpose to damn them. Will
you say, GOD designed to save those he from eternity passed by? And if he did
not design to save them, for what did he call them into being? I know you tell
us, that GOD by the entrance of sin designed, to display his justice in
punishing some, and his mercy in saving others, see p. 1^ and 27. For your GOD
it seems is equally made up of free grace and free wrath, and so contrives to
bring in sin in order to make himself known to his creatures! But pray consider
how you blaspheme your maker, while you suppose his decree to make it necessary
for his subjects, to trade with hell and Satan for sin and damnation, to the
end he may take advantage out of that commerce to raise an impost, to augment
the revenues of his own glory. A meanness this, which none but tyrants and
bankrupts would ever stoop to!

4. Then GOD must be the author of their sin and destruction. Those that GOD
passed by, you allow must perish, now that sin may seem to be the cause of
their destruction, GOD withholds from them necessary influence to prevent sin;
and so as I have shown, becomes the cause, author and even the doe^ of all the
wickedness that is in the world. And if any are destroyed by sin GOD is the
author of their destruction, according to you.

5. 'Events are unalterably fixed before hand.' From eternity you tell us they
were, which was before creatures existed, and so beforehand, as to them. Surely
you will not pretend, that any of those GOD choose will perish: or any be
passed by be saved; indeed you say the contrary.

6. There can be no liberty in respect to choosing and acting. If as you say,
GOD chose some and passed by others from eternity, it is impossible for men to
choose or act, with regard to their future state; being quite as destitute of
liberty as a stone.

7. Then men are machines, and ought not to be blamed. You deny to man a self
determining power with regard to his volitions. Now as this is the basis of
moral obligation; to talk of moral agency, unless this be first supposed, is to
contradict common sense. We might it is true, without the implantation of such
a power, in our natures, in consequence of a chain of exterior causes, not
within the reach of our control, be made instruments in the production of any
effects which are unavoidably connected with their chain of fatality, should
even volition or choice be one of its links. But free agents we could not be,
and it could never with truth be affirmed of us that we were the producers of
these effects. Mr. R's decree of election, totally destroys moral agency, and
makes all men machines respecting the world to come. True we may be
distinguished from windmills, carts and ploughs, because conscious and
voluntary, whereas they are not. But there is an essential difference between
conscious voluntary machines and agents. An agent must be the efficient cause
of his own volitions and actions. But such we are not, if there be such a
decree as Mr. R. tells of; and therefore at best but machines, and consequently
ought not to be blamed.

8. The old heathen doctrine of fate is palmed upon the Bible. Some among the
Pagan philosophers, in former ages thought, that all effects take rise from a
chain of causes, with the Deity at its head as the only efficient, so
unavoidably linked together, connected with, and dependent on each other, that
the coming of these effects into event, in consequence of the unavoidable
operation of these causes, was not only certain, but absolutely inevitable. And
they considered mankind, with all their powers, as so many links in the
adamantine chain, no one of which can possibly fail in the production of the
effect assigned to it. This is the old heathenish doctrine of fate. And the
very doctrine which Mr. R. labors to palm upon the Bible, under the name of
the decree of election, with regard to sin, he affirms a divine decree and
disposal, and a continued series, a confirmed state in wickedness, ending in
eternal ruin and destruction. p. 16.

9. A great part of mankind have no chance for their lives. You tell us, that
all those passed by will perish, surely they have no chance for their lives,
whose destruction was made certain from eternity by GOD's passing them by.

10. As vain to strive as to attempt to alter immutability itself. If GOD's
decrees are immutable, as you tell 'us they be, the consequence is necessary.

11. 'Men are chained down by unfrustable decrees.' If GOD has decreed as you
tell us, and his decrees are unfrustable; the consequence is necessary.

12. The divine government is an exercise of the most odious tyranny. Most
evidently true, if your decree of election is true.

13. not reasonable nor possible to love a Being of such a character. As to
those passed by, you tell us they will be 'eternal enemies of GOD;' and with
good reason, his character being as you give it. And as to those chosen,
whatever good they may receive from such a being, they can never love, but must
eternally hate his character, because destitute of equity, justice, truth
righteousness and mercy.

I will now by the same 'miserable way of reasoning,' that the foregoing
consequences are drawn, mention some more that dog your decree of election.

If GOD did from eternity choose a certain number in Christ, and appoint them
to obtain salvation, and pass by the rest; and that number will be saved, and
the rest perish.

1. Then the Bible does not give us the character of the true GOD.

2. Then Jesus Christ is falsely called the Savior of the world.

3. Then it is false to say that Christ marvelled at the unbelief of the Jews.

4. Then the preaching of the gospel is one of the most absurd, wicked, and
barbarous things in the world.

5. Then the present state of men in this world is not a state of trial.

6. Then men are not subjects of Law nor concerned in a Judgment to come.

7. Then all care in men about their eternal condition is vain and foolish.

8. Then the work of redemption by Christ has (not) opened the way to prevent
the eternal destruction of the human kind, as you tell us it has, p. 35.

9. Then ministers might as well be sent to preach to stones as to men.

10. Then the testimony of the Apostles unto the Gospel is false.

11. Then all exhortations to men to work out their own salvation are vain.

12. Then no sin that men can commit is damning.

13. Then the Devil is a fool to go about like a roaring lion seeking whom he
may devour. These consequences added to those mentioned by you will make,
twenty-six in number. And now Sir, I call upon you, with all your Logical and
metaphysical skill, to show one of them to be illogical, unfounded, vain and
impious; if you can: which when you shall have done, I will hold myself obliged
publicly to acknowledge my mistake. But here is something that at a distance
looks like reasoning, in page 58. I must take notice of that as I pass a long.
If the divine providence can be vindicated, in respect to things taking place
as they do in fact take place, a divine decree pre-ordaining the taking place
of things as they do take place, will be vindicated of course; for the former
is a full unanswerable vindication of the latter. I will try this reasoning by
a particular instance.

Mr. R. allows that it was refered to Adam to determine his own character and
state. But Adam with these high powers committed to him did transgress and eat
the forbidden fruit. Now how can providence be vindicated in suffering this to
take place? Esily as I think, for since GOD had made him a moral agent, and set
life and death before him, and his own choice and consequent actions were to
determine his character and state, it was fit that he should be left to act for
himself, and unfit that providence should interpose to stop him, and therefore
what GOD could not do; as I have elsewere shown. But does this vindication of
providence in the taking place of this event, vindicate a divine decree
preordaining the event? By no means. For GOD's decrees are powerful and active,
comprehending such means as shall unfrustrably produce the event decreed. But
to affirm this with regard to the first transgression, is to make GOD the
author, and indeed the door of the sin; and frees Adam from all blame. Thus it
appears that providence can be vindicated in respect to things taking place as
they do, when a degree preordaining the taking place of things as they do take
place, cannot; but would be blasphemy to affirm. I am sorry to see such
sophistry made use of, the truth never needs it. Mr. R. tells us p. 58. If man
will object -- let them fault the system and not the divine determination. --
And evince that such a system in the final issue is not a good one. Reply, I
have no objections to the divine plan, I believe it wise, holy, just, and good,
But I object to your plan as totally bad, unscriptural and antiscriptual, unfit
for GOD to reveal or men to believe. And you may be sure Sir, that discourse
contains no part of GOD's plan; if we are to judge of it by God's holy word, to
which you refer us. Mr. R. proceeds.

2. We may learn the obligation men are under to admit the doctrine which
teaches, that GOD is a sovereign in the highest sense, an absolute sovereign.
That God bestows original favors in a sovereign way I have shown. But that he
dispenses rewards and punishments in such a way is what I deny; and what Mr. R.
cannot prove.

He says p. 60, that with respect to men's eternal state, Many will admit no
such thing as a divine determination and disposal, insisting that it is left to
men themselves to determine their own character, and fix their own eternal
state. Reply, I have proved that it is left wholly with men to determine their
own character and eternal estate, you must now therefore take back your call
for the assent of your hearers and readers, to the contrary. Mr. R. proceeds.

3. We may learn the importance not only of assenting to the divine
sovereignty, but also, of being cordially reconciled to it. Reply, It is really
of importance that we cordially submit, to the sovereignty of GOD, in the
difference he makes among his creatures; in bestowing original favors. But as
sovereignty has been explained by Mr. R. we never ought to submit to it. Mr. R.
tells us, The wicked at the day of Judgment will without doubt be fully
convinced of the truth and justice of that sentence, every mo^th be stopped,
etc. But why did he not consider, that his decree of election is absolutely
inconsistent with a day of Judgment; and with the self condemnation of all
those, he tells us were passed by from eternity!

Mr. R. tells us that some, Resent with acrimony the idea of GOD's determining
the character, and disposing of the eternal state of men as he pleases. They
who do thus are the enemies of GOD. I am sorry to see such uncharitable judging
in this good gentleman; and will impute it rather to his pernicious principles
than to his want of a benevolent heart. It is doubtless the duty of every man
to reject the idea, Mr. R. holds up to view, as infinitely dishonorable to the
ever glorious God, and destructive of all religion. Mr. R. proceeds,

4. We may infer, that want of submission to GOD's sovereignty, and the
objections advanced against his uncontrollable dominion must be owing to
something that is criminal and very wrong. True, if the doctrine of the divine
sovereignty be rightly explained. I have no reason to complain because GOD made
me a man, and not an Angel; or because he gave my brother five talents, and me
but two.

5. We may learn what is necessary to remove objection from the hearts of men,
and effect a real reconciliation to GOD. Mr. R. goes on to tell us, that this
is not to be effected by the, Proposal of arguments is and motives, most
opposite and weighty. But why did not Mr. R. consider, that in saying thus, he
reflected upon the wisdom of GOD, in making use of this very method, under
every dispensation, to bring men to be reconciled to himself? Reconciliation to
GOD, Mr. R. tells us, can be effected no other way but by being born of God. I
am sorry he has not told us what he means by being born of God; that we might
know whether we have any part in it or not. If it is something that belongs
wholly to GOD, then we are not to blame that the work is not done; and our
being unreconciled is not our fault. Mr. R. proceeds,

6. The subject presents a criterion by which men may try themselves, and come
to know what manner of spirit they are of, know their true character and state.
Mr. R. proposes that we put it to ourselves, whether it seem proper and fit,
that GOD should have mercy on whom he will, and harden to their eternal
destruction whom he will: and whether we are willing to submit all to his
arbitrament without any reservation. To me, this appears a very strange rule of
trial. In order to know whether I am reconciled to GOD, I must find myself
willing that my fellow creatures should be eternally destroyed, and what is
this but having a will opposed to the will of GOD, who has declared that he
will have all men to be saved! That to be reconciled to GOD my will must oppose
GOD's will! But perhaps Mr. R. may intend GOD's decretive, providential will,
which according to him is in constant opposition to his preceptive will!
Further Mr. R. would have me be willing to submit all to GOD's arbitrament
without any reservation. If so, I see not but I must be willing to be damned
myself, as well as have my neighbors damned. Mr. R. says, 'At this some may
boggle.' I do not wonder he thought some would boggle. But he goes on to say,
If being willing to suffer the damnation of hell is implied in a true
submission and reconciliation to GOD; such willingness would certainly be right
and fit. Reply, considering what a sort of creature man is, it is quite unfit
that he should be willing to be damned. And if such willingness were necessary
in order to reconciliation to GOD, I see not, but it is best man never should
be reconciled to GOD.

In p. 66 Mr. R. tells us plainly what he esteems true submission to GOD. In
true submission men resolve themselves into the will of GOD; and make a
surrender to his disposals with no more than this: it may be he will have
mercy, and if he does not he is perfectly just and divinely glorious. Mr. R.
tells us, that it was the will of GOD from eternity, that some men should be
damned, even all that he passed by. To be resolved into the will of GOD,
therefore, according to him, does imply, 1st. That I am willing that some of my
fellow creatures should be damned. 2d. That I am willing to be damned myself
upon it so falling out, that I am one that was passed by. But is this right?
must I be willing that those for whom Christ died should be damned eternally?
That those whom GOD will have to be saved should be damned eternally? How does
this agree with my duty to love and pray for all? And as to being willing to be
damned myself, it is the same as to be willing to oppose the will of GOD and
Christ.

Furthermore, Mr. R. tells me that in true submission I must say that GOD is
perfectly just, though he does not have mercy on me. At this I shall certainly
'boggle.' For I do not see it to be equitable, that such a difference should be
made, by the great parent of all between the children of his family, and where
there is no equity, there is no justice. I believe it to be unjust and cruel in
the highest degree, to choose one and pass by another, as Mr. R. tells us GOD
did from eternity. But blessed be GOD we have no evidence of such a decree of
election but Mr. R's word; which we count not worth a^ rush, in this case. As
to what Mr. R. says, about our submitting the matter of our salvation to GOD, I
think he is wholly wrong. When we pray for earthly good things, as food,
friends, etc. we ought to pray for these with submission to the will of GOD;
because GOD has not made his will known to us in these matters, otherwise than
in general terms; we ought therefore, to refer ourselves to the will, wisdom
and goodness of GOD, to be dealt with as he sees best for us, in our present
state of education. But not so with regard to eternal life, because GOD has
expressly told us that it is his will we we should have eternal life. To pray
therefore for this with submission as for earthly good things would be to call
in question the truth of GOD's word, which declares GOD willing the salvation
of all men. In prayer therefore we are to consider eternal salvation as what
GOD wills we should have, and what his grace has brought to every man, and what
no man can miss of upon any other terms but his own putting of it away from
him. Upon the whole, it is my opinion, that what Mr. R. calls a true submission
to (...) is what would be very wrong, wicked and sinful for any man to make. As
to what Mr. R. has said about an eternal refusal to submit to GOD, belonging to
the character and state of the damned, who he says will be the eternal enemies
of GOD. I freely own I do not believe it. But be it so, according to Mr. R.
this is agreeable to the will of GOD! But I would pray him to consider how he
can reconcile this opinion of his, to the Apostle, 1 Cor. xv. 26, The last
enemy shall be destroyed, death.

Mr. R's discourse closes with a word of advice to profane sinners, the self
righteous and awakened sinners. I wonder the good gentleman did not consider,
that if he was ever asked a reason for this, he must be silent, or do worse.
Pray sir, how could you be so cruel to profane sinners, as to try to terrify
them with fear of hell, when you know their state was determined from eternity.
And in this discourse you declare that no state of mind has the least influence
in the divine determination respecting the bestowment of mercy? How could you
go about to terrify and trouble the self-righteous, when certainly
self-righteousness is better than no righteousness, and you know that no
righteousness can break up GOD's eternal decrees? How could you caution
awakened sinners against delusions and mistakes, as though they were in danger
from these? When you know, that all that GOD chose from eternity must be saved,
and all he passed by must perish? Had you been consistent with your self, you
would have told the profane, never to admit fear or care about their future
state. The self righteous, to persevere in their self righteousness, as it was
good and profitable unto men. And the awakened you would have soothed as much
as possible, and plainly told them that their fears were quite fruitless.

7thly. I shall conclude as proposed by a letter to the Rev. Mr. ROBBINS.

REV. SIR, as you submitted your discourse, to public inspection, you will not
be offended with me that I have examined it. Had I not Judged upon reading of
it, that it was most dishonorable to GOD, injurious to religion, and greatly
encouraging sin, I had not taken such notice of it as I have. I have constantly
endeavored to understand your true meaning; and am not sensible that I have in
any instance mistaken it. I am a total stranger to you, otherwise than by
reading the discourse that is now before me. Most certainly Sir I read your
discourse without any prejudice against your person. But perhaps two men
professing Christianity never thought more differently from each other than we
do. But although I look upon your discourse, taken connectively as not
containing one word of truth in it; yet I am willing to consider you sir, as
one that truly fears GOD, loves the truth and would knowingly do nothing
against it. Dr. Williams says of Dr. Crisp, that he believes he was a pious and
Godly man: that his life was a contradiction to his doctrines; that the grace
of GOD preserved his heart from being corrupted, by his wicked blasphemous
opinions. I am willing to have the same opinion dear sir, of you; and would
treat you accordingly. We are here in a dark state, and know but in part; I
would ever be jealous of myself, that I may be wrong, willing to see my own
mistakes, and make all charitable allowance for the mistakes of my brethren. I
am satisfied that you think, or did when you published, that your opinion was
right and would bear examination: For otherwise you would not have submitted it
to public inspection; in a day so remarkable as this for free enquiry. Pious
frauds will no longer do, mystical divinity is going out of vogue; and men
insist now upon plain common sense. Had your discourse been published a hundred
years ago, a great part of the Divines called Calvinistical would have disliked
it, on account of its making GOD the author of sin; which although it was
Calvin's opinion, yet it has not been universally acknowledged by his
followers. But there is but little comparison between the light enjoyed one
hundred years ago, and the light we enjoy.

We now clearly see that all the old creeds, conscisions of faith etc. are
wrong. That to have a discourse like yours come abroad, in a day like ours, for
light and liberty, is strange indeed. Men in our nation have too high a sense
of their liberty, to submit to doctrine that sets them upon a level with the
brutal creation. Such doctrine will do among slaves, but not among freemen. You
could not expect that any, who knew what it was to be men, or sinners; would
ever approve of your doctrine. A doctrine which degrades men into brutes, and
makes sin impossible to them. I have often thought, that the goodness of GOD is
to be admired, in so ordering of it, that men think nearly as differently from
each other as they look: as hereby they are rendered so much the more necessary
and useful to each other, and have the noblest opportunity for the exercise of
charity. But it will be thought strange that men devoted to study, should be so
extremely wide of each other as we are. And to what can this great difference
be attributed, unless one or the other of us, have been hampered with a system?
And so have studied rather to defend something that we took for truth, without
due examination; than to find out what was true.

You may, dear sir, think that I am blinded by bigotry, and see only with the
eyes of others: but I think none acquainted with me, will have that opinion of
me. For thirty years past, I have studied without shackles, as I think; fully
convinced that the truth was not to be found among the savings of men; but is
rooted in things, I have sought it where, as I apprehend it is only to be
found. And when I have discovered it at any time, I have not been afraid to
make it known for the good of others; however contrary to prevailing opinions.
But do my dear brother, give me leave, without offense, to tell you, that I
fear you have taken opinions too much upon trust; and have laid too much
weight upon the sayings of men. If not, how could one of your discerning, so
mistake the meaning of the scripture you founded your discourse upon? How could
you consider sin as the effect of the will and agency of GOD? What! sin the
choice of that being who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity! I have heard
it scoffingly said, that it is an article of faith in Connecticut, that GOD is
the author of sin. Because the confession of faith adopted by the elders and
messengers of the Churches, assembled at Saybrook, 1708, says, GOD's
determinate counsel extends itself even to the first fall, and all other sins
of angels and men, and that not by a bare permission. But I did not think,
'till I read your discourse, that there was a minister now in the State that
would avow that blasphemous sentiment.

How could you say that GOD orders the occasion, and withholds influence
necessary to prevent sin? which makes sin necessary, and lays the blame at
GOD's door! For a deficient cause in things necessary, is truly efficient.

How could you so limit the knowledge of the Deity, as to suppose things
properly contingent unknowable to him? Surely all things are done contingently
in respect to GOD, which for ought he has decreed, might with as much
possibility not be as be. But all things which are done by the creatures
voluntarily, may as well not be done, as done. Therefore, if GOD has decreed,
that many things should be done voluntarily, he has decreed, that they should
be done contingently. The minor is evident, because, if the creatures may not
as well omit them as do them, they do them not voluntarily, but necessarily.
How could you charge sin and blame upon men, merely for acting voluntarily in
the^ which is evil? Surely the prerogative of a voluntary agent consists not
in doing that which it desires to do; but in liberty of choice to do or not to
do, this or that, not in freedom from coercion only, but in freedom from
necessity also. How could you argue from the necessary holiness of GOD, that
necessity may consist with liberty among men; since he is above and out of all
predicaments wherein we are. How could you argue from GOD's right and propriety
in all things, that it belongs to him to dispose of the eternal state of men;
in sin and damnation, according to his good pleasure? we know that by GOD's
absolute and naked power, he can cast away the whole mass of mankind; it is not
repugnant to sovereignty: but by that actual power of his, which is always
clothed with goodness and justice, he cannot of his pleasure cast away one. How
could you say, that all men being sinners, GOD is not obliged to exercise his
saving mercy toward any? Is he not bound by his decree, by his promise, and by
his giving sinners of men a law to keep?

How could you adopt the opinion of absolute election and reprobation? an
opinion which drags after it the most absurd, wicked and blasphemous
consequences. Absolute reprobation being once granted, we may more properly
call GOD a father of cruelties, than of mercies; and of hatred rather than of
love; and a destroyer of men, rather than the savior of men. Mr. Fletcher,
illustrates this, by a mother that "conceived ^n unaccountable antipathy to her
sucking child. She goes to the brink of a precipice, bends herself over it with
the passive infant in her bosom, and, withdrawing her arms from under him,
drops him upon the craggy side of a rock, and thus he rolls down from rock to
rock, 'till he lies at the bottom beaten to pieces, a bloody instance of
finished destruction. The Judge asks the murderer what she has to say in her
own defense. The child was mine, replies she, and I have a right to do what I
please with my own. Besides, I did neither throw him down, nor murder him: I
only withdrew my arms from under him, and he fell of his own accord." Upon your
principles sir, this mother must be acquitted with honor; but common sense
will condemn the murderer. These and many other, like sentiments in your
discourse, satisfied me that a gentleman of your discerning, would never
embrace such opinions, had not your mind been warped by the opinions of others.
Hence I concluded on reading your discourse, that you was defending the
opinions of other men rather than your own. And several words and phrases in
your discourse, which I observed, made me think that you had been mislead by
Mr. Edwards' treatise on the will; than which I know of no book, where so much
labor and pains is taken to so little purpose. I own the book, but have it not
now by me, if I had, I would give you a confutation of it in one page, though,
as I remember it contains near four hundred. But you may find the sinews of Mr.
Edwards' arguments out by the ingenious Mr. West of Newbedford; in an essay on
liberty and necessity, lately published. What conceivable absurdity dear sir,
can be more shocking to the human mind, not corrupted with a false glare of
vain science, than for men to commend or blame themselves, or for others to do
it, for what they are no more the causes of, than of the beating of their
pulse, and could no more prevent than the ebbing and flowing of the sea! This
plan of fatalism which Mr. Edwards pleads for, and which you have adopted; is
wholly the product of metaphysical subtility; and in direct contradiction to
the invariable consciousness mankind have of a power within themselves to give
motion to the faculties both of their souls and bodies. Nay, even those who
pretend to believe the doctrine of fatal causalty, directly contradict, by
their practical sentiments, and in a steady uniform course, what they possess
in words. For their whole conduct in life is just as theirs is, who really
think they are possessed of an active self-moving power, and are the causes of
their own volitions, and the effects consequent upon them. So their practice in
life is a confutation of their faith in theory. I beseech you my dear brother
to review your whole scheme, turn it upon all sides, trace it in all its
consequences; and see where and to what they will lead you.

I have passed over in silence many things exceptionable in your discourse,
because I would not be tedious. And things that I have a little examined, I
have not pursued in there consequences as I might have done. Read dear Sir, the
remarks I have made on your discourse, in the spirit of love. Be assured that
your opponent is not your enemy. If any thing justly offensive has escaped my
pen, I will certainly retract it the moment I see it. If after all you remain
of the same mind, as when you published your discourse, you will doubtless
think that there is something necessary now for you to do; in order to defend
your discourse, against the exceptions I have made to it. I am quite willing
you should do your utmost to defend your scheme. But you know my dear brother,
that there is a certain number of first principles, or primary moral truths,
which are perceived and assented to, without hesitation, by mankind in common;
in consequence of that power of discernment they come into being furnished
with, and are the only basis on which there can be reasoning to any purpose
among men, with relation to the moral system. Hence, the further any one
proceeds in error the further he departs from those primary truths, which form
the basis of reasoning and consequently will be the more easily detected. If it
is my case, that I am in the wrong, as you may likely think; the further I go
the weaker I shall grow. And at length become a very easy tool to deal with.
Should this be the case, I will rejoice, may the truth but grain ground.

Controversy, though not desirable in it self, yet properly managed, has often
times rescued truth groaning under the lash of triumphant error. To pay a
strict attention to the thing, or object in dispute, and use no other artillery
against an adversary, than soft words and hard arguments, is generally the best
way to manage a dispute. If you should write again in defense of your scheme,
whatever you advance, that is argumentative and to the point, you may depend
upon my careful, and I hope candid examination; should it please GOD to spare
life and continue health. But any thing that is otherwise I shall treat with
silence.

But as wide as we now are in opinion from each other, what hinders our being
one in love? Let us my dear brother, notwithstanding our difference in opinion,
love one another out of a pure heart fervently, as the gospel of Christ
directs. Constantly praying for each other, that the GOD of patience and
consolation would grant us to be like minded, one toward another according to
Christ Jesus.

From your brother and fellow servant in the kingdom and patience of Jesus, J.
F.


