Dr: BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.


THE Works of the late Dr. BENJAMIN FRANKLIN Consisting of HIS LIFE Written by
himself Together with ESSAYS Humorous, Moral, and Literary, chiefly in the
manner of the Spectator.

NEW YORK Printed by Tiebout and Obrian for H. Guin, (...) Nutter, R. McGill,
J. Allen, J. Read, E. Duyckinck and Co. and Edward Mitchell No:9. Maiden Lane.

Engraved by P. R. Mavorick. 65 Liberty Street.

PREFACE.
THE volumes that are here presented to the Public, consist of two parts: the
Life of Dr. Franklin; and a Collection of Miscellaneous Essays, the work of
that Author.

It is already known to many, that Dr. Franklin amused himself, toward the
close of his life, with writing memoirs of his own history. These memoirs were
brought down to the year 1757. Together with some other manuscripts they were
left behind him at his death, and were considered as constituting a part of his
posthumous property. It is a little extraordinary that, under these
circumstances, interesting as they are, from the celebrity of the character of
which they treat, and from the critical situation of the present times, they
should so long have been withheld from the Public. A translation of them
appeared in France near two years ago, coming down to the year 1731. There can
be no sufficient reason, that what has thus been submitted to the perusal of
Europe, should not be made accessible to those to whom Dr. Franklin's language
is native. The first part of the history of his life is translated from that
publication.

The style of these memoirs is uncommonly pleasing. The story is told with the
most unreserved sincerity, and without any false coloring or ornament. We see,
in every page, that the author examined his subject with the eye of a master,
and related no incidents, the springs and origin of which he did not perfectly
understand. It is this that gives such exquisite and uncommon perspicuity to
the detail and delight in the review. The translator has endeavored, as he
went along, to conceive the probable manner in which Dr. Franklin expressed his
ideas in his English manuscript, and he hopes to be forgiven if this enquiry
shall occasionally have subjected him to the charge of a style in any respect
bald or low: to imitate the admirable simplicity of the author, is no easy task.

The Essays, which are now, for the first time, brought together from various
resources, will be found to be more miscellaneous than any of Dr. Franklin's
that have formerly been collected, and will therefore be more generally
amusing. Dr. Franklin tells us, in his Life that he was an assiduous imitator
of Addison; and from some of these papers it will be admitted that he was not
an unhappy one. The public will be amused with following a great philosopher in
his relaxations, and observing in what respects philosophy tends to elucidate
and improve the most common subjects. The editor has purposely avoided such
papers as, by their scientifical nature, were less adapted for general perusal.
These he may probably hereafter publish in a volume by themselves.

He subjoins a letter from the late celebrated and amiable Dr. Price, to a
gentleman in Philadelphia, upon the subject of Dr. Franklin's memoirs of his
own life.

Hackney, June 19, 1790. DEAR SIR,
I am hardly able to tell you how kindly I take the letters with which you
favor me. Your last, containing an account of the death of our excellent
friend Dr. Franklin, and the circumstances attending it, deserves my particular
gratitude. The account which he has left of his life will show, in a striking
example, how a man, by talents, industry, and integrity, may rise from
obscurity to the first eminence and consequence in the world; but it brings his
history no lower than the year 1757, and I understand that since he sent over
the copy, which I have read, he has been able to make no additions to it. It is
with a melancholy regret I think of his death; but to death we are all bound by
the irreversible order of nature, and in looking forward to it, there is
comfort in being able to reflect. -- that we have not lived in vain, and that
all the useful and virtuous shall meet in a better country beyond the grave.

Dr. Franklin, in the last letter I received from him, after mentioning his age
and infirmities, observes, that it has been kindly ordered by the Author of
nature, that, as we draw nearer the conclusion of life, we are furnished with
more helps to wean us from it, among which one of the strongest is the loss of
dear friends. I was delighted with the account you gave in your letter of the
honor shown to his memory at Philadelphia, and by Congress; and yesterday I
received a high additional pleasure, by being informed that the National
Assembly of France had determined to go in mourning for him. -- What a glorious
scene is opened there! The an^^ls of the world furnish no parallel to it. One
of the honors of our departed friend is, that he has contributed much to it.

I am, with great respect, Your obliged and very humble servant, RICHARD PRICE.


LIFE OF DOCTOR BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, etc.
MY DEAR SON,
I HAVE amused myself with collecting some little anecdotes of my family. You
may remember the enquiries I made, when you were with me in England, among such
of my relations as were then living; and the journey I undertook for that
purpose. To be acquainted with the particulars of my parentage and life, many
of which are unknown to you, I flatter myself, will afford the same pleasure to
you as to me. I shall relate them upon paper: it will be an agreeable
employment of a week's uninterrupted leisure, which I promise myself during my
present retirement in the country. There are also other motives which induce me
to the undertaking. From the bosom of poverty and obscurity, in which I drew my
first breath and spent my earliest years, I have raised myself to a state of
opulence and to some degree of celebrity in the world. A constant good fortune
has attended me through every period of life to my present advanced age; and my
descendants may be desirous of learning what were the means of which I made
use, and which, thanks to the assisting hand of providence, have proved so
eminently successful. They may also, should they ever be placed in a similar
situation, derive some advantage from my narrative.

When I reflect, as I frequently do, upon the felicity I have enjoyed, I
sometimes say to myself, that, were the offer made me, I would engage to run
again, from beginning to end, the same career of life. All I would ask should
be the privilege of an author, to correct, in a second edition, certain errors
of the first. I could wish, likewise, if it were in my power, to change some
trivial incidents and events for others more favorable. Were this however
denied me, still would I not decline the offer. But since a repetition of life
cannot take place, there is nothing which, in my opinion, so nearly resembles
it, as to call to mind all its circumstances, and to render their remembrance
more durable, commit them to writing. By thus employing myself, I shall yield
to the inclination, so natural to old men, to talk of themselves and their
exploits, and may freely follow my bent, without being tiresome to those, who,
from respect to my age, might think themselves obliged to listen to me; as they
will be at liberty to read me or not, as they please. In fine, (and I may well
avow it, since nobody would believe me were I to deny it,) I shall perhaps, by
this employment gratify my vanity. Scarcely indeed have I ever heard or read
the introductory phrase, "I may say without vanity," but some striking and
characteristic instance of vanity has immediately followed. The generality of
men hate vanity in others, however strongly they may be tinctured with it
themselves; for myself, I pay obeisance to it wherever I meet with it,
persuaded that it is advantageous, as well to the individual whom it governs,
as to those who are within the sphere of its influence. Of consequence, it
would, in many cases, not be wholly absurd, that a man should count his vanity
among the other sweets of life, and give thanks to providence for the blessing.

And here let me with all humility acknowledge, that to divine providence I am
indebted for the felicity I have hitherto enjoyed. It is that power alone which
has furnished me with the means I have employed, and that has crowned them with
success. My faith in this respect leads me to hope, though I cannot count upon
it, that the divine goodness will still be exercised toward me, either by
prolonging the duration of my happiness to the close of life, or by giving me
fortitude to support any melancholy reverse, which may happen to me, as to so
many others. My future fortune is unknown but to him in whose hand is our
destiny, and who can make our very afflictions subservient to our benefit.

One of my uncles, desirous, like myself, of collecting anecdotes of our
family, gave me some notes, from which I have derived many particulars
respecting our ancestors. From these I learn, that they had lived in the same
village (Eaton in Northamptonshire) upon a freehold of about thirty acres, for
the space at least of three hundred years. How long they had resided there
prior to that period, my uncle had been unable to discover; probably ever since
the institution of surnames, when they took the appellation of Franklin; which
had formerly been the name of a particular order of individuals As a proof that
Franklin was anciently the common name of an order or rank in England, see
Judge Fortescue, De laudibus legum Anglioe, written about the year 1412, in
which is the following passage, to show that good juries might easily be formed
in any part of England:

Regio etiam illa, ita resp^rsa refertaque est possessoribus terrarum et
agrorum, quod in ea, villu^a tam parva reperiri non poterit, in qua non est
miles, armiger, vel pater-familias, qualis ibidem franklin vulgaritur
nun-eupatur, magnis ditatus possessionibus, nec non libere, tenentes at alii
valecti plurimi, suis patrimoniis sufficientes, ad faciendum juratam, in forma
praenotata.

Moreover, the same country is so filled and replenished with landed men,
that therein so small a thorpe cannot be found wherein dwells not a knight,
an esquire, or such a householder as is there commonly called a franklin,
enriched with great possessions; and also other freeholders and many yeoman,
able for their livlihoodes to make a jury in form aforementioned.

Old Translation. Chaucer too calls his country gentleman a Franklin, and,
after describing his good housekeeping, thus characterises him: This worthy
Franklin bore a purse of silk,
Fixed to his girdle, white as morning milk.
Knight of the shire, first justice at the assize,
To help the poor, the doubtful to advise.
In all employments, generous, just he proved,
Renowned for courtesy, by all beloved.



.

This pretty estate would not have sufficed for their subsistence, had they not
added the trade of blacksmith, which was perpetuated in the family down to my
uncles time, the eldest son having been uniformerly brought up to this
employment: a custom which both he and my father observed with respect to their
eldest sons.

In the researches I made at Eaton, I found no account of their births,
marriages, and deaths, earlier than in the year 1555; the parish register not
extending farther back than that period. This register informed me, that I was
the youngest son of the youngest branch of the family, counting five
generations. My grandfather, Thomas, who was born in 1598, living at Eaton till
he was too old to continue his trade, when he retired to Banbury in
Oxfordshire, where his son John, who was a dyer, resided, and with whom my
father was apprenticed. He died, and was buried there: we saw his monument in
1758. His eldest son lived in the family house at Eaton, which he bequeathed,
with the land belonging to it, to his only daughter; who, in concert with her
husband, Mr. Fisher of Wellingborough, afterward sold it to Mr. Ested, the
present proprietor.

My grandfather had four surviving sons, Thomas John, Benjamin, and Josias. I
shall give you such particulars of them as my memory will furnish, not having
my papers here, in which you will find a more minute account, if they are not
lost during my absence.

Thomas had learned the trade of blacksmith under his father; but possessing a
good natural understanding, he improved it by study, at the solicitation of a
gentleman of the name of Palmer, who was at that time the principal inhabitant
of the village, and who encouraged in like manner all my uncles to improve
their minds. Thomas thus rendered himself competent to the functions of a
country attorney; soon became an essential personage in the affairs of the
village; and was one of the chief movers of every public enterprise, as well
relative to the county as the town of Northampton. A variety of remarkable
incidents were told us of him at Eaton. After enjoying the esteem and patronage
of Lord Halifax, he died, January 6, 1702, precisely four years before I was
born. The recital that was made us of his life and character, by some aged
persons of the village, struck you, I remember, as extraordinary, from its
analogy to what you knew of myself, "Had he died," said you, "just four years
later, one might have supposed a transmigration of souls."

John, to the best of my belief, was brought up to the trade of a wool-dyer.

Benjamin served his apprenticeship in London to a silk-dyer. He was an
industrious man; I remember him well; for, while I was a child, he joined my
father at Boston, and lived for some years in the house with us. A particular
affection had always subsisted between my father and him and I was his godson:
He arrived to a great age. He left behind him two quarto volumes of poems in
manuscript, consisting of little fugitive pieces addressed to his friends. He
had invented a shorthand, which he taught me, but having never made use of it,
I have now forgotten it. He was a man of piety, and a constant attendant on the
best preachers, whose sermons he took a pleasure in writing down according to
the expeditory method he had devised. Many volumes were thus collected by him.
He was also extremely fond of politics too much so perhaps for his situation. I
lately found in London a collection which he had made of all the principal
pamphlets relative to public affairs, from the year 1641 to 1717. Many volumes
are wanting, as appears by the series of numbers; but there still remain eight
in folio, and twenty four in quarto and octavo. The collection had fallen into
the hands of a second-hand bookseller, who, knowing me by having sold me some
books, brought it to me. My uncle, it seems, had left it behind him on his
departure for America, about fifty years ago. I found various notes of his
writing in the margins. His grandson, Samuel, is now living at Boston.

Our humble family had early embraced the Reformation. They remained faithfully
attached during the reign of QUEEN MARY, when they were in danger of being
molested on account of their zeal against Popery. They had an English Bible,
and, to conceal it the more securely, they conceived the project of fastening
it, open, with pack-threads across the leaves, on the inside of the lid of a
close-stool. When my great-grandfather wished to read to his family, he
reversed the lid of the close-stool upon his knees, and passed the leaves from
one side to the other, which were held down on each by the pack-thread. One of
the children was stationed at the door to give notice if he saw the proctor (an
officer of the spiritual court) make his appearance: in that case, the lid was
restored to its place with the Bible concealed under it as before. I had this
anecdote from my uncle Benjamin.

The whole family preserved its attachment to the Church of England till
toward the close of the reign of Charles II. when certain ministers, who had
been ejected as non-conformists, having held Conventicles in Northamptonshire,
they were joined by Benjamin and Josias, who adheared to them ever after. The
rest of the family continued in the Episcopal Church.

My father, Josias, married early in life. He went, with his wife and three
children, to New England, about the year 1682. Conventicles being at that time
prohibited by law, and frequently disturbed, some considerable persons of his
acquaintance determined to go to America, where they hoped to enjoy the free
exercise of their religion, and my father was prevailed on to accompany them.

My father had also by the same wife four children born in America, and ten
others by a second wife, making in all seventeen. I remember to have seen
thirteen seated together at his table, who all arrived to years of maturity,
and were married. I was the last of the sons, and the youngest child, excepting
two daughters. I was born at Boston in New England. My mother, the second wife,
was Abiah Folger, daughter of Peter Folger, one of the first colonists of New
England, of whom Cotton Mather makes honorable mention, in his Ecclesiastical
History of that province, as a pious and learned Englishman, if I rightly
recollect his expressions. I have been told of his having written a variety of
little pieces; but there appears to be only one in print, which I met with many
years ago. It was published in the year 1675, and is in familiar verse,
agreeably to the taste of the times and the country. The author addresses
himself to the governors for the time being, speaks for liberty of conscience,
and in favor of the anabaptists, quakers, and other sectaries, who had
suffered persecution. To this persecution he attributes the wars with the
natives, and other calamities which afflicted the country, regarding them as
the judgments of God in punishment of so odious an offense, and he exhorts the
government to the repeal of laws so contrary to charity. The poem appeared to
be written with a manly freedom and a pleasing simplicity. I recollect the six
concluding lines, though I have forgotten the order of words of the two first;
the sense of which was, that his censures were dictated by benevolence, and
that, of consequence, he wished to be known as the author; because, said he, I
hate from my very soul dissimulation: From Sherburne, Town in the Island of
Nantucket.
where I dwell,
I therefore put my name,
Your friend, who means you well.
PETER FOLGER.

My brothers were all put apprentice to different trades. With respect to
myself, I was sent, at the age of eight years, to a grammar school. My father
destined me for the church, and already regarded me as the chaplain of the
family. The promptitude with which from my infancy I had learned to read, for I
do not remember to have been ever without this acquirement, and the
encouragement of his friends, who assured him that I should one day certainly
become a man of letters, confirmed him in this design. My uncle Benjamin
approved also of the scheme, and promised to give me all his volumes of
sermons, written, as I have said, in the shorthand of his invention if I would
take the pains to learn it.

I remained however scarcely a year at grammar school, although, in this short
interval, I had risen from the middle to the head of my class, from thence to
the class immediately above, and was to pass, at the end of the year, to the
one next in order. But my father, burdened with a numerous family, found that
he was incapable, without subjecting himself to difficulties, of providing for
the expense of a collegiate education, and considering besides, as I heard him
say to his friends, that persons so educated were often poorly provided for, he
renounced his first intentions, took me from the grammar school, and sent me to
a school for writing and arithmetic, kept by a Mr. George Brownwel, who was a
skilful master, and succeeded very well in his profession by employing gentle
means only, and such as were calculated to encourage his scholars. Under him I
soon acquired an excellent hand; but I failed in arithmetic, and made therein
no sort of progress.

At ten years of age I was called home to assist my father in his occupation,
which was that of soap-boiler and tallow-chandler; a business to which he had
served no apprenticeship, but which he embraced on his arrival in New England,
because he found his own, that of a dyer, in too little request to enable him
to maintain his family. I was accordingly employed in cutting the wicks,
filling the moulds, taking care of the shop, carrying messages, etc.

This business displeased me, and I felt a strong inclination for a sea life;
but my father set his face against it. The vicinity of the water, however, gave
me frequent opportunities of venturing myself both upon and within it, and I
soon acquired the art of swimming, and of managing a boat. -- When embarked
with other children, the helm was commonly deputed to me, particularly on
difficult occasions; and, in every other project, I was almost always the
leader of the troop, whom I sometimes involved in embarrassments. I shall give
an instance of this, which demonstrates an early disposition of mind for public
enterprises, though the one in question was not conducted by justice.

The mill-pond was terminated on one side by a marsh, upon the borders of which
we were accustomed to take our stand, at high water, to angle for small fish.
By dint of walking, we had converted the place into a perfect quagmire. My
proposal was to erect a wharf that should afford us firm footing; and I pointed
out to my companions a large heap of stones, intended for the building a new
house near the marsh, and which were well adapted for our purpose. Accordingly,
when the workmen retired in the evening, I assembled a number of my
playfellows, and by laboring diligently, like ants, sometimes four of us
uniting our strength to carry a single stone, we removed them all, and
constructed our little quay. The workmen were surprised the next morning at not
finding their stones, which had been conveyed to our wharf. Enquiries were made
respecting the authors of this conveyance; we were discovered; complaints were
exhibited against us; many of us underwent correction on the part of our
parents; and though I strenuously defended the utility of the work, my father
at length convinced me, that nothing which was not strictly honest could be
useful.

It will not, perhaps, be uninteresting to you to know what sort of a man my
father was. He had an excellent constitution, was of a middle size, but well
made and strong, and extremely active in whatever he undertook. He designed
with a degree of neatness, and knew a little of music. His voice was sonorious
and agreeable; so that when he sung a psalm or hymn with accompaniment of his
violin, as was his frequent practice in an evening when the labors of the day
were finished, it was truly delightful to hear him. He was versed also in
mechanics, and could upon occasion, use the tools of a variety of trades. But
his greatest excellence was a sound understanding and solid judgment in matters
of prudence, both in public and private life. In the former indeed he never
engaged, because his numerous family and the mediocrity of his fortune, kept
him unremittingly employed in the duties of his profession. But I very well
remember that the leading men of the place used frequently to come and ask his
advice respecting affairs of the town, or of the church to which he belonged,
and that they paid much deference to his opinion. Individuals were also in the
habit of consulting him in their private affairs, and he was often chosen
arbiter between contending parties.

He was fond of having at his table, as often as possible, some friends or well
informed neighbors capable of rational conversation, and he was always careful
to introduce useful or ingenious topics of discourse, which might tend to form
the minds of his children. By this means he early attracted our attention to
what was just, prudent, and beneficial in the conduct of life. He never talked
of the meats which appeared upon the table, never discussed whether they were
well or ill dressed, of good or bad flavor, high-seasoned or otherwise,
preferable or inferior to this or that dish of a similiar kind. Thus
accustomed, from my infancy, to the utmost inattention as to these objects, I
have always been perfectly regardless of what kind of food was before me; and I
pay so little attention to it even now, that it would be a hard matter for me
to recollect, a few hours after I had dined, of what my dinner had consisted.
When traveling, I have particularly experienced the advantage of this habit;
for it has often happened to me to be in company with persons, who, having a
more delicate, because a more exercised taste, have suffered in many cases
considerable inconvenience; while, as to myself, I have had nothing to desire.

My mother was likewise possessed of an excellent constitution. She suckled all
her ten children, and I never heard either her or my father complain of any
other disorder than that of which they died: my father at the age of
eighty-seven, and mother at eighty-five. They are buried together at Boston
where, a few years ago, I placed a marble over their grave, with this
inscription:

Here lie JOSIAS FRANKLIN and ABIAH his wife: They lived together with
reciprocal affection for fifty-nine years; and without private fortune, without
lucrative employment, by assiduous labor and honest industry, decently
supported a numerous family, and educated with success, thirteen children, and
seven grand children. Let this example, reader, encourage thee diligently to
discharge the duties of thy calling, and to rely on the support of divine
providence.

He was pious and prudent, She discreet and virtuous. Their youngest son, from
a sentiment of filial duty, consecrates this stone To their memory.

I perceive, by my rambling digressions, that I am growing old. But we do not
dress for a private company as for a formal ball. This deserves perhaps the
name of negligence.

To return. I thus continued employed in my father's trade for the space of two
years; that is to say, till I arrived at twelve years of age. About this time
my brother John, who had served his apprenticeship in London, having quitted my
father, and being married and settled in business on his own account at
Rhode Island, I was destined, to all appearance, to supply his place, and be a
candle-maker all my life: but my dislike of this occupation continuing, my
father was apprehensive, that, if a more agreeable one were not offered me I
might play the truant and escape to sea; as, to his extreme mortification, my
brother Josias had done. He therefore took me sometimes to see masons, coopers,
braziers, joiners, and other mechanics employed at their work; in order to
discover the bent of my inclination, and fix it if he could upon some
occupation that might retain me on shore. I have since, in consequence of these
visits, derived no small pleasure from seeing skilful workmen handle their
tools; and it has proved of considerable benefit, to have acquired (...)
sufficient knowledge to be able to make little things for myself when I have
had no mechanic at hand, and to construct small machines for my experiments,
while the idea I have conceived has been fresh and strongly impressed on my
imagination.

My father at length decided that I should be a cutler, and I was placed for
some days upon trial with my cousin Samuel, son of my uncle Benjamin, who had
learned this trade in London, and had established himself at Boston. But the
premium he required for my apprenticeship displeasing my father, I was recalled
home.

From my earliest years I had been passionately fond of reading, and I laid out
in books all the little money I could procure. I was particularly pleased with
accounts of voyages. My first acquisition was Bunyan's collection in small
separate volumes. These I afterward sold in order to buy an historical
collection by R. Burton, which consisted of small cheap volumes, amounting in
all to about forty or fifty. My father's little library was principally made up
of books of practical and polemical theology. I read the greatest part of them.
I have since often regretted, that at a time when I had so great a thirst for
knowledge, more eligible books had not fallen into my hands, as it was then a
point de^^^d that I should not be educated for the church. There was also among
my father's books Plutarch's Lives, in which I read continually, and I still
regard as advantageously employed the time I devoted to them. I found besides a
work of De Foe's, entitled, an Essay on Projects, from which, perhaps, I
derived impressions that have since influenced some of the principal events of
my life.

My inclination for books at last determined my father to make me a printer,
though he had already a son in that profession. My brother had returned from
England in 1717, with a press and types, in order to establish a printing house
at Boston. This business pleased me much better than that of my father, though
I had still a predilection for the sea. To prevent the effects which might
result from this inclination, my father was impatient to see me engaged with my
brother. I held back for some time; at length however I suffered myself to be
persuaded, and signed my indentures, being then only twelve years of age. It
was agreed that I should serve as apprentice to the age of twenty-one, and
should receive journeyman's wages only during the last year.

In a very short time I made great proficiency in this business, and became
very serviceable to my brother. I had now an opportunity of procuring better
books. The acquaintance I necessarily formed with booksellers' apprentices,
enabled me to borrow a volume now and then, which I never failed to return
punctually and without injury. How often has it happened to me to pass the
greater part of the night in reading by my bedside, when the book had been
lent me in the evening, and was to be returned the next morning, lest it might,
be missed or wanted.

At length, Mr. Matthew Adams, an ingenious tradesman, who had a handsome
collection of books, and who frequented our printing house, took notice of me.
He invited me to see his library, and had the goodness to lend me any books I
was desirous of reading. I then took a strange fancy for poetry, and composed
several little pieces. My brother, thinking he might find his account in it,
encouraged me, and engaged me to write two ballads. One, called the Light-house
Tragedy, contained an account of the shipwreck of captain Worth^lake and his
two daughters; the other was a sailor's song on the capture of the noted pirate
called Teach, or Black-beard. They were wretched verses in point of style, mere
blind-men's ditties. When printed, he dispatched me about the town to sell
them. The first had a prodigious run, because the event was recent, and had
made a great noise.

My vanity was flattered by this success; but my father checked my exultation,
by ridiculing my productions, and telling me that versifiers were always poor.
I thus escaped the misfortune of being, probably a very wretched poet. But as
the faculty of writing prose has been of great service to me in the course of
my life, and principally contributed to my advancement, I shall relate by what
means, situated as I was, I acquired the small skill I may possess in that way.

There was in the town another young man, a great lover of books, of the name
of John Collins, with whom I was intimately connected. We frequently engaged in
dispute, and were indeed so fond of argumentation, that nothing was so
agreeable to us as a war of words. This contentious temper, I would observe by
the bye, is in danger of becoming a very bad habit, and frequently renders a
man's company insupportable, as being no otherwise capable of indulgence than
by indiscriminate contradiction. Independently of the acrimony and discord it
introduces into conversation, it is often productive of dislike, and even
hatred, between persons to whom friendship is indispensibly necessary. I
acquired it by reading, while I lived with my father, books of religious
controversy. I have since remarked, that men of sense seldom fall into this
error; lawyers, fellows of universities, and persons of every profession
educated at Edinburgh, excepted.

Collins and I fell one day into an argument relative to the education of
women; namely, whether it were proper to instruct them in the sciences, and
whether they were competent to the study. Collins supported the negative, and
affirmed that the task was beyond their capacity. I maintained the opposite
opinion, a little perhaps for the pleasure of disputing. He was naturally more
eloquent than I; words flowed copiously from his lips; and frequently I thought
myself vanquished, more by his volubility than by the force of his arguments.
We separated without coming to an agreement upon this point: and as we were not
to see each other again for some time, I committed my thoughts to paper, made a
fair copy, and sent it him. He answered, and I replied. Three or four letters
had been written by each, when my father, chanced to light upon my papers and
read them. Without entering into the merits of the cause, he embraced the
opportunity of speaking to me upon my manner of writing. He observed, that
though I had the advantage of my adversary in correct spelling and pointing,
which I owed to my occupation, I was greatly his inferior in elegance of
expression, in arrangement, and perspicuity. Of this he convinced me by several
examples. I felt the justice of his remarks, became more attentive to language,
and resolved to make every effort to improve my style. Amidst these resolves an
odd volume of the Spectator fell into my hands. This was a publication I had
never seen. I bought the volume, and read it again and again. I was enchanted
with it, thought the style excellent, and wished it were in my power to imitate
it. With this view I selected some of the papers, made short summaries of the
sense of each period, and put them for a few days aside. I then, without
looking at the book endeavored to restore the essays to their true form, and
to express each thought at length, as it was in the original, employing the
most appropriate words that occurred to my mind. I afterward compared my
Spectator with the original; I perceived some faults, which I corrected: but I
found that I wanted a fund of words, if I may so express myself, and a facility
of recollecting and employing them, which I thought I should by that time have
acquired, had I continued to make verses. The continual need of words of the
same meaning, but of different lengths for the measure, or of different sounds
for the rhyme, would have obliged me to seek for a variety of synonymes, and
have rendered me master of them. From this belief, I took some of the tales of
the Spectator, and turned them into verse; and after a time, when I had
sufficiently forgotten them, I again converted them into prose.

Sometimes also I mingled all my summaries together; and a few weeks after,
endeavored to arrange them in the best order, before I attempted to form the
periods and complete the essays. This I did with a view of acquiring method in
the arrangement of my thoughts. On comparing afterward my performance with the
original, many faults were apparent, which I corrected; but I had sometimes the
satisfaction to think, that, in certain particulars of little importance, I had
been fortunate enough to improve the order of thought or the style; and this
encouraged me to hope that I should succeed, in time, in writing the English
language, which was one of the great objects of my ambition.

The time which I devoted to these exercises, and to reading, was the evening
after my day's labor was finished, the morning before it began, and Sundays
when I could escape attending divine service. While I lived with my father, he
had insisted on my punctual attendance on public worship, and I still indeed
considered it as a duty, but a duty which I thought I had no time to practice.

When about sixteen years of age, a work of Tryon fell into my hands, in which
he recommends vegetable diet. I determined to observe it. My brother, being a
bachelor, did not keep house, but boarded with his apprentices in a
neighboring family. My refusing to eat animal food was found inconvenient, and
I was often scolded for my singularity. I attended to the mode in which Tryon
prepared some of his dishes, particularly how to boil potatoes and rice, and
make hasty puddings. I then said to my brother, that if he would allow me per
week half what he paid for my board, I would undertake to maintain myself. The
offer was instantly embraced, and I soon found that of what he gave me I was
able to save half. This was a new fund for the purchase of books; and other
advantages resulted to me from the plan. When my brother and his workmen left
the printing house to go to dinner, I remained behind; and dispatching my
frugal meal, which frequently consisted of a biscuit only, or a slice of bread
and a bunch of raisins, or a bun from the pastry cook's, with a glass of water,
I had the rest of the time, till their return, for study; and my progress
therein was proportioned to that clearness of ideas, and quickness of
conception, which are the fruit of temperance in eating and drinking.

It was about this period, that, having one day been put to the blush for my
ignorance in the art of calculation, which I had twice failed to learn while at
school, I took Cocker's Treatise of Arithmetic, and went through it by myself
with the utmost ease. I also read a book of Navigation by Seller and Sturmy,
and made myself master of the little geometry it contains, but I never
proceeded far in this science. Nearly at the same time I read Lock on the
Human Understanding, and the Art of Thinking by Messrs. Du Port Royal.

While laboring to form and improve my style, I met with an English Grammar,
which I believe was Greenwood's having at the end of it two little essays on
rhetoric and logic. In the latter I found a model of disputation after the
manner of Socrates. Shortly after I procured Xenophon's work, entitled,
Memorable Things of Socrates, in which are various examples of the same method.
Charmed to a degree of enthusiasm with this mode of disputing, I adopted it,
and renouncing blunt contradiction, and direct and positive argument, I assumed
the character of a humble questioner. The perusal of Shaftsbury and Collins had
made me a skeptic; and being previously so as to many doctrines of
Christianity, I found Socrates's method to be both the safest for myself, as
well as the most embarrassing to those against whom I employed it. It soon
afforded me singular pleasure; I incessantly practiced it; and became very
adroit in obtaining, even from persons of superior understanding, concessions
of which they did not foresee the consequences. Thus I involved them in
difficulties from which they were unable to extricate themselves, and sometimes
obtained victories, which neither my cause nor my arguments merited.

This method I continued to employ for some years; but I afterward abandoned
it by degrees, retaining only the habit of expressing myself with modest
diffidence, and never making use, when I advanced any proposition which might
be controverted, of the words certainly, undoubtedly, or any others that might
give the appearance of being obstinately attached to my opinion. I rather said,
I imagine, I suppose, or it appears to me, that such a thing is so or so, for
such and such reasons; or it is so, if I am not mistaken. This habit has, I
think, been of considerable advantage to me, when I have had occasion to
impress my opinion on the minds of others, and persuade them to the adoption of
the measures I have suggested. And since the chief ends of conversation are, to
inform or to be informed, to please or to persuade, I could wish that
intelligent and well-meaning men would not themselves diminish the powers they
possess of being useful, by a positive and presumptuous manner of expressing
themselves, which scarcely ever fails to disgust the hearer and is only
calculated to excite opposition, and defeat every purpose for which the faculty
of speech has been bestowed upon man. In short, if you wish to inform, a
positive and dogmatical manner of advancing your opinion may provoke
contradiction, and prevent your being heard with attention. On the other hand,
if, with a desire of being informed, and of benefiting by the knowledge of
others, you express yourselves as being strongly attached to your own opinions,
modest and sensible men, who do not love disputation, will leave you in
tranquil possession of your errors. By following such a method, you can rarely
hope to please your auditors, conciliate their good will, or work conviction on
those whom you may be desirous of gaining over to your views. Pope judiciously
observes,

Men must be taught as if you taught them not,
And things unknown proposed as things forgot.
And in the same poem he afterward advises us,

To speak, though sure, with seeming diffidence.
He might have added to these lines, one that he has coupled elsewhere, in my
opinion, with less propriety. It is this:

For want of modesty is want of sense.
If you ask why I say with less propriety, I must give you the two lines
together:

Immodest words admit of no defense,
For want of decency is want of sense.
Now want of sense, when a man has the misfortune^ to be so circumstanced, is
it not a kind of excuse for want of modesty? And would not the verses have been
more accurate, if they had been constructed thus:

Immodest words admit but this defense,
That want of decency is want of sense.
But I leave the decision of this to better judges than myself.

In 1720, or 1721, my brother began to prin^ new public paper. It was the
second that made its appearance in America, and was entitled the New England
Courant. The only one that existed before was the Boston News Letter. Some of
his friends, I remember, would have dissuaded him from this undertaking, as a
thing that was not likely to succeed; a single newspaper being, in their
opinion, sufficient for all America. At present, however, in 1777, there are no
less than twenty-five. But he carried his project into execution, and I was
employed in distributing the copies to his customers, after having assisted in
composing and working them off.

Among his friends he had a number of literary characters, who, as an
amusement, wrote short essays for the paper, which gave it reputation and
increased its sale. These gentlemen came frequently to our house. I heard the
conversation that passed, and the accounts they gave of the favorable
reception of their writings with the public. I was tempted to try my hand among
them; but, being still a child as it were, I was fearful that my brother might
be unwilling to print in his paper any performance of which he should know me
to be the aut^^^. I therefore contrived to disguise my hand, and having written
an anonymous piece, I placed it at night under the door of the printing house,
where it was found the next morning. My brother communicated it to his friends,
when they came as usual to see him, who read it, commented upon it within my
hearing, and I had the exquisite pleasure to find that it met with their
approbation, and that, in the various conjectures they made respecting the
author, no one was mentioned who did not enjoy a high reputation in the country
for talents and genius. I now supposed myself fortunate in my judges, and began
to suspect that they were not such excellent writers as I had hitherto supposed
them. Be that as it may, encouraged by this little adventure, I wrote and sent
to the press, in the same way, many other pieces, which were equally approved;
keeping the secret till my slender stock of information and knowledge for such
performances was pretty completely exhausted, when I made myself known.

My brother, upon this discovery, began to entertain a little more respect for
me; but he still regarded himself as my master, and treated me like an
apprentice. He thought himself entitled to the same services from me as from
any other person. On the contrary, I conceived that, in many instances, he was
too rigorous, and that, on the part of a brother, I had a right to expect
greater indulgence. Our disputes were frequently brought before my father; and
either my brother was generally in the wrong, or I was the better pleader of
the two, for judgment was commonly given in my favor. But my brother was
passionate, and often had recourse to blows; a circumstance which I took in
very ill part. This severe and tyrannical treatment contributed, I believe, to
imprint on my mind that aversion to arbitrary power, which during my whole life
I have ever preserved. My apprenticeship became insupportable to me, and I
continually sighed for an opportunity of shortening it, which at length
unexpectedly offered.

An article inserted in our paper upon some political subject which I have now
forgotten, gave offense to the Assembly. My brother was taken into custody,
censured, and ordered into confinement for a month, because, as I presume, he
would not discover the author. I was also taken up, and examined before the
council; but, though I gave them no satisfaction, they contented themselves
with reprimanding, and then dismissed me; considering me probably as bound, in
quality of apprentice, to keep my master's secrets.

The imprisonment of my brother kindled my resentment, notwithstanding our
private quarrels. During its continuance the management of the paper was
entrusted to me, and I was bold enough to insert some pasquerades against the
governors; which highly pleased my brother, while others began to look upon me
in an unfavourable point of view, considering me as a young wit inclined to
satire and lampoon.

My brother's enlargement was accompanied with an arbitrary order from the
house of assembly, That James Franklin should no longer print the newspaper
entitled the New England Courant. In this conjuncture, we held a consultation
of our friends at the printing house, in order to determine what was proper to
be done. Some proposed to evade the order, by changing the title of the paper:
but my brother foreseeing inconveniences that would result from this step,
thought it better that it should in future be printed in the name of Benjamin
Franklin; and to avoid the censure of the assembly, who might charge him with
still printing the paper himself, under the name of his apprentice, it was
resolved that my old indentures should be given up to me, with a full and
entire discharge written on the back, in order to be produced upon an
emergency: but that, to secure to my brother the benefit of my service, I
should sign a new contract, which should be kept secret during the remainder of
the term. This was a very shallow arrangement. It was, however, carried into
immediate execution, and the paper continued, in consequence, to make its
appearance for some months in my name. At length a new difference arising
between my brother and me, I ventured to take advantage of my liberty,
presuming that he would not dare to produce the new contract. It was
undoubtedly dishonorable to avail myself of this circumstance, and I reckon
this action as one of the first errors of my life; but I was little capable of
estimating it at its true value, embittered as my mind had been by the
recollection of the blows I had received. Exclusively of his passionate
treatment of me, my brother was by no means a man of an ill temper, and perhaps
my manners had too much of impertinence not to afford it a very natural pretext.

When he knew that it was my determination to quit him, he wished to prevent my
finding employment elsewhere. He went to all the printing-houses in the town,
and prejudiced the masters against me; who accordingly refused to employ me.
The idea then suggested itself to me of going to New York, the nearest town in
which there was a printing-office. Farther reflection confirmed me in the
design of leaving Boston, where I had already rendered myself an object of
suspicion to the governing party. It was probable, from the arbitary
proceedings of the assembly in the affair of my brother, that, by remaining, I
should soon have been exposed to difficulties, which I had the greater reason
to apprehend, as, from my indiscreet disputes upon the subject of religion, I
begun to be regarded, by pious souls, with horror, either as an apostate or an
atheist. I came therefore to a resolution; but my father, in this instance,
siding with my brother, I presumed that if I attempted to depart openly,
measures would be taken to prevent me. My friend Collins undertook (...) favor
my ^ight. He agreed for my passage with the captain of a New York sloop, to
whom he represented me as a young man of his acquaintance, who had had an
affair with a girl of bad character, whose parents wished to compel me to marry
her, and that of consequence I could neither make my appearance or go off
publicly. I sold part of my books to procure a small sum of money, and went
privately on board the sloop. By favor of a good wind, I found myself in three
days at New York, nearly three hundred miles from my home at the age only of
seventeen years, without knowing an individual in the place, and with very
little money in my pocket.

The inclination I had felt for a seafaring life was entirely subsided, or I
should now have been able to gratify it; but having another trade, and
believing myself to be a tolerable workman, I hesitated not to offer my
services to the old Mr. William Bradford, who had been the first Printer in
Pennsylvania, but had quitted that province on account of a quarrel with George
Keith, the Governor. He could not give me employment himself, having little to
do, and already as many persons as he wanted; but he told me that his son,
printer at Philadelphia, had lately lost his principal workman, Aquila Rose,
who was dead, and that if I would go thither, he believed that he would engage
me. Philadelphia was a hundred miles farther. I hesitated not to embark in a
boat in order to repair, by the shortest cut of the sea, to Amboy, leaving my
trunk and effects to come after me by the usual and more tedious conveyance In
crossing the bay we met with a squall, which shattered to pieces our rotten
^ails, prevented us from entering the Kill, and threw as upon Long Island.

During the squall a drunken Dutchman, who like myself was a passenger in the
boat, fell into the sea. At the moment that he was sinking, I seized him by the
fore-top, saved him, and drew him on board. This immersion sobered him a
little, so that he fell asleep, after having taken from his pocket a volume,
which he requested me to dry. This volume I found to be my old favorite work,
Bunyan's Voyages, in Dutch, a beautiful impression on fine paper, with
copperplate engravings; a dress in which I had never seen it in its original
language. I have since learned that it has been translated into almost all the
languages of Europe, and next to the Bible, I am persuaded, it is one of the
books which has had the greatest spread. Honest John is the first, that I know
of, who has mixed narrative and dialogue together: a mode of writing very
engaging to the reader, who in the most interesting passages, finds himself
admitted as it were into the company, and present at the conversation. De Foe
has imitated, it with success in his Robinson Crusoe, his Moll Flanders, and
other works; as also has Richardson in his Pamela, etc.

In approaching the island we found that we had made a part of the coast where
it was not possible to land, on account of the strong breakers produced by the
rocky shore. We cast anchor and veered the cable toward the shore. Some men,
who stood upon the brink, hallooed to us, while we did the same on our part;
but the wind was so high, and the waves so noisy, that we could neither of us
hear each other. There were some canoes upon the bank, and we called out to
them, and made signs to prevail on them to come and take us up; but either they
did not understand us, or they deemed our request impracticable, and withdrew:
Night came on, and nothing remained for us but to wait quietly the subsiding of
the wind; till when we determined, that is, the pilot and I, to sleep if
possible. For that purpose we went below the hatches along with the Dutchman,
who was drenched with water. The sea broke over the boat, and reached us in our
retreat, so that we were presently as completely drenched as he.

We had very little repose during the whole night; but the wind abating the
next day, we succeeded in reaching Amboy before it was dark, after having
passed thirty hours without provisions, and with no other drink than a bottle
of bad rum, the water upon which we rowed being salt. In the evening I went to
bed with a very violent fever. I had somewhere read that cold water, drank
plentifully, was a remedy in such cases. I followed the prescription, was in a
profuse sweat for the greater part of the night, and the fever left me. The
next day I crossed the river in a ferry-boat, and continued my journey on foot.
I had fifty miles to walk, in order to reach Burlington, where I was told I
should find passage-boats that would convey me to Philadelphia. It rained hard
the whole day, so that I was wet to the skin. Finding myself fatigued about
noon, I stopped at a paltry inn, where I passed the rest of the day and the
whole night, beginning to regret that I had quitted my home. I made besides so
wretched a figure, that I was suspected to be some runaway servant. This I
discovered by the questions that were asked me; and I felt that I was every
moment in danger of being taken up as such. The next day, however, I continued
my journey, and arrived in the evening at an inn, eight or ten miles from
Burlington, that was kept by one Dr. Brown.

This man entered into conversation with me while I took some refreshment, and
perceiving I had read a little, he expressed toward me considerable interest
and friendship. Our acquaintance continued during the remainder of his life. I
believe him to have been what is called an itinerant doctor; for there was no
town in England, or indeed in Europe, of which he could not give a particular
account. He was neither deficient in understanding nor literature, but he was a
sad infidel; and, some years after, undertook to travesty the Bible in
burlesque verse, as Cotton has travestied Virgil. He exhibited, by this means,
many facts in a very ludicrous point of view, which would have given umbrage to
weak minds, had his work been published, which it never was.

I spent the night at his house, and reached Burlington the next morning. On my
arrival, I had the mortification to learn that the ordinary passage-boats had
failed a little before. This was on a Saturday, and there would be no other
boat till the Tuesday following. I returned to the house of an old woman in the
town who had sold me some gingerbread to eat on my passage, and I asked her
advice. She invited me to take up my abode with her till an opportunity offered
for me to embark. Fatigued with having traveled so far on foot, I accepted her
invitation. When she understood that I was a Printer, she would have persuaded
me to stay at Burlington, and set up my trade: but she was little aware of the
capital that would be necessary for such a purpose! I was treated while at her
house with true hospitality. She gave me, with the utmost good will, a dinner
of beef-steaks, and would accept of nothing in return but a pint of ale.

Here I imagined myself to be fixed till the Tuesday in the ensuing week, but
walking out in the evening by the river side, I saw a boat with a number of
persons in it approach. It was going to Philadelphia, and the company took me
in. A^ there was no wind, we could only make way with our oars. About midnight,
not perceiving the town, some of the company were of opinion that we must have
passed it, and were unwi^ling to row any farther; the rest not knowing where we
were it was resolved that we should stop. We drew toward the shore, entered a
creek, and landed near some old palisades, which served us for firewood it
being a cold night in October. Here we stayed till day, when one of the company
found the place in which we were to be Cooper's Creek, a little above
Philadelphia; which in reality we perceived the moment we were out of the
creek. We arrived on Sunday about eight or nine o'clock in the morning, and
landed on Market-street wharf.

I have entered into the particulars of my voyage, and shall in like manner
describe my first entrance into this city, that you may be able to compare
beginnings so little auspicious, with the figure I have since made.

On my arrival at Philadelphia I was in my working dress, my best clothes
being to come by sea. I was covered with dirt; my pockets were filled with
shirts and stockings; I was unacquainted with a single soul in the place, and
knew not where to seek for a lodging. Fatigued with walking, rowing, and having
passed the night without sleep, I was extremely hungry, and all my money
consisted of a Dutch dollar, and about a shilling's worth of coppers which I
gave to the boatmen for my passage. As I had assisted them in rowing, they
refused it at first; but I insisted on their taking it. A man is sometimes more
generous when he has little, than when he has much money; probably because, in
the first case, he is desirous of concealing his poverty.

I walked toward the top of the street, looking eagerly on both sides, till I
came to Market-street where I met a child with a loaf of bread. Often had I
made my dinner on dry bread. I enquired where he had bought it, and went
straight to the baker's shop which he pointed out to me. I asked for some
biscuits, expecting to find such as we had at Boston; but they made it seems,
none of that sort at Philadelphia. I then asked for a three-penny loaf. They
made no loaves of that price. Finding myself ignorant of the prices, as well as
of the different kinds of bread, I desired him to let me have three pennyworth
of bread of some kind or other. He gave me three large rolls. I was surprised
at receiving so much: I took them, however, and having no room in my pockets, I
walked on with a roll under each arm, eating the third. In this manner I went
through Market-street to Fourth-street, and passed the house of Mr. Read, the
father of my future wife. She was standing at the door, observed me, and
thought, with reason, that I made a very singular and grotesque appearance.

I then turned the corner; and went through Chesnut-street, eating my roll all
the way; and having made this round; I found myself again on Market-street
wharf, near the boat in which I had arrived, I stepped into it to take a
draught of the river water; and finding myself satisfied with my first roll, I
gave the other two to a woman and her child, who had come down the river with
us in the boat, and was waiting to continue her journey. Thus refreshe^, I
regained the street, which was now full of well dressed people, all going the
same way. I joined them, and was thus led to a large Quakers' meeting house
near the marketplace. I sat down with the rest, and after looking round me for
some time, hearing nothing said, and being drowsy from my last night's labor
and want of rest, I fell into a sound sleep. In this state I continued till the
assembly dispersed, when one of the congregation had the goodness to wake me.
This was consequently the first house I entered, or in which I slept at
Philadelphia.

I began again to walk along the street by the river side; and looking
attentively in the face of every one I met, I at length perceived a young
quaker, whose countenance pleased me. I accosted him, and begged him to inform
me where a stranger might find a lodging. We were then near the sign of the
Three Mariners. They receive travelers here, said he, but it is not a house
that bears a good character; if you will go with me, I will show you a better
one. He conducted me to the Crooked Billet, in Water-street. There I ordered
something for dinner, and during my meal a number of curious questions were put
to me; my youth and appearance exciting the suspicion of my being a runaway.
After dinner my drowsiness returned, and I threw myself upon a bed without
taking off my clothes, and slept till six o'clock in the evening, when I was
called to supper* I afterward went to bed at a very early hour, and did not
awake till the next morning.

As soon as I got up I put myself in as decent a trim as I could, and went to
the house of Andrew Bradford the printer. I found his father in the shop, whom
I had seen at New York. Having traveled on horseback, he had arrived at
Philadelphia before me. He introduced me to his son, who received me with
civility, and gave me some breakfast; but told me he had no occasion for a
journeyman, having lately procured one. He added, that there was another
printer newly settled in the town, of the name of Keimer, who might perhaps
employ me; and that in case of a refusal, I should be welcome to lodge at his
house, and he would give me a little work now and then, till something better
should offer.

The old man offered to introduce me to the new printer. When we were at his
house: "Neighbor," said he, "I bring you a young man in the printing business;
perhaps you may have need of his services."

Keimer asked me some questions, put a composing stick in my hand to see how I
could work, and then said, that at present he had nothing for me to do, but
that he should soon be able to employ me. At the same time taking old Bradford
for an inhabitant of the town will-disposed toward him, he communicated his
project to him, and the prospect he had of success. Bradford was careful not to
discover that he was the father of the other printer: and from what Keimer had
said, that he hoped shortly to be in possession of the greater part of the
business of the town, led him by artful questions, and by starting some
difficulties, to disclose all his views, what his hopes were founded upon, and
how he intended to proceed. I was present, and I heard it all. I instantly saw
that one of the two was a cunning old fox, and the other a perfect novice.
Bradford left me with Keimer, who was strangely surprised when I informed him
who the old man was.

I found Keimer's printing materials to consist of an old damaged press, and a
small cast of worn-out English letters, with which he was himself at work upon
an elegy on Aquila Rose, whom I have mentioned above, an ingenious young man,
and of an excellent character, highly esteemed in the town, secretary to the
assembly, and a very tolerable poet. Keimer also made verses, but they were
indifferent ones. He could not be said to write in verse, for his method was to
set the lines as they flowed from his muse; and as he worked without copy, had
but one set of letter-cases, and the elegy would probably occupy all his type,
it was impossible for any one to assist him. I endeavored to put his press in
order, which he had not yet used, and of which indeed he understood nothing:
and having promised to come and work off his elegy as soon as it should be
ready, I returned to the house of Bradford, who gave me some trifle to do for
the present, for which I had my board and lodging.

In a few days Keimer sent for me to print off his elegy. He had now procured
another set of letter-cases, and had a pamphlet to reprint, upon which he set
me to work.

The two Philadelphia printers appeared destitute of every qualification
necessary in their profession. Bradford had not been brought up to it, and was
very illiterate. Keimer, though he understo^^ a little of the business, was
merely a compositor, and wholly incapable of working at the press. He (...)
been one of the French prophets, and knew (...) to imitate their supernatural
agitations. At the time of our first acquaintance he professed no particular
religion, but a little of all upon occasion. He was totally ignorant of the
world, and a great knave at heart, as I had afterward an opportunity of
experiencing.

Keimer could not endure that, working with him, I should lodge at Bradford's.
He had indeed a house, but it was unfurnished; so that he could not take me in.
He procured me a lodging at Mr. Read's, his landlord, whom I have already
mentioned. My trunk and effects being now arrived, I thought of making, in the
eyes of Miss Read, a more respectable appearance than when chance exhibited me
to her view, eating my roll, and wandering in the streets.

From this period I began to contract acquaintance with such young people of
the town as were fond of reading, and spent my evenings with them agreeably,
while at the same time I gained money by my industry, and, thanks to my
frugality, lived contented. I thus forgot Boston as much as possible, and
wished every one to be ignorant of the place of my residence, except my friend
Collins, to whom I wrote, and who kept my secret.

An incident, however arrived, which sent me home much sooner than I had
proposed. I had a brother-in-law, of the name of Robert Holmes, master of a
trading sloop from Boston to Delaware* Being at Newcastle, forty miles below
Philadelphia, he heard of me, and wrote to inform me of the chagrin which my
sudden departure from Boston had occasioned my parents, and of the affection
which they still entertained for me, assuring me that, if I would return, every
thing should be adjusted to my satisfaction; and he was very pressing in his
entreaties. I answered his letter, thanked him for his advice, and explained
the reasons which had induced me to quit Boston with such force and clearness,
that he was convinced I had been less to blame than he had imagined.

Sir William Keith, Governor of the province was at Newcastle at the time.
Captain Holmes, being by chance in his company when he received my letter, took
occasion to speak of me, and showed it him. The Governor read it, and appeared
surprised when he learned my age. He thought me, he said, a young man of very
promising talents, and that, of consequence, I ought to be encouraged; that
there were at Philadelphia none but very ignorant printers, and that if I were
to set up for myself, he had no doubt of my success; that, for his own part, he
would procure me all the public business, and would render me every other
service in his power. My brother-in-law related all this to me afterward at
Boston; but I knew nothing of it at the time; when one day Keimer and I being
at work together near the window, we saw the Governor and another gentleman,
Colonel French of Newcastle, handsomely dressed, cross the street, and make
directly for our house. We heard them at the door, and Keimer, believing it to
be a visit to himself, went immediately down: but the Governor enquired for me,
came up stairs, and, with (...) condescension and politeness to which I had not
at all been accustomed, paid me many compliments, desired to be acquainted with
me, obligingly reproached me for not having made myself known to him on my
arrival in the town, and wished me to accompany him to a tavern, where he and
colonel French were going to taste some excellent Madeira wine.

I was, I confess, somewhat surprised, and Keimer appeared thunderstruck. I
went however with the governor and the colonel to a tavern at the corner of
Third-street, where, while we were drinking the Madeira, he proposed to me to
establish a printing house. He set forth the probabilities of success, and
himself and colonel French assured me that I should have their protection and
influence in obtaining the printing of the public papers of both governments;
and as I appeared to doubt whether my father would assist me in this
enterprise, Sir William said that he would give me a letter to him, in which he
would represent the advantages of the scheme, in a light which he had no doubt
would determine him. It was thus concluded that I should return to Boston by
the first vessel, with the letter of recommendation from the governor to my
father. Meanwhile the project was to be kept secret, and I continued to work
for Keimer as before.

The Governor sent every now and then to invite me to dine with him. I
considered this as a very great honor; and I was the more sensible of it, as
he conversed with me in the most affable, familiar, and friendly manner
imaginable.

Toward the end of April 1724, a small vessel was ready to sail for Boston. I
took leave of Keimer, upon the pretext of going to see my parents. The governor
gave me a long letter, in which he said many flattering things of me to my
father; and strongly recommended the project of my settling at Philadelphia, as
a thing which could not fail to make my fortune.

Going down the bay we struck on a flat, and sprung a leak. The weather was
very tempestuous, and we were obliged to pump without intermission; I took my
turn. We arrived however safe and sound at Boston, after about a fortnight's
passage.

I had been absent seven complete months, and my relations, during that
interval, had received no intelligence of me; for my brother-in-law, Holmes,
was not yet returned, and had not written about me. My unexpected appearance
surprised the family; but they were all delighted at seeing me again, and,
except by brother, welcomed me home. I went to him at the printing-office. I
was better dressed than I had ever been while in his service: I had a complete
suit of clothes, new and neat, a watch in my pocket, and my purse was furnished
with nearly five pounds sterling in money. He gave me no very civil reception;
and having eyed me from head to foot, resumed his work.

The workmen asked me with eagerness where I had been, what sort of a country
it was, and how I liked it. I spoke in the highest terms of Philadelphia, the
happy life we led there, and expressed my intention of going back again. One of
them asked what sort of money we had, I displayed before them a handful of
silver, which I drew from my pocket. This was a curiosity to which they were
not accustomed, paper being the current money at Boston. I failed not after
this to let them see my watch; and at last, my brother continuing sullen and
out of humor, I gave them a shilling to drink, and took my leave. This visit
stung my brother to the soul; for when, shortly after, my mother spoke to him
of a reconciliation, and a desire to see us upon good terms, he told her that I
had so insulted him before his men, that he would never forget or forgive it:
in this, however, he was mistaken.

The governor's letter appeared to excite in my father some surprise; but he
said little. After some days, Capt. Holmes being returned, he showed it him,
asking him if he knew Keith, and what sort of a man he was: adding, that, in
his opinion, it proved very little discernment to think of setting up a boy in
business, who for three years to come would not be of an age to be ranked in
the class of men. Holmes said every thing he could in favor of the scheme; but
my father firmly maintained its absurdity, and at last gave a positive refusal.
He wrote, however, a civil letter to Sir William, thanking him for the
protection he had so obligingly offered me, but refusing to assist me for the
present, because he thought me too young to be entrusted with the conduct of so
important an enterprise, and which would require so considerable a sum of money.

My old comrade Collins, who was a clerk i^ the post office, charmed with the
account I gave of my new residence, expressed a desire of going thither; and
while I waited my father's determination, he set off before me, by land, for
Rhode Island, leaving his books which formed a handsome collection in
mathematics and natural philosophy, (...) be conveyed with mine to New York,
where (...) purposed to wait for me.

My father, though he could not approve Sir William's proposal, was yet pleased
that I had obtained so advantegeous a recommendation as that of a person of his
rank, and that my industry and economy had enabled me to equip myself so
handsomely in so short a period. Seeing no appearance of accommodating matters
between my brother and me, he consented to my return to Philadelphia, advised
me to be civil to every body, to endeavor to obtain general esteem, and avoid
satire and sarcasm, to which he thought I was too much inclined; adding, that,
with perseverance and prudent economy, I might, by the time I became of age,
save enough to establish myself in business; and that if a small sum should
then ^e wanting he would undertake to supply it.

This was all I could obtain from him, except some trifling presents, in token
of friendship from him and my mother. I embarked once more for New York,
furnished at this time with their approbation and blessing. The sloop having
touched at Newport in Rhode Island, I paid a visit to my brother John, who had
for some years been settled there, and was married. He had always been attached
to me, and received me with great affection. One of his friends, whose name was
Vernon, having a debt of about thirty-six pounds due to him in Pennsylvania,
begged me to receive it for him, and keep the money till I should hear from
him: accordingly he gave me an order for that purpose. This affair occasioned
me, in the sequel, much uneasiness.

At Newport we took on board a number of passengers; among whom were two young
women, and a grave and sensible quaker lady with her servants. I had shown an
obliging forwardness in rendering the quaker some trifling services, which led
her, probably, to feel some interest in my welfare; for when she saw a
familiarity take place, and every day increase, between the two young women and
me, she took me aside and said, "Young man, I am in pain for thee. Thou have no
parent to watch over thy conduct, and thou seem to be ignorant of the world,
and the snares to which youth is exposed. Rely upon what I tell thee: those are
women of bad characters; I perceive it in all their actions. If thou do not
take care, they will lead thee into danger. They are strangers to thee, and I
advise thee, by the friendly interest I take in thy preservation, to form no
connection with them." As I appeared at first not to think quite so ill of them
as she did, she related many things she had seen and heard, which had escaped
my attention, but which convinced me she was in the right. I thanked her for
her obliging advice, and promised to follow it.

When we arrived at New York, they informed me where they lodged, and invited
me to come and see them. I did not however go, and it was well I did not; for
the next day, the Captain missing a silver spoon and some other things which
had been taken from the cabin, and knowing these women to be prostitutes,
procured a search warrant, found the stolen goods upon them, and had them
punished. And thus, after having been saved from one rock concealed under
water, upon which the vessel struck during our passage, I escaped another of a
still more dangerous nature.

At New York I found my friend Collins, who had arrived some time before. We
had been intimate from our infancy, and had read the same books together; but
he had the advantage of being able to devote more time to reading and study,
and an astonishing disposition for mathematics, in which he left me far behind
him. When at Boston, I had been accustomed to pass with him almost all my
leisure hours. He was then a sober and industrious lad; his knowledge had
gained him (...) very general esteem, and he seemed to promise to make an
advantageous figure in society. But, during my absence, he had unfortunately
addicted himself to brandy, and I learned, as well from himself as from the
report of others, that every day since his arrival at New York he had been
intoxicated, and had acted in a very extravagant manner. He had also played,
and lost all his money; so that I was obliged to pay his expenses at the inn,
and to maintain him during the rest of the journey; a burden that was very
inconvenient to me.

The Governor of New York, whose name was Burnet, hearing the Captain say that
a young man who was a passenger in his ship had a great number of books, begged
him to bring me to his house, I accordingly went, and should have taken Collins
with me, had he been sober. The Governor treated me with great civility, showed
me his library* which was a very considerable one, and we talked for some time
upon books and authors. This was the second Governor who had honored me with
his attention; and to a poor boy, as I then was these little adventures did not
fail to be pleasing.

We arrived at Philadelphia. On the way I received Vernon's money, without
which we should have been unable to have finished our journey.

Collins wished to get employment as a merchant's clerk; but either his breath
or his countenance betrayed his bad habit; for, though he had recommendations,
he met with no success, and continued to lodge and eat with me, and at my
expense. Knowing that I had Vernon's money, he was continually asking me to
lend him some of it; promising to repay me as soon as he should get employment.
At last he had drawn so much of this money, that I was extremely alarmed at
what might become of me, should he fail to make good the deficiency. His habit
of drinking did not all diminish, and was a frequent source of discord between
us: for when he had drank a little too much, he was very headstrong.

Being one day in a boat together, on the Delaware, with some other young
persons, he refused to take his turn in rowing. You shall row for me, said he,
till we get home. -- No, I replied, we will not row for you. -- You shall, said
he, or remain upon the water all night. -- As you please. -- Let us row, said
the rest of the company: what signifies whether he assists or not. But, already
angry with him for his conduct in other respects, I persisted in my refusal. He
then swore that he would make me row, or would throw me out of the boat; and he
made up to me. As soon as he was within my reach I took him by the collar, gave
him a violent thrust, and threw him head-foremost into the river. I knew that
he was a good swimmer, and was therefore under no apprehensions for his life.
Before he could turn himself, we were able, by a few strokes of our oars, to
place ourselves out of his reach; and whenever he touched the boat, we asked
him if he would row, stricking his hands with the oars to make him let go his
hold. He was nearly suffocated with rage, but obstinately refused making any
promise to row. Perceiving at length that his strength began to be exhausted,
we took him into the boat, and conveyed him home in the evening, completely
drenched. The utmost coldness subsisted between us after this adventure. At
last the captain of a West India ship, who was commissioned to procure a tutor
for the children of a gentleman at Barbados, meeting with Collins, offered him
the place. He accepted it, and took his leave of me, promising to discharge the
debt he owed me with the first money he should receive; but I have heard
nothing of him since.

The violation of the trust reposed in me by Vernon, was one of the first great
errors of my life; and it proves that my father was not mistakes when he
supposed me too young to be entrusted with the management of important affairs.
But Sir William, upon reading his letter, thought him too prudent. There was a
difference, he said, between individuals: years of maturity were not always
accompanied with discretion, neither was youth in every instance devoid of it.
Since your father, added he, will not set you up in business, I will do it
myself. Make out a list of what will be wanted from England, and I will send
for the articles. You shall repay me when you can. I am determined to have a
good printer here, and I am sure you will succeed. This was said with so much
seeming cordiality, that I suspected not for an instant the sincerity of the
offer. I had hitherto kept the project, with which Sir William had inspired me,
of settling in business a secret at Philadelphia, and I still continued to do
so. Had my reliance on the governor been known, some friend, better acquainted
with his character than myself, would doubtless have advised me not to trust
him; for I afterward learned that he was universally known to be liberal of
promises, which he had no intention to perform. But having never solicited him,
how could I suppose his offers to be deceitful? On the contrary, I believed him
to be the best man in the world.

I gave him an inventory of a small printing-office; the expense of which I had
calculated at about a hundred pounds sterling. He expressed his approbation;
but asked if my presence in England, that I might choose the characters myself,
and see that every article was good in its kind, would not be an advantage. You
will also be able, said he, to form some acquaintance there, and establish a
correspondence with stationers and booksellers. This I acknowledged was
desirable. That being the case, added he, hold yourself in readiness to go with
the Annis. This was the annual vessel, and the only one, at that time, which
made regular voyages between the ports of London and Philadelphia. But the
Annis was not to sail for some months. I therefore continued to work with
Ke^mer, unhappy respecting the sum which Collins had drawn from me, and almost
in continual agony at the thoughts of Vernon, who fortunately made no demand of
his money till several years after.

In the account of my first voyage from Boston to Philadelphia, I omitted I
believe a trifling circumstance, which will not perhaps be out of place here.
During a calm which stopped us above Block-island, the crew employed themselves
in fishing for cod, of which they caught a great number. I had hitherto adhered
to my resolution of not eating any thing that had possessed life; and I
considered on this occasion, agreeably to the maxims of my master Tryon, the
capture of every fish as a sort of murder, committed without provocation, since
these animals had neither done, nor were capable of doing, the smallest injury
to any one that should justify the measure. This mode of reasoning I conceived
to be unanswerable. Meanwhile I had formerly been extremely fond of fish; and
when one of these cod was taken out of the fryingpan, I thought its flavor
delicious. I hesitated some time between principle and inclination, till at
last recollecting, that when the cod had been opened, some small fish were
found in its belly, I said to myself, If you eat one another, I see no reason
why we may not eat you. I accordingly dined on the cod with no small degree of
pleasure, and have since continued to eat like the rest of mankind, returning
only occasionally to my vegetable plan. How convenient does it prove to be a
rational animal, that knows how to find or invent a plausible pretext for
whatever it has an inclination to do!

I continued to live upon good terms with Keimer, who had not the smallest
suspicion of my projected establishment. He still retained a portion of his
former enthusiasm; and being fond of argument, we frequently disputed together.
I was so much in the habit of using my Socratic method, and had so frequently
puzzled him by my questions, which appeared at first very distant from the
point in debate, yet nevertheless led to it by degrees, involving him in
difficulties and contradictions from which he was unable to extricate himself,
that he became at last ridiculously cautious, and would scarcely answer the
most plain and familiar question without previously asking me -- What would you
infer from that? Hence he formed so high an opinion of my talents for
refutation, that he seriously proposed to me to become his colleague in the
establishment of a new religious sect. He was to propagate the doctrine by
preaching, and I to refute every opponent.

When he explained to me his tenets, I found many absurdities which I refused
to admit, unless he would agree in turn to adopt some of my opinions. Keimer
wore his beard long, because Moses had somewhere said, Thou shall not mar the
corners of thy beard. He likewise observed the Sabbath; and these were with him
two very essential points. I disliked them both; but I consented to adopt them,
provided he would abstain from animal food. I doubt, said he, whether my
constitution will be able to support it. I assured him on the contrary, that he
would find himself the better for it. He was naturally a glutton, and I wished
to amuse myself by starving him. He consented to make trial of this regimen, if
(...) would bear him company; and in reality we continued it for three months.
A woman in the neighborhood prepared and brought us our victuals, to whom I
gave a list of forty dishes; in the composition of which there entered neither
flesh nor fish. This fancy was the more agreeable to me, as it turned to good
account; for the whole expense of our living did not exceed for each
eighteen-pence a week.

I have since that period observed several Lents with the greatest strictness,
and have suddenly returned again to my ordinary diet, without experiencing the
smallest inconvenience; which has led me to regard as of no importance the
advice commonly given, of introducing gradually such alterations of regimen.

I continued it cheerfully; but poor Keimer suffered terribly. Tired of the
project, he sighed for the flesh pots of Egypt. At length he ordered a roast
pig, and invited me and two of our female acquaintance to dine with him; but
the pig being ready a little too soon, he could not resist the temptation, and
eat it all up before we arrived.

During the circumstances I have related, I had paid some attentions to Miss
Read. I entertained for her the utmost esteem and affection; and I had reason
to believe that these sentiments were mutual. But we were both young, scarcely
more than eighteen years of age; and as I was on the point of undertaking a
long voyage, her mother thought it prudent to prevent matters being carried too
far for the present, judging that if marriage was our object, there would be
more propriety in it after my return, when, as at least I expected, I should be
established in my business. Perhaps also she thought that my expectations were
not so well-founded as I imagined.

My most intimate acquaintance at this time were Charles Osborne, Joseph
Watson, and James Ralph; young men who were all fond of reading. The two first
were clerks to Mr. Charles Brockdon, one of the principal attorneys in the
town, and the other clerk to a merchant. Watson was an upright, pious and
sensible young man: the others were somewhat more loose in their principles of
religion, particularly Ralph, whose faith, as well as that of Collins, I had
contributed to shake; each of whom made me suffer a very adequate punishment.
Osborne was sensible, and sincere and affectionate in his friendships, but too
much inclined to the critic in matters of literature. Ralph was ingenious and
shrewd, genteel in his address, and extremely eloquent. I do not remember to
have met with a more agreeable speaker. They were both enamoured of the muses,
and had already evinced their passion by some small poetical productions.

It was a custom with us to take a charming walk on Sundays, in the woods that
border on the Skuylkill. Here we read together and afterward conversed on what
we read. Ralph was disposed to give himself up entirely to poetry. He flattered
himself that he should arrive at great eminence in the art, and even acquire a
fortune. The sublimest poets, he pretended, when they first began to write,
committed as many faults as himself. Osborne endeavored to dissuad him from
it, by assuring him that he had no genius for poetry, and advised him to stick
to the trade in which he had been brought up. In the road of commerce, said he,
you will be sure, by diligence and assiduity, though you have no capital, of so
far succeeding as to be employed as a factor, and may thus, in time, acquire
the means of setting up for yourself. I concured in these sentiments, but at
the same time expressed my approbation of amusing ourselves sometimes with
poetry, with a view to improve our style. In consequence of this it was
proposed, that, at our next meeting, each of us should bring a copy of verses
of his own composition. Our object in this competition was to benefit each
other by our mutual remarks, criticisms, and corrections; and as style and
expression were all we had in view, we excluded every idea of invention, by
agreeing that our task should be a version of the eighteenth psalm, in which is
described the descent of the deity.

The time of our meeting drew near, when Ralph called upon me, and told me his
piece was ready. I informed him that I had been idle, and, not much liking the
task, had done nothing. He showed me his piece, and asked what I thought of it.
I expressed myself in terms of warm approbation; because it really appeared to
have considerable merit. He then said: Osborne will never acknowledge the
smallest degree of excellence in any production of mine. Envy alone dictates to
him a thousand animadversions. Of you he is not so jealous: I wish therefore
you would take the verses and produce them as your own. I will pretend not to
have had leisure to write any thing. We shall then see in what manner he will
speak of them. I agreed to this little artifice, and immediately transcribed
the verses to prevent all suspicion.

We met. Watson's performance was the first that was read. It had some
beauties, but many faults. We next read Osborne's, which was much better. Ralph
did it justice, remarking a few imperfections, and applauding such parts as
were excellent. He had himself nothing to show. It was now my turn. I made some
difficulty; seemed as if I wished to be excused; pretended that I had had no
time to make corrections, etc. No excuse, however, was admissible, and the
piece must be produced. It was read and re-read. Watson and Osborne immediately
resigned the palm, and united in applauding it. Ralph alone made a few remarks,
and proposed some alterations; but I defended my text. Osborne agreed with me,
and told Ralph he was no more able to criticize than he was able to write.

When Osborne was alone with me, he expressed himself still more strongly in
favor of what he considered as my performance. He pretended that he had put
some restraint on himself before, apprehensive of my construing his
commendation into flattery. But who would have supposed, said he, Franklin to
be capable of such a composition? What painting, what energy, what fire! He has
surpassed the original. In his common conversation he appears not to have
choice of words; he hesitates, and is at a loss; and yet, good God, how he
writes!

At our next meeting Ralph discovered the trick we had played Osborne, who was
rallied without mercy.

By this adventure Ralph was fixed in his resolution of becoming a poet. I left
nothing unattempted to divert him from his purpose; but he persevered, till at
last the reading of Pope Probably the Dunciad, where we find him thus
immortalised by the Author: Silence ye wolves, while RALPH to Cynthia bowls,
And makes night hideous; answer him, ye owls!



effected his cure: he became, however, a very tolerable prose writer. I shall
speak more of him hereafter; but as I shall probably have no farther occasion
to mention the other two, I ought to observe here, that Watson died a few years
after in my arms. He was greatly regretted; for he was the best of our society.
Osborne went to the islands, where he gained considerable reputation as a
barrister, and was getting money; but he died young. We had seriously engaged,
that whoever died first should return, if possible, and pay a friendly visit to
the survivor, to give him an account of the other world; but he has never
fulfilled his engagement.

The governor appeared to be fond of my company, and frequently invited me to
his house. He always spoke of his intention of settling me in business, as a
point that was decided. I was to take with me letters of recommendation to a
number of friends; and particularly a letter of credit, in order to obtain the
necessary sum for the purchase of my press, types, and paper. He appointed
various times for me to come for these letters, which would certainly be ready;
and when I came, always put me off to another day.

These successive delays continued till the vessel, whose departure had been
several times deferred, was on the point of setting sail; when I again went to
Sir William's house, to receive my letters and take leave of him. I saw his
secretary, Dr. Bard, who told me that the governor was extremely busy writing,
but that he would be down at Newcastle before the vessel, and that the letters
would be delivered to me there.

Ralph, though he was married and had a child, determined to accompany me in
this voyage. His object was supposed to be the establishing a correspondence
with some mercantile houses, in order to sell goods by commission; but I
afterward learned, that, having reason to be dissatisfied with the parents of
his wife, he proposed to himself to leave her on their hands, and never return
to America again.

Having taken leave of my friends, and interchanged promises of fidelity with
Miss Read, I quitted Philadelphia. At Newcastle the vessel came to anchor. The
governor was arrived, and I went to his lodgings. His secretary received me
with great civility, told me on the part of the governor that he could not see
me then, as he was engaged in affairs of the utmost importance, but that he
would send the letters on board, and that he wished me, with all his heart, a
good voyage and speedy return. I returned, somewhat astonished, to the ship,
but still without entertaining the slightest suspicion.

Mr. Hamilton, a celebrated barrister of Philadelphia, had taken a passage to
England for himself and his son, and, in conjunction with Mr. Denham a quaker,
and Messrs. Oniam and Russel, proprietors of a forge in Maryland, had agreed
for the whole cabin, so that Ralph and I were obliged to take up our lodging
with the crew. Being unknown to every body in the ship, we were looked upon as
the common order of people: but Mr. Hamilton and his son (it was James, who was
afterward governor) left us at Newcastle, and returned to Philadelphia, where
he was recalled, (...) a very great expense, to plead the cause of a vessel
that had been seized; and just as we were about to sail, colonel Finch came on
board, and showed me many civilities. The passengers upon this pai^ me more
attention, and I was invited, together with my friend Ralph, to occupy the
place in the cabin which the return of the Mr. Hamiltons had made vacant; an
offer which we very readily accepted.

Having learned that the dispatches of the governor had been brought on board
by colonel Finch, I asked the captain for the letters that were to be entrusted
to my care. He told me that they were all put together in the bag, which he
could not open at present; but before we reached England, he would give me an
opportunity of taking them out. I was satisfied with this answer, and we
pursued one voyage.

The company in the cabin were all very sociable, and we were perfectly well
off as to provisions, as we had the advantage of the whole of Mr. Hamilton's,
who had laid in a very plentiful stock* During the passage Mr. Denham
contracted a friendship for me, which ended only with his life: in other
respects the voyage was by no means an agreeable one, as we had much bad
weather.

When we arrived in the river, the captain was as good as his word, and allowed
me to search the bag for the governor's letters. I could not find a single one
with my name written on it, as committed to my care; but I selected six or
seven, which I judged from the direction to be those that were intended for me;
particularly one to Mr. Basket the King's printer, an another to a stationer,
who was the first person I called upon. I delivered him the letter as coming
from Governor Keith. I have no acquaintance (said he) with any such person; and
opening the letter, Oh, it is from Riddlesden! he exclaimed. I have lately
discovered him to be a very arrant knave, and I wish to have nothing to do
either with him or his letters. He instantly put the letter into my hand,
turned upon his heel, and left me to serve some customers.

I was astonished at finding these letters were not from the Governor.
Reflecting and putting circumstances together, I then began to doubt his
sincerity. I rejoined my friend Denham, and related the whole affair to him. He
let me at once into Keith's character, told me there was not the least
probability of his having written a single letter; that no one who knew him
ever placed any reliance on him, and laughed at my credulity in supposing that
the Governor would give me a letter of credit, when he had no credit for
himself. As I showed some uneasiness respecting what step I should take, he
advised me to try to get employment in the house of some printer. You may
there, said he, improve yourself in business, and you will be able to settle
yourself the more advantageously when you return to America.

We knew already, as well as the stationer, attorney Riddlesden to be a knave.
He had nearly ruined the father of Miss Read, by drawing him in to be his
security. We learned from his letter, that he was secretly carrying on an
intrigue, in concert with the Governor, to the prejudice of Mr. Hamilton, who
it was supposed would by this time be in Europe. Denham, who was Hamilton
friend, was of opinion that he ought to be made acquainted with it; and in
reality, the instant be arrived in England, which was very soon after, I waited
on him, and, as much from good will to him as from resentment against the
Governor, put the letter into his hands. He thanked me very sincerely, the
information it contained being of consequence to him; and from that moment
bestowed on me his friendship, which afterward proved (...) many occasions
serviceable to me.

But what are we to think of a Governor who could play so scurvy a trick, and
thus grossly deceive a poor young lad, wholly destitute of experience? It was a
practice with him. Wishing to please every body, and having little to bestow,
(...) was lavish of promises. He was in other respects sensible and judicious,
a very tolerable writer, and a good Governor for the people; though not so f^r
the proprietaries, whose instructions he frequently disregarded. Many of our
best laws were his work, and established during his administration.

Ralph and I were inseparable companions. We took a lodging together at
three-and-sixpence 1 week, which was as much as we could afford. He met with
some relations in London, but they were poor, and not able to assist him. He
now, for the first time, informed me of his intention to remain in England, and
that he had no thoughts of ever returning to Philadelphia. He was totally
without money; the little he had been able to raise having barely sufficed for
his passage. I had still fifteen pistoles remaining; and to me he had from time
to time recourse, while he tried to get employment.

At first, believing himself possessed of talents for the stage, he thought of
turning actor; but Wilkes, to whom he applied, frankly advised him to renounce
the idea, as it was impossible to succeed. He next proposed to Roberts, a
bookseller in Paternoster-Row, to write a weekly paper in the manner of the
Spectator, upon terms to which Roberts would not listen. Lastly, he endeavored
to procure employment as a copyist, and applied to the lawyers and stationers
about the Temple; but he could find no vacancy.

As to myself, I immediately got engaged at Palmer's, at that time a noted
printer in Bartholomew Close, with whom I continued nearly a year. I applied
very assiduously to my work; but I expended with Ralph almost all that I
earned. Plays, and other places of amusement which we frequented together,
having exhausted my pistoles, we lived after this from hand to mouth. He
appeared to have entirely forgotten his wife and child, as I also, by degrees,
forgot my engagements with Miss Read, to whom I never wrote more than one
letter, and that merely to inform her that I was not likely to return soon.
This was another grand error of my life, which I should be desirous of
correcting, were I to begin my career again.

I was employed at Palmer's on the second edition of Woolaston's Religion of
Nature. Some of his arguments appearing to me not to be well founded, I wrote a
small metaphysical treatise, in which I animadverted on those passages. It was
entitled a Dissertation on Liberty and Necessity, Pleasure and Pain. I
dedicated it to my friend Ralph, and printed a small number of copies. Palmer
upon this treated me with more consideration. and regarded me as a young man of
talents; though he seriously took me to task for the principles of my pamphlet,
which he looked upon as abominable. The printing of this work was another error
of my life.

While I lodged in Little Britain I formed acquaintance with a bookseller of
the name of W^^cox, whose shop was next door to me. Circulating libraries were
not then in use. He had an immense collection of books of all sorts. We agreed
that, for a reasonable retribution, of which I have now forgotten the price, I
should have free access to his library, and take what books I pleased, which I
was to return when I had read them. I considered this agreement as a very great
advantage; and I derived from it as much benefit as was in my power.

My pamphlet falling into the hands of a surgeon, of the name of Lions, author
of a book entitled Infallibility of Human Judgment, was the occasion of a
considerable intimacy between us. He expressed great esteem for me, came
frequently to see me in order to converse upon metaphysical subjects, and
introduced me to Dr. Mandeville, author of the Fable of Bees, who had
instituted a club (...) a tavern in Cheapside, of which he was the (...) he was
a facetious and very amusing character. He also introduced me, at Baston's
coffee-house, to Dr. Pemberton, who promised to give me an opportunity of
seeing Sir Isaac Newton, which I very ardently desired; but he never kept his
word.

I had brought some curiosities with me from America; the principal of which
was a purse made of asbestos, which fire only purifies. Sir (...) Sl^ane
hearing of it, called upon me, and invited me to his house in Bloomsbury
square, where, after showing me every thing that was curious, he prevailed on
me to add this piece to his collection; for which he paid me very handsomely.

There lodged in the same house with us a young woman, a milliner, who had a
shop by the side of the Exchange. Lively and sensible, and having received an
education somewhat above her rank, her conversation was very agreeable. Ralph
read plays to her every evening. They became intimate. She took another
lodging, and he followed her. They lived for some time together; but Ralph
being without employment, she having a child, and the profits of her business
not sufficing for the maintenance of three, he resolved to quit London, and try
a country school. This was a plan in which he thought himself likely to
succeed, as he wrote a fine hand, and was versed in arithmetic and accounts.
But considering the office as beneath him, and expecting some day to make a
better figure in the world, when he should be ashamed of its being known that
he had exercised a profession so little honorable, he changed his name, and
did me the honor of assuming mine. He wrote to me soon after his departure,
informing me that he was settled at a small village in Berkshire. In his letter
he recommended Mrs. T***, the milliner, to my care, and requested an answer,
directed to Mr. Franklin, schoolmaster at N***.

He continued to write to me frequently, sending me large fragments of an epic
poem he was composing, and which he requested me to criticize and correct. I
did so, but not without endeavoring to prevail on him to renounce this
pursuit. Young had just published one of his Satires. I copied and sent him a
great part of it; in which the author demonstrates the folly of cultivating the
Muses, from the hope, by their instrumentality, of rising in the world. It was
all to no purpose; paper after paper of his poem continued to arrive every post.

Meanwhile Mrs. T*** having lost, on his account, both her friends and her
business, was frequently in distress. In this dilemma she had recourse to me;
and to extricate her from her difficulties, I lent her all the money I could
spare. I felt a little too much fondness for her. Having at that time no ties
of religion, and taking advantage of her necessitous situation, I attempted
liberties (another error of my life) which she repelled with becoming
indignation. She informed Ralph of my conduct; and the affair occasioned a
breach between us. When he returned to London, he gave me to understand that he
considered all the obligations he owed me as annihilated by this proceeding;
whence I concluded that I was never to expect the payment of what money I had
lent him, or advanced on his account. I was the less afflicted at this, as he
was unable to pay me; and as, by losing his friendship, I was relieved at the
same time from a very heavy burden.

I now began to think of laying by some money. The printing house of Watts,
near Lincoln's Inn-Fields, being a still more considerable one than that in
which I worked, it was probable I might find it more advantageous to be
employed there. I offered myself, and was accepted; and in this house I
continued during the remainder of my stay in London.

On my entrance I worked at first as a pressman, conceiving that I had need of
bodily exercise, to which I had been accustomed in America, where the printers
work alternately as compositors and at the press. I drank nothing but water.
The other workmen, to the number of about fifty, were great drinkers of beer. I
carried occasionally a large form of letters in each hand, up and down stairs,
while the rest employed both hands to carry one. They were surprised to see, by
this and many other examples, that the American Aquatic, as they used to call
me, was stronger than those who drank porter. The beer-boy had sufficient
employment during the whole day in serving that house alone. -- My
fellow-pressman drank every day a pint of beer before breakfast, a pint with
bread and cheese for breakfast, one between breakfast and dinner, one at
dinner, one again about six o'clock in the afternoon, and another after he had
finished his day's work. This custom appeared to me abominable; but he had
need, said he, of all this beer, in order to acquire strength to work.

I endeavored to convince him that bodily strength furnished by the beer,
could only be in proportion to the solid part of the barley dissolved in the
water of which the beer was composed; that there was a larger portion of flour
in a penny loaf, and that consequently if he eat this loaf, and drank a pint of
water with it, he would derive more strength from it than from a pint of beer.
This reasoning, however, did not prevent him from drinking his accustomed
quantity of beer, and paying every Saturday night a score of four or five
shillings a week for this cursed beverage; an expense from which I was wholly
exempt. Thus do these poor devils continue all their lives in a state of
voluntary wretchedness and poverty.

At the end of a few weeks, Watts having occasion for me above stairs as a
compositor, I quitted the press. The compositors demanded of me garnish-money
afresh. This I considered as an imposition, having already paid below. The
master was of the same opinion, and desired me not to comply. I thus remained
two or three weeks out of the fraternity. I was consequently looked upon as
excommunicated; and whenever I was absent, no little trick that malice could
suggest was left unpractised upon me. I found my letters mixed, my pages
transposed, my matter broken, etc. etc. all which was attributed to the spirit
that haunted the chapel Printing-houses in general are thus denominated by the
workmen; the spirit they call by the name of Ralph.
, and tormented those who were not regularly admitted. I was at last obliged to
submit to pay, notwithstanding the protection of the master; convinced of the
folly of not keeping up a good understanding with those among whom we are
destined to live.

After this I lived in the utmost harmony with my fellow laborers, and soon
acquired considerable influence among them. I proposed some alterations in the
laws of the chapel, which I carried without opposition. My example prevailed
with several of them to renounce their abominable practice of bread and cheese
with beer; and they procured, like me, from a neighboring house, a good basin
of warm gruel, in which was a small slice of butter, with toasted bread and
nutmeg. This was a much better breakfast, which did not cost more than a pint
of beer, namely, three-halfpence, and at the same time preserving the head
clearer. Those who continued to gorge themselves with beer, often lost their
credit with the publican, from neglecting to pay their score. They had then
recourse to me, to become security for them; their light, as they used to call
it, being out. I attended at the pay-table every Saturday evening, to take up
the little sum which I had made myself answerable for; and which sometimes
amounted to nearly thirty shillings a week.

This circumstance, added to my reputation of being a tolerable good gabber,
or, in other words, skilful in the art of burlesque, kept up my importance in
the chapel. I had besides recommended myself to the esteem of my master by my
assiduous application to business, never observing Saint Monday. My
extraordinary quickness in composing always procured me such work as was most
urgent, and which is commonly best paid; and thus my time passed away in a very
pleasant manner.

My lodging in Little Britain being too far from the printing house, I took
another in Duke-street, opposite the Roman Chapel. It was at the back of an
Italian warehouse. The house was kept by a widow, who had a daughter, a
servant, and a shop boy; but the latter slept out of the house. After sending
to the people with whom I lodged in Little Britain, to enquire into my
character, she agreed to take me in at the same price, three-and-sixpence a
week; contenting herself, she said, with so little, because of the security she
would derive; ^s they were all women, from having a man lodge in the house.

She was a woman rather advanced in life, the daughter of Clergyman. She had
been educated a Protestant; but her husband, whose memory she highly revered,
had converted her to the Catholic religion. She had lived in habits of intimacy
with persons of distinction; of whom she knew various anecdotes as far back as
the time of Charles II. Being subject to sits of the gout, which often confined
her to her room, she was sometimes disposed to see company. Hers was so amusing
to me, that I was glad to pass the evening with her as often as she desired it.
Our supper consisted only of half an anchovy a-piece, upon a slice of bread and
butter, with a half a pint of ale between us. But the entertainment was in her
conversation.

The early hours I kept, and the little trouble I occasioned in the family,
made her loath to part with me; and when I mentioned another lodging I had
found, nearer the printing house, at two shillings a week, which fell in with
my plan of saving, she persuaded me to give it up, making herself an abatement
of two shillings: and thus I continued to lodge with her, during the remainder
of my abode in London, at eighteen-pence a week.

In a garret of the house there lived, in the most retired manner, a lady
seventy years of age, of whom I received the following account from my
landlady. She was a Roman Catholic. In her early years she had been sent to the
continent, and entered a convent with the design of becoming a nun; but the
climate not agreeing with her constitution, she was obliged to return to
England, where, as there were no monasteries, she made a vow to lead a monastic
life, in as rigid a manner as circumstances would permit. She accordingly
disposed of all her property to be applied to charitable uses, reserving to
herself only twelve pounds a year; and of this small pittance she gave a part
to the poor, living on water gruel, and never making use of fire but to boil
it. She had lived in this garret a great many years, without paying rent to the
successive Catholic inhabitants that had kept the house; who indeed considered
her abode with them as a blessing. A priest came every day to confess her. I
have asked her, said my landlady, how, living as she did, she could find so
much employment for a confessor? To which she answered, that it was impossible
to avoid vain thoughts.

I was once permitted to visit her. She was cheerful and polite, and her
conversation agreeable. Her apartment was neat; but the whole furniture
consisted of a mattrass, a table, on which were a crucifix and a book, a chair,
which she gave me to sit on, and over the mantle-piece a picture of St.
Veronica displaying her handkerchief, on which was seen the miraculous
impression of the face of Christ, which she explained to me with great gravity.
Her countenance was pale, but she had never experienced sickness; and I may
adduce her as another proof how little is sufficient to maintain life and
health.

At the printing house I contracted an intimacy with a sensible young man of
the name of Wygate, who, as his parents were in good circumstances, had
received a better education than is common with printers. He was a tolerable
Latin scholar, spoke French fluently, and was fond of reading. -- I taught him,
as well as a friend of his, to swim, by taking them twice only into the river;
after which they stood in need of no farther assistance. We one day made a
party to go by water to Chelsea in order to see the College, and Don Soltero's
curiosities. On our return, at the request of the company, whose curiosity
Wygate had excited, I undressed myself, and leaped into the river. I swam from
near Chelsea the whole way to Black, friars Bridge, exhibiting, during my
course, a variety of feats of activity and address, both upon the surface of
the water, as ^ell as under it. This sight occasioned much astonishment and
pleasure to those to whom it was new. In my youth I took great delight in this
exercise. I knew, and could execute, all the evolutions and positions of The*
venot; and I added to them some of my own invention, in which I endeavored to
unite gracefulness and utility. I took a pleasure in displaying them all on
this occasion, and was highly flattered with the admiration they excited.

Wygate, besides his being desirous of perfecting himself in this art, was the
more attached to me from there being, in other respects, a conformity in our
tastes and studies. He at length proposed to me to make the tour of Europe with
him, maintaining ourselves at the same time by working (...) our profession. I
was on the point of consenting, when I mentioned it to my friend Denham, with
whom I was glad to pass an hour whenever I had leisure. He dissuaded me from
the project, and advised me to return to Philadelphia, which he was about to do
himself. I must relate in this place* a trait of this worthy man's character.

He had formerly been in business at Bristol, but failing, he compounded with
his creditors, and departed for America, where, by assiduous application as a
merchant, he acquired in a few years a very considerable fortune. Returning to
England in the same vessel with myself, as I have related above, he invited all
his old creditors to a feast. When assembled, he thanked them for the readiness
with which they had received his small composition; and, while they expected
nothing more than a simple entertainment, each found under his plate, when it
came to be removed, a draft upon a banker for the residue of his debt, with
interest.

He told me it was his intention to carry back with him to Philadelphia a great
quantity of goods, in order to open a store; and he offered to take me with him
in the capacity of clerk, to keep his books, in which he would instruct me,
copy letters, and superintend the store. He added, that, as soon as I had
acquired a knowledge of mercantile transactions, he would improve my situation,
by sending me with a cargo of corn and flour to the American islands, and by
procuring me other lucrative commissions; so that, with good management and
oeconemy, I might in time begin business with advantage for myself.

I relished these proposals. London began to tire me; the agreeable hours I had
passed at Philadelphia presented themselves to my mind, and I wished to see
them revive. I consequently engaged myself to Mr. Denham, at a salary of fifty
pounds a year. This was indeed less than I earned as a compositor, but then I
had a much fairer prospect. I took leave, therefore, as I believed forever, of
printing, and gave myself up entirely to my new occupation, spending all my
time either in going from house to house with Mr. Denham to purchase goods, or
in packing them up, or in expediting the workmen, etc. etc. When every thing
however was on board, I had at last a few days leisure.

During this interval, I was one day sent for by a Gentleman, whom I knew only
by name, It was Sir William Wyndham. I went to his house. He had by some means
heard of my performances between Chelsea and Blackfriars, and that I had taught
the art of swimming to Wygate and another young man in the course of a few
hours. His two sons were on the point of setting out on their travels; (...)
was desirous that they should previously learn to swim, and offered me a very
liberal reward if I would undertake to instruct them. They were not yet arrived
in town, and the stay I should make myself was uncertain; I could not therefore
accept his proposal. I was led however to suppose from this incident, that if I
had wished to remain in London and open a swimming-school, I should perhaps
have gained a great deal of money. This idea struck me so forcibly, that, had
the offer been made sooner, I should have dismissed the thought of returning as
yet to America. Some years after, you and I had a more important business to
settle with one of the sons of Sir William Wyndham, then Lord Egremont. But let
us not anticipate events.

I thus passed about eighteen months in London, working almost without
intermission at my trade, avoiding all expense on my own account, except going
now and then to the play, and purchasing a few books. But my friend Ralph kept
me poor. He owed me about twenty-seven pounds, which was so much money lost;
and when considered as taken from my little savings, was a very great sum. I
had, notwithstanding this, a regard for him, as he possessed many amiable
qualities. But though I had done nothing for myself in point of fortune, I had
increased my stock of knowledge, either by the many excellent books I had read,
or the conversation of learned and literary persons with whom I was acquainted.

We sailed from Gravesend the 23d of July 1726. For the incidents of my voyage
I refer you to my Journal, where you will find all the circumstances minutely
related. We landed at Philadelphia on the 11th of the following October.

Keith had been deprived of his office of governor, and was succeeded by Major
Gordon. I met him walking in the streets as a private individual. He appeared a
little ashamed at seeing me, but passed on without saying any thing.

I should have been equally ashamed myself at meeting Miss Read, had not her
family, justly despairing of my return after reading my letter, advised her to
give me up, and marry a potter, of the name of Rogers; to which she consented;
but he never made her happy, and she soon separated from him, refusing to
cohabit with him, or even bear his name, on account of a report which
prevailed, of his having another wife. His skill in his profession had seduced
Miss Read's parents; but he was as bad a subject as he was excellent as a
workman. He involved himself in debt, and fled, in the year 1727 or 1728, to
the West Indies, where he died.

During my absence Keimer had taken a more considerable house, in which he kept
a shop, that was well supplied with paper, and various other articles. He had
procured some new types, and a number of workmen; among whom, however, there
was not one who was good for any thing; and he appeared not to want business.

Mr. Denham took a warehouse in Water-street, where we exhibited our
commodities. I applied myself closely, studied accounts, and became (...) short
time very expert in trade. We lodged and eat together. He was sincerely
attached to me and acted toward me as if he had been my father* On my side, I
respected and loved him. My ^^^^ation was happy; but it was a happiness of no
long duration.

Early in February 1727, when I entered in^^ my twenty second year, we were
both taken (...) I was attacked with a pleurisy, which had near^^ carried me
off; I suffered terribly, and consider^ it as all over with me. I felt indeed a
sort of disappointment when I found myself likely to recever, and regretted
that I had still to experience sooner or later, the same disagreeable scene
again.

I have forgotten what was Mr. Denham's dis^^der; but it was a tedious one, and
he at last (...) under it. He left me a small legacy in his (...) as a
testimony of his friendship; and I was (...) more abandoned to myself in the
wide world; the warehouse being confided to the care of the te^^^mentary
executor, who dismissed me.

My brother-in-law, Holmes, who happened (...) be at Philadelphia, advised me
to return to (...) former profession, and Keimer offered me a (...)
considerable salary if I would undertake the ^^nagement of his printing-office,
that he might devote himself entirely to the superintendance of (...) shop. His
wife and relations in London had giv^^ me a bad character of him; and I was
loath, (...) the present, to have any concern with him. I (...) deavoured to
get employment as a clerk to a merchant; but not readily finding a situation, I
(...) induced to accept Keimer's proposal.

The following were the persons I found in his printing house:

Hugh Meredith, a Pennsylvanian, about thirtyfive years of age. He had been
brought up to husbandry, was honest, sensible, had some experience, and was
fond of reading; but too much addicted to drinking.

Stephen Potts, a young rustic, just broke from school, and of rustic
education, with endowments rather above the common order, and a competent
portion of understanding and gaiety; but a little idle. Keimer had engaged
these two at very low wages, which he had promised to raise every three months
a shilling a week, provided their improvement in the typographic art should
merit it. This future increase of wages was the bait he made use of to ensnare
them. Meredith was to work at the press, and Potts to bind books, which he had
engaged to teach them, though he understood neither himself.

John Savage, an Irishman, who had been brought up to no trade, and whose
service, for a period of four years, Keimer had purchased of the captain of a
ship. He was also to be a pressman.

George Webb, an Oxford scholar, whose time he had in like manner bought for
four years, intending him for a compositor. I shall speak more of him presently.

Lastly, David Harry, a country lad, who was apprenticed to him.

I soon perceived that Keimer's intention, in engaging me at a price so much
above what he was accustomed to give, was, that I might form all these raw
journeymen, and apprentices who s^arcely cost him any thing, and who, being
lentured, would as soon as they should be sufficiently instructed, enable him
to do without me. I nevertheless adhered to my agreement. I put the office in
order, which was in the utmost confusion, and brought his people, by degrees,
to pay attention to their work, and to execute it in a more masterly manner.

It was singular to see an Oxford scholar in the condition of a purchased
servant. He was (...) more than eighteen years of age; and the following are
the particulars he gave me of himself Born at Gloucester, he had been educated
at a grammar school, and had distinguished himself among the scholars by his
superior style of acting when they represented dramatic performance* He was
member of a literary club in the town and some pieces of his composition, in
prose as well as in verse, had been inserted in the Gloucester papers. From
hence he was sent to Oxford, where he remained about a year; but he was not
contented, and wished above all things to see London, and become an actor. At
length, having received fifteen guineas to pay his quarter's board, he deca^^ed
with the money from Oxford, hid his gown in a hedge, and traveled to London.
There, having no friend to direct him, he fell into bad company, soon
squandered his fifteen guineas, could find no way of being introduced to the
actors, became contemptible, pawned his clothes, and was in want of bread. As
he was walking along the streets, almost famished with hunger, and not knowing
what to do, a recruiting bill was put into his hand, which offered an immediate
treat and bounty-money to whoever was disposed to serve in America. He
instantly repaired to the house of rendezvous, (...) listed himself, was put on
board a ship and conveyed to America, without ever writing to inform his
parents what was become of him. His mental vivacity, and good natural
disposition, made him an excellent companion; but he was indolent, thoughtless,
and to the last degree imprudent.

John, the Irishman, soon ran away. I began to live very agreeably with the
rest. They respected me, and the more so as they found Keimer incapable of
instructing them, and as they learned something from me every day. We never
worked on a Saturday, it being Keimer's sabbath; so that I had two days a week
for reading.

I increased my acquaintance with persons of knowledge and information in the
town. Keimer himself treated me with great civility and apparent esteem; and I
had nothing to give me uneasiness but my debt to Vernon, which I was unable to
pay, my savings as yet being very little. He had the goodness, however, not to
ask me for the money.

Our press was frequently in want of the necessary quantity of letter; and
there was no such trade as that of letter-founder in America. I had seen the
practice of this art at the house of James, in London; but had at the same time
paid it very little attention. I however contrived to fabricate a mould. I made
use of such letters as we had for punches, ^ounded new letters of lead in
matrices of clay, and thus supplied, in a tolerable manner, the wants that were
most pressing.

I also, upon occasion, engraved various ornaments, made ink, gave an eye to
the shop; in short, I was in every respect the factotum. But useful as I made
myself, I perceived that my services became every day of less importance, in
proportion at the other men improved; and when Keimer paid (...) my second
quarter's wages, he gave me to understand that they were too heavy, and that he
thought I ought to make an abatement. He became by degrees less civil, and
assumed more the tone of master. He frequently found fault, was difficult (...)
please, and seemed always on the point of coming to an open quarrel with me.

I continued, however, to bear it patiently, ^^^ceiving that his ill-humour was
partly occasi^^^^ by the derangement and embarrassment of his (...) fairs. At
last a slight incident broke our co^^^tion. Hearing a noise in the
neighborhood, I (...) my head out of the window to see what was the matter.
Keimer being in the street, observed (...) and in a loud and angry tone told me
to (...) work; adding some reproachful words, which ^^qued me the more as they
were uttered in the street; and the neighbors, whom the (...) noise had
attracted to the windows, were witnesses of the manner in which I was treated.
He immediately came up to the printing-room, and continued to exclaim against
me. The (...) became warm on both sides, and he gave me ^^tice to quit him at
the expiration of three months as had been agreed between us; regretting (...)
he was obliged to give me so long a term. I tell him that his regret was
superfluous, as I was ready to quit him instantly; and I took my hat (...) came
out of the house, begging Meredith to take care of some things which I left,
and bring the^^ (...) my lodgings.

Meredith came to me in the evening. We talked for some time upon the quarrel
that had (...) place. He had conceived a great veneration for me, and was sorry
I should quit the house while he remained in it. He dissuaded me from returning
to my native country, as I began to think of doing. He reminded me that Keimer
owed more than he possessed; that his creditors began to be alarmed; that he
kept his shop in a wretched slate, often selling things at prime cost for the
sake of ready money, and continually giving credit without keeping any
accounts; that of consequence he must very soon fail, which would occasion a
vacancy from which I might derive advantage. I objected my want of money. Upon
which he informed me that his father had a very high opinion of me, and, from a
conversation that had passed between them, he was sure that he would advance
whatever might be necessary to establish us, if I was willing to enter into
partnership with him. "My time with Keimer," added he, "will be at an end next
spring. In the mean time we may send to London for our press and types. I know
that I am no workman; but if you agree to the proposal, your skill in the
business will be balanced by the capital I will furnish, and we will share the
profits equally." His proposal was reasonable, and I fell in (...) it. His
father, who was then in the town, approved of it. He knew that I had some
ascendency over his son, as I had been able to prevail on him to abstain a long
time from drinking brandy; and he hoped that, when more closely connected with
him, I should cure him entirely of this unfortunate habit.

I gave the father a list of what it would be necessary to import from London.
He took it to a merchant, and the order was given. We agreed to keep the secret
till the arrival of the materials and I was in the mean time to procure work,
if possible, in another printing house; but there was no place vacant, and I
remained idle. After some days* Keimer having the expectation of being employed
to print some New Jersey money-bills, that would require types and engravings
which I only could furnish, and fearful that Bradford, by engaging me might
deprive him of the undertaking, sent me a very civil message, telling me that
old friends ought not to be disunited on account of a few words, which were the
effect only of a momentary passion, and inviting me to return to him. Meredith
persuaded me to comply with the invitation, particularly as it would afford him
more opportunities (...) improving himself in the business by means of any
instructions. I did so, and we lived upon better terms than before our
separation.

He obtained the New Jersey business; and, it order to execute it, I
constructed a copper-plate printing-press; the first that had been seen in the
country. I engraved various ornaments and vignettes for the bills; and we
repaired to Burlington together, where I executed the whole to the general
satisfaction; and he received a sum of money for this work, which enabled him
to keep his head above water for a considerable time longer.

At Burlington I formed acquaintance with the principal personages of the
province; many (...) whom were commissioned by the assembly to superintend the
press, and to see that no more (...) were printed than the law had prescribed.
Accordingly they were constantly with us, each in his turn; and he that came
commonly brought (...) him a friend or two to bear him company. (...) mind was
more cultivated by reading than Keimer's; and it was for this reason, probably,
that they set more value on my conversation. They took me to their houses,
introduced me to their friends and treated me with the greatest civility; while
Keimer though master, saw himself a little neglected. He was, in fact, a
strange animal, ignorant of the common modes of life; apt to oppose with
rudeness generally received opinions, an enthusiast in certain points of
religion, disgustingly unclean in his person, and a little knavish withal.

We remained there nearly three months; and at the expiration of this period I
could include in the list of my friends, Judge Allen, Samuel Bus^^^, secretary
of the province, Isaac Pearson, Joseph Cooper, several of the Smiths, all
members of the assembly, and Isaac Deacon, inspector general. The last was a
shrewd and subtle old (...). He told me, that, when a boy, his first employment
had been that of carrying clay to brick-makers; that he did not learn to write
till he was somewhat advanced in life; that he was afterward employed as an
underling to a surveyor, who taught him his trade, and that by industry he had
at last acquired a competent fortune, "I fore^^^" said he one day to me, "that
you will soon supplant this man" speaking of Keimer, "and get a fortune in the
business at Philadelphia." He was totally ignorant at the time of my intention
of establishing myself there, or any where else. These friends were very
serviceable to me in the end, as was I also, upon occasion, to some of them;
and they have continued ever since their esteem for me.

Before I relate the particulars of my entrance into business, it may be proper
to inform you what was at that time the state of my mind as to moral
principles, that you may see the degree on influence they had upon the
subsequent events of my life.

My parents had given me betimes religious impressions; and I received from my
infancy a pious education in the principles of Calvinism. But scarcely was I
arrived at fifteen years of age, when, after having doubted in turn of
different tenets, according as I found them combated in the different books
that I read, I began to doubt of revelation itself. Some volumes against deism
fell into my hands. They were said to be the substance of sermons preached at
Boyle's Lecture. It happened that they produced on me an effect precisely the
reverse of what was intended by the writers; for the arguments of the deists,
which were cited in order to be refuted, appeared to me much more forcible than
the refutation itself. In a word, I soon became a perfect deist. My arguments
perverted some other young persons; particularly Collins and Ralph. But in the
sequel, when I recollected that they had both used me extremely ill, without
the smallest remorse; when I considered the behavior of Keith, another
freethinker, and my own conduct toward Vernon and Miss Read, which at times
gave me much uneasiness, I was led to suspect that this doctrine, though it
might be true, was not very useful. I began to entertain a less favorable
opinion of my London pamphlet, to which I had prefixed, as a motto, the
following lines of Dryden; Whatever is, is right; though purblind man
Sees but part of the chain, the nearest link,
His eyes not carrying to the equal beam
That poises all above.
and of which the object was (...) prove, from the attributes of God, his
goodness, wisdom, and power that there could be no such thing as evil in the
world; that vice and virtue did not in reality exist, and were nothing more
than vain distinctions. I no longer regarded it as so blameless a work as I had
formerly imagined; and I suspected that some error must have imperceptibly have
glided into my argument, by all the inferences I had drawn from it had been
affected, as it frequently happens in metaphysical reasonings. In a word, I was
at last convinced that truth, probity and sincerity, in transactions between
man and man were of the utmost importance to the happiness of life; and I
resolved from that moment, and wrote the resolution in my ^^^^nal, to practice
them as long as I lived.

Revelation indeed, as such, had no influence on my mind; but I was of opinion
that, though certain actions could not be bad merely because revelation
prohibited them, or good because it enjoined them, yet it was probable that
those actions were prohibited because they were bad for us, or enjoined because
advantageous in their nature, all things considered. This persuasion, divine
providence, or some guardian angel, and perhaps a concurrence of favorable
circumstances cooperating, preserved me from all immorality, or gross and
voluntary injustice, to which my want of religion was calculated to expose me,
in the dangerous period of youth, and in the hazardous situations in which I
sometimes found myself, among strangers, and at a distance from the eye and
admonitions of my father. I may say voluntary, because the errors into which I
had fallen, had been in a manner the forced result either of my own
inexperience, or the dishonesty of others. Thus, before I entered (...) my new
career. I had imbibed solid principles, and a character of probity. I knew
their value; and I made a solemn engagement with myself never in depart from
them.

I had not long returned from Burlington before our printing materials arrived
from London. I settled my accounts with Keimer, and quitted (...) with his own
consent, before he had any knowledge of our plan. We found a house to let new
the market. We took it; and to render the (...) less burdensome (it was then
twenty-four pou^^^ a year, but I have since known it let for seve^^ (...) we
admitted Thomas Godfrey, a glazier, with (...) fam^^^ who eased us of a
considerable part of (...) and with him we agreed to board.

We had no sooner unpacked our letter, and (...) our press in order, than a
person of my acquaintance, George House, brought us a countryman whom he had
met in the streets enquiring for (...) printer. Our money was almost exhausted
by the number of things we had been obliged to procure. The five shillings we
received from this countryman, the first fruit of our earnings, coming so
seasonably, gave me more pleasure than any sum I have since gained; and the
recollection of the gratitude I felt on this occasion to George House has
rendered me often more disposed, than perhaps I should otherwise have been, to
encourage young beginners in trade.

There are in every country morose beings, who are always prognosticating ruin.
There was (...) of this stamp in Philadelphia. He was a man of fortune,
declined in years, had an air of wisdom and a very grave manner of speaking.
His name was Samuel Mickle. I knew him not; but he stopped one day at my door,
and asked me if I was the young man who had lately opened a new printing house.
Upon my answering in the affirmative, he said that he was very sorry for me, as
it was an expensive undertaking; and the money that had been laid out upon it
would be loft, Philadelphia being a place falling into decay; its inhabitants
having all, or nearly all of them, been obliged to call together their
creditors. That he knew, from undoubted fact, the circumstances which might
(...) us to suppose the contrary, such as new build^^^^, and the advanced price
of rent, to be deceit^^ appearances, which in reality contributed to hasten the
general ruin; and he gave me so long a detail of misfortunes, actually
existing, or which were soon to take place, that he left me almost in a state
of despair. Had I known this man before I entered into trade, I should
doubtless never have ventured. He however continued to live in this place of
decay, and to declaim in the same style, refusing for many years to buy a
house, because all was going to wreck? and in the end I had the satisfaction to
see him pay five times as much for one as it would cost him had he purchased it
when he first began his lamentations.

I ought to have related, that, during the autumn of the preceding year, I had
united the majority of well-informed persons of my acquaintance into a club,
which we called by the name of the Junt^, and the object of which was to
improve our understandings. We met every Friday evening. The regulations I drew
up, obliged every member to propose, in his turn, one or more questions upon
some point of morality, politics, or philosophy, which were to be discussed by
the society; and to read, once in three months, an essay of his own
composition, on whatever subject he pleased. Our debates were under the
direction of a president, and were to be dictated only by a sincere desire of
truth; the pleasure of disputing, and the va^^ty of triumph having no share in
the business and in order to prevent undue warmth, every expression which
implied obstinate adherence to (...) opinion, and all direct contradiction,
were prohibited, under small pecuniary penalties.

The first members of our club were Joseph Breintnal, whose occupation was that
of a scrivener. He was a middle-aged man, of a good natural disposition,
strongly attached to his friends, a great lover of poetry, reading every thing
that came in his way, and writing tolerably well, ingenious in many little
trifles, and of an agreeable conversation.

Thomas Godfrey, a skilful, though self-taught mathematician, and who was
afterward the inventor of what now goes by the name of Hadley's dial; but he
had little knowledge out of his own line, and was insupportable in company,
always requiring, like the majority of mathematicians that have fallen in my
way, an unusual precision in every thing that is said, continually
contradicting, or making trifling distinctions; a sure way of defeating all the
ends of conversation. He very soon left us.

Nicholas Scull, a surveyor, and who became afterward surveyor-general. He was
fond of books, and wrote verses.

William Parsons, brought up to the trade of a shoemaker, but who, having a
taste for reading, had acquired a profound knowledge of mathematics. He first
studied them with a view to astrology, and was afterward the first to laugh at
his folly. He also became surveyor-general.

William Mawgridge, a joiner, and very excellent mechanic; and in other
respects a man of solid understanding.

Hugh Meredith, Stephen Potts, and George Webb, of whom I have already spoken.

Robert Grace, a young man of fortune; generous, animated, and witty; fond of
epigrams, but move fond of his friends.

And lastly, William Coleman, at that time a merchant's clerk, and nearly of my
own age. He had a cooler and clearer head, a better heart, and more scrupulous
morals, than almost any other person I have ever met with. He became a very
respectable merchant, and one of our provincial judges. Our friendship
subsisted, without interruption, for more than forty years, till the period of
his death; and the club continued to exist almost as long.

This was the best school of politics and philosophy that then existed in the
province; for our questions, which were read a week previous to their
discussion, induced us to peruse attentively such books as were written upon
the subjects proposed, that we might be able to speak upon them more
pertinently. We thus acquired the habit of conversing more agreeably; every
object being discussed conformably to our regulations, and in a manner to
prevent mutual disgust. To this circumstance may be attributed the long
duration of the club; which I shall have frequent occasion to mention as I
proceed.

I have introduced it here, as being one of the means on which I had to count
for success in my business; every member exerting himself to procure work for
us. Breintnal, among others, obtained for us, on the part of the Quakers, the
printing of forty sheets of their history; of which the rest was to be done by
Keimer. Our execution of this work was by no means masterly; as the price was
very low. It was in folio, upon pro p^tria paper, and in the pica letter, with
heavy notes in the smallest type. I composed a sheet a day, and Meredith put it
to the press. It was frequently eleven o'clock at night sometimes later, before
I had finished my distribution for the next day's task; for the little things
which our friends occasionally sent us, kept us back in this work: but I was so
determined to compose a sheet a day, that one evening, when my form was
imposed, and my day's work, as I thought, at an end, an accident having broken
this form, and arranged two complete folio pages, I immediately distributed,
and composed them anew before I went to bed.

This unwearied industry, which was perceived by our neighbors, began to
acquire us reputation and credit. I learned, among other things, that our new
printing house being the subject of conversation at a club of merchants, who
met every evening, it was the general opinion that it would fail; there being
already two printing-houses i^ the town, Keimer's and Bradford's. But Dr. (...)
whom you and I had occasion to see, many (...) after, at his native town of St.
Andrew's in Scot^ land was of a different opinion. "The industry of this
Franklin (said he) is superior to any thing of the kind I have ever witnessed.
I see him still at work when I return from the club at night, and he is at it
again in the morning before his neighbors are out of bed." This (...) struck
the ^est of the assembly, and shortly after one of its members came to our
house, and offered to supply (...) with articles of stationary; but we wished
not (...) yet to embarrass ourselves with keeping a shop. It is not for the
sake of applause that I enter so freely into the particulars of my industry,
but that such of my descendants as shall read these memoirs may know the use of
this virtue, by seeing in the recital of my life the effects it operated in my
sa^our.

George Webb, having found a friend who lent him the necessary sum to buy out
his time of Keimer, came one day to offer himself to us as a journeyman. We
could not employ him immediately; but I foolishly told him, under the rose,
that I in^ended shortly to publish a new periodical paper, and that we should
then have work for him. My hopes of success, which I imparted to him, were
founded on the circumstance, that the only paper we had in Philadelphia at that
time, and which Brandford printed, was a paltry thing, miserably conducted, in
no respect amusing, and which yet was profitable. I consequently supposed that
a good work of this kind could not fail of success. Webb betrayed my sec^et to
Keimer, who, to prevent me, immediately published the prospectus of a paper
that he intended to institute himself, and in which Webb was to be engaged.

I was exasperated at this proceeding, and, with a view to counteract them, not
being able at present to institute my own paper, I wrote some humourous pieces
in Bradford's, under the title of the Busy Body A manuscript note in the file
of the American Mercury, preserved in the Philadelphia library, says, that
Franklin wrote the first five numbers, and part of the eighth.
and which was continued for several months by Breint^al. I hereby fixed the
attention of the public upon Bradford's paper; and the prospectus of Keimer,
which we turned into ridicule, was treated with contempt. He began,
notwithstanding, (...) paper; and after continuing it for nine months, having
at most not more than ninety subscribers, he offered it me for a mere trifle. I
had for sometime been ready for such an engagement; I therefore instant^^ took
it upon myself, and in a few years it proved extremely profitable to me.

I perceive that I am apt to speak in the first person, though our partnership
still continued. It is, perhaps, because, in fact, the whole business devolved
upon me. Meredith was no compositor, and but an indifferent pressman; and it
was rarely that he abstained from hard drinking. My friends were sorry to see
me connected with him; but I contrived to derive from it the utmost advantage
the case admitted.

Our first number produced no other effect than any other paper which had
appeared in the province, as to type and printing; but some remarks, in my
peculiar style of writing, upon the dispute which then prevailed between
governor Burnet, and the Massachusett assembly, struck some persons as above
mediocrity, caused the paper and its editors to be talked of, and in a few
weeks induced them to become our subscribers. Many others followed their
example; and our subscription continued to increase. This was one of the first
good effects of the pains I had taken to learn to put my ideas on paper. I
derived this farther advantage from it, that the leading men of the place,
seeing in the author of this publication a man so well able to use his pen,
thought it right to patronise and encourage me.

The votes, laws, and other public pieces, were printed by Bradford. An address
of the house of assembly to the governor had been executed by him in a very
coarse and incorrect manner. We reprinted it with accuracy and neatness, and
sent a copy to every member. They perceived the difference; and it so
strengthened the influence of our friends in the assembly, that we were
nominated its printer for the following year.

Among these friends I ought not to forget one member in particular, Mr.
Hamilton, whom I have mentioned in a former part of my narrative, and who was
now returned from England. He warmly interested himself for me on this
occasion, as he did likewise on many others afterward; having continued his
kindness to me till his death.

About this period Mr. Vernon reminded me of the debt I owed him, but without
pressing me for payment. I wrote him a handsome letter on the occasion, begging
him to wait a little longer, to which he consented; and as soon as I was able I
paid him, principal and interest, with many expressions of gratitude; so that
this error of my life was in a manner atoned for.

But another trouble now happened to me, which I had not the smallest reason to
expect. Meredith's father, who, according to our agreement, was to defray the
whole expense of our printing materials, had only paid a hundred pounds. As
other hundred was still due, and the merchant being tired of waiting, commenced
a suit against (...) We bailed the action, but with the melanch^^^ prospect,
that, if the money was not forthcomi^^ at the time fixed, the affair would come
to (...) judgment be put in execution, our delightful (...) be annihilated, and
ourselves entirely ruined; as (...) types and press must be sold, perhaps at
half their ^^lue, to pay the debt.

In this distress, two real friends, whose gener^^^ conduct I have never
forgotten, and never (...) forget while I retain the remembrance of any thi^^
came to me separately, without the knowledge (...) each other, and without my
having applied to the (...) Each offered me whatever sum might be necessary to
take the business into my own hands, if the thing was practicable, as they did
not like I should continue in partnership with Meredith, who, (...) said, was
frequently seen drunk in the streets, (...) gambling at alehouses, which very
much (...) our credit. These friends were William Cole^^^ and Robert Grace. I
told them that while (...) remained any probability that the Merediths (...)
fulfill their part of the compact, I could not ^^^pose a separation; as I
conceived myself to be ^^der obligations to them for what they had (...)
already, and were still disposed to do if they (...) the power: but in the end
should they fail (...) their engagement, and our partnership be differed, I
should then think myself at liberty to (...) the kindness of my friends.

Things remained for some time in this (...) At last I said one day to my
partner, "Your father is perhaps dissatisfied with your having a share only in
the business, and is unwilling to do for two, what he would do for you alone.
Tell me frankly if that be the case, and I will resign the whole to you, and do
for myself as well as I can." -- "No (said he) my father has really been
disappointed in his hopes; he is not able to pay, and I wish to put him to no
further inconvenience. I see that I am not at all calculated for a printer; I
was educated as a farmer, and it was absurd in me to come here, at thirty years
of age, and bind myself apprentice to a new trade. Many of my countrymen are
going to settle in North Carolina, where the soil is exceedingly favorable. I
am tempted to go with them, and to resume my former occupation. You will
doubtless find friends who (...) that you. If you will take upon yourself the
debts of the partnership, return my father the hundred pounds he has advanced,
pay my little personal debts, and give me thirty pounds and a new saddle, I
will renounce the partnership, and consign over the whole stock to you."

I accepted this proposal without hesitation. It (...) committed to paper, and
signed and sealed without delay. I gave him what he demanded and he departed
soon after for Carolina, from whence he (...) me, in the following year, two
long letters, co^^^ining the best accounts that had yet been given of that
country, as to climate, soil, agriculture, etc. for he was well versed in these
matters. I published them in my newspaper, and they were received with great
satisfaction.

As soon as he was gone I applied to my two friends, and not wishing to give a
disobliging preferen^^ to either of them, I accepted from each half what he had
offered me, and which it (...) necessary I should have. I paid the partnership
debts, and continued the business on my own account; taking care to inform the
public, by advertisement, of the partnership being dissolved. This was, I
think, in the year 1729, or ther^^bout.

Nearly at the same period the people demanded a new emission of paper money:
the existing and only one that had taken place in the province, and which
amounted to fifteen thousand pound, being soon to expire. The wealthy
inhabita^^ prejudiced against every sort of paper curren^^ from the fear of its
depreciation, of which th^^ had been an instance in the province of New
England, to the injury of its holders, strongly ^^sed the measure. We had
discussed this affair (...) our junto, in which I was on the side of the
^^emission; convinced that the first small sum, fabricated in 1723, had done
much good in the province, by favoring commerce, industry and population,
since all the houses were now inhabi^^^ and many others bulding; whereas I
remembered to have seen, when first I paraded the streets of Philadelphia
eating my roll, the majority of th^^ in Walnut-street, Second-street,
Fourth-street, (...) well as a great number in Chestnut and other streets, with
papers on them signifying that they were to be; let which made me think at the
time that the inhabitants of the town were deserting (...) one after another.

Our debates made me so fully master of the ^^^ject, that I wrote and published
an anony^^^ pamphlet, entitled An Enquiry into the (...) and Necessity of a
Paper Currency. It was (...) well received by the lower and middling class of
people; but it displeased the opulent, as it increased the clamor in favor of
the new emission. -- Having, however, no writer among them capable of answering
it, their opposition became less violent; and their being in the house of
assembly a majority for the measure, it passed. The friends I had acquired in
the house, persuaded that I had done the country essential service on this
occasion, rewarded me by giving me the printing of the bills. It was a
lucrative employment, and proved a very seasonable help to me; another
advantage which I derived from having habituated myself to write.

Time and experience so fully demonstrated the utility of paper currency, that
it never after experienced any considerable opposition; so that it (...)
amounted to 55,000l. and in the year 17^^^^ 80,000l. It has since risen, during
the last war, to 350,000l. trade, buildings and population having in the
interval continually increased: but I am now convinced that there are limits
beyond which paper money would be prejudicial.

I soon after obtained, by the influence of my friend Hamilton, the printing of
the Newcastle paper money, another profitable work, as I then thought it,
little things appearing great to persons of moderate fortune; and they were
really great to me, as proving great encouragements. He also procured me the
printing of the laws and votes of that government which I retained as long as I
continued in the business.

I now opened a small stationer's shop. I kept bonds and agreements of all
kinds, drawn up in a more accurate form than had yet been seen in that part of
the world; a work in which I was assisted by my friend Brientnal. I had also
paper, par^^ment, pasteboard, books, etc. One Whitema^^ an excellent
compositor, whom I had known is London, came to offer himself. I engaged him
and he continued constantly and diligently to (...) with me. I also took an
apprentice, the son of Aquil^ Rose.

I began to pay, by degrees, the debt I had contracted; and in order to insure
my credit and character as a tradesman, I took care not only to be really
industrious and frugal, but also to (...) every appearance of the contrary. I
was plai^^^ dressed, and never seen in ^any place of public amusement. I never
went a fishing or hunting. A book indeed enticed me sometimes from my work, but
it was seldom, by stealth, and occasioned (...) scandal; and to show that I did
not think myself above my profession, I conveyed home sometimes in a
wheelbarrow the paper I purchased at the warehouses.

I thus obtained the reputation of being an industrious young man, and very
punctual in his payments. The merchants who imported artic^^^ of stationary
solicited my custom; others offered (...) furnish me with books, and my little
trade went (...) prosperously.

Meanwhile the credit and business of Keimer diminished every day, he was at
last forced to (...) his stock to satisfy his creditors; and he bet^^^ himself
to Barbados, where he lived for some time in a very impoverished state. His
apprentice, David Harry, whom I had instructed wh^^ I worked with Keimer,
having bought his ma^^rials, succeeded him in the business. I was apprehensive
at first, of finding in Harry a powerful competitor, as he was allied to an
opulent and respectable family; I therefore proposed a partnership, which,
happily for me, he rejected with disda^^. He was extremely proud, thought
himself a fine gentleman, lived extravagantly, and pursued amusements which
suffered him to be scarcely ever at home; of consequence he became in debt
neglected his business, and business neglected (...). Finding in a short time
nothing to do in the country, he followed Keimer to Barbados, carrying his
printing materials with him. There the apprentice employed his old matter as a
journeyman. They were continually quarrelling; and Harry still getting in debt,
was obliged at last to sell his press and types, and return to his old
occupation of husbandry in Pennsylvania. The person who purchased them employed
Keimer to manage the business; but he died a few years after.

I had now at Philadelphia no competitor but Bradford, who, being in easy
circumstances, did not engage in the printing of books, except now and then as
workmen chanced to offer themselves; and was (...) ^^^xious to extend his
trade. He had, however, one advantage over me, as he had the direction of the
post office, and was of consequence supposed to have better opportunities of
obtaining news. His paper was also supposed to be more advantageous to
advertising customers; and in consequence of that supposition, his
advertisements were much more numerous than mine; this was a source of great
profit to him, and disadvantageous to me. It was to no purpose that I really
proc^^ed other papers, and distributed my own, by means of the post; the public
took for granted my inability in this respect; and I was indeed unable to
conquer it in any other mode than by bribing the post-boys, who served me only
by stealth, Bradford being so illiberal as to forbid them. -- The treatment of
his excited my resentment; and (...) disgust was so rooted, that, when I
afterward succeeded him in the post office, I took care to avoid copying his
example.

I had hitherto continued to board with Godfrey who, with his wife and
children, occupied part of my house, and half of the shop for his business* at
which indeed he worked very little, being always absorbed by mathematics. Mrs.
Godfrey formed a wish of marrying me to the daughter (...) one of her
relations. She contrived various opportunities of bringing us together, till
she (...) that I was captivated; which was not difficult the lady in question
possessing great personal ^^^rit. The parents encouraged my addresses, by
inviting me continually to supper, and leaving (...) together, till at last it
was time to come to (...) explanation. Mrs. Godfrey undertook to negociate our
little treaty. I gave her to understand, that I expected to receive with the
young lady a sum of money that would enable me at least to discharge the
remainder of my debt for my printing materials. It was then, I believe, not
more than a hundred pounds. She brought me for answer, that they had no such
sum at their disposal. I observed that it might easily be obtained, by a
mortgage on their house. The reply of this was, after a few days interval, that
they did not approve of the match; that they had consulted Bradford, and found
that the business of a printer was not lucrative; that my letters would soon be
worn out, and must be supplied by new ones; that Keimer and Harry had failed,
and that, probably, I should do so too. Accordingly they forbade me the house,
and the young lady was confined. I know not if they had really changed their
minds, or if it was merely an artifice, supposing our affections to be too far
engaged for us to desist, and that we should contrive to marry secretly, which
would leave them at liberty to give or not as they pleased. But, suspecting
this motive, I never went again to their house.

Some time after Mrs. Godfrey informed me that they were favorably disposed
toward me, and wished me to renew the acquaintance; but I declared a firm
resolution never to have any thing more to do with the family. The Godfreys
expressed some resentment at this; and as we could no longer agree, they
changed their residence, leaving me in possession of the whole house. I then
resolved to take no more lodgers. This affair having turned my thoughts to
marriage, I looked around me, and made overtures of alliance in other quarters;
but I soon found that the profession of a printer being generally looked upon
as a poor trade, I could expect no money with a wife at least if I wished her
to possess any other charm. Meanwhile, that passion of youth, so difficult to
govern, had often drawn me into intrigues with despicable women who fell in my
way; which were not unaccompanied with expense and inconvenience, besides the
perpetual risk of injuring my health, and catching a disease which I dreaded
above all things. But I was fortunate enough to escape this danger.

As a neighbor and old acquaintance, I kept up a friendly intimacy with the
family of Miss Re^^. Her parents had retained an affection for me from the time
of my lodging in their house. I was often invited thither; they consulted me
about their affairs, and I had been sometimes serviceable to them. I was
touched with the unhappy situation of their daughter, who was almost always
melancholy, and continually seeking solitude. I regarded my forgetfulness and
inconstancy, during up abode in London, as the principal cause of his
misfortune; though her mother had the cand^^ to attribute the fault to herself,
rather than to (...) because, after having prevented our marriage previous to
my departure, she had induced her to (...) another in my absence.

Our mutual affection revived; but there (...) great obstacles to our union.
Her marriage was considered, indeed, as not being valid, the (...) having, it
was said, a former wife still living (...) England; but of this it was
difficult to obtain (...) proof at so great a distance: and though a (...)
prevailed of his being dead, yet we had no ^^tainty of it; and supposing it to
be true, he (...) left many debts, for the payment of which his ^^cessor might
be sued. We ventured nevertheless, in spite of all these difficulties, and I
(...) her on the first of September 1730. None (...) inconveniences we had
feared happened to (...) She proved to me a good and faithful compa^^^ and
contributed essentially to the success of (...) shop. We prospered together,
and it was (...) mutual study to render each other happy. (...) I corrected, as
well as I could, this great error (...) my youth.

Our club was not at that time established at a tavern. We held our meetings at
the house of Mr. Grace, who appropriated a room to the purpose. Some members
observed one day, that as our books were frequently quoted in the course of our
discussions, it would be convenient to have them collected in the room in which
we assembled, in order to be consulted upon occasion; and that, by thus forming
a common library of our individual collections, each would have the advantage
of using the books of all the other members, which would nearly be the same as
if he possessed them all himself. The idea was approved, and we accordingly
brought such books as we thought we could spare, which were placed at the end
of the club-room. They amounted not to so many as we expected; and though we
made considerable use of them, yet some inconveniences resulting, from want of
care, it was agreed, after about a year, to destroy the collection; and each
took away such books as belonged to him.

It was now that I first started the idea of establishing by subscription, a
public library. I drew up the proposals, had them engrossed in form by Brockden
the attorney, and my project succeeded, as will be seen in the sequel
**************

[The life of Dr. Franklin, as written by himself, so far as it has yet been
communicated to the world, breaks off in this place. We understand that it wa^
continued by him somewhat further and we hope that the remainder will, at some
future period, be communicated to the public. We have no hesitation in
supposing that every reader will find himself greatly interested by the frank
simplicity and the philosophical discernment by which these pages are so
eminently characterised. We have therefore thought proper, in order as much as
possible to relieve his regret, to subjoin the following continuation, by one
of the doctor's intimate friends. It is extracted from an American periodical
publication, and was written by the late Dr. Stuber Dr. Stuber was born in
Philadelphia, of German parents. He was sent, at an early age, to the
university, where his genius, diligence, and amiable temper soon acquired him
the particular notice and favor of those under whose immediate direction he
was placed. After passing through the common course of study, in a much shorter
time than usual, he left the university, at the age of sixteen, with great
reputation. Not long after, he entered on the study of Physic; and the zeal
with which he pursued it, and the advances he made, gave his friends reason to
form the most flattering prospects of his future eminence and usefulness in the
profession. As Dr. Stuber's circumsta^^^^ were very moderate, he did not think
this pursuit well calculated to answer them. He therefore relinquished it,
after he had obtained a degree in the profession, and qualif^^^ himself to
practice with credit and success; and immediately entered on the study of Law.
In pursuit of the lastmentioned object, he was prematurely arrested, before he
had an opportunity of reaping the fruit of those talents with which he was
endowed, and of a youth spent in the ardent and successful pursuit of useful
and elegant literature.
of Philadelphia.]

THE promotion of literature had been little attended to in Pennsylvania. Most
of the inhabitants were too much immersed in business to think of scientific
pursuits; and those few, whose inclinations led them to study, found it
difficult to gratify them, from the want of sufficiently large libraries. In
such circumstances, the establishment of a public library was an important
event. This was first set on foot by Franklin, about the year 1731. Fifty
persons subscribed forty shillings each, and agreed to pay ten shillings
annually. -- The number increased; and in 1742, the company was incorporated by
the name of "The Library Company of Philadelphia." Several other companies were
formed in this city in imitation of it. These were all at length united with
the library company of Philadelphia, which thus received a considerable
accession of books and property. It now contains about eight thousand volumes
on all subjects, a philosophical apparatus, and a good beginning toward a
collection of natural and artificial curiosities, besides landed property of
considerable value. The company have lately built an elegant house in
Fifth-street, in the front of which will be erected a marble statue of their
founder, Benjamin Franklin.

This institution was greatly encouraged by the friends of Literature in
America and in Great Britain. The Penn family distinguished themselves by their
donations. Amongst the earliest friends of this institution must be mentioned
the late Peter Collinson, the friend and correspondent of Dr. Franklin. He not
only made considerable presents himself, and obtained others from his friends,
but voluntarily undertook to manage the business of the company in London,
recommending books, purchasing and shipping them. His extensive knowledge, and
zeal for the promotion of science, enabled him to execute this important trust
with the greatest advantage. He continued to perform these services for more
than thirty years, and uniformly refused to accept of any compensation: During
this time, he communicated to the directors every information relative to
improvements and discoveries in the arts, agriculture, and philosophy.

The beneficial influence of this institution was soon evident. The cheapness
of terms rendered it accessible to every one. Its advantages were not confined
to the opulent. The citizens in the middle and lower walks of life were equally
partakers of them. Hence a degree of information was extended amongst all
classes of people, which is very unusual in other places. The example was soon
followed. Libraries were established (...) various places, and they are now
become very numerous in the United States, and particularly in Pennsylvania. It
is to be hoped that they will be still more widely extended, and that
information will be every where increased. This will be the best security for
maintaining our liberties. A nation of well-informed men, who have been taught
to know and prize the rights which God has given them cannot be enslaved. It is
in the regions of ignorance that tyranny reigns. It (...) before the light of
science. Let the citizens of America, then, encourage institutions calculated
to diffuse knowledge amongst the people; and amongst these, public libraries
are not the (...) important.

In 1732, Franklin began to publish Poor Richard's Almanac. This was
remarkable for the numerous and valuable concise maxims which i^ contained, all
tending to exhort to industry and frugality. It was continued for many years.
In the almanac for the last year, all the maxims were collected in an address
to the reader, entitled, The Way to Wealth. This has been translated in various
languages, and inserted in different publications. It has also been printed on
a large sheet, and may be seen framed in many houses in this city. This address
contains, perhaps the best practical system of economy that ever has appeared.
It is written in a manner intelligible to every one, and which cannot fail of
convincing every reader of the justice and propriety of the remarks and advice
which it contains. The demand for this almanac was so great, that ten thousand
have been sold in one year; which must be considered as a very large number,
especially when we reflect, that this country was, at that time, but thinly
peopled. It cannot be doubted that the salutary maxims contained in these
almanacks must have made a favorable impression upon many of the readers of
them.

It was not long before Franklin entered upon his political career. In the year
1736 he was appointed clerk to the general assembly of Pennsylvania; and was
re-elected by succeeding assemblies for several years, until he was chosen a
representative for the city of Philadelphia.

Bradford was possessed of some advantages over Franklin, by being postmaster,
thereby having an opportunity of circulating (...) paper more extensively, and
thus rendering it a better vehicle for advertisements, etc. Franklin, in his
turn, enjoyed these advantages, by being appointed postmaster of Philadelphia
in 1737. Bradford, while in office, had acted ungenerously toward Franklin,
preventing as much as possible the circulation of his paper. He had now an
opportunity of retaliating; but his nobleness of soul prevented him from making
use of it.

The police of Philadelphia had early appointed watchmen, whose duty it was to
guard the citizens against the midnight robber, and to give an immediate alarm
in case of fire. This duty is, perhaps, one of the most important that can be
committed to any set of men. The regulations, however, were not sufficiently
strict. Franklin saw the dangers arising from this cause, and suggested an
alteration, so as to oblige the guardians of the night to be more watchful over
the lives and property of the citizens. The propriety of this was immediately
perceived, and a reform was affected.

There is nothing more dangerous to growing cities than fires. Other causes
operate slowly, and almost imperceptibly; but these in a moment render abortive
the labors of ages. On this account there should be, in all cities, ample
provisions to prevent fires from spreading. Franklin early saw the necessity of
these; and, about the year 17^8, formed the first fire-company in this city.
Th^^ example was soon followed by others; and there (...) now numerous
fire-companies in the city and liberties. To these may be attributed in a great
degree the activity in extinguishing fires, for which the citizens of
Philadelphia are distinguished, and the inconsiderable damage which this city
has sustained from this cause. -- Some time after, Franklin suggested the plan
of an association for insuring houses from losses by fire, which was adopted;
and the association continues to this day. The advantages experienced from it
have been great.

From the first establishment of Pennsylvania, a spirit of dispute appears to
have prevailed amongst its inhabitants. During the lifetime of William Penn,
the constitution had been three times altered. After this period, the History
of Pennsylvania is little else than a recital of the quarrels between the
proprietaries* or their governors, and the assembly. The proprietaries
contended for the right of exempting their land from taxes; (...) which the
assembly would by no means consent. This subject of dispute interfered in
almost every question, and prevented the most salutary laws from being enacted.
This at times subjected the people to great inconveniences. In the year 1744,
during a war between France and Great Britain, some French and Indians had made
inroads upon the frontier inhabitants of the province, who were unprovided for
such an attack. It became necessary that the citizens should arm for their
defense. Governor Thomas recommended to the assembly, who were then sitting to
pass a militia law. To this they would agree only upon co^^^tion that he should
give his assent to certain laws, which appeared to them calculated to promote
the interest of the people. As he thought these laws would be injurious to the
proprietaries, he refused his assent to them; and the assembly broke up without
passing a militia (...) The situation of the province was at this time truly
alarming: exposed, to the continual inroads of an enemy, and destitute of every
means of defense. At this crisis Franklin stepped forth, and proposed to a
meeting of the citizens of Philadelphia, a plan of a voluntary association for
the defense of the province. This was approved of, and signed by twelve hundred
persons immediately. Copies of it were circulated throughout the province; and
in a short time the number of signers amounted to ten thousand. Franklin was
chosen colonel of the Philadelphia regiment; but he did not think proper to
accept of the honor.

Pursuits of a different nature now occupied the greatest part of his attention
for some years. He engaged in a course of electrical experiments, with all the
ardor and thirst for discovery which characterized the philosophers of that
day. Of all the branches of experimental philosophy, electricity had been least
explored. The attractive power of amber is mentioned by Theophrastus and ^liny,
and, from them, by later naturalists. In the year 1600, Gilbert, an English
physician, enlarged considerably the catalogue of substances which have the
property of attracting light bodies. Boil, Otto Guericke, a burgomaster of
Magdeburg, celebrated as the inventor of the air pump, Dr. Wall, and Sir Isaac
Newton added some facts. Guericke first observed the repulsive power of
electricity, and the light and noise produced by (...). In 1709 Hawkesbec
communicated some important observations and experiments to the world. For
several years electricity was entirely neglected, until Mr. Gray applied
himself to it, in 1728, with great assiduity, He, and his friend Mr. Wheeler,
made a great variety of experiments; in which they demonstrated, that
electricity may be communicated from one body to another, even without being in
contact, and in this way may be conducted to a great distance. Mr. Gray
afterward found, that, by suspending rods of iron by silk or hair lines, and
bringing an excited tube under them, sparks might be drawn, and a light
perceived at the extremities in the dark. M. Du Faye, intendant of the French
King's gardens, made a number of experiments, which added not a little to the
science. He made the discovery of two kinds of electricity, which he called
vitreous and resinous; the former produced by rubbing glass, the latter from
excited sulphur, sealing-wax, etc. But this idea he afterward gave up as
erroneous. Between the years 1739 and 1742, Desaguliers (...) a number of
experiments, but added little of importance. He first used the terms conductors
and electrics, per se. In 1742, several ingenious Germans engaged in the
subject. Of these the principal were, professor Boze of Wittembergh, professor
Winkler of Leipfic, Gordon, a Scotch Benedictine monk, professor of philosophy
at Erfurt, and Dr. Ludolf (...) Berlin. The result of their researches
astonished the philosophers of Europe. Their apparatus was large, and by means
of it they were enabled to collect large quantities of electricity, and thus to
produce phenomena which had been hitherto unobserved. They killed small birds,
and set spirits on fire. Their experiments excited the c^^^^sity of other
philosophers. Collinson, about the year 1745, sent to the library company of
Philadelphia an account of these experiments, together with a tube, and
directions how to use it. Franklin, with some of his friends, immediately
engaged in a course of experiments; the result of which is well known. He was
enabled to make a number of important discoveries, and to propose theories to
account for various phenomena; which have been universally adopted, and which
bid fair to endure for ages. His observations he communicated, in a series of
letters, to his friend Collinson; the first of which is dated March 28, 1747.
In these he makes known the power of points in d^^^ing and throwing off the
electrical matter, which had hitherto escaped the notice of electricians. He
also made the grand discovery of a plus and minus, or of a positive and
negative state of electricity. We gave him the honor of this, without
hesitation; although the English have claimed it for their countryman Dr.
Watson. Watson's paper is dated January 21, 1748; Franklin's July 11, 1747;
several months prior. Shortly after, Franklin from his principles of plus and
minus state, explained, in a satisfactory manner, the phenomena of the Leyden
phial, first observed by Mr. (...), or by professor Mus^henbroeck of Leyden,
which had much perplexed philosophers. He showed clearly that the bottle, when
charged, contained no more electricity (...) before, but that as much was taken
from the one (...) as was throw^ on the other; and that, to discharge it,
nothing was necessary but to make a communication between the two sides, by
which the equilibrium might be restored, and that then no signs of electricity
would remain. He afterward demonstrated, by experiments, that the electricity
did not reside in the coating, as had been supposed, but in the (...) of the
glass itself. After a phial was charged (...) removed the coating, and found
that upon applying a new coating the shock might still be received. In the year
1749, he first suggested his idea of explaining the phenomena of thunder-gusts,
and of the aurora borealis, upon electrical principles. He points ^ut many
particulars in which lightning and electricity agree; and he adduces many
facts, and reasoning from facts, in support of his positions. In the same year
he conceived the astonishingly bold and grand idea of ascertaining the truth of
his doctrine, by actually drawing down the forked lightning, by means of sharp
pointed iron rods raised into the region of the clouds. Even in this uncertain
state, his passion to be useful to mankind displays itself in a powerful
manner. Admitting the identity of electricity and lightning, and knowing the
power of points in repelling bodies charged with electricity, and in conducting
their fire silently and imperceptibly, he suggests the idea of securing houses,
ships, etc. from being damaged by lightning, by erecting pointed iron rods,
which should rise some feet above the most elevated part, and descend some feet
into the ground or the water. The effect of these, he concluded, would be
either to prevent^^ stroke by repelling the cloud beyond the strik^ (...)
distance, or by drawing off the electrical fire which it contained; or, if they
could not effect this, they would at least conduct the stroke to the earth,
without any injury to the building.

It was not until the summer of 1752, that he was enabled to complete his grand
and unparalleled discovery by experiment. The plan which he had originally
proposed, was, to erect (...) some high tower, or other elevated place, a
^entry-box, from which should rise a pointed iron rod, insulated by being fixed
in a cake of resin. Electrified clouds passing over this, would (...)
conceived, impart to it a portion of their (...), which would be rendered
evident (...) by sparks being emitted, when a key, a (...), or other conductor,
was presented to it, Philadelphia at this time afforded no opportunity of
trying an experiment of this kin^. Whilst Franklin was waiting for the erection
of a spire, it occurred to him, that he might have more ready access to the
region of clouds by means of a common kite. He prepared one by attaching two
cross sticks to a silk handkerchief, which would not suffer so much from the
rain as paper. To his upright stick was affixed an iron point. The string was,
as usual, of hemp, except the lower end, which was silk. Where the hempen
string terminated, a key was fastened. With this apparatus, on the appearance
of a thunder-gust approaching, he went into the commons, accompanied by his
son, to whom alone he communicated his intentions, well knowing the ridicule
which, too generally for the interest of science, awaits unsuccessful
experiments in philosophy. He placed himself under a shed to (...) the rai^.
His kite was raised. A thunder clo^^ passed over it. No sign of electricity
appeared. He almost despaired of success; when suddenly he observed the loose
fibers of his string to move toward an erect position. He now presented his
knuckle to the key, and received a strong spark. How exquisite must his
sensations have been at this moment! On this experiment depended the fate of
his theory. If he succeeded, his name would rank* high amongst those who have
improved science (...) if he failed, he must inevitably be subjected to the
derision of mankind, or, what is worse, their pity, as a well-meaning man, but
a weak, silly projector. The anxiety with which he looked for the result of his
experiment, may easily be conceived. Doubts and despair had begun to prevail,
when the fact was ascertained in so clear a manner, that even the most
incredulous could no longer withhold their assent. Repeated sparks were drawn
from the key, a vial was charged, a shock given, and all the experiments made,
which are usually performed with electricity.

About a month before this period, some ingenious Frenchmen had completed the
discovery, in the manner originally proposed by Dr. Franklin. The letters which
he sent to Mr. Collinson, it is said, were refused a place amongst the papers
of the Royal Society of London. However this may be, Collinson published them
in a separate volume, under the title of New Experiments and Observations on
Electricity, made at Philadelphia in America. They were read with avidity, and
soon translated into different languages. A very incorrect French translation
fell into the hands of the celebrated Buffon, who notwithstanding the
disadvantages under which the work labored, was much pleased with it, and
repeated the experiments with success. He prevailed upon his friend, M.
D'Alibard, to give his countrymen a more correct translation of the work of the
American electrician. This contributed much toward spreading a knowledge of
Franklin's principles in France. The King, Louis XV. hearing of these
experiments, expressed a wish to be a spectator of them. A course of
experiments was given at the seat of the Duc D'Aven, at St. Germain, by M. De
Lor. The applauses which the King bestowed upon Franklin, excited in Buffon,
D'Alibard, and De Lor, an earnest desire of ascertaining the truth of his
theory of thunder-gusts. Buffon, erected his apparatus on the tower of Montbar.
M. D'Alibard at Mary-la-ville, and De Lor at his house in the Estrapade at
Paris, some of the highest ground in that capital. D'Alibard's machine first
showed signs of electricity. On the 10th of May, 1752, a thunder-cloud passed
over it, in the absence of M. D'Alibard; and a number of sparks were drawn from
it by Coiffier, a joiner, with whom D'Alibard had left directions how to
proceed, and by M. Raulet, the prior of Mary-la-ville. An account of this
experiment was given to the Royal Academy of Sciences, in a memoir by M.
D'Alibard, dated May 13th, 1752. On the 18th of May, M. De Lor proved equally
successful with the apparatus erected at his own house. These discoveries soon
excited the philosophers of other parts of Europe to repeat the experiment.
Amongst these, none signalized themselves more than Father Becaria of Turin, to
whose observations science is much indebted. Even the cold regions of Russia
were penetrated by the ardour for discovery. Professor Richman bade fair to add
much to the stock of knowledge on this subject, when an unfortunate flash from
his rod put a period to his existence. The friends of science will long
remember with regret the admirable martyr to electricity.

By these experiments Franklin's theory was established in the most firm
manner. When the truth of it could no longer be doubted, the vanity of men
endeavored to detract from its merit. That an American, an inhabitant of the
obscure city of Philadelphia, the name of which was hardly known, should be
able to make discoveries, and to frame theories, which had escaped the notice
of the enlightened philosophers of Europe was too mortifying to be admitted. He
must certainly have taken the idea from somebody else. An American, a being of
inferior order, make discoveries! Impossible. It was said, that the Abbe
Nollet, in 1748, had suggested the idea of the similarity of lightning and
electricity, in his Lecons de Physique. It is true, that the Abbe mentions the
idea, but he throws it out as a bare conjecture, and proposes no mode of
ascertaining the truth of it. He himself acknowledges, that Franklin first
entertained the bold thought of bringing lightning from the heavens, by means
of pointed rods fixed in the air. The similarity of electricity and lightning
is so strong, that we need not be surprised at notice being taken of it, as
soon as electrical phenomena became familiar. We find it mentioned by Dr. Wall
and Mr. Gray, while the science was in its infancy. But the honor of forming a
regular theory of thunder-gusts, of suggesting a mode of determining the truth
of it by experiments, and of putting these experiments in practice, and thus
establishing his theory upon a firm and solid basis, is incontestibly due to
Franklin. D'Alibard, who made the experiments in France, says, that he only
followed the track which Franklin had pointed out.

It has been of late asserted, that the honor of completing the experiment
with the electrical kite, does not belong to Franklin. Some late English
paragraphs have attributed it to some Frenchman, whose name they do not
mention; and the Abbe Bertholon gives it to M. De Romas, assessor to the
presideal of Nerac; the English paragraphs probably refer to the same person.
But a very slight attention will convince us of the injustice of this
procedure; Dr. Franklin's experiment was made in June 1752; and his letter,
giving an account of it, is dated October 19, 1752, M. De Romas made his first
attempt on the 14th of May 1753, but was not successful until the 7th of June;
a year after Franklin had completed the discovery, and when it was known to all
the philosophers in Europe.

Besides these great principles, Franklin's letters on electricity contain a
number of facts and hints. which have contributed greatly toward reducing this
branch of knowledge to a science. His fri^^d. Mr. Kinnersly, communicated to
him a discovery of the different kinds of electricity excited by rubbing glass
and sulphur. This, we have said, was first observed by M. Du Faye; but it was
for many years neglected. The philosophers were disposed to account for the
phenomena, rather from a difference in the quantity of electricity collected;
and even Du. Faye himself seems at last to have adopted this doctrine. Franklin
at first entertained the same idea: but upon repeating the experiments, he
perceived that Mr. Kinnersley was right; and that the vitreous and r^sin^^s
electricity of Du Faye were nothing more than the positive and negative states
which he had before observed: that the glass globe charged positively, or
increased the quantity ^f electricity on the prime conductor, whilst the globe
of sulphur diminished its natural quantity, or charged negatively. These
experiments and observations opened a new field for investigation, upon which
electricians entered with avidity; and their labors have added much to the
stock of our knowledge.

In September, 1752, Franklin entered upon a course of experiments, to
determine the state of electricity in the clouds. From a number of experiments
he formed this conclusion: "that the clouds of a thunder-gust are most commonly
in a negative state of electricity, but sometimes in a positive state;" and
from this it follows, as a necessary consequence, "that, for the most part, in
thunder-strokes, it is the earth that strikes into the clouds, and not the
clouds that strike into the earth." The letter containing these observations is
dated in September, 1753; and yet the discovery of ascending thunder has been
said to be of a modern date, and has been attributed to the Abbe Bertholon, who
published his memoir on the subject in 1776.

Franklin's letters have been translated into most of the European languages,
and into Latin. In proportion as they have become known, his principles have
been adopted. Some opposition was made to his theories, particularly by the
Abbe Nollet, who was, however, but feebly supported, whilst the first
philosophers of Europe stepped forth in defense of Franklin's principles; among
whom D'Alibard and Beccaria were the most distinguished. The opposition has
gradually ceased, and the Franklinian system is now universally adopted, where
science flourishes.

The important practical use which Franklin made of his discoveries, the
securing of houses from injury by lightning, has been already mentioned.
Pointed conductors are now very common in America, but prejudice has hitherto
prevented their general introduction into Europe, notwithstanding the most
undoubted proofs of their utility have been given. But mankind can with
difficulty be brought to lay aside established practices, or to adopt new ones.
And perhaps we have more reason to be surprised that a practice, however
rational, which was proposed about forty years ago should in that time have
been adopted in so many places, than that it has not universally prevailed. It
is only by degrees that the great body of mankind can be led into new
practices, however salutary their tendency. It is now nearly eighty years since
inoculation was introduced into Europe and America; and it is so far from being
general at present, that it will, perhaps, require one or two centuries to
render it so.

In the year 1745, Franklin published an account of his new invented
Pennsylvania fire-places, in which he minutely and accurately states the
advantages and disadvantages of different kinds of fire-places; and endeavors
to show that the one which he describes is to be preferred to any other. This
contrivance has given rise to the open stoves now in general use, which however
differ from it in construction, particularly in not having an air-box at the
back, through which a constant supply of air, warmed in its passage, is thrown
into the room. The advantages of this are, that as a stream of warm air is
continually flowing into the room, less fuel is necessary to preserve a proper
temperature, and the room may be so tightened as that no air may enter through
cracks; the consequences of which are colds, tooth-aches, etc.

Although philosophy was a principal object of Franklin's pursuit for several
years, he confined himself not to this. In the year 1747, he became a member of
the general assembly of Pennsylvania, as a burgess for the city of
Philadelphia. Warm disputes at this time subsisted between the assembly and the
proprietaries; each contending for what they conceived to be their just rights.
Franklin, a friend to the rights of man from his infancy, soon distinguished
himself as a steady opponent of the unjust schemes of the proprietaries. He was
soon looked up to as the head of the opposition; and to him have been
attributed many of the spirited replies of the assembly, to the messages of the
governors. His influence in the body was very great. This arose not from any
superior powers of eloquence; he spoke but seldom, and he never was known to
make any thing like an elaborate harangue. His speeches often consisted of a
single sentence, or of a well-told story, the moral of which was always
obviously to the point. He never attempted the flowery fields of oratory. His
manner was plain and mild. His style in speaking was* like that of his
writings, remarkably concise. With this plain manner, and his penetrating and
solid judgment, he was able to confound the most eloquent and subtle of his
adversaries, to confirm the opinions of his friends, and to make converts of
the unprejudiced who had opposed him. With a single observation, he has
rendered of no avail an elegant and lengthy discourse, and determined the fate
of a question of importance.

But he was not contented with thus supporting the rights of the people. He
wished to render them permanently secure, which can only be done by making
their value properly known; and this must depend upon increasing and extending
information to every class of men. We have already seen that he was the founder
of the public library, which contributed greatly toward improving the minds of
the citizens. But this was not sufficient. The schools then subsisting were in
general of little utility. The teachers were men ill-qualified for the
important duty which they had undertaken; and, after all, nothing more could be
obtained than the rudiments of a common English education. Franklin drew up a
plan of an Academy to be erected in the city of Philadelphia, suited to "the
state of an infant country;" but i^ this, as in all his plans, he confined not
hi^ (...) to the present time only. He looked forward to the period when an
institution on an enlarged plan would become necessary. With this view he
considered his Academy as "a foundation for posterity to erect a seminary of
learning, more extensive, and suitable to future circumstances." In pursuance
of this plan the constitutions were drawn up and signed on the 13th of November
1749. In these twenty-four of the most respectable citizens of Philadelphia was
named as trustees. In the choice of these, and in the formation of his plan,
Franklin is said to have consulted chiefly with Thomas Hopkinson, Esquire. Rev.
Richard Peter's, then secretary of the province, Tench Francis, Esquire.
attorneygeneral, and Dr. Phineas Bond.

The following article shows a spirit of benevolence worthy of imitation; and,
for the honor of our city, we hope that it continues to be in force.

"In case of the inability of the rector, or any master, (established on the
foundation by receiving a certain salary) through sickness, or any other
natural infirmity, whereby he may be reduced to poverty, the trustees shall
have power to contribute to his support, in proportion to his distress and
merit, and the stock in their hands."

The last clause of the fundamental rules is expressed in language so tender
and benevolent, so truly parental, that it will do everlasting honor to the
hearts and heads of the founders.

"It is hoped and expected, that the trustees will make it their pleasure, and
in some degree their business, to visit the academy often; to encourage and
countenance the youth, countenance and assist the masters, and by all means in
their power advance the usefulness and reputation of the design; that they will
look on the students as, in some measure, their own children, treat them with
familiarity and affection; and when they have behaved well, gone through their
studies, and are to enter the world, they shall zealously unite, and make all
the interest that can be made, to promote and establish them, whether in
business, offices, marriages, or any other thing for their advantage,
preferable to all other persons whatsoever, even of equal merit."

The constitutions being signed and made public, with the names of the
gentlemen proposing themselves as trustees and founders, the design was so well
approved of by the public-spirited citizens of Philadelphia, that the sum of
eight hundred pounds per annum, for five years, was in the course of a few
weeks subscribed for carrying the plan into execution; and in the beginning of
January following ( viz. 1750) three of the schools were opened, namely, the
Latin and Greek schools, the Mathematical, and the English schools. In
pursuance of an article in the original plan, a school for educating sixty boys
and thirty girls (in the charter since called the Charitable School) was
opened, and amidst all the difficulties with which the trustees have struggled
in respect to their funds, has still been continued full for the space of forty
years; so that allowing three years education for each boy and girl admitted
into it, which is the general rule, at least twelve hundred children have
received in it the chief part of their education who might otherwise, in a
great measure, have been left without the means of instruction. And many of
those who have been thus educated, are now to be found among the most useful
and reputable citizens of this state.

The institution, thus successfully begun, continued daily to flourish, to the
great satisfaction of Dr. Franklin; who, notwithstanding the multiplicity of
his other engagements and pursuits, at that busy stage of his life, was a
constant attendant at the monthly visitations and examinations of the schools,
and made it his particular study, by mean^ of his extensive correspondence
abroad, to advance the reputation of the seminary, and to draw students and
scholars to it from different parts of America and the West Indies. Through the
interposition of his benevolent and learned friend, Peter Collinson, of London,
upon the application of the trustees, a charter of incorporation, dated July
13, 1753, was obtained from the honorable proprietors of Pennsylvania, Thomas
Penn and Richard Penn, Esqrs. accompanied with a liberal benefaction of five
hundred pounds sterling; and Dr. Franklin now began in good earnest to please
himself with the hopes of a speedy accomplishment of his original design, viz.
the establishment of a perfect institution, upon the plan of the European
colleges and universities; for which his academy was intended as a nursery or
foundation. To elucidate this fact, is a matter of considerable importance in
respect to the memory and character of Dr. Franklin, as a philosopher, and as
the friend and patron of learning and science; for notwithstanding what is
expressly declared by him in the preamble to the constitutions, viz. that the
academy was begun for "teaching the Latin and Greek languages, with all useful
branches of the arts and sciences, suitable to the state of an infant country,
and laying a foundation for posterity to erect a seminary of learning more
extensive, and suitable to their future circumstances;" yet it has been
suggested of late, as upon Dr. Franklin's authority, that the Latin and Greek,
or the dead languages, are an encumbrance upon a scheme of liberal education,
and that the engranfting or founding a college, or more extensive seminary,
upon his academy, was without his approbation or agency, and gave him
discontent. If the reverse of this does not already appear, from what has been
quoted above, the following letters will put the matter beyond dispute. They
were written by him to a gentleman, who had at that time published the idea of
a college, suited to the circumstances of a young country, (meaning New York) a
copy of which having been sent to Dr. Franklin for his opinion, gave rise to
that correspondence which terminated about a year afterward, in erecting the
college upon the foundation of the academy, and establishing that gentleman at
the head of both, where he still continues, after a period of thirty-six years,
to preside with distinguished reputation.

From these letters also, the state of the academy, at that time, will be seen.

Philadelphia, April 19, 1753. Sir,
I received your favor of the 11th instant, with your new A general idea of
the college of Marania.
piece on Education which I shall carefully peruse, and give you my sentiments
of it, as you desire, by next post.

I believe the young gentlemen, your pupils, may be entertained and instructed
here, in mathematics and philosophy to satisfaction. Mr. Alison The Rev. and
learned Mr. Francis Alison, afterward D. D. and Vice Provost of the College.
(who was educated at Glasgow) has been long accustomed to teach the latter,
and Mr. Grew Mr. Theophilus Grew, afterward Professor of Mathematics in the
College.
the former; and I think their pupils make great progress. Mr. Alison has the
care of the Latin and Greek school, but as he has now three good assistants
Those assistants were at that time Mr. Charles Thompson, late Secretary of
Congress, Mr. Paul Jackson and Mr. Jacob Duche.
, he can very well afford some hours (...) day for the instruction of those who
are engaged in higher studies. The mathematical school is pretty well furnished
with instruments. The English library is a good one; and we have belonging to
it a middling apparatus for experimental philosophy, and purpose speedily to
complete it. The Loganian library, one of the best collections in America, will
shortly be opened; so that neither books nor instruments will be wanting; and
as we are determined always to give good salaries, we have reason to believe we
may have always an opportunity of choosing good masters; upon which, indeed,
the success of the whole depends. We are obliged to you for your kind offers in
this respect, and when you are settled in England, we may occasionally make use
of your friendship and judgment.

If it suits your convenience to visit Philadelphia before you return to
Europe, I shall be extremely glad to see and converse with you here, as well as
to correspond with you after your settlement in England; for an acquaintance
and communication with men of learning, virtue, and public spirit, is one of my
greatest enjoyment.

I do not know whether you ever happened to see the first proposals I made for
erecting the Academy. I send them enclosed. They had (however imperfect) the
desired success, being followed by a subscription of four thousand pounds,
toward carrying them into execution. And as we are fond of receiving advice,
and are daily improving by experience, I am in hopes we shall in a few years,
see a perfect institution.

I am very respectfully, etc. B. FRANKLIN.
Mr. W. Smith, Long Island.




Philadelphia, May3 d,1753. Sir,
Mr. Peter's has just now been with me, and we have compared notes on your new
piece. We find nothing in the scheme of education, however excellent, but what
is, in our opinion, very practicable. The great difficulty will be to find the
Aratus The name given to the principal or head of the ideal college, the system
of education in which has nevertheless been nearly realized, or followed as a
model, in the college and Academy of Philadelphia, and some other American
seminaries, for many years past.
, and other suitable persons, to carry it into execution; but such may be had
if proper encouragement be given. We have both received great pleasure in the
perusal of it. For my part, I know (...) I have read a piece that has mo^e
affected me -- so noble and just are the sentiments, so warm and animated the
language; yet as censure from your friends may be of more use, as well as more
agreeable to you than praise, I ought to mention, that I wish you had omitted
not only the quotation from the Review The quotation alluded to (from the
London Monthly Review for 1749,) was judged to reflect too severely (...) the
discipline and government of the English university of Oxford and Cambridge,
and was expunged from the following editions of this work.
, which you are now justly dissatisfied with, but those expressions of
resentment against your adversaries, in pages 65 and 79. In such cases the
noblest victory is obtained by neglect and by shining on.

Mr. Allen has been out of town these ten days; but before he went he directed
me to procure him six copies of your piece. Mr. Peter's has taken ten. He
purposed to have written to you; but omits it, as he expects so soon to have
the pleasure of seeing you here. He desires me to present his affectionate
compliments to you, and to assure you that you will be very welcome to him. I
shall only say, that you may depend on my doing all in my power to make your
visit to Philadelphia agreeable to you.

I am, etc. B. FRANKLIN.
Mr. Smith.




Philadelphia, Nov. 27 th, 1753. Dear Sir,
Having written you fully, via Bristol, I have now little to add. Matters
relating to the Academy remain in slutu quo. The trustees would be glad to see
a rector established there, but they dread entering into new engagements till
they are got out of debt; and I have not yet got them wholly over to my
opinion, that a good professor, or teacher of the higher branches of learning
would draw so many scholars as to pay great part, if not the whole of his
salary. Thus, unless the proprietors (of the province) shall think fit to put
the finishing hand to our institution, it must, I fear, wait some few years
longer before it can arrive at that state of perfection, which to ^he it seems
now capable of; and all the pleasure I promised myself in seeing you settled
among us, vanishes into smoke.

But good Mr. Collinson writes me word, that no endeavors, of his shall be
wanting; and he hopes, with the archbishop's assistance, to be able to to
prevail with our proprietors Upon the application of Archbishop Herring, and P.
Collinson, Esquire. at Dr. Franklin's request, (aided by the l^^ters of Mr. Allen
and Mr. Peter's) the Hon. Thomas (...), Esquire. subscribed an annual sum, and
afterward gave at least, 5000 l. to the founding or engrafting the College
upon the Academy.
. I pray God grant them success.

My son presents his affectionate regards, with, dear sir,

Yours, etc. B. FRANKLIN.
P. S. I have not been favored with a line from you since your arrival in
England.




Philadelphia, April 18 th, 1754. Dear Sir,
I have had but one letter from you since your arrival in England, which was a
short one, via Boston, dated October 18th, acquainting me that you had written
largely by Capt. Davis -- Davis was lost, and with him your letters, to my
great disappointment. -- Mesnard and Gibbon have since arrived here, and I hear
nothing from you. -- My comfort is, an imagination that you only omit writing
because you are coming, and purpose (...) tell me every thing viva voce. So not
knowing whether this letter will reach you, and hoping either to see or hear
from you by the Myrtill^, (...) Buddon's ship, which is daily expected, I only
(...) that I am, with great esteem and affection,

Yours, etc. B. FRANKLIN
Mr. Smith.




About a month after the date of this last (...) the gentleman to whom it was
addressed arrived in Philadelphia, and was immediately placed at the head of
the seminary; whereby Dr. Franklin, and the other trustees were enabled to
prosecute their plan, for perfecting the institution, and opening the College
upon the large and liberal foundation on which it now stands; for which purpose
they obtained their additional charter, dated May 27th, 1755.

Thus far we thought it proper to exhibit in one view Dr. Franklin's services
in the foundation and establishment of this seminary. He soon afterward
embarked for England, in the public service of his country; and having been
generally employed abroad, in the like service, for the greatest part of the
remainder of his life (as will appear in our subsequent account of the same) he
had but few opportunities of taking any further active part i^ the affairs of
the seminary, until his sinal return i^ the year 1785, when he found its
charters violated, and his ancient colleagues, the original founders, deprived
of their trust, by an act of the legislature; and although his own name had
been inserted among the new trustees, yet he declined to take his seat among
them, or any concern in the management of their affairs, till the institution
was restored by law to its original owners. He then assembled his old
colleagues at his own house, and being chosen their president, all their future
meetings were, at his request, held there, till within a few months of his
death, when with reluctance, and at their desire, lest he might be too much
injured by his attention to their business, he suffered them to meet at the
college.

Franklin not only gave birth to many useful institutions himself, but he was
also instrumental in promoting those which had originated with other men. About
the year 1752, an eminent physician of this city, Dr. Bond, considering the
deplorable state of the poor, when visited with disease, conceived the idea of
establishing an hospital. Notwithstanding very great exertions on his part, he
was able to interest few people so far in his benevolent plan, as to obtain
subscriptions from them. Unwilling that his scheme should prove abortive, he
sought the aid of Franklin, who readily engaged in the business, both by using
his influence with his friends, and by stating the advantageous influence of
the proposed institution in his paper. These efforts were attended with
success. Considerable sums were subscribed; but they were still short of what
was necessary. Franklin now made another exertion. He applied to the assembly;
and, after some opposition, obtained leave to bring in a bill, specifying, that
as soon as two thousand pounds were subscribed, the same sum should be drawn
from the treasury by the speaker's warrant, to be applied to the purposes of
the institution. The opposition, (...) the sum was granted upon a contingency
which they supposed would never take place, were silent, and the bill passed.
The friends of the plan now redoubled their efforts, to obtain subscriptions to
the amount stated in the bill, and were soon successful. This was the
foundation of the Pennsylvania Hospital, which, with the Bettering-house and
Dispensary, bears ample testimony of the humanity of the citizens of
Philadelphia.

Dr. Franklin had conducted himself so well (...) the office of postmaster,
and had shown himself to be so well acquainted with the business of that
department, that it was thought expedient (...) raise him to a more dignified
station. In 1753 (...) was appointed deputy post-master-general for the British
colonies. The profits arising from the postage of the revenue, which the crown
of Great Britain derived from the colonies. In the hands of Franklin, it is
said, that the post office in America yielded annually thrice as much as that
of Ireland.

The American colonies were much exposed to depredations on their frontiers, by
the Indians; and more particularly whenever a war took place between France and
England. The colonies, individually, were either too weak to take efficient
measures for their own defense, or they were unwilling to take upon themselves
the whole (...) of erecting forts and maintaining garrisons, (...) their
neighbors, who partook equally with themselves, of the advantages, contributed
nothing to the expense. Sometimes also the disputes, which subsisted between
the Governors and Assemblies, prevented the adoption of means of defense; as we
have seen was the case in Pennsylvania in 1745. To devise a plan of union
between the Colonies, to regulate this and other matters, appeared a desirable
object. To accomplish this, in the year 1754, commissioners from New Hampshire,
Massachusetts, Rhode Island, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Maryland, met at
Albany. Dr. Franklin attended here, as a commissioner from Pennsylvania, and
produced a plan, which, from the place of meeting, has been usually termed "The
Albany Plan of Union." This proposed, that application should be made for an
act of Parliament, to establish in the colonies a general government, to be
administered by a president-general, appointed by the crown, and by a
grand-council, consisting of members chosen by the representatives of the
different colonies; their number to be in direct proportion to the sums paid by
each colony into the general treasury, with this restriction, that no colony
should have more than seven, nor less than two representatives. The whole
executive authority was committed to the president- general. The power of
legislation was lodged in the grand council and president-general jointly; his
consent being made necessary to passing a bill into a law. The power vested in
the president and council were, to declare war and peace, and to conclude
treaties with the Indian nations; to regulate trade with, and to make purchases
of vacant lands from them, either in the name of the crown, or of the union; to
settle new colonies, to make laws for governing these until they should be
erected in separate governments, and to raise troops, build forts, fit out
armed vessels, and use other means for the general defense: and, to effect
these things, a power was given to make laws, ^aying such duties, imposts, or
taxes, as they should find necessary, and as would be least burdensome to the
people. All laws were to be sent to England for the King's approbation; and
unless disapproved of within three years, were to remain in force. All officers
in the land or sea service were to be nominated by the president-general, and
approved of by the general council; civil officers were to be nominated by the
council, and approved by the president. Such are the outlines of the plan
proposed, for the consideration of the congress, by Dr. Franklin. After several
days' discussion, it was unanimously agreed to by the commissioners, a copy
transmitted to each assembly, and one to the King's council. The fate of it was
singular. It was disapproved of by the ministry of Great Britain, because it
gave too much power to the representatives of the people; and it was rejected
by every assembly, as giving to the president-general, the representative of
the crown, an influence greater than appeared to them proper, in a plan of
government intended for freemen. Perhaps this rejection, on both sides, is the
strongest proof that could be adduced of the excellence of it, as suited to the
situation of America and Great Britain at that time. It appears to have steered
exactly in the middle, between the opposite interests of both.

Whether the adoption of this plan would have prevented the separation of
America from Great Britain, is a question which might afford much room for
speculation. It may be said, that, by enabling the colonies to defend
themselves, it would have removed the pretext upon which the stamp act,
tea-act, and other acts of the British parliament, were passed: which excited a
spirit of opposition, and laid the foundation for the separation of the two
countries, But, on the other hand, it must be admitted, that the restriction
laid by Great Britain upon our commerce, obliging us to sell our produce to her
citizens only, and to take from them various articles, of which, as our
manufactures were discouraged, we stood in need, at a price greater than that
for which they could have been obtained from other nations, must inevitably
produce dissatisfaction, even though no duties were imposed by the parliament;
a circumstance which might still have taken place. Besides, as the
president-general was to be appointed by the crown, he must, of necessity, be
devoted to its views* and would, therefore, refuse his assent to any laws,
however salutary to the community, which had the most remote tendency to injure
the interests of his sovereign. Even should they receive his assent, the
approbation of the king was to be necessary; who would indubitably, in every
instance, prefer the advantage of his home dominions to that of his colonies.
Hence would ensue perpetual disagreements between the council and the
president-general, and thus, between the people of America and the crown of
Great Britain: While the colonies continued weak, they would be obliged to
submit, and as soon as they acquired strength they would become more urgent in
their demands, until, at length, they would shake off the yoke, and declare
themselves independent.

Whilst the French were in possession of Canada* their trade with the natives
extended very far; even to the back of the British settlements. They were
disposed, from time to time, to establish posts within the territory, which the
British claimed as their own. Independent of the injury to the furtrade, which
was considerable, the colonies suffered this further inconvenience, that the
Indians were frequently instigated to commit depredations on their frontiers.
In the year 1753, encroachments were made upon the boundaries of Virginia.
Remonstrances had no effect. In the ensuing year, a body of men was sent out
under the command of Mr. Washington, who, though a very young man, had, by his
conduct in the preceding year, shown himself worthy of such an important trust.
Whilst marching to take possession of the post at the junction of the Allegany
and Monongahela, he was informed that the French had already erected a fort
there. A detachment of their men marched against him. He fortified himself as
strongly as time and circumstances would admit. A superiority of numbers soon
obliged him to surrender Fort Necessity. He obtained honorable terms for
himself and men, and returned to Virginia. The government of Great Britain now
thought it necessary to interfere. In the year 1755, General Braddock, with
some regiments of regular troops, and provincial levies, was sent to dispossess
the French of the posts upon which they had seized. After the men were all
ready, a difficulty occurred, which had nearly prevented the expedition. This
was the want of wagons. Franklin now stepped forward, and with the assistance
of his son, in a little time procured a hundred and fifty. Braddock
unfortunately fell into an ambuscade, and perished, with a number of his men.
-- Washington, who had accompanied him as an aidde-camp, and had warned him, in
vain, of his danger, now displayed great military talents in effecting a
retreat of the remains of the army, and in forming a juction with the rear,
under Colonel Dunbar, upon whom the chief command now devolved. With some
difficulty they brought their little body to a place of safety; but they found
it necessary to destroy their wagons and baggage, to prevent their falling
into the hands of the enemy. For the wagons which he had furnished, Franklin
had given bonds to a large amount. The owners declared their intentions of
obliging him to make a restitution of their property. Had they put their
threats into execution, ruin must inevitably have been the consequence.
Governor Shirley, finding that he had incurred these debts for the service of
government, made arrangements to have them discharged, and released Franklin
from his disagreeable situation.

The alarm spread through the colonies, after the defeat of Braddock, was very
great. Preparations to arm were every where made. In Pennsylvania, the
prevalence of the quaker interest prevented the adoption of any system of
defense, which would compel the citizens to bear arms. Franklin introduced into
the assembly a bill for organizing a militia, by which every man was allowed to
take arms or not, as to him should appear fit. The quakers, being thus left at
liberty, suffered the bill to pass; for although their principles would not
suffer them to fight, they had no objections to their neighbors fighting for
them. In consequence of this act a very respectable militia was formed. The
sense of impending danger infused a military spirit in all* whose religious
tenets were not opposed to war. Franklin was appointed colonel of a regiment in
Philadelphia, which consisted of 1200 men.

The north-western frontier being invaded by the enemy, it became necessary to
adopt measures for its defense. Franklin was directed by the governor to take
charge of this business. A power of raising men and of appointing officers to
command them, was vested in him. He soon levied a body of troops, with which he
repaired to the place at which their presence was necessary. Here he built a
fort, and placed the garrison in such a posture of defense, as would enable
them to withstand the inroads, to which the inhabitants had previously been
exposed. He remained here for some time, in order the more completely to
discharge the trust committed to him. Some business of importance rendered his
presence necessary in the assembly, and he returned to Philadelphia.

The defense of her colonies was a great expense to Great Britain. The most
effectual mode of lessening this was, to put arms into the hands of the
inhabitants, and to teach them their use. But England wished not that the
Americans should become acquainted with their own strength. She was
apprehensive, that, as soon as this period arrived, they would no longer submit
to that monopoly of their trade, which to them was highly injurious, but
extremely advantageous to the mother country. In comparison with the profits of
this, the expense of maintaining armies and fleets to defend them was trifling.
She sought to keep them dependent upon her for protection, the best plan which
could be devised for retaining them in peaceable subjection. The least
appearance of a military spirit was therefore to be guarded against, and,
although a war then raged, the act organizing a militia was disapproved of by
the ministry. The regiments which had been formed under it were disbanded, and
the defense of the province entrusted to regular troops.

The disputes between the proprietaries and the people continued in full force,
although a war was raging on the frontiers. Not even the sense of danger was
sufficient to reconcile, for ever so short a time, their jarring interests. The
assembly still insisted upon the justice of taxing the proprietary estates, but
the governors constantly refused to give their assent to this measure, without
which no bill could pass into a law. Enraged at the obstinacy, and what they
conceived to be unjust proceedings of their opponents, the assembly at length
determined to apply to the mother country for relief. A petition was addressed
to the King in council, stating the inconveniences under which the inhabitants
labored, from the attention of the proprietaries to their private interests,
to the neglect of the general welfare of the community, and praying for
redress. Franklin was appointed to present this address, as agent for the
province of Pennsylvania, and departed from America in June 1757. In conformity
to the instructions which he had received from the legislature, he held a
conference with the proprietaries, who then resided in England, and endeavored
to prevail upon them to give up the long-contested point. Finding that they
would hearken to no terms of accommodation, he laid his petition before the
council. During this time governor Denny assented to a law imposing a tax, in
which no discrimination was made in favor of the estates of the Penn family.
They, alarmed at this intelligence, and Franklin's exertions, used their utmost
exertions to prevent the royal sanction being given to this law, which they
represented as highly iniquitous, designed to throw the burden of supporting
government on them, and calculated to produce the most ruinous consequences to
them and their posterity. The cause was amply discussed before the privy
council. The Penns found here some strenuous advocates; nor were there wanting
some who warmly espoused the side of the people. After some time spent in
debate, a proposal was made, that Franklin should solemnly engage, that the
assessment of the tax should be so made, as that the proprietary estates should
pay no more than a due proportion. This he agreed to perform, the Penn family
withdrew their opposition, and tranquillity was thus once more restored to the
province.

The mode in which this dispute was terminated is a striking proof of the high
opinion entertained of Franklin's integrity and honor, even by those who
considered him as inimical to their views. Nor was their confidence
ill-founded. The assessment was made upon the strictest principles of equity;
and the proprietary estates bore only a proportionable share of the expenses of
supporting government.

After the completion of this important business, Franklin remained at the
court of Great Britain, as agent for the province of Pennsylvania. The
extensive knowledge which he possessed of the ^^^uation of the colonies, and
the regard which he always manifested for their interests, occasioned his
appointment to the same office by the colonie^ of Massechusetts, Maryland, and
Georgia. His conduct, in this situation, was such as rendered him still more
dear to his countrymen.

He had now an opportunity of indulging in the society of those friends, whom
his merits had procured him while at a distance. The regard which they had
entertained for him was rather encrease^ by a personal acquaintance. The
opposition which had been made to his discoveries in philosophy gradually
ceased, and the rewards of leterary merit were abundantly conferred upon him.
The Royal Society of London, which had at first refused his performances
admission into its transactions, now thought it an honor to rank him among its
fellows. Other societies of Europe were equally ambitious of calling him a
member. The university of St. Andrew's in Scotland, conferred upon him the
degree of Doctor of Laws. Its example was followed by the Universities of
Edinburgh and of Oxford. His correspondence was sought for by the most eminent
Philosophers of Europe. His letters to these abound with true science,
delivered in the most simple unadorned manner.

The province of Canada was at this time in the possession of the French, who
had originally settled it. The trade with the Indians, for which its situation
was very convenient, was exceedingly lucrative. The French traders here found a
market for their commodities, and received in return large quantities of rich
furs, which they disposed of at a high price in Europe. Whilst the possession
of this country was highly advantageous to France, it was a grevious
inconvenience to the inhabitants of the British colonies. The Indians were
almost generally desirous to cultivate the friendship of the French; by whom
they were abundantly supplied with arms and ammunition. Whenever a war
happened, the Indians were ready to fall upon the frontiers: and this they
frequently did; even when Great Britain and France were at peace. From these
considerations, it appeared to be the interest of Great Britain to gain the
possession of Canada. But the importance of such an acquisition was not well
understood in England. Franklin about this time published his Canada pamphlet,
in which he, in a very forcible manner, pointed out the advantages which would
result from the conquest of this province.

An expedition against it was planned, and the command given to General Wolf.
His success is well known. At the treaty in 1762, France ceded Canada to Great
Britain, and by her cession of Louisiana, at the same time relinquished all her
possessions on the continent of America.

Although Dr. Franklin was now principally occupied with political pursuits, he
found time for philosophical studies. He extended his electrical researches,
and made a variety of experiments, particularly on the tourmalin. The singular
properties which this stone possesses of being electrified on one side
positively, and on the other negatively, by heat alone, without friction, had
been but lately observed.

Some experiments on the cold produced by evaporation, made by Dr. Cullen, had
been communicated to Dr. Franklin by Professor Simpson of Glasgow. These he
repeated, and found, that, by the evaporation of either in the exhausted
receiver of an air-pump, so great a degree of cold was produced in a summer's
day, that water was converted into ice. This discovery he applied to the
solution of a number of phenomena, particularly a singular fact, which
philosophers had endeavored in vain to account for, viz. that the temperature
of the human body, when in health, never exceeds 96 degrees of Farenheit's
thermometer, although the atmosphere which surrounds it may be heated to a much
greater degree. This he attributed to the increased perspiration, and
consequent evaporation produced by the heat.

In a letter to Mr. Small of London, dated in May 1760, Dr. Franklin makes a
number of observations, tending to show that, in North America, north-east
storms begin in the south-west parts. It appears, from actual observation, that
a north-east storm, which extended a considerable distance, commenced at
Philadelphia nearly four hours before it was felt at Boston. He endeavored to
account for this, by supposing that, from heat, some rarefaction takes place
about the Gulf of Mexico, that the air further north being cooler rushes in,
and is succeeded by the cooler and denser air still further north, and that
thus a continued current is at length produced.

The tone produced by rubbing the brim of a drinking glass with a wet finger
had been generally known. A Mr. Puckeridge, an Irishman, by placing on a table
a number of glasses of different sizes, and tuning them by partly filling them
with water, endeavored to form an instrument capable of playing tunes. He was
prevented by an untimely end, from bringing his invention to any degree of
perfection. After his death some improvements were made upon his plan. The
sweetness of the tones induced Dr. Franklin to make a variety of experiments;
and he at length formed that elegant instrument, which he has called the
Armonica.

In the summer of 1762 he returned America. On his passage he observed the
singular effect produced by the agitation of a vessel, containing oil floating
on water. The surface of the oil remains smooth and undisturbed, whilst the
water is agitated with the utmost commotion. No satisfactory explanation of
this appearance has, we believe, ever been given.

Dr. Franklin received the thanks of the assembly of Pennsylvania, "as well for
the faithful discharge of his duty to that province in particular, as for the
many and important services done to America in general, during his residence in
Great Britain." A compensation of 5000l. Pennsylvania currency, was also
decreed him for his services during six years.

During his absence he had been annually elected member of the assembly. On his
return to Pennsylvania he again took his feat in this body, and continued a
steady defender of the liberties of the people.

In December 1762, a circumstance which caused great alarm in the province took
place. A number of Indians had resided in the county of Lancaster, and
conducted themselves uniformly as friends to the white inhabitants. Repeated
depredations on the frontiers had exasperated the inhabitants to such a degree,
that they determined on revenge upon every Indian. A number of persons, to the
amount of 120, principally inhabitants of Donnegal and Peckstang or Paxton
townships, in the county of York, assembled; and, mounted on horseback,
proceeded to the settlement of these harmless and defenseless Indians, whose
number had now reduced to about twenty. The Indians received intelligence of
the attack which was intended against them, but disbelieved it. Considering the
white people as their friends, they apprehended no danger from them. When the
party arrived at the Indian settlement, they found only some women and
children, and a few old men, the rest being absent at work. They murdered all
whom they found, and amongst others the chief Shahaes, who had been always
distinguished for his friendship to the whites. This bloody deed excited much
indignation in the well-disposed part of the community.

The remainder of these unfortunate Indians, who, by absence, had escaped the
massacre, were conducted to Lancaster, and lodged in the gaol, as a place of
security. The governor issued a proclamation expressing the strongest
disapprobation of the action, offering a reward for the discovery of the
perpetrators of the deed, and prohibiting all injuries to the peaceable Indians
in future. But, notwithstanding this, a party of the same men shortly after
marched to Lancaster, broke open the gaol, and inhumanly butchered the innocent
Indians who had been placed there for security. Another proclamation was
issued, but had no effect. A detachment marched down to Philadelphia, for the
express purpose of murdering some friendly Indians, who had been removed to the
city for safety. A number of the citizens armed in their defense. The Quakers,
whose principles are opposed to fighting, even in their own defense, were most
active upon this occasion. The rioters came to Germantown. The governor fled
for safety to the house of Dr. Franklin, who, with some others, advanced to
meet the Paxton boys, as they were called, and had influence enough to prevail
upon them to relinquish their undertaking, and return to their homes.

The disputes between the proprietaries and the assembly, which, for a time,
had subsided, were again revived. The proprietaries were dissatisfied with the
concessions made in favor of the people, and made great struggles to recover
the privilege of exempting their estates from taxation, which they had been
induced to give up.

In 1763 the assembly passed a militia bill, to which the governor refused to
give his assent, unless the assembly would agree to certain amendments which he
proposed. These consisted in increasing the fines, and, in some cases,
substituting death for fines. He wished too that the officers should be
appointed altogether by himself, and not be nominated by the people, as the
bill had proposed. These amendments the assembly considered as inconsistent
with the spirit of liberty. They would not adopt them; the governor was
obstinate, and the bill was lost.

These, and various other circumstances, increased the uneasiness which
subsisted between the proprietaries and the assembly, to such a degree, that,
in 1764, a petition to the King was agreed to by the house, praying an
alteration from a proprietary to a regal government. Great opposition was made
to this measure, not only in the house but in the public prints. A speech of
Mr. Dickenson, on the subject, was published, with a preface by Dr. Smith, in
which great pains were taken to show the impropriety and impolicy of this
proceeding. A speech of Mr. Galloway, in reply to Mr. Dickenson, was published,
accompanied with a preface by Dr. Franklin; in which he ably opposed the
principles laid down in the preface to Mr. Dickenson's speech. This application
to the throne produced no effect. The proprietary government was still
continued.

At the election for a new assembly, in the fall of 1764, the friends of the
proprietaries made great exertions to exclude those of the adverse party, and
obtained a small majority in the City of Philadelphia. Franklin now lost his
seat in the house, which he had held for fourteen years. On the meeting of the
assembly, it appeared that there was still a decided majority of Franklin's
friends. He was immediately appointed provincial agent, to the great chagrin of
his enemies, who made a solemn protest against his appointment; which was
refused admission upon the minutes, as being unprecedented. It was, however,
published in the papers, and produced a spirited reply from him, just before
his departure for England.

The disturbances produced in America by Mr. Grenvill's stamp act, and the
opposition made to it are well known. Under the Marquis of Rockingham's
administration, it appeared expedient to endeavor to calm the minds of the
colonists; and the repeal of the odious tax was contemplated. Amongst other
means of collecting information on the disposition of the people to submit to
it, Dr. Franklin was called to the bar of the house of commons. The examination
which he here underwent was published, and contains a striking proof of the
extent and accuracy of his information, and the facility with which he
communicated his sentiments. He represented facts in so strong a point of view,
that the inexpediency of the act must have appeared clear to every unprejudiced
mind. The act, after some opposition, was repealed, about a year after it was
enacted, and before it had ever been carried into execution.

In the year 1766, he made a visit to Holland and Germany, and received the
greatest marks of attention from men of Science. In his passage through
Holland, he learned from the watermen the effect which a diminution of the
quantity of water in canals has, in impeding the progress of boats. Upon his
return to England, he was led to make a number of experiments; all of which
tended to confirm the observation. These, with an explanation of the
phenomenon, he communicated in a letter to his friend, Sir John Pringle, which
is contained in the volume of his philosophical pieces.

In the following year he traveled into France, where he met with no less
favorable reception than he had experienced in Germany. He was introduced to a
number of literary characters, and to the King, Louis XV.

Several letters written by Hutchinson, Oliver, and others, to persons in
eminent stations in Great Britain, came into the hands of Dr. Franklin.

These contained the most violent invectives against the leading characters of
the state of Massachusetts, and strenuously advised the prosecution of vigorous
measures, to compel the people to obedience to the measures of the ministry.
These he transmitted to the legislature, by whom they were published. Attested
copies of them were sent to Great Britain, with an address, praying the king to
discharge from office persons who had rendered themselves so obnoxious to the
people, and who had shown themselves so unfriendly to their interests. The
publication of these letters produced a duel between Mr. Whately and Mr.
Temple; each of whom was suspected of having been instrumental in procuring
them. To prevent any further disputes on this subject, Dr. Franklin, in one of
the public papers, declared that he had sent them to America, but would give no
information concerning the manner in which he had obtained them; nor was this
ever discovered.

Shortly after, the petition of the Massachusetts assembly was taken up for
examination, before the privy council. Dr. Franklin attended, as agent for the
assembly; and here a torrent of the most violent and unwarranted abuse was
poured upon him by the solicitor-general, Wedderburne, who was engaged as
council for Oliver and Hutchinson. The petition was declared to be scandalous
and vexatious, and the prayer of it refused.

Although the parliament of Great Britain had repealed the stamp act, it was
only upon the principle of expediency. They still insisted upon their right to
tax the colonies; and, at the same time that the stamp act was repealed, an act
was passed, declaring the right of parliament to bind the colonies in all cases
whatsoever. This language was used even by the most strenuous opposers of the
stamp act; and, amongst others, by Mr. Pit. This right was never recognized by
the colonists; but, as they flattered themselves that it would not be
exercised, they were not very active in remonstrating against it. Had this
pretended right been suffered to remain dormant, the colonists would cheerfully
have furnished their quota of supplies, in the mode to which they had been
accustomed; that is, by acts of their own assemblies, in consequence of
requisitions from the secretary of state. If this practice had been pursued,
such was the disposition of the colonies toward the mother country, that,
notwithstanding the disadvantages under which they labored from restraints
upon their trade, calculated solely for the benefit of the commercial and
manufacturing interests of Great Britain, a separation of the two countries
might have been a far distant event. The Americans, from their earliest
infancy, were taught to venerate a people from whom they were descended; whose
language, laws, and manners, were the same as their own. They looked up to them
as models of perfection; and, in their prejudiced minds, the most enlightened
nations of Europe were considered as almost barbarians, in comparison with
Englishmen. The name of an Englishman conveyed to an American the idea of every
thing good and great. Such sentiments instilled into them in early life, what
but a repetition of unjust treatment could have induced them to entertain the
most distant thought of separation! The duties on glass, paper, leather,
painter's colors, tea, etc. the disfranchisement of some of the colonies: the
obstruction to the measures of the legislature in others, by the King's
governors; the contemptuous treatment of their humble remonstrances, stating
their grievances and praying a redress of them, and other violent and
oppressive measures, at length excited an ardent spirit of opposition. Instead
of endeavoring to allay this by a more lenient conduct, the ministry seemed
resolutely bent upon reducing the colonies to the most slavish obedience to
their decrees. But this tended only to aggravate. Vain were all the efforts
made use of to prevail upon them to lay aside their designs, to convince them
of the impossibility of carrying them into effect, and of the mischievous
consequences which must ensue from a continuence of the attempt. They
persevered, with degree of inflexibility scarcely paralleled.

The advantages which Great Britain derived from her colonies were so great,
that nothing but a degree of infatuation, little short of madness, could have
produced a continuance of measures calculated to keep up a spirit of
uneasiness, which might occasion the slightest wish for a separation. When we
consider the great improvements in the science of government, the general
diffusion of the principles of liberty amongst the people of Europe, the
effects which these have already produced in France, and the probable
consequences which will result from them elsewhere, all of which are the
offspring of the American revolution, it cannot but appear strange, that events
of so great moment to the happiness of mankind, should have been ultimately
occasioned by the wickedness or ignorance of a British ministry.

Dr. Franklin left nothing untried to prevail upon the ministry to consent to a
change of measures. In private conversations, and in letters to persons in
government, he continually expatiated upon the impolicy and injustice of their
conduct toward America; and stated, that, notwithstanding the attachment of
the colonists to the mother country, a repetition of ill treatment must
ultimately alienate their affections. They listened not to his advice. They
blindly persevered in their own schemes, and left to the colonists no
alternative, but opposition or unconditional submission. The latter accorded
not with the principles of freedom, which they had been taught to revere. To
the former they were compelled, though reluctantly, to have recourse.

Dr. Franklin, finding all efforts to restore harmony between Great Britain and
her colonies useless, returned to America in the year 1775; just after the
commencement of hostilities. The day after his return he was elected by the
legislature of Pennsylvania a Member of Congress. Not long after his election a
committee was appointed, consisting of Mr. Lynch, Mr. Harrison, and himself, to
visit the Camp at Cambridge, and in conjunction with the commander in chief, to
endeavor to convince the troops, whose term of enlistment was about to expire,
of the necessity of their continuing in the field, and persevering in the cause
of their country.

In the fall of the same year he visited Canada, to endeavor to unite them in
the common cause of liberty; but they could not be prevailed upon to oppose the
measures of the British Government. M. Le Roy, in a letter annexed to Abbe
Fauchet's eulogium of Dr. Franklin, states that the ill success of this
negotiation was occasioned, in a great degree, by religious animosities, which
subsisted between the Canadians and their neighbors, some of whom had at
different times burnt their chapels.

When Lord How came to America, in 1776, vested with power to treat with the
colonists, a correspondence took place between him and Dr. Franklin, on the
subject of a reconciliation. Dr. Franklin was afterward appointed, together
with John Adams and Edward Rutledge, to wait upon the commissioners, in order
to learn the extent of their power. These were found to be only to grant
pardons upon submission. These were terms which would not be accepted; and the
object of the commissioners could not be obtained.

The momentous question of Independence was shortly after brought into view, at
a time when the fleets and armies, which were sent to enforce obedience, were
truly formidable. With an army, numerous indeed, but ignorant of discipline,
and entirely unskilled in the art of war, without money, without a fleet,
without allies, and with nothing but the love of liberty to support them, the
colonists determined to separate from a country, from which they had
experienced a repetition of injury and insult. In this question, Dr. Franklin
was decidedly in favor of the measure proposed, and had great influence in
bringing over others to his sentiments.

The public mind had been pretty fully prepared for this event, by Mr. Paine's
celebrated pamphlet, Common Sense. There is good reason to believe that Dr.
Franklin had no inconsiderable share, at least, in furnishing materials for
this work.

In the convention which assembled at Philadelphia in 1776, for the purpose of
establishing a new form of government for the state of Pensylvania, Dr.
Franklin was chosen president. The late constitution of this state, which was
the result of their deliberations, may be considered as a digest of his
principles of government. The single legislature, and the plural executive,
seem to have been his favorite tenets.

In the latter end of 1776, Dr. Franklin was appointed to assist in the
negociations which had been set on foot by Silas Deane at the court of France.
A conviction of the advantages of a commercial intercourse with America, and a
desire of weakening the British empire by dismembering it, first induced the
French court to listen to proposals of an alliance. But they showed rather a
reluctance to the measure, which, by Dr. Franklin's address, and particularly
by the success of the American arms against general Burgoyne, was at length
overcome; and in February 1778, a treaty of alliance, offensive and defensive,
was concluded; in consequence of which France became involved in the war with
Great Britain.

Perhaps no person could have been found, more capable of rendering essential
services to the United States at the court of France, than Dr. Franklin. He was
well known as a philosopher, and his character was held in the highest
estimation. He was received with the greatest marks of respect by all the
literary characters: and this respect was extended amongst all classes of men.
His personal influence was hence very considerable. To the effects of this were
added those of various performances which he published, tending to establish
the credit and character of the United States. To his exertions in this way,
may, in no small degree be ascribed the success of the loans negociated in
Holland and France, which greatly contributed to bringing the war to a happy
conclusion.

The repeated ill success of their arms, and more particularly the capture of
Cornwallis and his army at length convinced the British nation of the
impossibility of reducing the Americans to subjection. The trading interest
particularly became very clamorous for peace. The ministry were unable longer
to oppose their wishes. Provisionial articles of peace were agreed to, and
signed at Paris on the 30th of November, 1782, by Dr. Franklin, Mr. Adams, Mr.
Jay, and Mr. Laurens, on the part of the United States; and by Mr. Oswald on
the part of Great Britain. These formed the basis of the difinitive treaty,
which was concluded the 30th of September 1783, and signed by Dr. Franklin, Mr.
Adams, and Mr. Jay, on the one part, and by Mr. David Hartley on the other.

On the 3d of April 1783, a treaty of amity and commerce, between the United
States and Sweden, was concluded at Paris, by Dr. Franklin and the Count Von
Krutz.

A similar treaty with Prussia was concluded in 1785, not long before Dr.
Franklin's departure from Europe.

Dr. Franklin did not suffer his political pursuits to engross his whole
attention. Some of his performances made their appearance in Paris. The object
of these was generally the promotion of industry and economy.

In the year 1784, when animal magnetism made great noise in the world,
particularly at Paris, it was thought a matter of such importance, that the
King appointed commissioners to examine into the foundation of this pretended
science. Dr. Franklin was one of the number. After a fair and diligent
examination, in the course of which Mesmer repeated a number of experiments, in
the presence of the commissioners, some of which were tried upon themselves,
they determined that it was a mere trick, intended to impose upon the ignorant
and credulous -- Mesmer was thus interrupted in his career to wealth and same,
and a most insolent attempt to impose upon the human understanding baffled.

The important ends of Dr. Franklin's mission being completed by the
establishment of American Independence, and the infirmities of age and disease
coming upon him, he became desirous of returning to his native country. Upon
application to Congress to be recalled, Mr. Jefferson was appointed to succeed
him, in 1785. Sometime in September of the same year, Dr. Franklin arrived in
Philadelphia. He was shortly after chosen member of the supreme executive
council for the city; and soon after was elected president of the same.

When a Convention was called to meet in Philadelphia, in 1787, for the purpose
of giving more energy to the government of the union, by revising and amending
the articles of confederation, Dr. Franklin was appointed a delegate from the
State of Pennsylvania. He signed the Constitution which they proposed for the
union, and gave it the most unequivocal marks of his approbation.

A society of political enquiries, of which Dr. Franklin was President, was
established about this period. The meetings were held at his house. -- Two or
three essays read in the society were published. It did not long continue.

In the year 1787, two societies were established in Philadelphia, founded on
principles of the most liberal and refined humanity -- The Philadelphia Society
for alleviating the miseries of public prisons; and the Pennsylvania Society
for promoting the abolition of slavery, the relief of free negroes unlawfully
held in bondage, and the improvement of the condition of the African race. Of
each of these Dr. Franklin was president. The labors of the these bodies have
been crowned with great success; and they continue to prosecute, with unwearied
diligence, the laudable designs for which they were established.

Dr. Franklin's increasing infirmities prevented his regular attendance at the
council chamger: and, in 1788, he retired wholly from public life.

His constitution had been a remarkably good one. He had been little subject to
disease, except an attack of the gout occasionally, until the year 1781, when
he was first attacked with the symptoms of the calculous complaint, which
continued during his life. During the intervals of pain from this grievous
disease, he spent many cheerful hours, conversing in the most agreeable and
instructive manner. His faculties were entirely unimpaired, even to the hour of
his death.

His name, as president of the Abolition Society, was signed to the memorial
presented to the House of Representatives of the United States, on the 12th of
February 1789, praying them to exert the full extent of power vested in them by
the constitution, in discouraging the traffic of the human species. This was
his last public act. In the debates to which this memorial gave rise, several
attempts were made to justify the trade. In the Federal Gazette of March 25th
there appeared an essay, signed Historicus, written by Dr. Franklin, in which
he communicated a speech, said to have been delivered in the Divan of Algiers
in 1687, in opposition to the prayer of the petition of a sect called Erika, or
purists, for the abolition of piracy and slavery. This pretended African speech
was an excellent parody of one delivered by Mr. Jackson of Georgia. All the
arguments urged in favor of negro slavery, are applied with equal force to
justify the plundering and enslaving the Europeans. It affords, at the same
time, a demonstration of the futility of the arguments in defense of the slave
trade, and of the strength of mind and ingenuity of the author, at his advanced
period of life. It furnished too a no less convincing proof of his power of
imitating the style of other times and nations, than his celebrated parable
against persecution. And as the latter led many to search the scriptures with a
view to find it, so the former caused many persons to search the book-stores
and libraries, for the work from which it was said to be extracted. This speech
will be found in the volume of Essays.


In the beginning of April following, he was attacked with a fever and
complaint of his breast, which terminated his existence. The following account
of his last illness was written by his friend and physician, Dr. Jones.

"The stone, with which he had been afflicted for several years, had for the
last twelve months confined him chiefly to his bed; and during the extreme
painful paroxysims, he was obliged to take large doses of laudanum to mitigate
his tortures -- still, in the intervals of pain, he not only amused himself
with reading and conversing with his family, and a few friends who visited him,
but as often employed in doing business of a public as well as private nature,
with various persons who waited on him for that purpose; and in every instance
displayed, not only that readiness and disposition of doing good, which was the
distinguished characteristic of his life, but the fullest and clearest
possession of his uncommon mental abilities; and not unfrequently indulged
himself in those jeux d' esprit and entertaining anecdotes, which were the
delight of all who heard him.

"About sixteen days before his death, he was seized with a feverish
indisposition, without any particular symptoms attending it, till the third or
fourth day, when he complained of pain in his left breast, which increased till
it became extremely acute, attended with a cough and laborious breathing.
During this state, when the severity of his pains sometimes drew forth a groan
of complaint, he would observe -- that he was afraid he did not bear them as he
ought -- acknowledged his greatful sense of the many blessings he had received
from that Supreme Being, who had raised him from small and low beginnings to
such high rank and consideration among men -- and made no doubt but his present
afflictions were kindly intended to wean him from a world, in which he was no
longer fit to act the part assigned him. In this frame of body and mind he
contined till five days before his death, when his pain and difficulty of
breathing entirely left him, and his family were flattering themselves with the
hopes of his recovery, when an imposthumation, which had formed itself in his
lungs, suddenly burst, and discharged a great quantity of matter, which he
continued to throw up while he had strength to do it; but, as that failed, the
orgaus of respiration became gradually oppressed -- a calm lethargic state
succeeded, and, on the 17th of April, 1790, about eleven o'clock at night, he
quietly expired, closing a long and useful life of eighty four years and three
months.

"It may not be amiss to add to the above account, that Dr. Franklin, in the
year 1735, had a severe pleurisy, which terminated in an abscess of the left
lobe of his lungs, and he was then almost suffocated with the quantity and
suddenness of the discharge. A second attack of a similiar nature happened some
years after this, from which he soon recovered, and did not appear to suffer
any inconvenience in his respiration from these diseases."

The following Epitaph on himself, was written by him many years previous to
his death:

THE BODY of BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, Printer, (Like the cover of an old Book, Its
contents torn out, And stripped of its lettering and gilding) Lies here, food for
worms; Yet the work itself shall not be lost, For it will (as he believed)
appear once more, In a new And more beautiful edition Corrected and Amended by
The Author. EXTRACTS from the last Will and Testament of Dr. FRANKLIN.
WITH regard to my Books, those I had in France, and those I left in
Philadelphia, being now assembled together here, and a catalogue made of them,
it is my intention to dispose of the same as follows:

My History of the Academy of Sciences, in sixty or seventy volumes quarto, I
give to the philosophical society of Philadelphia, of which I have the honor
to be president. My collection in folio of Les Arts and Les Metiers, I give to
the philosophical society, established in New England, of which I am a member.
My quarto edition of the same Arts and Metiers, I give to the Library Company
of Philadelphia. Such and so many of my books as I shall mark, in the said
catalogue, with the name of my grandson, Benjamin Franklin Bache, I do hereby
give to him: and such and so many of my books as I shall mark in the said
catalogue with the name of my grandson William Bache, I do hereby give to him:
and such as shall be marked with the name of Jonathan Williams, I hereby give
to my cousin of that name. The residue and remainder of all my books,
manuscripts and papers I do give to my grandson William Temple Franklin. My
share in the library company of Philadelphia I give to my grandson Benjamin
Franklin Bache, confiding that he will permit his brothers and sisters to share
in the use of it.

I was born in Boston, New England, and owe my first instructions in literature
to the free grammar-schools established there. I therefore give one hundred
pounds sterling to my executors, to be by them, the survivors or survivor of
them, paid over to the managers or directors of the free schools in my native
town of Boston, to be by them, or the person or persons who shall have the
superintendance and management of the said schools, put out to interest, and so
continued at interest for ever; which interest annually shall be laid out in
silver medals, and given as honorary rewards annually by the directors of the
said free schools, for the encouragement of scholarship in the said schools,
belonging to the said town, in such manner as to the discretion of the select
men of the said town (...) seem meet.

Out of the salary that may remain due to (...) as president of the state, I
give the sum of two thousand pounds to my executors, to be by them, the
survivors or survivor of them, paid over to such person or persons as the
legislature of this state, by an act of assembly, shall appoint to receive the
same, in trust, to be employed for making the Schuylkill navigable.

During the number of years I was in business (...) a stationer, printer, and
postmaster, a great many small sums became due to me, for books,
advertisements, postage of letters, and other matters, which were not
collected, when, in 1757, I was sent by the assembly to England as their agent
-- and, by subsequent appointments continued there till 1775 -- when, on my
return, I was immediately engaged in the affairs of congress, and sent to
France in 1776, where I remained nine years, not returning till 1785; and the
said debts not being demanded in such a length of time, are become in a manner
obsolete, yet are nevertheless justly due -- These, as they are stated in my
great folio ledger, E, I bequeath to the contributors of the Pennsylvania
hospital; hoping that those debtors, and the descendants of such as are
deceased, who now, as I find, make some difficulty of satisfying such
antiquated demands as just debts, may however be induced to pay or give them as
charity to that excellent institution. I am sensible that much must inevitably
be lost; but I hope something considerable may be recovered. It is possible too
that some of the parties charged may have existing old unsettled accounts
against me; in which case the managers of the said hospital will allow and
deduct the amount, and pay the balance, if they find it against me.

I request my friends Henry Hill, Esquire. John Jay, Esquire. Francis Hopkinson, Esquire.
and Mr. Edward Duffield, of Bonfield, in Philadelphia county, to be the
executors of this my last will and testament, and I hereby nominate and appoint
them for that purpose.

I would have my body buried with as little expense or ceremony as may be.

Philadelphia, July 17, 1788.
CODICIL.
I Benjamin Franklin, in the foregoing or annexed last will and testament,
having further considered the same, do think proper to make and publish the
following codicil, or addition, thereto:

IT having long been a fixed political opinion of (...), that in a democratical
state there ought to be no offices of profit, for the reasons I had given in an
article of my drawing in our constitution, it was my intention, when I accepted
the office of president, to devote the appointed salary to some public use:
Accordingly I had already, before I made my last will, in July last, given
large sums of it to colleges, schools, building of churches, etc. and in that
will I bequeathed two thousand pounds more to the state, for the purpose of
making the Schuylkill navigable; but understanding since, that such a sum will
do but little toward accomplishing such a work, and that the project is not
likely to be undertaken for many years to come -- and having entertained
another idea, which I hope may be found more extensively useful, I do hereby
revoke and annual the bequest, and direct that the certificates I have for what
remains due to me of that salary, be sold toward raising the sum of two
thousand pounds sterling, to be disposed of as I am now about to order.

It has been an opinion, that he who receives an estate from his ancestors, is
under some obligation to transmit the same to posterity. This obligation lies
not on me, who never inherited (...) shilling from any ancestor or relation. I
shall, however, if it is not diminished by some accident before my death, leave
a considerable estate among my descendants and relations. The above observation
is made merely as some apology to my family, for my making bequests that do not
appear to have any immediate relation to their advantage.

I was born in Boston, New England, and owe my first instructions in literature
to the free grammar-schools established there. I have therefore considered
those schools in my will.

But I am under obligations to the state of Massachusetts, for having, unasked,
appointed me formerly their agent, with a handsome salary, which continued some
years; and although I accidentally lost in their service, by transmitting
Governor Hutchinson's letters, much more than the amount of what they gave me,
I do not think that ought in the least to diminish my gratitude. I have
considered that, among artisans, good apprentices are most likely to make good
citizens; and having been myself bred to a manual art, printing, in my native
town, and afterward assisted to set up my business in Philadelphia by kind
loans of money from two friends there, which was the foundation of my fortune,
and of all the utility in life that may be ascribed to me -- I wish to be
useful even after my death, if possible, in forming and advancing other young
men, that may be serviceable to their country in both these towns.

To this end I devote two thousand pounds sterling, which I give, one thousand
thereof to the inhabitants of the town of Boston, in Massachusetts, and the
other thousand to the inhabitants of the city of Philadelphia, in trust, to and
for the uses, intents, and purposes, herein after mentioned and declared.

The said sum of one thousand pounds sterling, if accepted by the inhabitants
of the town of Boston, shall be managed under the direction of the select men,
united with the ministers of the oldest episcopalian, congregational, and
presbyterian churches in that town, who are to let out the same upon interest
at five per cent. per annum, to such young married artificers, under the age of
twenty five years, as have served an apprenticeship in the said town, and
faithfully fulfilled the duties required in their indentures, so as to obtain a
good moral character, from at least two respectable citizens, who are willing
to become sureties in a bond, with the applicants, for the repayment of the
money so lent with interest, according to the terms herein after prescribed;
all which bonds are to be taken for Spanish milled dollars, or the value
thereof in current gold coin: and the managers shall keep a book, or books,
wherein shall be entered the names of those who shall apply for and receive the
benefit of this institution, and of their sureties, together with the sums
lent, the dates, and other necessary and proper records respecting the business
and concerns of this institution: and as these loans are intended to assist
young married artificers in setting up their business, they are to be
proportioned by the discretion of the managers, so as not to exceed sixty
pounds sterling to one person, nor to be less than fifteen pounds.

And if the number of appliers so entitled should be so large as that the sum
will not suffice to afford to each as much as might otherwise not be improper,
the proportion to each shall be diminished, so as to afford to every one some
assistance. These aids may therefore be small at first, but as the capital
increases by the accumulated interest, they will be more ample. And in order to
serve as many as possible in their turn, as well as to make the repayment of
the principal borrowed more easy, each borrower shall be obliged to pay with
the yearly interest one tenth part of the principal which sums of principal and
interest so paid in, shall be again let out to fresh borrowers. And it is
presumed, that there will be always found in Boston virtuous and benevolent
citizens, willing to bestow a part of their time in doing good to the rising
generation, by superintending and managing this institution gratis; it is hoped
that no part of the money will at any time lie dead, or be diverted to other
purpose^, but be continually augmenting by the interest, in which case there
may in time be more than the occasion in Boston shall require: and then some
may be spared to the neighboring or other towns in the said state of
Massachusetts, which may desire to have it, such towns engaging to pay
punctually the interest, and such proportions of the principal annually to the
inhabitants of the town of Boston, if this plan is executed, and succeeds, as
projected, without interruption, for one hundred years, the sum will be then
one hundred and thirty-one thousand pounds; of which I would have the managers
of the donation to the town of Boston then lay out, at their discretion, one
hundred thousand pounds in public works, which may be judged of most general
utility to the inhabitants; such as fortifications, bridges, aqueducts, public
buildings, baths, pavements, or whatever may make living in the town more
convenient to its people, and render it more agreeable to strangers resorting
thither for health, or a temporary residence. The remaining thirty-one thousand
pounds I would have continued to be let out to interest, in the manner above
directed, for one hundred years; as I hope it will have been found that the
institution has had a good effect on the conduct of youth, and been of service
to many worthy characters and useful citizens. At the end of this second term,
if no unfortunate accident has prevented the operation, the sum will be four
millions and sixty-one thousand pounds sterling; of which I leave one million
and sixty-one thousand pounds to the disposition and management of the
inhabitants of the town of Boston, annd the three millions to the disposition
of the government of the state; not presuming to carry my views any farther.

All the directions herein given respecting the disposition and management of
the donation to the inhabitants of Boston, I would have observed respecting
that to the inhabitants of Philadelphia; only, as Philadelphia is incorporated,
I request the corporation of that city to undertake the management, agreeable
to the said directions: and I do hereby vest them with full and ample powers
for that purpose. And having considered that the covering its ground-plat with
buildings and pavements, which carry off most rain, and prevent its soaking
into the earth, and renewing and purifying the springs, whence the water of the
wells must gradually grow worse, and in time be unfit for use, as I find has
happened in all old cities; I recommend, that, at the end of the first hundred
years, if not done before, the corporation of the city employ a part of the
hundred thousand pounds in bringing by pipes the water of Wissahickon-creek
into the town, so as to supply the inhabitants, which I apprehend may be done
without great difficulty, the level of that creek being much above that of the
city, and may be made higher by a dam. I also recommend making the Schuylkill
completely navigable. At the end of the second hundred years, I would have the
disposition of the four millions and sixty-one thousand pounds divided between
the inhabitants of the city of Philadelphia and the government of Pennsylvania,
in the same manner as herein directed with respect to that of the inhabitants
of Boston and the government of Massachusetts. It is my desire that this
institution should take place, and begin to operate within one year after my
decease; for which purpose due notice should be publicly given, previous to the
expiration of that year, that those for whose benefit this establishment is
intended may make their respective applications: and I hereby direct my
executors, the survivors and survivor of them, within six months after my
decease, to pay over the said sum of two thousand pounds sterling to such
persons as shall be duly appointed by the select men of Boston, and the
corporation of Philadelphia, to receive and take charge of their respective
sums of one thousand pounds each for the purposes aforesaid. Considering the
accidents to which all human affairs and projects are subject in such a length
of time, I have perhaps too much flattered myself with a vain fancy, that these
dispositions, if carried into execution, will be continued without
interruption, and have the effects proposed; I hope, however, that, if the
inhabitants of the two cities should not think fit to undertake the execution,
they will at least accept the offer of these donations, as marks of my good
will, token of my gratitude, and testimony of my desire to be useful to them
even after my departure. I wish, indeed, that they may both undertake to
endeavor the execution of my project, because I think, that, though unforeseen
difficulties may arise, expedients will be found to remove them, and the scheme
be found practicable. If one of them accepts the money with the conditions, and
the other refuses, my will then is, that both sums be given to the inhabitants
of the city accepting; the whole to be applied to the same purposes, and under
the same regulations directed for the separate parts; and if both refuse, the
money remains of course in the mass of my estate, and it is to be disposed of
therewith, according to my will made the seventeenth day of July, 1788.

My fine crab-tree walking-stick, with a gold head curiously wrought in the
form of the cap of Liberty, I give to my friend, and the friend of mankind,
General Washington. If it were a scepter, he has merited it, and would become
it.

END OF VOL. I.
THE Works of the late Dr. BENJAMIN FRANKLIN Consisting of HIS LIFE Written by
himself Together with ESSAYS Humorous, Moral, and Literary, chiefly in the
manner of the Spectator.

NEW YORK Printed by Tiebout and Obrian for H. Gain, (...) Nutter, R. McGill,
J. Allen, J. Read, E. Duyckinck and Co. and Edward Mitchell No: 9. Maiden Lane.

Engraved by P. R. Mavorick. 65 Liberty Street.

ESSAYS, HUMOUROUS, MORAL, and LITERARY, etc.
On EARLY MARRIAGES. TO JOHN ALLEYNS, ESQUIRE.
DEAR JACK,
YOU desire, you say, my impartial thoughts on the subject of an early
marriage, by way ^f answer to the numberless objections that have (...) made by
numerous persons to your own. You (...) remember, when you consulted me on the
occasion, that I thought youth on both sides to be no objection. Indeed, from
the marriages that have (...) under my observation, I am rather inclined (...)
think, that early ones stand the best chance of happiness. The temper and
habits of the young (...) not yet become so stiff and uncomplying, (...) when
more advanced in life; they form more easily to each other, and hence many
occasions of disgust are removed. And if youth has less of that prudence which
is necessary to manage a family, yet the parents and elder friends of young
married persons are generally at hand to offer their advice, which amply
supplies that defect; and by early marriage, youth is sooner formed to regular
and useful life; and possibly some of those accidents or connections, that
might have injured the constitution, or reputation, or both, are thereby
happily prevented. Particular circumstances of particular persons, may possibly
sometimes make it prudent to delay entering into that state; but in general,
when nature has rendered our bodies fit for it, the presumption is in nature's
favor, that she has not judged amiss in making us desire it. Late-marriages
are often attended, too, with this further inconvenience, that there is not the
same chance that the parents shall live to see their offspring educated. "Late
children," says the Spanish proverb, "are early orphans." A melancholy
reflection to those whose case it may be! With us in America marriages are
generally in the morning of life; our children are therefore educated and
settled in the world by noon; and thus, our business being done, we have an
afternoon and evening of cheerful leisure to ourselves, such as our friend at
present enjoys. By these early marriages we are blessed with more children; and
from the mode among us, founded by nature, of every mother suckling and nursing
her own child, more of them are raised. Thence the swift progress of population
among us, unparalleled in Europe. In fine, I am glad you are married and
congratulate you most cordially upon it. You are now in the way of becoming a
useful citizen; and you have escaped the unnatural state of celibacy for life
-- the fate of many here, who never intended it, (...) who having too long
postponed the change of their condition, find, at length, that it is too late
to think of it, and so live all their lives in a situation that greatly lessens
a man's value. An odd volume of a set of books bears not the value of its
proportion to the set: what think you of the odd half of a pair of scissors? it
cannot well cut any thing; it may possibly serve to scrape a trencher.

Pray make my compliments and best wishes acceptable to your bride. I am old
and heavy, or I should ere this have presented them in person. I shall make but
small use of the old man's privilege, that of giving advice to younger friends.
Treat your wife always with respect; it will procure respect to you, not only
from her, but from all that observe it. Never use a slighting expression to
her, even in jest; for slights in jest, after frequent bandyings, are apt to
end in anger earnest. Be studious in your profession, and you will be learned.
Be industrious and frugal, and you will be rich. Be sober and temperate, and
you will be healthy. Be in general virtuous, and you will be happy. At least,
you will, by such conduct, stand the best chance for such consequences. I pray
God to bless you both! being ever your affectionate friend,

B. FRANKLIN.

ON THE DEATH OF HIS BROTHER, Mr. JOHN FRANKLIN.
TO MISS HUBBARD.
I CONDOLE with you. We have lost a most dear and valuable relation. But it is
the will of God and nature, that these mortal bodies be laid aside, when the
soul is to enter into real life. This is rather an embroy state, a preparation
for living. A man is not completely born until he be dead. Why then should we
grieve that a new child it born among the immortals, a new member added to
their happy society? We are spirits. That bodies should be lent us, while they
can afford (...) pleasure, assist us in acquiring knowledge, or doing good to
our fellow creatures, is a kind and benevolent act of God. When they become
unfit for these purposes, and afford us pain instead of pleasure, instead of an
aid become an encumbrance, and answer none of the intentions for which they
were given, it is equally kind and benevolent that a way is provided by which
we may get rid of them. Death is that way. We ourselves, in some cases,
prudently choose a partial death. A mangled painful limb, which cannot be
restored, we willingly cut off. He who plucks out a tooth, parts with it
freely, since the pain goes with it: and (...) who quits the whole body, parts
at once with all pains, and possibilities of pains and diseases, it was liable
to, or capable of making him suffer.

Our friend and we were invited abroad on a party of pleasure, which is to last
for ever. His chair was ready first; and he is gone before us. We could not all
conveniently start together: and why should you and I be grieved at this, since
we are soon to follow, and know where to find him?

Adieu. B. FRANKLIN.

TO THE LATE Doctor MATHER of BOSTON.
REV. SIR,
I RECEIVED your kind letter, with your excellent advice to the United States,
which I read with great pleasure, and hope it will be duly regarded. Such
writings, though they may be lightly passed over by many readers, yet, if they
make a deep impression on one active mind in a hundred, the effects may be
considerable.

Permit me to mention one little instance, which, though it relates to myself,
will not be quite uninteresting to you. When I was a boy, I met with a book
entitled, "Essays to do good," which I think was written by your father. It had
been so little regarded by a former possessor, that several leaves of it were
torn out; but the remainder gave me such a turn of thinking, as to have an
influence on my conduct through life: for I have always set a greater value on
the character of a doer of good, than any other kind of reputation; and if I
have been, as you seem to think, a useful citizen, the public owes the
advantage of it to that book.

You mention your being in your seventy-eighth year. I am in my seventy-ninth.
We are grown old together. It is now more than sixty years since I left Boston;
but I remember well both your father and grandfather, having heard them both in
the pulpit, and seen them in their houses. The last time I saw your father was
in the beginning of 1724, when I visited him after my first trip to
Pennsylvania: he received me in his library; and on my taking leave, showed me
a shorter way out of the house, through a narrow passage, which was crossed by
a beam over head. We were still talking as I withdrew, he accompanying me
behind, and I turning partly toward him, when he said hastily, "Stoop Stoop!"
I did not understand him till I felt my head hit against the beam. He was a man
who never missed any occasion of giving instruction; and upon this he said to
me: "You are young, and have the world before you: stoop as you go through it,
and you will miss many hard thumps." This advice, thus beat into my heart, has
frequently been of use to me; and I often think of it, when I see pride
mortified, and misfortunes brought upon people by their carrying their heads
too high.

I long much to see again my native place; and once hoped to lay my bones
there. I left it in 1723. I visited it in 1733, 1743, 1753, and 1763; and in
1773 I was in England. In 1775 I had a sight of it, but could not enter, it
being in possession of the enemy. I did hope to have been there in 1783, but
could not obtain my dismission from this employment here; and now I fear I
shall never have that happiness. My best wishes however attend my dear country,
"esto perpetua." It is now blessed with an excellent constitution: may it last
for ever!

This powerful monarchy continues its friendship for the United States. It is a
friendship of the utmost importance to our security, and should be carefully
cultivated. Britain has not yet well digested the loss of its dominions over
us; and has still at times some flattering hopes of recovering it. Accidents
may increase those hopes, and encourage dangerous attempts. A breach between us
and France would infallibly bring the English again upon our backs: and yet we
have some wild beasts among our countrymen, who are endeavoring to weaken that
connection.

Let us preserve our reputation, by performing our engagements; our credit by
fulfilling our contracts; and our friends by gratitude and kindness; for we
know not how soon we may again have occasion for all of them.

With great and sincere esteem, I have the honor to be, Reverend Sir, Your
most obedient and most humble servant, B. FRANKLIN.
Passy, May 12, 1784.
THE WHISTLE. A TRUE STORY. WRITTEN TO HIS NEPHEW.
WHEN I was a child, at seven years old, my friends on a holiday, filled my
pocket with coppers, I went directly to a shop where they sold toys for
children; and being charmed with the sound of a whistle, that I met by the way
in the hands of another boy, I voluntarily offered him all my money for one. I
then came home, and went whistling all over the house, much pleased with my
whistle, but disturbing all the family. My brothers, and sisters, and cousins,
understanding the bargain I had made, told me I had given four times as much
for it as it was worth. This put me in mind what good things I might have
bought with the rest of my money; and they laughed at me so much for my folly,
that I cried with vexation; and the reflection gave me more chagrin than the
whistle gave me pleasure.

This however was afterward of use to me, the impression continuing o^ my
mind: so that often, when I was tempted to buy some unnecessary thing, I said
to myself, Don't give too much for the whistle; and so I saved my money.

As I grew up, came into the world, and observed the actions of men, I thought
I met with many, very many, who gave too much for the whistle.

When I saw any one too ambitious of court favors, sacrificing his time in
attendance on levees, his repose, his liberty, his virtue, and perhaps his
friends to attain it, I have said to myself, This man gives too much for his
whistle.

When I saw another fond of popularity, constantly employing himself in
political bustles, neglecting his own affairs, and ruining them by that
neglect: He pays indeed, says I, too much for his whistle.

If I knew a miser, who gave up every kind of comfortable living, all the
pleasure of doing good to others, all the esteem of his fellow-citizens, and
the joys of benevolent friendship, for the sake of accumulating wealth: Poor
man, says I, you do in^eed pay too much for your whistle.

When I meet a man of pleasure, sacrificing every laudable improvement of the
mind, or of his fortune, to mere corporeal sensations; Mistaken man, says I,
you are providing pain for yourself, instead of pleasure: you give too much for
your whistle.

If I see one fond of fine clothes, fine furniture, fine equipages, all above
his fortune, for which he contracts debts, and ends his career in prison; Alas,
says I, he has paid dear, very dear, for his whistle.

When I see a beautiful, sweet-tempered girl, married to an ill-natured brute
of a husband! What a pity it is, says I, that she has paid so much for a
whistle.

In short, I conceive that great part of the miseries of mankind were brought
upon them by the false estimates they had made of the value of things, and by
their giving too much for (...) whistles.

A PETITION TO THOSE WHO HAVE THE SUPER-INTENDENCY OF EDUCATION.
I ADDRESS myself to all the friends of youth, and conjure them to direct their
compassionate regards to my unhappy fate, in order to remove the prejudices of
which I am the victim. There are twin sisters of us: and the two eyes of man do
not more resemble, nor are capable of being upon better terms with each other,
than my sister and myself, were it not for the partiality of our parents, who
make the most injurious distinctions between us. From my infancy I have been
led to consider my sister as a being of a more elevated rank. I was suffered to
grow up without the least instruction, while nothing was spared in her
education. She had masters to teach her writing, drawing, music, and other
accomplishments; but if by chance I touched a pencil, a pen, or a needle, I was
bitterly rebuked; and more than once I have been beaten for being awkward, and
wanting a graceful manner. It is true, my sister associated me with her upon
some occasions* but she always made a point of taking the lead, calling upon me
only from necessity, or to figure by her side.

But conceive not, Sirs, that my complaints are instigated merely by vanity --
No; my uneasiness is occasioned by one object much more serious. It is the
practice in our family, that the whole business of providing for its
subsistence falls upon my sister and myself. If any indisposition should attack
my sister -- and I mention it in confidence, upon this occasion, that she is
subject to the gout, the rheumatism and cramp, without making mention of other
accidents -- what would be the fate of our poor family? Must not the regret of
our parents be excessive, at having placed so great a difference between
sisters who are so perfectly equal? Alas! we must perish from distress: for it
would not be in my power even to scrawl a suppliant petition for relief, having
been obliged to employ the hand of another in transcribing the request which I
have now the honor to prefer to you.

Condescend, Sirs, to make my parents sensible of the injustice of an exclusive
tenderness, and of the necessity of distributing their care and affection among
all their children equally.

I am, with a profound respect, Sirs, Your obedient servant, THE LEFT HAND.

THE HANDSOME and DEFORMED LEG.
THERE are two sorts of people in the world, who with equal degrees of health
and wealth, and the other comforts of life, becomes the one happy; and the
other miserable. This arises very much from the different views in which they
consider things, persons, and events; and the effect of those different views
upon their own minds.

In whatever situation men can be placed, they may find conveniences and
inconveniences: in whatever company, they may find persons and conversation
more or less pleasing: at whatever table, they may meet with meats and drinks
of better and worse taste, dishes better and worse dressed: in whatever climate
they will find good and bad weather: under whatever government, they may find
good and bad laws, and good and bad administration of those laws: in whatever
poem, or work of genius, they may see faults and beauties: in almost every
face, and every person, they may discover fine features and defects, good and
bad qualities.

Under these circumstances, the two sorts of people abovementioned, fix their
attention, those who are disposed to be happy, on the conveniences of things,
the pleasant parts of conversation, the well dressed dishes, the goodness of
the wines, the fine weather, etc. and enjoy all with cheerfulness. Those who
are to be unhappy, think and speak only of the contraries. Hence they are
continually discontented themselves, and, by their remarks, sour the pleasures
of society; offend personally many people, and make themselves every where
disagreeable. If this turn of mind was founded in nature, such unhappy persons
would be the more to be pitied. But as the disposition to criticize, and to be
disgusted, is perhaps, taken up originally by imitation, and is, unawares,
grown into a habit, which, though at present strong, may nevertheless be cured,
when those who have it are convinced of its bad effects on their felicity; I
hope this little admonition may be of service to them, and put them on changing
a habit, which, though in the exercise it is chiefly an act of imagination, yet
has serious consequences in life, as it brings on real griefs and misfortunes.
For as many are offended by, and nobody loves this sort of people; no one shows
them more than the most common civility and respect, and scarcely that; and
this frequently puts them out of humor, and draws them into disputes and
contentions. If they aim at obtaining some advantage in rank or fortune, nobody
wishes them success, or will stir a step, or speak a word to favor their
pretensions. If they incur public censure or disgrace, no one will defend or
excuse, and many join to aggravate their misconduct, and render them completely
odious: If these people will not change this bad habit, and condescend to be
pleased with what is pleasing, without fretting themselves and others about the
contraries, it is good for others to avoid an acquaintance with them; which is
always disagreeable, and sometimes very inconvenient, especially when one finds
one's self entangled in their quarrels.

An old philosophical friend of mine was grown, from experience, very cautious
in this particular, and carefully avoided any intimacy with such people. He
had, like other philosophers, a thermometer to show him the heat of the
weather; and a barometer, to mark when it was likely to prove good or bad; but
there being no instrument invented to discover, at first sight, this unpleasing
disposition in a person, he, for that purpose, made use of his legs; one of
which was remarkably handsome, the other, by some accident, crooked and
deformed. If a stranger, at the first interview, regarded his ugly leg more
than his handsome one, he doubted him. If he spoke of it, and took no notice of
the handsome leg, that was sufficient to determine my philosopher to have no
further acquaintance with him. Every body has not this two legged instrument;
but every one, with a little attention, may observe signs of that carping,
fault-finding disposition, and take the same resolution of avoiding the
acquaintance of those infected with it. I therefore advise those critical,
querulous, discontented, unhappy people, that if they (...) to be respected and
beloved by others, and happy in themselves, they should leave off looking at
the ugly leg.

CONVERSATION OF A COMPANY of EPHEMERAE; WITH THE SOLILOQUY OF ONE ADVANCED IN
AGE.
TO MADAME BRILLIANT.
YOU may remember, my dear friend, that when we lately spent that happy day, in
the delightful garden and sweet society of the Moulin Joly, I stopped a little in
one of our walks, and staid some time behind the company. We had been shown
numberless skeletons of a kind of little fly, called an Ephemerae, whose
successive generations, we were told, were bred and expired within the day. I
happened to see a living company of them on a leaf, who appeared to be engaged
in conversation. You know I understand all the inferior animal tongues: my too
great application to the study of them, is the best excuse I can give for the
little progress I have made in your charming language. I listened through
curiosity to the discourse of these little creatures; but as they, in their
natural vivacity, spoke three or four together, I could make but little of
their conversation. I found, however, by some broken expressions that I heard
now and then, they were disputing warmly on the merit of two foreign (...) the
one a cousin, the other a muscheto; in which dispute they spent their time,
seemingly as regardless of the shortness of life as if they had been sure of
living a month. Happy people, thought I, you live certainly under a wise, just,
and mild government, since you have no public grievances to complain of, nor
any subject of contention, but the perfections or imperfections of foreign
music. I turned my head from them to an old grey-headed one, who was single on
another leaf, and talking to himself. Being amused with his soliloquy, I put it
down in writing, in hopes it will likewise amuse her to whom I am so much
indebted for the most pleasing of all amusements, her delicious company, and
heavenly harmony.

"It was," says he, "the opinion of learned philosophers of our race, who lived
and flourished long before my time, that this vast world the Moulin Joly could
not itself subsist more than eighteen hours: and I think there was some
foundation for that opinion; since, by the apparent motion of the great
luminary, that gives life to all nature, and which in my time has evidently
declined considerably toward the ocean at the end of our earth, it must then
finish its course, be extinguished in the waters that surround us, and leave
the world in cold and darkness, necessarily producing universal death and
destruction. I have lived seven of those hours; a great age, being no less than
420 minutes of time. How very few of us continue so long! I have seen
generations born, flourish, and expire. My present friends are the children and
grandchildren of the friends of my youth, who are now, alas, no more! And I
must soon follow them; for, by the course of nature, though still in health, I
cannot expect to live above seven or eight minutes longer. What now avails all
my toil and labor, in amassing honey-dew on this leaf, which I cannot live to
enjoy! What the political struggles I have been engaged in, for the good of my
compatriot inhabitants of this bush, or my philosophical studies, for the
benefit of our race in general! for in politics (what can laws do without
morals?) our present race of Ephemerae will in a course of minutes become
corrupt, like those of other and older bushes, and consequently as wretched:
And in philosophy how small our progress! Alas! art is long and life is short!
My friends would comfort me with the idea of a name, they say, I shall leave
behind me; and they tell me I have lived long enough to nature and to glory.
But what will same be to an Ephemerae who no longer exists? and what will
become of all history in the eighteenth hour, when the world itself, even the
whole Moulin Joly, shall come to its end, and be buried in universal ruin?" --

To me, after all my eager pursuits, no solid pleasures now remain, but the
reflection of a long life spent in meaning well, the sensible conversation of a
few good lady Ephemerae, and now and then a kind smile and a tune from the ever
amiable Brilliant.

B. FRANKLIN.

MORALS OF CHESS.
PLAYING at chess is the most ancient and most universal game known among men;
for its original is beyond the memory of history, and it has, for numberless
ages, been the amusement of all the civilized nations of Asia, the Persians,
the Indians, and the Chinese. Europe has had it above a thousand years; the
Spaniards have spread it over their part of America, and it begins lately to
make its appearance in these states. It is so interesting in itself, as to not
need the view of gain to induce engaging in it; and thence it is never played
for money. Those, therefore, who have leisure for such diversions, cannot find
one that is more innocent; and the following piece, written with a view to
correct (among a few young friends) some little improprieties in the practice
of it, shows, at the same time, that it may, in its effects on the mind, be not
merely innocent, but advantageous, to the vanquished as well as the victor.

THE game of chess is not merely an idle amusement. Several valuable qualities
of the mind, useful in the course of human life, are to be acquired or
strengthened by it, so as to become habits, rea^^^ on all occasions. For life
is a kind of chess, in which we have often points to gain, and competitors or
adversaries to contend with, and in which there is a vast variety of good and
ill events, that are, in some degree, the effects of prudence or the want of
it. By playing at chess, then, we may learn,

I. Foresight, which looks a little into futurity, and considers the
consequences that may attend an action: for it is continually occurring to the
player, "If I move this piece, what will be the advantage of my new situation?
What use can my adversary make of it to annoy me? What other moves ca^ I make
to support it, and to defend myself from ^^is attacks*

II. Circumspection, which surveys the whole chess-board, or scene of action,
the relations of the several pieces and situations, the dangers they are
respectively exposed to, the several possibilities of their aiding each other,
the probabilities that the adversary may take this or that move, and attack
this or the other piece, and what different means can be used to avoid his
stroke, or turn its consequences against him.

III. Caution, not to make our moves too hastily. This habit is best acquired
by observing strictly the laws of the game, such as, If you touch a piece, you
must move it somewhere; if you set is down, you must let it stand; and it is
therefore best that these rules should be observed, as the game thereby becomes
more the image of human life, and particularly of war; in which, if you have
incautiously put yourself into a bad and dangerous position, you cannot obtain
your enemy's leave to withdraw your troops, and place them more securely, but
you must abide all the consequences of your rashness.

And, lastly, we learn by chess the habit of not being discouraged by present
bad appearances in the state of our affairs, the habit of hoping for a
favorable change, and that of persevering in the search of resources. The game
is so full of events, there is such a variety of turns in it, the fortune of it
is so subject to sudden vicissitudes, and one so frequently, after long
contemplation, discovers the means of extricating oneself from a supposed
insurmountable difficulty, that one is encouraged to continue the contest to
the last, in hopes of victory by our own skill, or at least of giving a stale
mate, by the negligence of our adversary. And whoever considers, what in chess
he often sees instances of, that particular pieces of success are apt to
produce presumption, and its consequent inattention, by which the loss may be
recovered, will learn not to be too much discouraged by the present success of
his adversary, nor to despair of final good fortune, upon every little check he
receives in the pursuit of it.

That we may, therefore, be induced more frequently to choose this beneficial
amusement, in preference to others, which are not attended with the same
advantages, every circumstance which may increase the pleasures of it should be
regarded; and every action or word that is unfair, disrespectful, or that in
any way may give uneasiness, should be avoided, as contrary to the immediate
intention of both the players, which is to pass the time agreeably.

Therefore, first, if it is agreed to play ac^ording to the strict rules; then
those rules are to be exactly observed by both parties, and should not be
insisted on for one side, while deviated from by the other -- for this is not
equitable.

Secondly, If it is agreed not to observe the rules exactly, but one party
demands indulgences, he should then be as willing to allow them to the other.

Thirdly, no false move should ever be made to extricate yourself out of a
difficulty, or to gain an advantage. There can be no pleasure in playing with a
person once detected in such unfair practice.

Fourthly, if your adversary is long in playing, you ought not to hurry him, or
express any uneasiness at his delay. You should not sing, nor whistle, nor look
at your watch, nor take up a book to read, nor make a tapping with your feet on
the floor, or with your fingers on the table, nor do any thing that may disturb
his attention. For all these things displease, and they do not show your skill
in playing, but your craftiness or your rudeness.

Fifthly, You ought not to endeavor to amuse and deceive your adversary, by
pretending to have made bad moves, and saying that you have now lost the game,
in order to make him secure and careless, and inattentive to your schemes; for
this is fraud and deceit, not skill in the game.

Sixthly, You must not, when you have gained a victory, use any triumphing or
insulting expression, nor show too much pleasure; but endeavor to console your
adversary, and make him less dissatisfied with himself, by every kind of civil
expression that may be used with truth, such as, You understand the game better
than I, but you are a little inattentive; or, "You play too fast;" or, you had
the best of the game, but something happened to divert your thoughts, and that
turned it in my favor.

Seventhly, If you are a spectator while others play, observe the most perfect
silence. For if you give advice, you offend both parties; him against whom you
give it, because it may cause the loss of his game; him in whose favor you
give it, because, though it be good and he follows it, he loses the pleasure he
might have had, if you had permitted him to think until it had occurred to
himself. Even after a move, or moves, you must not, by replacing the pieces,
show how it might have been placed better: for that displeases, and may
occasion disputes and doubts about their true situation. All talking to the
players lessens or diverts their attention, and is therefore unpleasing. Nor
should you give the least hint to either party, by any kind of noise or motion.
If you do, you are unworthy to be a spectator. If you have a mind to exercise
or show your judgment, do it in playing your own game, when you have an
opportunity, not in criticizing, or meddling with, or counselling the play of
others.

Lastly, If the game is not to be played rigorously, according to the rules
above mentioned, then moderate your desire of victory over your adversary, and
be pleased with one over yourself. Snatch not eagerly at every advantage
offered by his unskilfulness or inattention; but point out to him kindly, that
by such a move he places or leaves a piece in danger and unsupported; that by
another he will put his King in a perilous situation, etc. By this generous
civility (so opposite to the unfairness above forbidden) you may, indeed,
happen to lose the game to your opponent, but you will win what is better, his
esteem, his respect, and his affection; together with the silent approbation
and good will of impartial spectators.

THE ART OF PROCURING PLEASANT DREAMS. INSCRIBED TO MISS ****, Being written at
her request.
AS a great part of our life is spent in sleep, during which we have sometimes
pleasing, and sometimes painful dreams, it becomes of some consequence to
obtain the one kind, and avoid the other; for, whether real or imaginary, pain
is pain, and pleasure is pleasure. If we can sleep without dreaming, it is well
that paninful dreams are avoided. If, while we sleep, we can have any pleasing
dreams, it is, as the French say, tunt gagne, so much added to the pleasure of
life.

To this end it is, in the first place, necessary to be careful in preserving
health, by due exercise, and great temperance; for, in sickness, the
imagination is disturbed; and disagreeable, sometimes terrible, ideas are apt
to present themselves. Exercise should precede meals, not immediately follow
them: the first promotes, the latter, unless moderate, obstructs digestion. If,
after exercise, we feed sparingly, the digestion will be easy and good, the
body lightsome, the temper cheerful, and all the animal functions performed
agreeably. Sleep, when it follows, will be natural and undisturbed. While
indolence, with full feeding, occasion nightmares and horrors inexpressible: we
fall from precipices, are assaulted by wild beasts, murderers, and demons, and
experience every variety of distress. Observe, however, that the quantities of
food and exercise are relative things: those who move much may, and indeed
ought to eat more; those who use little exercise, should eat little. In
general, mankind, since the improvement of cookery, eat about twice as much as
nature requires. Suppers are not bad, if we have not dined; but restless nights
naturally follow hearty suppers, after full dinners. Indeed, as there is a
difference in constitutions, some rest well after these meals; it costs them
only a frightful dream, and an apoplexy, after which they sleep till doomsday.
Nothing i^ more common in the newspapers, than instances of people, who, after
eating a hearty supper, are found dead a-bed in the morning.

Another means of preserving health, to be attended to, is the having a
constant supply of fresh air in your bedchamber. It has been a great mistake,
the sleeping in rooms exactly closed, and in beds surrounded by curtains. No
outward air, that may come into you, is so unwholesome as the unchanged air,
often breathed, of a close chamber. As boiling water does not grow hotter by
longer boiling, if the particles that receive greater heat can escape; so
living bodies do not putrify, if the particles, as fast as they become putrid,
can be thrown off. Nature expels them by the pores of the skin and lungs, and
in a free open air, they are carried off; but, in a close room, we receive them
again and again, though they become more and more corrupt. A number of persons
crowded into a small room, thus spoil the air in a few minutes, and even render
it mortal, as in the Black Hole at Calcutta. A single person is said to spoil
only a gallon of air per minute, and therefore requires a longer time to spoil
a chamber-full; but it is done, however, in proportion, and many putrid
disorders hence have their origin. It is recorded of Methusalem, who, being the
longest liver, may be supposed to have best preserved his health, that he slept
always in the open air; for, when he had lived five hundred years, an angel
said to him: Arise, Methusalem; and build thee an house, for thou shall live
yet five hundred years longer. But Methusalem answered and said: If I am to
live but five hundred years longer, it is not worth while to build me an house
-- I will sleep in the air as I have been used to do. Physicians, after having
for ages contended that the sick should not be indulged with fresh air, have at
length discovered that it may do them good. It is therefore to be hoped that
they may in time discover likewise that it is not hurtful to those who are in
health; and that we may be then cured of the aerophobia that at present
distresses weak minds, and make them choose to be stifled and poisoned, rather
than leave open the windows of a bedchamber, or put down the glass of a coach.

Confined air, when saturated with perspirable matter What physicians call the
perspirable matter is that vapor which passes off from our bodies, from the
lungs, and through the pores of the skin. The quantity of this is said to be
five-eighths of what we eat.,
will not receive more; and that matter must remain in our bodies, and occasion
diseases: but it gives some previous notice of its being about to be hurtful,
by producing certain uneasinesses, slight indeed at first, such as, with regard
to the lungs, is a trifling sensation, and to the pores of the skin a kind of
restlessness which is difficult to describe, and few that feel it know the
cause of it. But we may recollect, that sometimes, on waking in the night, we
have, if warmly covered, found it difficult to get asleep again. We turn often
without finding repose in any position. This figgettiness, to use a vulgar
expression for want of a better, is occasioned wholly by an uneasiness in the
skin, owing to the retention of the perspirable matter -- the bed clothes
having received their quantity, and, being saturated, refusing to take any
more. To become sensible of this by an experiment, let a person keep his
position in the bed, but throw off the bed-clothes, and suffer fresh air to
approach the part uncovered of his body; he will then feel that part suddenly
refreshed; for the air will immediately relieve the skin, by receiving, licking
up, and carrying off, the load of perspirable matter that incommoded it. For
every portion of cool air that approaches the warm skin, in receiving its part
of that vapor, receives therewith a degree of heat, that rarifies and renders
it lighter, when it will be pushed away, with its burden by cooler, and
therefore heavier fresh air; which, for a moment, supplies its place, and then,
being likewise changed, and warmed, gives way to a succeeding quantity. This is
the order of nature, to prevent animals being infected by their own
perspiration. He will now be sensible of the difference between the part
exposed to the air, and that which, remaining sunk in the bed, denies the air
access: for this part now manifests its uneasiness more distinctly by the
comparison, and the seat of the uneasiness is more plainly perceived, than when
the whole surface of the body was affected by it.

Here then, is one great and general cause of unpleasing dreams. For when the
body is uneasy, the mind will be disturbed by it, and disagreeable ideas of
various kinds, will, in sleep, be the natural consequences. The remedies,
preventative, and curative, follow:

1. By eating moderately, (as before advised for health's sake) less
perspirable matter is produced in a given time; hence the bed clothes receive
it longer before they are saturated; and we may, therefore, sleep longer,
before we are made uneasy by their refusing to receive any more.

2. By using thinner and more porous bed-clothes, which will suffer the
perspirable matter more easily to pass through them, we are less incommoded,
such being longer tolerable.

3. When you are awakened by this uneasiness, and find you cannot easily sleep
again, get out of bed, beat up and turn your pillow, shake the bedclothes well,
with at least twenty shakes, then throw the bed open, and leave it to cool; in
the meanwhile, continuing undrest, walk about your chamber, till your skin has
had time to discharge its load, which it will do sooner as the air may be drier
and colder. When you begin to feel the cold air unpleasant, then return to your
bed; and you will soon fall asleep, and your sleep will be sweet and pleasant.
All the scenes presented to your fancy, will be of the pleasing kind. I am
often as agreeably entertained with them, as by the scenery of an opera. If you
happen to be too indolent to get out of bed, you may, instead of it, lift up
your bed-clothes with one arm and leg, so as to draw in a good deal of fresh
air, and, by letting them fall, force it out again. This, repeated twenty
times, will so clear them of the perspirable matter they have imbibed, as to
permit your sleeping well for some time afterward. But this latter method is
not equal to the former.

Those who do not love trouble, and can afford to have two beds, will find
great luxury in rising, when they wake in a hot bead, and going into the cool
one. Such shifting of beds would also be of great service to persons ill of a
fev^r, as it refreshes and frequently procures sleep. A (...) large bed, that
will admit a removal so distant from the first situation as to be cool and
sweet, may in a degree answer the same end.

One or two observations more will conclude this little piece. Care must be
taken, when you lie down, to dispose your pillow so as to suit your manner of
placing your head, and to be perfectly easy; then place your limbs so as not to
bear inconveniently hard upon one another, as, for instance, the joints of your
ancles: for though a bad position may at first give but little pain, and be
hardly noticed, yet a continuence will render it less tolerable, and the
uneasiness may come on while you are asleep, and disturb your imagination.

These are the rules of the art. But though they will generally prove effectual
in producing the end intended, there is a case in which the most punctual
observance of them will be totally fruitless. I need not mention the case to
you my dear friend: but my account of the art would be imperfect without it.
The case is, when the person who desires to have pleasant dreams has not taken
care to preserve, what is necessary above all things, A GOOD CONSCIENCE.

ADVICE TO A YOUNG TRADESMAN. WRITTEN ANNO 1748. To my Friead A. B.
As you have desired it of me, I write the following hints, which have been of
service to me, and may, if observed, be so to you.

REMEMBER that time is money. He that can earn ten shillings a day by his
labor, and goes abroad, or sits idle one half of that day, though he spends
but sixpence during his diversion or idleness, ought not to reckon that the
only expense; he has really spent, or rather thrown away, five shillings
besides.

Remember that credit is money. If a man lets his money lie in my hands after
it is due, he gives me the interest, or so much as I can make of it during that
time. This amounts to a considerable sum when a man has good and large credit,
and makes good use of it.

Remember that money is of a prolific generating nature. Money can beget money,
and its offspring can beget more, and so on. Five shillings turned is six;
turned again, it is seven and three pence; and so on till it becomes an hundred
pounds. The more there is of it, the more it produces, every turning, so that
the profits rise quicker and quicker. He that kills a breeding sow, destroys
all her offspring to the thousandth generation. He that murders a crown,
destroys all that it might have produced, even scores of pounds.

Remember that six pounds a year is but a groat a day. For this little sum,
which may be daily wasted either in time or expense, unperceived, a man of
credit may, on his own security, have the constant possession and use of an
hundred pounds. So much in stock, briskly turned by an industrious man,
produces great advantage.

Remember this saying, "The good paymaster is lord of another man's purse." He
that is known to pay punctually and exactly to the time he promises, may at any
time, and on any occasion, raise all the money his friends can spare. This is
sometimes of great use. After industry and frugality, nothing contributes more
to the raising of a young man in the world, than punctuality and justice in all
his dealings: therefore never keep borrowed money an hour beyond the time you
promised, left a disappointment shut up your friend's purse for ever.

The most trifling actions that effect a man's credit are to be regarded. The
sound of your hammer at five in the morning, or nine at night, heard by a
creditor, makes him easy six months longer; but if he sees you at a billiard
table, or hears your voice at a tavern, when you should be at work, he sends
for his money the next day; demands it before he can receive it in a lump.

It shows, besides, that you are mindful of what you owe; it makes you appear a
careful, as well as an honest man, and that still increases your credit.

Beware of thinking all your own that you possess, and of living accordingly.
It is a mistake that many people who have credit fall into. To prevent this
keep an exact account, for some time, both of your expenses and your income. If
you take the pains at first to mention particulars, it will have this good
effect; you will discover how wonderfully small trifling expenses mount up to
large sums, and will discern what might have been, and may for the future be
saved, without occasioning any great inconvenience.

In short, the way to wealth, if you desire it, is as plain as the way to
market. It depends chiefly on two words, industry and frugality; that is, waste
neither time nor money, but make the best use of both. Without industry and
frugality nothing will do, and with them every thing. He that gets all he can
honestly, and saves all he gets, (necessary expenses excepted) will certainly
become rich -- if that Being who governs the world, to whom all should look for
a blessing on their honest endeavors, does not, in his wise providence,
otherwise determine.

AN OLD TRADESMAN.

NECESSARY HINTS TO THOSE THAT WOULD BE RICH. WRITTEN ANNO 1736.
THE use of money is all the advantage there is in having money.

For six pounds a year you may have the use of one hundred pounds, provided you
are a man of known prudence and honesty.

He that spends a groat a day idly, spends idly above six pounds a year, which
is the price for the use of one hundred pounds.

He that wastes idly a groat's worth of his time per day, one day with another,
wastes the privilege of using one hundred pounds each day.

He that idly loses five shillings worth of time, loses five shillings, and
might as prudently throw five shillings into the sea.

He that loses five shillings, not only loses that sum, but all the advantage
that might be made by turning it in dealing, which, by the time that a young
man becomes old, will amount to a considerable sum of money.

Again: he that sells upon credit, asks a price for what he sells equivalent to
the principal and interest of his money for the time he is to be kept out of
it; therefore, he that buys upon credit, pays interest for what he buys; and he
that pays ready money, might let that money out to use: so that he that posses
any thing he has bought, pays interest for the use of it.

Yet, in buying goods, it is best to pay ready money, because, he that sells
upon credit, expects to lose five per cent. by bad debts; therefore he charges,
on all he sells upon credit, an advance that shall make up that deficiency.

Those who pay for what they buy upon credit, pay their share of this advance.

He that pays ready money, escapes, or may escape, that charge.

A Penny saved is twopence clear;
A pin a day's a groat a year.
THE WAY TO MAKE MONEY PLENTY IN EVERY MAN's POCKET.
AT this time, when the general complaint is that -- "money is scarce," it will
be an act of kindness to inform the moneyless how they may reinforce their
pockets. I will acquaint them with the true secret of money-catching -- the
certain way to fill empty purses -- and how to keep them always full. Two
simple rules, well observed, will do the business.

First, let honesty and industry be thy constant companions; and,

Secondly, spend one penny less than thy clear gains.

Then shall thy hide-bound pocket soon begin to thrive, and will never again
cry with the empty belly ache: neither will creditors insult thee, nor want
oppress, nor hunger bite, nor nakedness freeze thee. The whole hemisphere will
shine brighter, and pleasure spring up in every corner of thy heart. Now,
therefore, embrace these rules and be happy. Banish the bleak winds of sorrow
from thy mind, and live independent. Then shall thou be a man, and not hide thy
face at the approach of the rich, nor suffer the pain of feeling little when
the sons of fortune walk at thy right hand: for independency, whether with
little or much, is good fortune, and places thee on even ground with the
proudest of the golden fleece. Oh then, be wise, and let industry walk with
thee in the morning, and attend thee until thou reachest the evening hour for
rest. Let honesty be as the breath of thy soul, and never forget to have a
penny, when all thy expenses are enumerated and paid: then shall thou reach the
point of happiness, and independence shall be thy shield and buckler, thy
helmet and crown; then shall thy soul walk upright, nor stoop to the silken
wretch because he has riches, nor pocket an abuse because the hand which
offers it wears a ring set with diamonds.

AN OECONOMICAL PROJECT.
[A Translation of this Letter appeared in one of the Daily Papers of Paris
about the Year 1784. The following is the Original Piece, with some Additions
and Corrections made in it by the Author.]
To the AUTHORS of the JOURNAL. MESSIEURS.
YOU often entertain us with accounts of new discoveries. Permit me to
communicate to the public, through your paper, one that has lately been made by
myself, and which I conceive may be of great utility.

I was the other evening in a grand company, where the new lamp of Messrs.
Quinquet and Lange was introduced, and much admired for its splendour; but a
general enquiry was made, whether the oil it consumed, was not in proportion to
the light it afforded, in which case there would be no saving in the use of it.
No one present could satisfy us in that point, which all agreed ought to be
known, it being a very desirable thing to lessen, if possible, the expense of
lighting our apartments, when every other article of family expense was so much
augmented.

I was pleased to see this general concern for economy; for I love economy
exceedingly.

I went home, and to bed, three or four hours after midnight, with my head full
of the subject. An accidental sudden noise waked me about six in the morning,
when I was surprised to find my room filled with light; and I imagined at
first, that a number of those lamps had been brought into it: but, rubbing my
eyes, I perceived the light came in at the windows. I got up and looked out to
see what might be the occasion of it, when I saw the sun just rising above the
horizon, from whence he poured his rays plentifully into my chamber, my
domestic having negligently omitted the preceding evening to close the shutters.

I looked at my watch, which goes very well, and found that it was but six
o'clock: and still thinking it something extraordinary that the sun should rise
so early, I looked into the almanac; where I found it to be the hour given for
his rising on that day. I looked forward too, and found he was to rise still
earlier every day till toward the end of June; and that at no time in the year
he retarded his rising so long as till eight o'clock. Your readers, who with me
have never seen any signs of sunshine before noon, and seldom regard the
astronomical part of the almanac, will be as much astonished as I was, when
they hear of his rising so early; and especially when I assure them, that he
gives light as soon as he rises. I am convinced of this. I am certain of the
fact. One cannot be more certain of any fact. I saw it with my own eyes. And
having repeated this observation the three following mornings, I found always
precisely the same result.

Yet so it happens, that when I speak of this discovery to others, I can easily
perceive by their countenances, though they forbear expressing it in words,
that they do not quite believe me. One indeed, who is a learned natural
philosopher, has assured me that I must certainly be mistaken as to the
circumstance of the light coming into my room: for it being well known, as he
says, that there could be no light abroad at that hour, it follows that none
could enter from without: and that of consequence, my windows being
accidentally left open, instead of letting in the light, had only served to let
out the darkness: and he used many ingenious arguments to show me how I might,
by that means, have been deceived. I own that he puzzled me a little, but he
did not satisfy me; and the subsequent observations I made, as above mentioned,
confirmed me in my first opinion.

This event has given rise, in my mind, to several serious and important
reflections. I considered that, if I had not been awakened so early in the
morning, I should have slept six hours longer by the light of the sun, and in
exchange have lived six hours the following night by candle light; and the
latter being a much more expensive light than the former, my love of economy
induced me to muster up what little arithmetic I was master of, and to make
some calculations, which I shall give you, after observing, that utility is, in
my opinion, the test of value in matters of invention, and that a discovery
which can be applied to no use, or is not good for something, is good for
nothing.

I took for the basis of my calculation the supposition that there are 100,000
families in Paris, and that these families consume in the night half a pound of
bougies, or candles, per hour. I think this is a moderate allowance, taking one
family with another; for though I believe some consume less, I know that many
consume a great deal more. Then estimating seven hours per day, as the medium
quantity between the time of the sun's rising and ours, he rising during the
six following months from six to eight hours before noon, and there being seven
hours of course per night in which we burn candles, the account will stand thus
-- In the six months between the twentieth of March and the twentieth of
September, there are Nights 183 Hours of each night in which we burn candles 7
Multiplication gives for the total number of hours 1,281 These 1,281 hours
multiplied by 100,000, the number of inhabitan^^ give 128,100,000 One hundred
twenty eight millions and one hundred thousand hours, spent at Paris by
candlelight, which, at half a pound of wax and tallow per hour, gives the
weight of 64,050,000 Sixty-four millions and fifty thousand of pounds, which,
estimating the whole at the medium price of thirty sols the pound, makes the
sum of ninety-six millions and seventy-five thousand livres tournois 96,075,000


An immense sum! that the city of Paris might save every year, by the economy
of using sunshine instead of candles.

If it should be said, that the people are apt to be obstinately attached to
old customs, and that it will be difficult to induce them to rise before noon,
consequently my discovery can be of little use; I answer, Nil desperandum. I
believe all who have common sense, as soon as they have learnt from this paper
that it is daylight when the sun rises, will contrive to rise with him; and,
to compel the rest, I would propose the following regulations:

First. Let a tax be laid of a louis per window, on every window that is
provided with shutters to keep out the light of the sun.

Second. Let the same salutary operation of police be made use of to prevent
our burning candles, that inclined us last winter to be more oeconomical in
burning wood; that is, let guards be placed in the shops of the wax and tallow
chandlers, and no family be permitted to be supplied with more than one pound
of candles per week.

Third. Let guards be posted to stop all the coaches, etc. that would pass the
streets after sunset, except those of physicians, surgeons and midwives.

Fourth. Every morning, as soon as the sun rises, let all the bells in every
church be set ringing; and if that is not sufficient, let cannon be fired in
every street, and wake the sluggards effectually, and make them open their eyes
to see their true interest.

All the difficulty will be in the first two or three days; after which the
reformation will be as natural and easy as the present irregularity: for, ce
(...) que le pr^m^^r pas qui coute. Oblige a man to rise to four in the
morning, and it is more than probable he shall go willingly to bed at eight in
the evening; and, having had eight hours sleep, he will rise more willingly at
four the morning following. But this sum of ninety-six millions and
seventy-five thousand livres is not the whole of what may be saved by my
oeconomical project. You may observe, that I have calculated upon only one half
of the year, and much may be saved in the other* though the days are shorter.
Besides, the immense stock of wax and tallow lest unconsumed during the summer,
will probably make candles much cheaper for the ensuing winter, and contin^e
cheaper as long as the proposed reformation shall be supported.

For the great benefit of this discovery, thus freely communicated and bestowed
by me on the public, I demand neither place, pension, exclusive privilege, nor
any other reward whatever. I expect only to have the honor of it. And yet I
know there are little envious minds who will, as usual, deny me this, and say
that my invention was known to the ancients, and perhaps they may bring
passages out of the old books in proof of it. I will not dispute with these
people that the ancients knew not the sun would rise at certain hours; they
possibly had, as we have, almanacks that predicted it: but it does not follow
from thence that they knew he gave light as soon as he rose. This is what I
claim as my discovery. If the ancients knew it, it must have long since been
forgotten, for it certainly was unknown to the moderns, at least to the
Parisians; which to prove, I need use but one plain simple argument. They are
as well instructed, judicious, and prudent a people as exist any where in the
world, all professing, like myself, to be lovers of economy; and, from the
many heavy taxes required from them by the necessities of the state, have
surely reason to be oeconomical. I say it is impossible that so sensible a
people, under such circumstances, should have lived so long by the smoky,
unwholesome, and enormously expensive light of candles, if they had really
known that they might have had as much pure light of the sun for nothing. I am,
etc.

AN ABONNE.

On MODERN INNOVATIONS in the ENGLISH LANGUAGE, and in PRINTING.
To NOAH WEBSTER, jun. Esquire. at HARTFORD. Philadelphia, Dec. 26, 1789. DEAR SIR,
I RECEIVED, some time since, your Dissertations on the English Language. It is
an excellent work, and will be greatly useful in turning the thoughts of our
countrymen to correct writing. Please to accept my thanks for it, as well as
for the great honor you have done me in its dedication. I ought to have made
this acknowledgement sooner, but much indisposition prevented me.

I cannot but applaud your zeal for preserving the purity of our language both
in its expression and pronunciation, and in correcting the popular errors
several of our states are continually falling into with respect to both. Give
me leave to mention some of them, though possibly they may already have
occurred to you. I wish, however, that in some future publication of yours you
would set a discountenancing mark upon them. The first I remember, is the word
improved. When I left New England in the year 1723, this word had never been
used among us, as far as I know, but in the sense of ameliorated, or made
better, except once in a very old book of Dr. Mather's, entitled, Remarkable
Providence. As that man wrote a very obscure hand, I remember that when I read
^^at word in his book, used instead of the word employed, I conjectured that it
was an error of the printer, who had mistaken a short l in the writing for an
r, and a y with too short a tail for a v, whereby employed was converted into
improved: but when I returned to Boston in 1733, I found this change (...)
obtained favor, and was then become common; for I met with it often in
perusing the newspapers, where it frequently made an appearance rather
ridiculous. Such, for instance, as the advertisement of a country house to be
sold, which had been many years improved as a tavern; and in the character of a
deceased country gentlemen, that he had been, for more than thirty years,
improved as a justice of the peace. This use of the word improve is peculiar to
New England, and not to be met with among any other speakers of English, either
on this or the other side of the water.

During my late absence in France, I find that several other new words have
been introduced into our parliamentary language. For example, I find a verb
formed from the substantive notice. I should not have noticed this were it not
that the gentleman, etc. Also another verb, from the substantive advocate; The
gentleman who advocates, or who has advocated that motion, etc. Another from
the substantive progress, the most awkward and abominable of the three: The
committee having progressed, resolved to adjourn. The word opposed, though not
a new word, I find used in a new manner, as, The gentlemen who are opposed to
this measure, to which I have also myself always been opposed. If you should
happen to be of my opinion with respect to these innovations, you will use your
authority in reprobating them.

The Latin language, long the vehicle used in distributing knowledge among the
different nations of Europe, is daily more and more neglected; and one of the
modern tongues, viz. French, seems in point of universality, to have supplied
its place. It is spoken in all the courts of Europe; and most of the literati,
those even who do not speak it, have acquired knowledge of it, to enable them
easily to read the books that are written in it. This gives a considerable
advantage to that nation. It enables its authors to inculcate and spread
through other nations, such sentiments and opinions, on important points, as
are most conducive to its interests, or which may contribute to its reputation,
by promoting the common interests of mankind. It is, perhaps, owing to its
being written in French, that Voltaire's Treatise on Toleration has had so
sudden and so great an effect on the bigotry of Europe, as almost entirely to
disarm it. The general use of the French language has likewise a very
advantageous effect on the profits of the bookselling branch of commerce, it
being well known, that the more copies can be sold that are struck off from one
composition of types, the profits increase in a much greater proportion than
they do in making a greater number of pieces in any other kind of manufacture.
And at present there is no capital town in Europe without a French bookseller's
shop corresponding with Paris. Our English bids fair to obtain the second
place. The great body of excellent printed sermons in our language, and the
freedom of our writings on political subjects, have induced a great number of
divines of different sects and nations, as well as gentlemen concerned in
public affairs to study it, so far at least as to read it. And if we were to
endeavor the facilitating its progress, the study of our tongue might become
much more general. Those who have employed some part of their time in learning
a new language, must have frequently observed, that while their acquaintance
with it was imperfect, difficulties, small in themselves, operated as great
ones in obstructing their progress. A book, for example, ill printed, or a
pronunciation in speaking not well articulated, would render a sentence
unintelligible, which from a clear print, or a distinct speaker, would have
been Immediately comprehended. If therefore, we would have the benefit of
seeing our language more generally known among mankind, we should endeavor to
remove all the difficulties, however small, that discourage the learning of it.
But I am sorry to observe, that of late years, those dff^iculties, instead of
being diminished, have been augmented.

In examining the English books that were printed between the restoration and
the accession of George the Second, we may observe, that all substantives were
begun with a capital, in which we imitated our mother tongue, the German. This
was more particularly useful to those who were not well acquainted with the
English, there being such a prodigious number of our words that are both verbs
and substantives, and spelt in the same manner, though often accented
differntly in pronunciation. This method has, by the fancy of printers, of late
years, been entirely laid aside; from an idea, that suppressing the capitals
shows the character to greater advantage; those letters, prominent above the
line, disturbing its even, regular appearance. The effect of this change is so
considerable, that a learned man in France, who used to read our books, though
not perfectly acquainted with our language, in conversation with* me on the
subject of our authors attributed the greater obscurity he found in our modern
books, compared with those written in the period above mentioned, to change of
style for the worse in our writers; of which mistake I convinced him, by
marking for him each substantive with a capital, in a paragraph, which he then
easily understood, though before he could not comprehend it. This shows the
inconvenience of that pretended improvement.

From the same fondness for an uniform and even appearance of characters in the
line, the printers have of late banished also the Italic types, in which words
of importance to be attended to in the sense of the sentence, and words on
which an emphasis should be put in reading, used to be printed. And lately
another fancy has induced other printers to use the round s instead of the long
one, which formerly served well to distinguish a word readily by its varied
appearance. Certainly the omitting this prominent letter makes a line appear
more even, but renders it less immediately legible; as the paring of all men's
noses might smooth and level their faces, but would render their physiognomies
less distinguishable. Add to all these improvements backwards, another modern
fancy, that gray printing is more beautiful than black* Hence the English new
books are printed in so dim a character, as to be read with difficulty by old
eyes, unless in a very strong light and with good glasses. Whoever compares a
volume of the Gentleman's Magazine, printed between the years. 1731 and 1740,
with one of those printed in the last ten years, will be convinced of the much
greater degree of perspicuity given by black than by the gray. Lord
Chesterfield pleasantly remarked this difference to Faulkener, the printer of
the Dublin Journal, who was vainly making encomiums on his own paper, as the
most complete of any in the world. "But Mr. Faulkener," says my lord, don't you
think it might be still farther improved, by using paper and ink not quite so
near of a color. -- For all these reasons I cannot but wish that our American
printers would, in their editions, avoid these fancied improvements, and
thereby render their works more agreeable to foreigners in Europe, to the great
advantage of our bookselling commerce.

Farther, to be more sensible of the advantage of clear and distinct printing,
let us consider the assistance it affords in reading well aloud to an auditory.
In so doing the eye generally slides forward three or four words before the
voice. If the sight clearly distinguishes what the coming words are, it gives
time to order the modulation of the voice, to express them properly. But if
they are obscurely printed, or disguised by omiting the capitals and long s's.
or otherwise, the reader is apt to modulate wrong, and finding he has done so,
he is obliged to go back and begin the sentence again; which lessens the
pleasure of the hearers. This leads me to mention an old error in our mode of
printing. We are sensible that when a question is met with in the reading,
there is a proper variation to be used in the management of the voice. We have,
therefore, a point, called an interrogation, affixed to the question, in order
to distinguish it. But this is absurdly placed at its end, so that the reader
does not discover it till he finds that he has wrongly modulated his voice, and
is therefore obliged to begin again the sentence. To prevent this, the Spanish
printers, more sensibly, place an interrogation at the bgnining as well as at
the end of the question. We have another error of the same kind in printing
plays, where something often occurs that is marked as spoken aside. But the
word aside is placed at the end of of the speech, when it ought to precede it,
as a direction to the reader, that he may govern his voice accordingly. The
practice of our ladies in meeting five or six together, to form little busy
parties, where each is employed in some useful work, while one reads to them,
is so commendable in itself, that it deserves the attention of authors and
printers to make it as pleasing as possible, both to the reader and hearers.

My best wishes attend you, being, with sincere esteem,

Sir, Your most obedient and very humble servant, B. FRANKLIN.

An ACCOUNT of the HIGHEST COURT of JUDICATURE in PENNSYLVANIA, viz. THE COURT
OF THE PRESS.
Power of this Court.
IT may receive and promulgate accusations of all kinds, against all persons
and characters among the citizens of the state, and even against all inferior
courts; and may judge, sentence, and condemn to infamy, not only private
individuals, but public bodies, etc. with or without enquiry or hearing, at the
court's discretion.

Whose favor, or for whose emoluments this Court is established.
In favor of about one citizen in five hundred, who, by education, or practice
in scribbling, has acquired a tolerable style as to grammar and construction,
so as to bear printing; or who is possessed of a press and a few types. This
five hundredth part of the citizens have the privilege of accusing and abusing
the other four hundred and ninety-nine parts at their pleasure; or they may
hire out their pens and press to others, for that purpose.

Practice of this Court.
It is not governed by any of the rules of the common courts of law. The
accused is allowed no grand jury to judge of the truth of the accusation before
it is publicly made; nor is the name of the accuser made known to him; nor has
he an opportunity of confronting the witnesses against him, for they are kept
in the dark, as in the Spanish court of inquisition. Nor is there any petty
jury of his peers sworn to try the truth* of the charges. The proceedings are
also sometimes so rapid, that an honest good citizen may find himself suddenly
and unexpectedly accused, and in the same morning judged and condemned, and
sentence pronounced against him that he is a rogue and a villain. Yet if an
officer of this court receives the slightest check for misconduct in this his
office, he claims immediately the rights of a free citizen by the constitution,
and demands to know his accuser, to confront the witnesses, and to have a fair
trial by a jury of his peers.

The foundation of its authority.
It is said to be founded on an article in the state constitution, which
establishes the liberty of the press -- a liberty which every Pennsylvanian
would fight and die for, though few of us, I believe, have distinct ideas of
its nature and extent. It seems, indeed, somewhat like the liberty of the press
that felons have; by the common law of England before conviction; that is, to
be either pressed to death or hanged. If, by the liberty of the press, were
understood merely the liberty of discussing the propriety of public measures
and political opinions, let us have as much of it as you please; but if it
means the liberty of affronting, calumniating, and defaming one another, I, for
my part, own myself willing to part with my snare of it, whenever our
legislators shall please so to alter the law and shall cheerfully consent to
exchange my liberty of abusing others, for the privilege of not being abused
myself.

By whom this court is commissioned or constituted.
It is not any commission from the supreme executive council, who might
previously judge of the abilities, integrity, knowledge, etc. of the persons to
be appointed to this great trust of deciding upon the characters and good fame
of the citizens: for this court is above that council, and may accuse, judge,
and condemn it at pleasure. Nor is it hereditary, as is the court of dernier
resort in the peerage of England. But any man who can procure pen, ink, and
paper, with a press, a few types, and a huge pair of blacking balls, may
commissionate himself, and his court is immediately established in the plenary
possession and exercise of its rights. For if you make the least complaint of
the judge's conduct, he daubs his blacking balls in your face wherever he meets
you, and besides fearing your private character to splinters, marks you out for
the odium of the public, as an enemy to the liberty of the press.

Of the natural support of this court.
Its support is founded in the depravity of such minds as have not been mended
by religion, no^ improved by good education.

There is a lust in man no charm can tame,
Of loudly publishing his neighbor's shame.
Hence,

On eagles' wings, immortal, scandals fly,
While virtuous actions are but born and die.
Whoever feels pain in hearing a good character of his neighbor, will feel a
pleasure in the reverse. And of those who, despairing to rise to distinction by
their virtues, are happy if others can be depressed to a level with themselves,
there are a number sufficient in every great town to maintain one of these
courts by their subscription. A shrewd observer once said, that in walking in
the streets of a slippery morning, one might see where the good natured people
lived, by the ashes thrown on the ice before the doors; probably he would have
formed a different conjecture of the temper of those whom he might find engaged
in such subscriptions.

Of the checks proper to be established against the abuses of power in those
courts.
Hitherto there are none. But since so much has been written and published on
the federal constitution; and the necessity of checks, in all other parts of
good government, has been so clearly and learnedly explained, I find myself so
far enlightened as to suspect some check may be proper in this part also: but I
have been at a loss to imagine any that may not be construed an infringement of
the sacred liberty of the press. At length, how^er, I think I have found one,
that instead of diminishing general liberty, shall augment it; which is, by
restoring to the people a species of liberty of which they have been deprived
by our laws, I mean the^ liberty of the cudgel! In the rude state of society,
prior to the existence of laws, if one man gave another Ill language, the
affronted person might return it by a box on the ear; and if repeated, by a
good drubbing; and this without offending against any law* but now the right of
making such returns is denied, and they are punished as breaches of the peace,
while the right of abusing seems to remain in full force; the laws made against
it being rendered ineffectual by the liberty of the press.

My proposal then is, to leave the liberty of the press untouched, to be
exercised in its full extent, force, and vigor, but to permit the liberty of
the cudgel to go with it, pari passu. Thus, my fellow citizens, if an impudent
writer attacks your reputation -- dearer perhaps to you than your life, and
puts his name to the charge, you may go to him as openly and break his head. If
he conceals himself behind the printer, and you can nevertheless discover who
he is, you may in like manner, waylay him in the night, attack him behind, and
give him a good drubbing. If your adversary hires better writers than himself,
to abuse you more effectually, you may hire brawny porters, stronger than
yourself, to assist you, in giving him a more effectual drubbing. Thus far goes
my project, as to private resentment and retribution. But if the public should
ever happen to be affronted, as it ought to be, with the conduct of such
writers, I would not advise proceeding immediately to these extremities, but
that we should in moderation content ourselves with tarring and feathering, and
tossing them in a blanket.

If, however, it should be thought that this proposal of mine may disturb the
public peace, I would then humbly recommend to our legislators to take up the
consideration of both liberties, that of the press, and that of the cudgel; and
by an explicit law mark their extent and limits: and at the same time that they
secure the person of a citizen from assaults, they would likewise provide for
the security of his reputation.

PAPER: A POEM.
SOME wit of old -- such wits of old there were --
Whose hints showed meaning whose allusions care,
By one brave stroke to mark all human kind,
Called clear blank paper every infant mind;
When still, as opening sense her dictates wrote,
Fair Virtue put a seal, or Vice a blot.
The thought was happy, pertinent, and true;
Methinks a genius might the plan pursue.
I, (can you pardon my presumption? I --)
No wit, no genius, yet for once will try.
Various the papers various wants produce,
The wants of fashion, elegance, and use.
Men are as various: and, if right I scan,
Each sort of paper represents some man.
Pray note the fop -- half powder and half lace --
Nice, as a band-box were his dewlling place;
He Is the gilt paper, which apart you store,
And lock from vulgar hands in the 'scrutoire.
Mechanics, servants, farmers, and so forth,
Are copy paper, of inferior worth;
Less prized, more useful, for your desk decreed,
Free to all pens, and prompt at every need.
The wretch whom avarice bids to pinch and ^part,
Starve, cheat, and pilfer, to enrich an heir.
Is coarse brown paper; such as pedlers choose
To wrap up wares, which better men will use.
Take next the Miser's contrast, who destroys
Health, same, and fortune, in a round of joys.
Will any paper match him? Yes, through out,
He Is a true sinking paper, past all doubt.
The retail politician's anxious thought
Deems this side always right, and that stark naught*
He forms with censure; with applause he raves --
(...) dupe to rumors, and a tool of knaves;
He Will want no type his weakness to proclaim,
While such a thing as fools-^ap has a name.
The hasty gentleman, whose blood runs high,
Who picks a quarrel, if you step awry,
Who cannot a jest, or hint, or look endure:
What Is he? What? Touch-paper to be sure.
What are our poets, take them as they fall,
Good, bad, rich, poor, much read, not read at all?
Them and their works in the same class you will find;
They are the mere waste-paper of mankind.
Observe the maiden, innocently sweet,
She Is fair white-paper, an unsullied sheet;
On which the happy man whom fate ordains,
May write his name, and take her for his pains.
One instance more, and only one I Will bring;
It Is the Great-Man who scorns a little thing,
Whose thoughts, whose deeds, whose maxims are his own,
Formed on the feelings of his heart alone:
True genuine royal-paper is his breast;
Of all the kinds most precious, purest, best.
ON THE ART OF SWIMMING.
In answer to some enquiries of M. Dubourg Translator of Dr. Franklin's Works
into French.
on the subject.
I AM apprehensive that I shall not be able to find leisure for making all the
disquisitions and experiments which would be desirable on this subject. I must,
therefore, content myself with a few remarks.

The specific gravity of some human bodies, in comparison to that of water, has
been examined by M. Robinson, in our Philosophical Transactions, volume 50,
page 30, for the year 1757. He asserts, that fat persons with small bones float
most easily upon water

The diving bell is accurately described in our transactions.

When I was a boy, I made two oval pallets, each about ten inches long, and six
broad, with a hole for the thumb, in order to retain it fast in the palm of my
hand. They much resemble a painter's pallets. In swimming I pushed the edges of
these forward, and I struck the water with their flat surfaces as I drew them
back. I remember I swam faster by means of these pallets, but they fatigued my
wrists. -- I also fitted to the soles of my feet a kind of sandals; but I was
not satisfied with them, because I observed that the stroke is partly given
with the inside of the feet and the ancles, and not entirely with the soles of
the feet.

We have here waistcoats for swimming, which are made of double sail-cloth,
with small pieces of cork quilted in between them.

I know nothing of the scaphandre of M. de la Chapell^.

I know by experience that it is a great comfort to a swimmer, who has a
considerable distance to go, to turn himself sometimes on his back, and to vary
in other respects the means of procuring a progressive motion.

When he is seized with the cramp in the leg, the method of driving it away is
to give to the parts affected a sudden, vigorous, and violent shock; which he
may do in the air as he swims on his back.

During the great heats of summer there is no danger in bathing, however warm
we may be, in rivers which have been thoroughly warmed by the sun. But to throw
oneself into cold spring water, when the body has been heated by exercise in
the sun, is an imprudence which may prove fatal. I once knew an instance of
four young men, who, having worked at harvest in the hea^ of the day, with a
view of refreshing themselves plunged into a spring of cold water: two died
upon the spot, a third the next morning, and the fourth recovered with great
difficulty. A copious draught of cold water, in similar circumstances, is
frequently attended with the same effect in North America.

The exercise of swimming is one of the most healthy and agreeable in the
world. After having swam for an hour or two in the evening, one sleeps coolly
the whole night, even during the most ardent heat of summer. Perhaps the pores
being cleansed, the insensible perspiration increases and occasions this
coolness. -- It is certain that much swimming is the means of stopping a
diarrhea, and even of producing a constipation. With respect to those who do
not know how to swim, or who are affected with a diarrhoea at a season which
does not permit them to use that exercise, a warm bath, by cleansing and
purifying the skin, is found very salutary, and often effects a radical cure. I
speak from my own experience, frequently repeated, and that of others to whom I
have recommended this.

You will not be displeased if I conclude these hasty remarks by informing you,
that as the ordinary method of swimming is reduced to the act of rowing with
the arms and legs, and is consequently a laborious and fatiguing operation when
the space of water to be crossed is considerable; there is a method in which a
swimmer may pass to great distances with much facility, by means of a fail.
This discovery I fortunately made by accident, and in the following manner.

When I was a boy I amused myself one day with flying a paper kite; and
approaching the bank of a pond, which was near a mile broad, I tied the string
to a stake, and the kite ascended to a very considerable height above the pond,
while I was swimming. In a little time, being desirous of amusing myself with
my kite, and enjoying at the same time the pleasure of swimming, I returned;
and loosing from the stake the string with the little stick which was fastened
to it, went again into the water, where I found, that, lying on my back and
holding the stick in my hands, I was draws along the surface of the water in a
very agreeable (...). Having then engaged another boy to carry my clothes round
the pond, to a place which I pointed out to him on the other side, I began to
cross the pond with my kite, which carried me quite over without the least
fatigue, and with the greatest pleasure imaginable. I was only obliged
occasionally to halt a little in my course, and resist its progress, when it
appeared that, by following too quick, I lowered the kite too much: by doing
which occasionally I made it rise again. -- I have never since that time
practiced this singular mode of swimming, though I think it not impossible to
cross in this manner from Dover to Calais. The packet-boat, however, is still
preferable.

NEW MODE OF BATHING.
EXTRACTS OF LETTERS TO M. DUBOURG.
London, July 28, 1768.
I GREATLY approve the epithet you give, in your letter of the 8th of June, to
the new method of treating the smallpox, which you call the tonic or bracing
method; I will take occasion, from it, to mention a practice to which I have
accustomed myself. You know the cold bath has long been in vogue here as a
tonic; but the shock of the cold water has always appeared to me, generally
speaking, as too violent, and I have found it much more agreeable to my
constitution to bathe in another element, I mean cold air. With this view I
rise early almost every morning, and sit in my chamber without any clothes
whatever, half an hour or an hour, according to the season, either reading or
writing. This practice is not in the least painful, but, on the contrary,
agreeable; and if I return to bed afterward, before I dress myself, as
sometimes happens, I make a supplement to my night's rest of one or two hours
of the most pleasing sleep that can be imagined. I find no ill consequences
whatever resulting from it, and that at least, it does not injure my health, if
it does not in fact contribute much to its preservation. -- I shall therefore
call it for the future a bracing or tonic bath.

March 10, 1773.
I shall not attempt to explain why damp clothes occasion colds, rather than
wet ones, because I doubt the fact: I imagine that neither the one nor the
other contribute to this effect, and that the causes of colds are totally
independent of wet and even of cold. I propose writing a short paper on this
subject, the first leisure moment I have at my disposal. -- In the mean time I
can only say, that having some suspicions that the common notion, which
attributes to cold the property of stopping the pores and obstructing
perspiration, was ill founded, I engaged a young physician, who is making some
experiments with Sanctorius's balance, to estimate the different proportions of
his perspiration when remaining one hour quite naked, and another warmly
clothed. He pursued the experiment in this alternate manner for eight hours
successively and found his perspiration almost done his during those hours in
which he was naked.

OBSERVATIONS on the GENERAL PREVAILING DOCTRINES of LIFE and DEATH.
TO THE SAME.
YOUR observations on the causes of death, and the experiments which you
propose for recalling to life those who appear to be killed by lightning,
demonstrate equally your sagacity and humanity. It appears that the doctrines
of life and death, in general, are yet but little understood.

A toad, buried in sand, will live, it is said, until the sand becomes
petrified; and then, being enclosed in the stone, it may still live for we know
not how many ages. The facts which are cited in support of this opinion, are
too numerous and too circumstantial not to deserve a certain degree of credit.
As we are accustomed to see all the animals with which we are acquainted eat
and drink, it appears to us difficult to conceive how a toad can be supported
in such a dungeon. But if we reflect, that the necessity of nourishment, which
animals experience in their ordinary state, proceeds from the continual waste
of their substance by perspiration: it will appear less incredible that some
animals in a torpid state, perspiring less because they use no exercise, should
have less need of alement; and that others, which are covered with scales or
shells, which stop perspiration, such as land and sea turtles, serpents, and
some species of fish, should be able to subsist a considerable time without any
nourishment whatever. -- A plant, with its flowers, fades and dies immediately,
if exposed to the air without having its roots immersed in a humid soil, from
which it may draw a sufficient quantity of moisture, to supply that which
exhales from its substance, and is carried off continually by the air. Perhaps,
however, if it were buried in quicksilver, it might preserve, for a
considerable space of time, its vegetable life, its smell and color. If this
be the case, it might prove a commodious method of transporting from distant
countries those delicate plants which are unable to sustain the inclemency of
the weather at sea, and which require particular care and attention.

I have seen an instance of common flies preserved in a manner somewhat
similar. They had been drowned in Madeira wine, apparently about the time when
it was bottled in Virginia, to be sent to London. At the opening of one of the
bottles, at the house of a friend where I was, three drowned flies fell into
the first glass which was filled. Having heard it remarked that drowned flies
were capable of being revived by the rays of the sun, I proposed making the
experiment upon these. They were therefore exposed to the sun, upon a sieve
which had been employed to strain them out of the wine. In less than three
hours two of them began by degrees to recover life. They commenced by some
convulsive motions in the thighs, and at length they raised themselves upon
their legs, wiped their eyes with their fore feet, beat and brushed their wings
with their hind feet, and soon after began to fly, finding themselves in Old
England, without knowing how they came thither. The third continued lifeless
until sunset, when, losing all hopes of him, he was thrown away.

I wish it were possible, from this instance, to invent a method of embalming
drowned persons, in such a manner that they might be recalled to life at any
period, however distant; for having a very ardent desire to see and observe the
state of America an hundred years hence, I should prefer to an ordinary death,
the being immersed in a task of Madeira wine, with a few friends, until that
time, then to be recalled to life by the solar warmth of my dear country! But,
since, in all probability, we live in an age too early, and too ^ear the
infancy of science, to see such an art brought in our time to its perfection, I
must, for the present, content myself with the treat, which you are so kind as
to promise me, of the resurrection of a fowl or a turkey-cock.

PRECAUTIONS to be used by those who are about to undertake A SEA VOYAGE.
WHEN you intend to take a long voyage, nothing is better than to keep it a
secret till the moment of your departure. Without this you will be continually
interrupttd and tormented by visits from friends and acquaintances, who not
only make you lose your valuable time, but make you forget a thousand things
which you wish to remember; so that when you are embarked, and fairly at sea,
you recollect, with much uneasiness affairs which you have not terminated,
accounts that you have not settled, and a number of things which you proposed
to carry with you, and which you find the want of every moment. Would it not be
attended with the best consequences to reform such a custom, and to suffer a
traveller, without deranging him, to make his preparations in quietness, to set
apart a few days, when these are finished, to take leave of his friends, and to
receive their good wishes for his happy return?

It is not always in one's power to choose a captain; though great part of the
pleasure and happiness of the* passage depends upon this choice, and though one
must for a time be confined to his company, and be in some measure under his
command. If he is a social sensible man, obliging, and of a good disposition,
you will be so much the happier. One sometimes meets with people of this
description, but they are not common; however, if yours be not of this number,
if he be a good seaman, attentive, careful, and active in the management of his
vessel, you may dispense with the rest, for these are the most essential
qualities.

Whatever right you may have by your agreement with him, to the provisions he
has taken on board for the use of the passengers, it is always proper to have
some private store, which you may make use of occasionally. You ought,
therefore, to provide good water, that of the ship being often bad; but you
must put it into bottles, without which you cannot expect to preserve it sweet.
You ought also to carry with you good tea, ground coffee, chocolate, wine of
the sort you like best, cider dried raisins, almonds, sugar, capillaire,
citrons, rum, eggs dipped in oil, portable soup, bread twice baked. With regard
to poultry, it is almost useless to carry any with you, unless you resolve to
undertake the office of feeding and fattening them yourself. With the little
care which is taken of them on board ship, they are almost all sickly, and
their flesh is as tough as leather.

All sailors entertain an opinion, which has undoubtedly originated formily
from a want of water, and when it has been found necessary to be sparing of it,
that poultry never know when they have drank enough; and that when water is
given them at discretion, they generally kill themselves by drinking beyond
measure. In consequence of this opinion, they gave them water only once in two
days, and even then in small quantities: but as they pour this water into
troughs inclining on one side, which occasions it to run to the lower part, it
thence happens that they are obliged to mount one upon the back of another in
order to reach it; and there are some which cannot even dip their beaks in it.
Thus continually tantalized and tormented by thurst, they are unable to digest
their food, which is very dry, and they soon fall sick and die. Some of them
are found thus every morning, and are thrown into the sea; whilst those which
are killed for the table are scarcely sit to be eaten. To remedy this
inconvenience, it will be necessary to divide their troughs into small
compartments, in such a manner that each of them may be capable of containing
water; but this is seldom or never done. On this account, sheep and hogs are to
be considered as the best fresh provision that one can have at sea; mutton
there being in general very good, and pork excellent.

It may happen that some of the provisions and stores which I have recommended
may become almost useless, by the care which the captain has taken to lay in a
proper stock; but in such a case you may dispose of it to relieve the poor
passengers, who, paying less for their passage, are stowed among the common
sailors, and have no right to the captain's provisions, except such part of
them as is used for feeding the crew. These passengers are sometimes sick,
melancholy, and dejected; and there are often women and children among the^
neither of whom have any opportunity of procuring those things which I have
mentioned, and of which, perhaps, they have the greatest need. By distributing
amongst them a part of your superfluity, you may be of the greatest assistance
to them. You may restore their health, save their lives, and in short render
them happy; which always affords the liveliest sensation to a feeling mind.

The most disagreeable thing at sea is the cookery; for there is not, properly
speaking, any professed cook on board. The worst sailor is generally chosen for
that purpose, who for the most part is equally dirty. Hence comes the proverb
used among the English sailors, that God sends meat, and the Devil sends cooks.
Those, however, who have a better opinion of providence, will think otherwise.
Knowing that sea air, and the exercise or motion which they receive from the
rolling of the ship, have a wonderful effect in whetting the appetite, they
will say that Providence has given sailors bad cooks to prevent them from
eating too much; or that knowing they would have bad cooks, he has given them a
good appetite to prevent them from dying with hungar. However, if you have is
confidence in these succors of Providence, you ^ay yourself, with a lamp and a
boiler, by the help of a little spirits of wine, prepare some food, such (...)
soup, hash, etc. A small oven made of tinplate is not a bad piece of furniture:
your servant may roast in it a piece of mutton or pork. If you are ever tempted
to eat salt beef, which is often very good, you will find that cider is the
best liquor to quench the thirst generally caused by salt next or salt fish.
Sea-biscuit which is too hard for the teeth of some people, may be softened by
keeping it; but bread double-baked is the best, for being made of good
loaf-bread cut into slices, and baked a second time, it readily imbibes water,
becomes soft, and is easily digested; it consequently forms excellent
nourishment, much superior to that of biscuit, which has not been fermented.

I must here observe, that this double-baked bread was originally the real
biscuit prepared to keep at sea; for the word biscuit, in French, signifies
twice baked It is derived from his again, and cuit baked.
. Pease often boil badly, and do not become soft; in such a case, by putting a
two-pound shot into the kettle, the rolling of the vessel, by means of this
bullet will convert the pease into a kind of porridge, like mustard.

Having often seen soup, when put upon the table at sea in broad flat dishes,
thrown out on every side by the rolling of the vessel, I have wished that our
tinmen would make our soup-basons with divisions or compartments forming small
plates, proper for containing soup for one person only. By this disposition,
the soup, in an extraordinary roll, would not be thrown out of the plate, and
would not fall into the breasts of those who are at table, and scald them. --
Having entertained you with these things of little importance, permit me now to
conclude with some general reflections upon navigation.

When navigation is employed only for transporting necessary provisions from
one country, where they abound, to another where they are wanting; when by this
it prevents famines, which where so frequent and so fatal before it was
invested and became so common; we cannot help considering it as one of those
arts which contribute most to the happiness of mankind. -- But when it is
employed to transport things of no utility, or articles merely of luxury, it is
then uncertain whether the advantages resulting from it are sufficient to
counterbalance the misfortunes it occasions, by exposing the lives of so many
individuals upon the vast ocean. And when it is used to plunder vessels and
transport slaves, it is evidently only the dreadful means of increasing those
calamities which afflict human nature.

One is astonished to think on the number of vessels and men who are daily
exposed in going to bring tea from China, coffee from Arabia, and (...) gar and
tobacco from America; all commodities which our ancestors lived very well
without. The sugar-trade employs nearly a thousand vessels; and that of tobacco
almost the same number. With regard to the utility of tobacco, little can be
said; and, with regard to sugar, how much more meritorious would it be to
sacrifice the momentary pleasure which we receive from drinking it once or
twice a day in our tea, than to encourage the numberless cruelties that are
continually exercised in order to procure it us?

A celebrated French moralist said, that when he considered the wars which we
foment in Africa to get negroes, the great number who of course perish in these
wars; the multitude of those wretches who die in their passage, by disease, bad
air, and bad provisions; and lastly, how many perish by the cruel treatment
they meet with in a state of slavery; when he saw a bit of sugar, he could not
help imagining it to be covered with spots of human blood. But, had he added to
these considerations the wars which we carry on against one another, to take
and retake the islands that produce this commodity, he would not have seen the
sugar simply spotted with blood, he would have beheld it entirely tinged with
it.

These wars make the maritime powers of Europe, and the inhabitants of Paris
and London, pay much dearer for their sugar than those of Vienna, though, they
are almost three hundred leagues distant from the sea. A pound of sugar,
indeed, costs the former not only the price which they give for it, but also
what they pay in taxes, necessary to support those (...) and armies which serve
to de^end and protect the countries that produce it.

On LUXURY, IDLENESS, and INDUSTRY.
From a Letter to Benjamin Vaughan, Esquire. Present member of Parliament for the
borough of Calne, in Wiltshire, between whom and our authors these subsisted
(...) very close friendship.
written in 1784.
IT is wonderful how preposterously the affairs of this world are managed.
Naturally one would imagine that the interest of a few individuals should give
way to general interest; but individuals manage their affairs with so much more
application, industry and address, than the public do theirs, that general
interest most commonly gives way to particular. -- We assemble parliaments and
councils, to have the benefit of their collected wisdom; but we necessarily
have, at the same time, the inconvenience of their collected passions,
prejudices, and private interests. By the help of these, artful men overpower
their wisdom, and dupe its possessors; and if we may judge by the acts, arrets,
and edicts, all the world over, for regulation commerce, an assembly of great
men is the greatest fool upon earth.

I have not yet, indeed, thought of a remedy for luxury. I am not sure that in
a great state it is capable of a remedy; nor that the evil is in itself always
so great as it is represented. Suppose we include in the definition of luxury
all unnecessary expense, and then let us consider whether laws to prevent such
expense are possible to be executed in a great country, and whether, if they
could be executed, our people generally would be happier, or even richer. Is
not the hope of being one day able to purchase and enjoy luxuries, a great spur
to labor and industry? May not luxury therefore produce more than it consumes,
if, without such a spur, people would be, as they are naturally enough inclined
to be, lazy and indolent? To this purpose I remember a circumstance. The
skipper of a shallop, employed between Cape-May and Philadelphia, had done us
some small service, for which he refused to be paid. My wife understanding that
he had a daughter, sent her a present of a new-fashioned cap. Three years
after, this skipper being at my house with an old farmer of Cape-May, his
passenger, he mentioned the cap, and how much his daughter had been pleased
with it. "But (said he) it proved a dear cap to our congregation." -- "How so?"
-- "When my daughter appeared with it at meeting, it was so much admired, that
all the girls resolved to get such caps from Philadelphia; and my wife and I
computed that the whole could not have cost less than a hundred pounds" --
"True, (said the farmer) but you do not tell all the story. I think the cap was
nevertheless an advantage to us; for it was the first thing that put our girl,
upon knitting worsted mittens for sale at Philadelphia, that they might have
wherewithal to buy caps and ribbons there; and you know that that industry has
continued, and is likely to continue and increase to a much greater value, and
answer much better purposes." -- Upon the whole, I was more reconciled to this
little piece of luxury, since not only the girls were made happier by having
fine caps, but the Philadelphians by the supply of warm mittens.

In our commercial towns upon the seacoast, fortunes will occasionally be
made. Some of those who grow rich will be prudent, live within bounds, and
preserve what they have gained for their posterity: others, fond of showing
their wealth, will be extravagant and ruin themselves. Laws cannot prevent
this: and perhaps it is not always an evil to the public. A shilling spent idly
by a fool, may be picked up by a wiser person, who knows better what to do with
it. It is therefore not lost. A vain, silly fellow builds a fine house,
furnishes it richly, lives in it expensively, and in a few years ruins himself:
but the masons, carpenters, smiths, and other honest tradesmen, have been by
his employ assisted in maintaining and raising their families; the farmer has
been paid for his labor, and encouraged, and the estate is now in better
hands. -- In some cases, indeed, certain modes of luxury may be a public evil,
in the manner as it is a private one. If there be a nation, for instance, that
exports its beef and linen, to pay for the importation of claret and porter,
while a great part of its people live upon potatoes, and wear no shirts;
wherein does it differ from the sot who lets his family starve, and sells his
clothes to buy drink? Our American commerce is, I confess, a little in this
way. We sell our victuals to the islands for rum and sugar; the substantial
necessaries of life for superfluities. But we have plenty, and live well
nevertheless, though, by being soberer, we might be richer,

The vast quantity of forest land we have yet to clear, and put in order for
cultivation, will for a long time keep the body of our nation laborious and
frugal. Forming an opinion of our people and their manners, by what is seen
among the inhabitants of the seaports, is judging from an improper sample. The
people of the trading towns may be rich and luxurious, while the country
possesses all the virtues that tend to promote happiness and public prosperity.
Those towns are not much regarded by the country; they are hardly considered as
an essential part of the states; and the experience of last war has shown, that
their being in the possession of the enemy did not necessarily draw on the
subjection of the country; which bravely continued to maintain its freedom and
independence notwithstanding.

It has been computed by some political arithmetician, that if every man and
women would work for four hours each day on something useful, that labor would
produce sufficient to procure all the necessaries and comforts of life; want
and misery would be banished out of the world, and the rest of the twenty-four
hours might be leisure and pleasure.

What occasions then so much want and misery? It is the employment of men and
women in works that produce neither the necessaries or conveniences of life,
who, with those that do nothing, consume necessaries raised by the laborious.
To explain this:

The first elements of wealth are obtained by labor, from the earth and
waters. (...) have land, and raise corn. With this, if I feed a family that
does nothing, my corn will be consumed, and at the end of the year I shall be
no richer than I was at the beginning. But if while I feed them, I employ them,
some in spinning, others in making bricks, etc. for building, the value of my
corn will be arrested and remain with me, and at the end of the year we may be
all better clothed and better lodged. And if, instead of employing a man I feed
in making bricks, I employ him in fiddling for me, the corn he eats is gone,
and no part of his manufacture remains to augment the wealth and convenience of
the family; I shall therefore be the poorer for this fiddling man, unless the
rest of my family work more, or eat less, to make up the deficiency he
occasions.

Look round the world, and see the millions employed in doing nothing, or in
something that amounts to nothing, when the necessaries and conveniences of
life are in question. What Is the bulk of commerce, for which we fight and
destroy each other, but the toil of millions for superfluities, to the great
hazard and loss of many lives, by the constant dangers of the sea? How much
labor is spent in building and fitting great ships, to go to China and Arabia
for tea and coffee, to the West Indies for sugar, to America for tobacco? These
things cannot be called the necessaries of life, for our ancestors lived very
comfortably without them.

A question may be asked: Could all these people now employed in raising,
making, or carrying superfluities, be subsisted by raising necessaries? I think
they might. The world is large, and a great part of it still uncultivated. Many
hundred millions of acres in Asia, Africa, and America, are still in a forest;
and a great deal even in Europe. On a hundred acres of this forest, a man might
become a substantial farmer; and a hundred thousand men employed in clearing
each his hundred acres, would hardly brigthen a spot big enough to be vesible
from the moon, unless with Herschel's telescope; so vast are the regions still
in wood.

It is however some comfort to reflect, that, upon the whole, the quantity of
industry and prudence among mankind exceeds the quantity of idleness and folly.
Hence the increase of good buildings, farms cultivated, and populous cities
filled with wealth, all over Europe, which a few years since were only to be
found on the coasts of the Mediterranean; and this notwithstanding the mad wars
continually raging, by which are often destroyed in one year the works of many
years peace. So that we may hope, the luxury of a few merchants on the coast
will not be the ruin of America.

One reflection more, and I will end this long rambling letter. Almost all the
parts of our bodies require some expense. The feet demand shoes; the legs
stockings; the rest of the body clothing; and the belly a good deal of
victuals. Our eyes, though exceedingly useful, ask, when reasonable, only the
cheap assistance of spectacles, which could not much impair our finances. But
the eyes of other people are the eyes that ruin us. If all but myself were
blind, I should want neither fine clothes, fine houses, nor fine furniture.

ON THE SLAVE TRADE.
READING in the newspapers the speech of Mr. Jackson in congress, against
meddling with the affair of slavery, or attempting to mend the condition of
slaves, it put me in mind of a similar speech, made about an hundred years
since, by Sidi Mehemet Ibrahim, a member of the divan of Algiers, which may be
seen in Martin's account of his consulship, 1687. It was against granting the
petition of the sect called Erika or Purists, who prayed for the abolition of
piracy and slavery, as being unjust. -- Mr. Jackson does not quote it; perhaps
he has not seen it. If, therefore, some of its reasonings are to be found in
his eloquent speech, it may only show that men's interests operate, and are
operated on, with surprising similarity, in all countries and climates,
whenever they are under similar circumstances. The African speech, as
translated, is as follows:

Alla Bismillah, etc. God is great, and Mahomet is his prophet.

Have these Erika considered the consequences of granting their petition? If we
cease our cruises against the Christians, how shall we be furnished with the
commodities their countries produce, and which are so necessary for us? If we
forbear to make slaves of their people, who, in this hot climate, are to
cultivate our lands? Who are to perform the common labors of our city, and of
our families? Must we not then be our own slaves? And is there not more
compassion and more favor due to us Mussulmen than to those Christian dogs? --
We have now above fifty thousand slaves in and near Algiers. This number, if
not kept up by fresh supplies, will soon diminish, and be gradually
annihilated. If, then, we cease taking and plundering the infidel ships, and
making slaves of the seamen and passengers, our lands will become of no value,
for want of cultivation; the rents of houses in the city will sink one half;
and the revenues of government, arising from the share of prizes, must be
totally destroyed. -- And for what? To gratify the whim of a whimsical sect,
who would have us not only forbear making more slaves, but even manumit those
we have. But who is to indemnify their masters for the loss? Will the state do
it? Is our treasury sufficient? Will the Erika do it? Can they do it? Or would
they, to do what they think justice to the slaves, do a greater injustice to
the owners? And if we set our slaves free what is to be done with them? Few of
them will return to their native countries? they know too well the greater
hardships they must there be subject to. They will not embrace our holy
religion: they will not adopt our manners: our people will not pollute
themselves by intermarrying with them. Must we maintain them as beggars in our
streets? or suffer our properties to be the prey of their pillage? for men
accustomed to slavery, will not work for a livelihood, when not compelled. --
And what is there so pitiable in their present condition? Were they not slaves
in their own countries? Are not Spain, Portugal, France, and the Italian
states, governed by despots, who hold all their subjects in slavery, without
exception? Even England treats her sailors as slaves, for they are, whenever
the government pleases, seized, and confined in ships of war, condemned, not
only to work, but to fight for small wages, or a mere subsistence, not better
than our slaves are allowed by us. Is their condition then made worse by their
falling into our hands? No; they have only exchanged one slavery for another;
and I may say a better: for here they are brought into a land where the sun of
Islamism gives forth its light, and shines in full splendour, and they have an
opportunity of making themselves acquainted with the true doctrine, and thereby
saving their immortal souls. Those who remain at home, have not that happiness.
Sending the slaves home, then, would be sending them out of light into darkness.

I repeat the question, what is to be done with them? I have heard it
suggested, that they may be planted in the wilderness, where there is plenty of
land for them to subsist on, and where they may flourish as a free state. --
But they are, I doubt, too little disposed to labor without compulsion, as
well as too ignorant to establish good government: and the wild Arabs would
soon molest and destroy, or again enslave them. While serving us, we take care
to provide them with every thing; and they are treated with humanity. The
laborers in their own countries, are, as I am informed, worse fed lodged, and
clothed. The condition of most of them is therefore already mended, and
requires no farther improvement. Here their lives are is safety. They are not
liable to be impressed for soldiers, and forced to cut one another's Christian
throats as in the wars of their own countries. If (...) of the religious mad
bigots who now tease us with their silly petitions, have, in a fit of blind
zeal, freed their slaves, it was not generosity, it was not humanity that moved
them to the action; it was from the conscious burden of a load of sins, and
hope* from the supposed merits of so good a work, to be excused from damnation
-- How grossly are they mistaken, in imagining slavery to be disavowed by the
Alcoran! Are not the two precepts, to quote no more, "Masters, treat your
slaves with kindness -- Slaves serve your masters with cheerfulness and
fidelity," clear proofs to the contrary? Nor can the plundering of infidels be
in that sacred book forbidden; since it is well known from it, that God has
given the world, and all that it contains, to his faithful Mussulmen, who are
to enjoy it, of right, as fast as they can conquer it. Let us then hear no more
of this detestable proposition, the manumission of Christian slaves, the
adoption of which would, be depreciating our lands and houses, and thereby
depriving so many good citizens of their properties, create universal
discontent, and provoke insurrections, to the endangering of government, and
producing general confusion. I have, therefore, no doubt that this wise council
will prefer the comfort and happiness of a whole nation of true believers, to
the whim of a few Erika, and dismiss their petition.

The result was, as Martin tells us, that the Divan came to this resolution:
That the doctrine, that the plundering and enslaving the Christians is unjust,
is at best problematical; but that it is the interest of this state to continue
the practice is clear; therefore, let the petition be rejected. -- And it was
rejected accordingly.

And since like motives are apt to produce, in the minds of men, like opinions
and resolutions, may we not venture to predict; from this account, that the
petitions to the parliament of England for abolishing the slave trade, to say
nothing of other legislatures and the debates upon them, will have a similar
conclusion.

HISTORICUS.
March 23, 1790.
OBSERVATIONS ON WAR.
BY the original law of nations, war and extirpation were the punishment of
injury. Humanizing by degrees, it admitted slavery instead of death: a farther
step was the exchange of prisoners instead of slavery: another, to respect more
the property of private persons under conquest, and be content with acquired
dominion. Why should not this law of nations go on improving? Ages have
intervened between its several steps: but as knowledge of late increases
rapidly, why should not those steps be quickened? Why should it not be agreed
to, as the future law of nations, that in any war hereafter the following
description of men should be undisturbed, have the protection of both sides,
and be permitted to follow their employments in security? viz.

1. Cultivators of the earth, because they labor for the subsistence of
mankind. 2. Fishermen, for the same reason. 3. Merchants and traders in unarmed
ships, who accommodate different nations by communicating and exchanging the
necessaries and conveniences of life. 4. Artists and mechanics, inhabiting and
working in open towns.
It is hardly necessary to add, that the hospitals of enemies should be
anmolested -- they ought to be assisted. It is for the interest of humanity in
general, that the occasions of war, and the inducements to it, should be
diminished. If rapine be abolished, one of the encouragements to war is taken
away; and peace therefore more likely to continue and be lasting.

The practice of robbing merchants on the high seas -- a remnant of the ancient
piracy -- though it may be accidentally beneficial to particular persons, is
far from being profitable to all engaged in it, or to the nation that
authorizes it. In the beginning of a war some rich ships are surprised and
taken. This encourages the first adventures to fit out more armed vessels; and
many others to do the same. But the enemy at the same time become more careful;
arm their merchant ships better, and render them not so easy to be taken; they
go also more under the protection of convoys. Thus, while the privateers to
take them are multiplied, the vessels subject to be taken, and the chances of
profit, are diminished; so that many cruises are made, wherein the expenses
overgo the gains; and, as is the case in other lotteries, though particulars
have got prizes, the mass of adventures are losers, the whole expense of
fitting out all the privateers during a war being much greater than the whole
amount of goods taken.

Then there is the national los^ of all the labor of so many men during the
time they have been employed in robbing; who besides spend what they get in
riot, drunkenness, and debauchery; loose their habits of industry; are rarely
fit for any sober business after a peace, and serve only to increase the number
of highwaymen and house breakers. Even the undertakers who have been fortunate,
are, by sudden wealth, led into expensive living, the habit of which continues
when the means of supporting it cease, and finally ruins them: a just
punishment for having wantonly and unfeelingly ruined many honest, innocent
traders and their families, whose substance was employed in serving the common
interest of mankind.

ON THE IMPRESS OF SEAMEN.
Notes copied from Dr. Franklin's writing in pencil in the margin of Judge
Foster's celebrated argument in favor of the IMPRESSING OF SEAMEN (published
in the folio edition of his works.)
JUDGE Foster, p. 158. "Every Man." -- The conclusion here from the whole to a
part, does not seem to be good logic. If the alphabet should say, Let us all
fight for the defense of the whole; that is equal, and may therefore be just.
But if they should say, Let A, B, C, and D go out and fight for us, while we
stay at home and sleep in whole ^kins; that is not equal, and therefore cannot
be just.

Ib. "Employ." -- If you please. The word signifies engaging a man to work for
me, by offering him such wages as are sufficient to induce him to prefer my
service. This is very different from compelling him to work on such terms as I
think proper.

Ib. "This service and employment, etc." -- These are false facts. His
employments and service are not the same -- Under the merchant be goes in an
unarmed vessel, not obliged to fight, but to transport merchandise. In the
king's service he is obliged to fight, and to hazard all the dangers of battle.
Sickness on board of king's ships is also more common and more mortal. The
merchant's service too he can quit at the end of the voyage; not the king's.
Also, the merchant's wages are much higher.

Ib. "I am very sensible, etc." -- Here are two things put in comparison that
are not comparable: viz. injury to seamen, and inconvenience to trade.
Inconvenience to the whole trade of a nation will not justify injustice to a
single seaman. If the trade would suffer without his service, it is able and
ought to be willing to offer him such wages as may induce him to afford his
service voluntarily.

Page 159. Private mischief must be borne with patience, for preventing a
national calamity. -- Where is this maxim in law and good policy to be found?
And how can that be a maxim which is not consistent with common sense? If the
maxim had been, that private mischiefs, which prevent a national calamity,
ought to be generously compensated by the nation, one might understand it: but
that such private mischiefs are only to be borne with patience, is absurd!

Ib. "The expedient, etc. And, etc." (Paragraphs 2 and 3.) -- Twenty
ineffectual or inconvenient schemes will not justify one that is unjust.

Ib. "Upon the foot of, etc." -- Your reasoning, indeed, like a lie, stands but
upon one foot; truth upon two.

Page 160. "Full wages. -- Probably the same they had in the merchant's service.

Page 174. "I hardly admit, etc." (Paragraph 5) -- When this autho^ speaks of
impressing, page 158, he diminishes the horror of the practice as much as
possible, by presenting to the mind one sailor only suffering hardship (as he
tenderly calls it) in some particular cases only: and he places against this
private mischief the inconvenience to the trade of the kingdom. -- But if, as
he supposes is often the case, the sailor who is pressed, and obliged to serve
for the defense of trade, at the rate of twentyfive shillings a month, could
get three pounds fifteen shillings in the merchant's service, you take from him
fifty shillings a month; and if you have a 100,000 in your service, you rob
this honest industrious part of society, and their poor families of 250,000l.
per month, or three millions a year, and at the same time oblige them to hazard
their lives in fighting for the defense of your trade; to the defense of which
all ought indeed to contribute (and sailors among the rest) in proportion to
their profits by it; but this three millions is more than their share, if they
did not pay with their persons; but when you force that, methinks you should
excuse the other.

But it may be said, to give the king's seamen merchant's wages would cost the
nation too much, and call for more taxes. The question then will amount to
this: whether it be just in a community, that the richer part should compel the
poorer to fight in desence of them and their properties, for such wages as they
think fit to allow, and punish them if they refuse? Our author tells us that it
is " legal." I have not law enough to dispute his authorities, but I cannot
persuade myself that it is equitable. I will, however, own for the present,
that it may be lawful when necessary; but then I contend that it may be used so
as to produce the same good effects -- the public security, without doing so
much intolerable injustice as attends the impressing common seamen. -- In order
to be better understood, I would premise too things; First, that voluntary
seamen may be had for the service, if they were sufficiently paid. The proof
is, that to serve in the same ship, and incur the same dangers, you have no
occasion to impress captains, lieutenants, second lieutenants, midshipmen,
pursers, nor many other officers. Why, but that the profits of their places, or
the emoluments expected, are sufficient inducements? The business then is, to
find money, by impressing, sufficient to make the sailors all volunteers, as
well as their officers; and this without any fresh burden upon trade. -- The
second of my premises is, that twenty-five shillings a month, with his share of
salt beef, pork, and pease-pudding, being found sufficient for the subsistence
of a hard-working seaman, it will certainly be so for a sedentary scholar or
gentleman. I would then propose to form a treasury, out of which encouragements
to seamen should be paid. To fill this treasury, I would impress a number of
civil officers, who at present have great salaries, oblige them to serve in
their respective offices for twenty-five shillings a month with their shares of
mess provisions, and (...) salaries into the seamen's treasury. If such a
press-warrant were given me to execute, the first I would press should be a
Recorder of Bristol, or a Mr. Justice Foster, because I might have need of his
edifying example, to show how much impressing ought to be borne with; for he
would certainly find, that though to be reduced to twenty-five shillings a
month might be a private mischief, yet that, agreeably to his maxim of law and
good policy, it ought to be borne with patience, for preventing a national
calamity. Then I would press the rest of the Judges; and, opening the red book,
I would press every civil officer of government from 50l. a year salary, up to
50,000l. which would throw an immense sum into our treasury: and these
gentlemen could not complain, since they would receive twenty five shillings a
month, and their rations: and this without being obliged to fight. Lastly, I
think I would impress.

ON THE CRIMINAL LAWS, AND THE PRACTICE OF PRIVATEERING.
Letter to Benjamin Vaughan, Esquire.
March 14th, 1785. MY DEAR FRIEND,
AMONG the pamphlets you lately sent me, was one, entitled, Thoughts on
Executive Justice. In return for that, I send you one on the same subject,
Observations concervant l' Execution (...) p Article II. de la Declaration fur
le Vol. They are both addressed to the Judges, and written, as you will see, in
a very different spirit. The English author is for hanging all thieves. The
Frenchman is for proportioning punishments to offenses.

If we really believe, as we profess to believe, that the law of Moses was the
law of God, the dictate of divine wisdom, infinitely superior to human; on what
principles do we ordain death as the punishment of an offense, which, according
to that law, was only to be punished by a restitution of fourfold? To put a man
to death for an offense which does not deserve death, is it not a murder? And,
as the French writer says, Doit-on punir un (...) contre la societe par un
crime contre la nature?

Superfluous property is the creature of society. Simple and mild laws were
sufficient to guard the property that was merely necessary. The savages' bow,
his hatchet, and his coat of skins, were sufficiently secured, without law, by
the fear of personal resentment and retaliation. When, by virtue of the first
laws, part of the society accumulated wealth and grew powerful, they enacted
others more severe, and would protect their property at the expense of
humanity. This was abusing their power, and commencing a tyranny. If a savage,
before he entered into society, had been told -- Your neighbor by this means,
may become owner of an hundred deer; but if your brother, or your son, or
yourself, having no deer of your own, and being hungry, should kill one, an
infamous death must be the consequence: he would probably have preferred his
liberty, and his common right of killing any deer, to all the advantages of
society that might be proposed to him.

That it is better a hundred guilty persons should escape, than that one
innocent person should suffer, is a maxim that has been long and generally
approved; never, that I know of, controverted. Ever the sanguinary author of
the thoughts agrees to it adding well, that the very thought of injured
innocence, and much more that of suffering innocence, must awaken all our
tenderest and most compassionate feelings, and at the same time raise our
highest indignation against the instruments of it. But, he adds, there is no
danger of either, from a strict adherenc^ to the laws. -- Really! -- Is it then
impossible to make an unjust law? and if the law itself be unjust, may it not
be the very "instrument" which ought to raise the author's, and every body's
highest indignation? I see, in the last newspapers from London, that a woman is
capitally convicted at the Old Bailey, for privately stealing out of a shop
some gauze, value fourteen shillings and three pence: Is there any proportion
between the injury done by a theft value fourteen shillings and threepence,
and the punishment of a human creature, by death, on a gibit? Might not that
woman, by her labor have made the reparation ordained by God, in paying
fourfold? Is not all punishment inflicted beyond the merit of the offense, so
much punishment of innocence? In this light, how vast is the annual quantity,
of not only injured but suffering innocence, in almost all the civilized states
of Europe!

But it seems to have been thought that this kind of innocence may be punished
by way of preventing crimes. I have read, indeed, of a cruel Turk in Barbary,
who, whenever he bought a new Christian slave, ordered him immediately to be
hung up by the legs, and to receive a hundred blows of a cudgel on the soles of
his feet, that the severe sense of the punishment, and fear of incurring it
thereafter, might prevent the faults that should merit it. Our author himself
would hardly approve entirely of this Turk's conduct in the government of
slaves; and yet he appears to recommend something like it for the government of
English subjects, when he applauds the reply of Judge Burnet to the convict
horse-stealer; who being asked what he had to say why judgment of death should
not pass against him, and answering, that it was hard to hand a man for only
stealing, a horse, was told by the judge, "Man, thou art not to be hanged only
for stealing a horse, but that horses may not be stolen." The man's answer, if
heartily examined, will, I imagine, appear reasonable as being founded on the
eternal principle of justice and equity, that punishments should be
proportioned to offenses, and the judge's reply brutal and unreasonable, though
the writer "wishes all judges to carry it with them whenever they go to the
circuit, and to bear it in their minds, as containing a wise reason for all the
penal statutes which they are called upon to put in execution. It at once
illustrates (says he) the true grounds and reasons of all capital punishments
whatsoever, namely, that every man's property, as well as his life, may be held
sacred and inviolate." Is there then no difference in value between property
and life? If I think it right that the crime of murder should be punished with
death, not only as an equal punishment of the crime, but to prevent other
murders, does it follow that I must approve of the same punishment for a little
invasion on my property by theft? If I am not myself so barbarous, so
bloody-minded, and revengeful, as to kill a fellow creature for stealing from
me fourteen shillings and threepence, how can I approve of a law that does it?
Montesquieu, who was himself a judge, endeavors to impress other maxims. He
must have known what humane judges feel on such occasions, and what the affects
of those feelings; and, so far from thinking that severe and excessive
punishments prevent crimes, he asserts, as quoted by our French writer, that
L'atrocite des loix en empeche l' execution.

Lorsque la peine est sons mesure, on est sonvent "oblige de lui preferer l'
impunite,

La cause des tous les relachemens vient de l'impunite des crimes, et non de la
moderation de^ peines.



It is said by those who know Europe generally, that there are more thefts
committed and punished annually in England than in all the other nations put
together. If this be so, there must be a cause or causes for such depravity in
our common people. May not one be the deficiency of justice and morality in our
national government, manifested in our oppressive conduct to subjects, and
unjust wars on our neighbors? View the long persisted in, unjust, monopolizing
treatment of Ireland, at length acknowledged! View the plundering government
exercised by our merchants in the Indies; the confiscating war made upon the
American colonies; and, to say nothing of those upon France and Spain, view the
late war upon Holland, which was seen by impartial Europe in no other light
than that of a war of rapine and pillage; the hopes of an immense and easy prey
being its only apparent, and probably its true and real motive and
encouragement. Justice is as strictly due between neighbor nations as between
neighbor citizens. A highwayman is as much a robber when he plunders in a
gang, as when single; and a nation that makes an unjust war is only a great
gang. After employing your people in robbing the Dutch, it is strange that,
being out of that employ by peace, they still continue robbing, and rob one
another? Piraterie, as the French call it, or privateering, is the universal
bent of the English nation, at home and abroad, wherever settled. No less than
seven hundred privateers were, it is said, commissioned in the last war! These
were fitted out by merchants, to prey upon other merchants, who have never done
them any injury. Is there probably any one of those privateering merchants of
London, who were so ready to rob the merchants of Amsterdam; that would not as
readily plunder another London merchant of the next street, if he could do it
with the same impunity! The avidity, the alieni appetens is the same; it is the
fear alone of the gallows that makes the difference. How then can a nation,
which, among the honestest of its people, has so many thieves by inclination,
and whose government encourag^d and commissioned no less than seven hundred
gangs of robbers; how can such a nation have the face to condemn the crime in
individuals, and hang up twenty of them in a morning! It naturally puts one in
mind of a Newgate anecdote, One of the prisoners complained, that in the night
somebody had taken his buckles out of his shoes. "What the devil!" says
another, "have we then thieves amongst us? It must not be suffered. Let us
search out the rogue, and pump him to death."

There is, however, one late instance of an English merchant who will not
profit by such ill-gotten gain. He was, it seems, part owner of a ship, which
the other owners thought fit to employ as a letter of marque, and which took a
number of French prizes. The booty being shared, he has now an agent here
enquiring, by an advertisement in the Gazette, for those who suffered the loss,
in order to make them, as far as in him lies, restitution. This conscientious
man is a Quaker. The Scotch presbyterians were formerly as tender; for there is
still extant an ordinance of the towncouncil of Edinburgh, made soon after the
Reformation, "forbidding the purchase of prize goods, under pain of losing the
freedom of the burgh for ever, with other punishments at the will of the
magistrate; the practice of making prizes being contrary to good conscience,
and the rule of treating Christian brethren as we would wish to be treated; and
such goods are not to be sold by any godly men within this burgh." The race of
these godly men in Scotland is probably extinct, or their principles abandoned,
since, as far as that nation had a hand in promoting the war against the
colonies, prizes and confiscations are believed to have been a considerable
motive.

It has been for some time a generally-received opinion, that a military man is
not to enquire whether a war be just or unjust; he is to execute his orders.
All princes who are disposed to become tyrants, must probably approve of this
opinion, and be willing to establish it; but is it not a dangerous one? since,
on that principle, if the tyrant commands his army to attack and destroy, not
only an unoffending neighbor nation, but even his own subjects, the army is
bound to obey. A negro slave, in our colonies, being commanded by his master to
rob or murder a neighbor, or do any other immoral act, may refuse; and the
magistrate will protect him in his refusal. The slavery then of a soldier is
worse than that of a negro! A conscientious officer, if not restrained by the
apprehension of its being imputed to another cause, may indeed resign, rather
than be employed in an unjust war, but the private men are slaves for life and
they are perhaps incapable of judging for themselves. We can only lament their
fate, and still more that of a sailor, who is often dragged by force from his
honest occupation, and compelled to imbrue his hands in perhaps innocent blood.
But methinks it well behooves merchants (men more enlightened by their
education, and perfectly free from any such force or obligation) to consider
well of the justice of a war, before they voluntarily engage a gang of ruffian^
to attack their fellow-merchants of a neighboring nation, to plunder them of
their property, and perhaps ruin them and their families, if they yield it; or
to wound, maim, and murder them, if they attempt to defend it. Yet these things
are done by Christian merchants, whether a war be just or unjust; and it can
hardly be just on both sides. They are done by English and American merchants,
who, nevertheless, complain of private theft, and hand by dozens the thieves
they have taught by their own example.

It is high time, for the sake of humanity, that a stop were put to this
enormity. The United States of America, though better situated than any
European nation to make profit by privateering, (most of the trade of Europe,
with the West Indies passing before their doors) are, as far as in them lies,
endeavoring to abolish the practice, by offering, in all their treaties with
other powers, an article, engaging sol^mnly, that, in case of future war, no
privateer shall be commissioned on either side; and that unarmed
merchant-ships, on both sides, shall pursue their voyages unmolested This offer
having been excepted by the late King of Prussia, a treaty of amity and
commerce was concluded between that Monarch and the United States, containing
the following humane, philanthropic article; in the formation of which Dr.
Franklin, as one of the American Plenipotentiaries, was principally concerned,
viz.

ARTICLE XXIII.

If war should arise between the two contracting parties, the merchants of
either country, then residing in the other, shall be allowed to remain nine
months to collect their debts and settle their affairs, and may depart freely,
carrying off all their effects without molestation or hindrance: and all women
and children, scholars of every faculty, cultivators of the earth, artifans,
manufacturers, and fishermen unarmed and inhabiting unfortified towns,
villages, or places, and in general all others whose occupations are for the
common subsistence and benefit of mankind, shall be allowed to continue their
respective employments, and shall not be molested in their persons, nor shall
their houses or goods be burnt, or otherwise destroyed, nor their fields
wasted, by the armed force of the enemy into whose power, by the events of war,
they may happen to fall; but if any thing is necessary to be taken from them
for the use of such armed force, the same shall be paid for at a reasonable
price. And all merchant and trading vessels employed in exchanging the products
of different places, and thereby rendering the necessaries, conveniences, and
comforts of human life more easy to be obtained, and more general, shall be
allowed to pass free and unmolested; and neither of the contracting powers
shall grant or issue any commission to any private armed vessels empowering
them to take or destroy such trading vessels, or interrupt such commerce.


. This will be a happy improvement of the law of nations. The humane and the
just cannot but wish general success to the proposition.

With unchangeable esteem and affection, I am, my dear friend, Ever yours.

REMARKS CONCERNING the SAVAGES of NORTH AMERICA.
SAVAGES we call them, because their manners differ from ours, which we think
the perfection of civility; they think the same of theirs.

Perhaps, if we could examine the manners of different nations with
impartiality* we should find no people so rude as to be without any rules of
politeness; nor any so polite as not to have some remains of rudeness.

The Indian men, when young, are hunters and warriors; when old, counselors;
for all their government is by the counsel or advice of sages; there is no
force, there are no prisons, no officers to compel obedience, or inflict
punishment. Hence they generally study oratory; the best speaker having the
most influence. The Indian women till the ground, dress the food, nurse and
bring up the children, and preserve and hand down to posterity the memory of
public transactions. These employments of men and women are accounted natural
and honorable. Having few artificial wants, they have abundance of leisure for
improvement by conversation. Our laborious manner of life, compared with
theirs, they esteem slavish and base; and the learning on which we value our
selves, they regard as frivolous and useless. An instance of this occured at
the treaty of Lancaster, in Pennsylvania, anno 1744, between the government of
Virginia and the Six Nations. After the principal business was settled, the
commissioners from Virginia acquainted the Indians by a speech, that there was
at Williamsburg a college, with a fund, for educating Indian youth; and that if
the chiefs of the Six Nations would send down half a dozen of their sons to
that college the government would take care that they should be well provided
for, and instructed in all the learning of the white people. It is one of the
Indian rules of politeness not to answer a public proposition the same day that
it is made; they think it would be treating it as a light matter; and they show
it respect by taking time to consider it, as of a matter important. They
therefore deferred their answer till the day following; when their speaker
began, by expressing their deep sense of the kindness of the Virginia
government, in making them that offer; "for we know (says he) that you highly
esteem the kind of learning taught in those colleges, and that the maintenance
of our young men, while with you, would be very expensive to you. We are
convinced, therefore, that you mean to do us good by your proposal, and we
thank you heartily. But you who are wise, must know, that different nations
have different conceptions of things; and you will therefore not take it amiss,
if our ideas of this kind of education happen not to be the same with yours. We
have had some experience of it: several of our young people were formerly
brought up at the colleges of the northern provinces: they were instructed in
all your sciences; but when they came back to us, they were bad runners;
ignorant of every means of living in the woods; unable to bear either cold or
hunger; knew neither how to build a cabin, take a deer, or kill an enemy; spoke
our language imperfectly; were therefore neither fit for hunters, warriors, or
counselors; they were totally good for nothing. We are however not the less
obliged by your kind offer, though we decline accepting it: and to show our
grateful sense of it, if the gentlemen of Virginia will send us a dozen of
their sons, we will take great care of their education, instruct them in all we
know, and make men of them."

Having frequent occasions to hold public councils, they have acquired great
order and decency in conducting them. The old men fit in the foremost ranks,
the warriors in the next, and the women and children in the hindmost. The
business of the women is to take exact notice of what passes, imprin^ it in
their memories, for they have no writing, and communicate it to their children.
They are the records of the council, and they preserve tradition of the
stipulations in treaties a hundred years back; which, when we compare with our
writings, we always find exact. He that would speak, rises. The rest observe a
profound silence. When he has finished, and fits down, they leave him five or
six minutes to recollect, that if he has omitted any thing he intended to say,
or has any thing to add, he may rise again and deliver it. -- To interrupt
another, even in common conversation, is reckoned highly indecent. How
different this is from the conduct of a polite British House (...) Commons,
where scarce a day passes (...) some (...), that makes the speaker hoarse in
(...) ^^rder; and how different from the mode (...) ^^^tion in many polite
companies of Eu(...), if you do not deliver your sentence (...) ^rapidity, you
are cut off in the middle (...) ^^impatient loquacity of those you con(...) and
never suffered to finish it!

(...) of these savages in conversation, (...) ^arried to excess; since it does
not per(...) contradict or deny the truth of what (...) their presence. By this
means they (...) ^^putes; but then it becomes difficult to know their minds, or
what impression you make upon them. The missionaries who have attempted to
convert them to Christianity, all complain of this as one of the great
difficulties of their mission. The Indians hear with patience the truths of the
gospel explained to them, and give their usual tokens of (...) and approbation:
you would think they were convinced. No such matter. It is mere civility.

A Swedish minister having assembled the chiefs of the Sasquehannah Indians,
made a sermon to them, acquainting them with the principal historical facts on
which our religion is founded; such as the fall of our first parents by eating
an apple; the *coming of Christ to repair the mischief; his meracles and
suffering, etc. -- When he had finished, an Indian orator stood up to thank
him. "What you have told us," says he, "is all very good. It is indeed bad to
eat apples. It is better to make them all into cider. We are much obliged by
your kindness in coming so far to tell us those things which you have heard
from your mothers. In return, I will tell you some of those we have heard from
ours.

"In the beginning, our fathers had only the (...) of animals to subsist on;
and if their hunting was unsuccessful, they were star^ing. Two of our young
hunters having killed a deer, made a fire in the woods to broil some parts of
it. When they were about to satisfy their hunger, they beheld a beautiful young
woman descend from the clouds, and seat herself on that hill which you see
yonder among the Blue Mountains. They said to each other, it is a spirit that
perhaps has smelt our broiling venison, and wishes to eat of it: let us offer
some to her. They presented her with the tongue: she was pleased with the taste
of it, and said, "Your kindness shall be rewarded. Come to this place after
thirteen moons, and you shall find something that will be of great benefit in
nourishing you and your children to the latest generations. They did so, and to
their surprise, found plants they had never seen before; but which, from that
ancient time, have been constantly cultivated among us, to our great advantage.
Where her right hand had touched the ground, they found maize; where her left
hand had touched it they found kidney-beans, and where her backside had sat on
it, tobacco." The good missionary, disgusted with this idle tale, said, "What I
delivered to you were sacred truths; but what you tell me is mere fable,
fiction, and falsehood." The Indian, offended, replied, "My brother, it seems
your friends have not done you justice in your education; they have not well
instructed you in the rules of common civility. You saw that we, who understand
and practice those rules, believed all your stories, why do you refuse to
believe ours?"

When any of them come into our towns, our people are apt to crowd round them,
gaze upon them, and incommode them where they desire to be private; this they
esteem great rudeness, and the effect of the want of instruction in the rules
of civility and good manners. "We have," say they, "as much curiosity as you,
and when you come into our towns, we wish for opportunities of looking at you;
but for this purpose we hide ourselves behind bushes where you are to pass, and
never intrude ourselves into your company."

Their manner of entering one another's villages has likewise its rules. It is
reckoned uncivil in traveling strangers to enter a village abruptly, without
giving notice of their approach. Therefore, as soon as they arrive within
hearing, they stop and hollow, remaining there till invited to enter. Two old
men usually come out to them, and lead them in. There is in every village a
vacant dwelling, called the strangers house. Here they are placed, while the
old men go round from hut to hut, acquainting the inhabitants that strangers
are arrived, who are probably hungry and weary; and every one sends them what
he can spare of victuals, and skins to repose on. When the strangers are
refreshed, pipes and tobacco are brought; and then, but not before,
conversation begins, with enquiries who they are, whither bound, what news,
etc. and it usually ends with offers of service; if the strangers have occasion
for guides, or any necessaries for continuing their journey; and nothing is
exacted for the entertainment.

The same hospitality, esteemed among them as a principal virtue, is practiced
by private persons; of which Conrad Weiser, our interpreter, gave me the
following instance. He had been naturalized among the Six Nations, and spoke
well the Mobock language. In going through the Indian country, to carry a
message from our governor to the council at Onondaga, he called at the
habitation of Canassetego, an old acquaintance, who embraced him, spread furs
for him to sit on, placed before him some boiled beans and venison, and mixed
some rum and water for his drink. When he was well refreshed, and had lit his
pipe, Canasfetego began to converse with him: asked how he had fared the many
years since they had seen each other, whence he then came, what occasioned the
journey, etc. Conrad answered all his questions; and when the discourse began
to flag, the Indian, to continue it, said, Conrad, you have lived long among
the white people, and know something of their customs; I have been sometimes at
Albany, and have observed, that once in seven days they shut up their shops,
and assemble all in the great house; tell me what it is for! What do they do
these?" "They meet there," says Conrad, "to hear and learn good things." "I do
not doubt," says the Indian, "that they tell you so; they have told me the
same: but I doubt the truth of what they say, and I will tell you my reasons. I
went lately to Albany, to fell my skins, and buy blankets, knives, powder, rum,
etc. You know I used generally to deal with Hans Hanson; but I was a little
inclined this time to try some other merchants. However, I (...) first upon
Hans, and asked him what he would give for beaver. He said he could not give
more than four shillings a pound: but, says he, I cannot talk on business now;
this is the day when we meet together to learn good things, and I am going to
the meeting. So I thought to myself, since I cannot do any business today, I
may as well go to the meeting too, and I went with him. There stood up a man in
black, and began to talk to the people very angrily. I did not understand what
he said; but perceiving that he looked much at me, and at Hanson, I imagined he
was angry at seeing me there: so I went out, sat down near the house, struct
fire, and lit my pipe, waiting till the meeting should break up. I thought too
that the man had mentioned something of beaver, and I suspected it might be the
subject of their meeting. So when they came out I accosted my merchant. 'Well,
Hans,' says I 'I hope you have agreed to give more than four shillings a
pound.' 'No,' says he, 'I cannot give so much, I cannot give more than three
shillings and six pence.' I then spoke to several other dealers, but they all
sung the same song, three and sixpence, three and sixpence. This made it clear
to me that my suspicion was right; and that whatever they pretended of meeting
to learn good things, the purpose was to consult how to cheat Indians is the
price of beaver. Consider but a little, Conrad, and you must be of my opinion.
If they met so often to learn good things, they would certainly have learned
some before this time. But they are still ignorant. You know our practice. If a
white man, in traveling through our country, enters one of our cabins, we all
treat him as I do you; we dry him if he is wet, we warm him if he is cold, and
give him meat and drink, that he may allay his thirst and hunger: and we spread
soft furs for him to rest and sleep on: we demand nothing in return It is
remarkable, that in all ages and countries, hospitalities has been allowed as
the virtue of those, whom the civilized were pleased to call Barbarians; the
Greeks celebrated the ^^ythians for it. The Saracens possessed it eminently;
and it is to this day the reigning virtue of the wild Arabs. St. Paul too, in
the relation of his voyage and shipwreck on the island of Melita, says, The
barbarous people showed us no little kindness, for they kindled a fire, and
received us every one, because of the present rain, and because of the cold.
This note is taken from a small collection of Franklin's papers printed for
Dilly.
. But if I go into a white man's house at Albany, and ask for victuals and
drink, they say, Where is your money, and if I have none, they say, Get out,
you Indian dog. You see they have not yet learned those little good things that
we need no meetings to be instructed in, because our mothers taught them to us
when we were children; and therefore it is impossible their meetings should be,
as they say, for any such purpose, or have any such effect; they are only to
contrive the cheating of Indians in the price of beaver."

To MR. DUBOURG, Concerning the Dissensions between ENGLAND and AMERICA.
London, October 2, 1770.
I SEE with pleasure that we think pretty much like on the subjects of English
America. We of the colonies have never insisted that we ought to be exempt from
contributing to the common expenses necessary to support the prosperity of the
empire. We only assert, that having parliaments of our own, and not having
representatives in that of Great Britain, our parliaments are the only judges
of what we can and what we ought to contribute in this case; and that the
English parliament has no right to take our money without our consent. -- In
fact, the British empire is not a single state; it comprehends many; and though
the parliament of Great Britain has arrogated to itself the power of taxing the
colonies, it has no more right to do so, than it has to tax Hanover. We have
the same king, but not the same legislatures.

The dispute between the two countries has already cost England many millions
sterling, which it has lost in its commerce, and America has in this respect
been a proportionable gainer. This commerce consisted principally of
superfluities; objects of luxury and fashion, which we can well do with out;
and the resolution we have formed of importing no more till our grievances are
redressed, has enabled many of our infant manufacturs to take root; and it will
not be easy to make our people abandon them in future, even should a connection
more cordial than ever succeed the present troubles. -- I have, indeed, no
doubt that the parliement of England will finally abandon its present
pretensions, and leave us to the peaceable enjoyment of our rights and
privileges.

B. FRANKLIN.

A Comparison of the Conduct of the ancient JEWS, and of the ANTIFEDERALISTS in
the United States of AMERICA.
A ZEALOUS advocate for the proposed Federal Constitution in a certain public
assembly said, that the repugnance of a great part of mankind to good
government was such, that he believed, that if an angel from heaven was to
bring down a constitution formed there for our use, it would nevertheless meet
with violent opposition. -- He was reproved for the supposed extravagance of
the sentiment; and he did not justify it. -- Probably it might not have
immediately occurred to him that the experiment had been tried, and that the
event was recorded in the most faithful of all histories, the Holy Bible;
otherwise he might, as it seems to me, have supported his opinion by that
unexceptionable authority.

The Supreme Being had been pleased to nourish up a single family, by continued
acts of his attentive providence, 'till it became a great people: and having
rescued them from bondage by many miracles performed by his servant Moses, he
personally delivered to that chosen servant, in presence of the whole nation, a
constitution and code of laws for their observance; accompanied and sanctioned
with promises of great rewards, and threats of severe punishments, as the
consequence of their obedience or disobedience.

This constitution, though the Deity himself was to be at its head (and it is
therefore called by political writers a Theocracy) could not be carried into
execution but by means of his ministers; Aaron and his sons were therefore
commissioned to be, with Moses, the first established ministry of the new
government.

One would have thought, that the appointment of men who had distinguished
themselves in procuring the liberty of their nation, and had hazarded their
lives in openly opposing the will of a powerful monarch who would have retained
that nation in slavery, might have been an appointment acceptable to a grateful
people; and that a constitution, framed for them by the Deity himself, might on
that account have been secure of an universal welcome reception. Yet there
were, in every one of the thirteen tribes, some discontented, restless spirits,
who were continually exciting them to reject the proposed new government, and
this from various motives.

Many still retained an affection for Egypt, the land of their nativity, and
these, whenever they felt any inconvenience or hardship, though the natural and
unavoidable effect of their change of situation, exclaimed against their
leaders as the authors of their trouble; and were not only for returning into
Egypt, but for stoning their deliverers Numbers, chap xiv.
. Those inclined to idolatry were displeased that their golden calf was
destroyed. Many of the chiefs thought the new constitution might be injurious
to their particular interest, that the profitable places would be engrossed by
the families and friends of Moses and Aaron, and others equally well-born
excluded Numbers chap. xvi. ver. 3. "And they gathered themselves together
against Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, ye take too much upon you, seeing
all the congregations are holy, every one of them -- wherefore then lift ye up
yourselves above the congregation?"
. -- In Josephus, and the Talmud, we learn some particulars, not so fully
narrated in the scripture. We are there told, "that Corah was ambitious of the
priesthood; and offended that it was conferred on Aaron; and this, as he said,
by the authority of Moses only, without the consent of the people. He accused
Moses of having, by various artifices, fraudulently obtained the government,
and deprived the people of their liberties; and of conspiring with Aaron to
perpetuate the tyranny in their family. Thus, though Corah's real motive was
the supplanting of Aaron, he persuaded the people he meant only the public
good; and they, moved by his insinuations, began to cry out -- "Let us maintain
the common liberty of our respective tribes; we have freed ourselves from the
slavery imposed upon us by the Egyptians, and shall we suffer ourselves to be
made slaves by Moses? If we must have a master, it were better to return to
Pharaoh, who at least fed us with bread and onions, than to serve this new
tyrant, who by his operations has brought us into danger or famine." Then they
called in question the reality of his conferrence with God; and objected to the
privacy of the meetings, and the preventing any of the people from being
present at the colloques, or even approaching the place, as grounds of great
suspicion. They accused Moses also of peculation; as embezzling part of the
golden spoons and the silver chargers, that the princes had offered at the
dedication of the altar Numbers, chap. vii.
, and the offerings of the gold of the common people Exodus, chap. xxxv. ver.
(...)
, as well as most of the poll tax Numbers, chap. iii. and Exodus, chap. xxx
; and Aaron they accused of pocketing much of the gold of which he pretended to
have made a molten calf. Besides peculation, they charged Moses with ambition;
to gratify which passion, he had, they said, deceived the people, by promising
to bring them to a land flowing with milk and honey; instead of doing which, he
had brought them from such a land; and that he thought light of this mischief,
provided he could make himself an absolute prince Numbers, chap. xvi. ver. 13.
"Is it a small thing that thou have brought us up out of a land ^flowing with
milk and honey, to kill us in this wilderness, except thou make thyself
altogether a prince over us?"
. That, to support the new dignity with splendor in his family, the partial
poll tax already levied and given to Aaron Numbers, chap. iii.
was to be followed by a general one Exodus, chap. xxx.
, which would probably be augmented from time to time, if he were suffered to
go on promulgating new laws on pretense of new occasional revelations of the
divine will, till their whole fortunes were devoured by that aristocracy."

Moses denied the charge of peculation; and his accusers were destitute of
proofs to support it; though facts, if real, are in their nature capable of
proof. "I have not," said he, (with holy confidence in the presence of God) "I
have not take from this people the value of an ass, nor done them any other
injury." But his enemies had made the charge, and with some success among the
populace; for no kind of accusation is so readily made, or easily believed, by
knaves, as the accusation of knavery.

In fine, no less than two hundred and fifty of the principal men "famous in
the congregation, men of renown Numbers, chap. xvi.
," heading and exciting the mob, worked them up to such a pitch of phrensy,
that they called out, stone 'em, stone 'em, and thereby secure our liberties;
and let us choose other captains that may lead us back into Egypt, in case we
do not succeed in reducing the Canaanites.

On the whole, it appears that the Israelites were a people jealous of their
newly acquired liberty, which jealousy was in itself no fault; but that when
they suffered it to be worked upon by artful men, pretending public good, with
nothing really in view but private interest, they were led to oppose the
establishment of the new constitution, whereby they brought upon themselves
much inconvenience and misfortune. It farther appears from the same inestimable
history, that when, after many ages, the constitution had become old and much
abused, and an amendment of it was proposed, the populace as they had accused
Moses of the ambition of making himself a prince, and cried out, stone him,
stone him; so, excited by their highpriests and scribes, they exclaimed
against the Messiah, that he aimed at becoming king of the Jews, and cried,
crucify him, crucify him. From all which we may gather, that popular opposition
to a public measure is no proof of its impropriety, even though the opposition
be excited and headed by men of distinction.

To conclude. I beg I may not be understood to infer, that our general
convention was divinely inspired when it formed the new federal constitution,
merely because that constitution has been unreasonably and vehemently opposed:
yet, I must own, I have so much faith in the general government of the world by
Providence, that I can hardly conceive a transaction of such momentous
importance to the welfare of millions now existing, and to exist in the
posterity of a great nation, should be suffered to pass without being in some
degree influenced, guided, and governed by that omnipotent, omnipresent and
beneficent Ruler, in whom all inferior spirits live, and move, and have their
being.

THE INTERNAL STATE OF AMERICA. Being a true Description of the Interest and
Policy of that vast Continent.
THERE is a tradition, that, in the planting of New England, the first settlers
met with many difficulties and hardships; as is generally the case when a
civilized people attempt establishing themselves in a wilderness country. Being
piously disposed, they sought relief from Heaven, by laying their wants and
distresses before the Lord, in frequent set days of fasting and prayer.
Constant meditation and discourse on these subjects kept their minds gloomy and
discontented; and, like the children of Israel, there were many disposed to
return to that Egypt which persecution had induced them to abandon. At length,
when it was proposed in the assembly to proclaim another fast, a farmer of
plain sense rose, and remarked, that the inconveniences they suffered, and
concerning which they had so often wearied heaven with their complaints, were
not so great as they might have expected, and were diminishing every day as the
colony strengthened; that the earth began to reward. their labor, and to
furnish liberally for their subsistence; that the seas and rivers were found
full of fish, the air sweet, and the climate healthy; and, above all, that they
were there in the full enjoyment of liberty, civil and religious: he therefore
thought, that reflecting and conversing on these subjects would be more
comfortable, as tending more to make them contented with their situation; and
that it would be more becoming the gratitude they owed to the Divine Being, if,
instead of a fast, they should proclaim a thanksgiving. His advice was taken,
and from that day to this they have, in every year, observed circumstances of
public felicity sufficient to furnish employment for a thanksgiving day, which
is therefore constantly ordered and religiously observed.

I see in the public newspapers of different states frequent complaints of hard
times, deadness of trade, scarcity of money, etc. etc. It is not my intention
to assert or maintain that these complaints are entirely without foundation.
There can be no country or nation existing, in which there will not be some
people so circumstanced as to find it hard to gain a livelihood; people who are
not in the way of any profitable trade, and with whom money is scarce, because
they have nothing to give in exchange for it; and it is always in the power of
a small number to make a great clamor. But let us take a cool view of the
general state of our affairs, and perhaps the prospect will appear less gloomy
than has been imagined.

The great business of the continent is agriculture. For one artisan, or
merchant. I suppose, we have at least one hundred farmers, and by far the
greatest part cultivators of their own fertile lands, from whence many of them
draw not only food necessary for their subsistence, but the materials of their
clothing, so as to need very few foreign supplies; while they have a surplus of
productions to dispose of, whereby wealth is gradually accumulated. Such has
been the goodness of Divine Providence to these regions, and so favorable the
climate, that, since the three or four years of hardship in the first
settlement of our fathers here, a famine or scarcity has never been heard of
amongst us; on the contrary, though some years may have been more, and others
less plentiful, there has always been provision enough for ourselves, and a
quantity to spare for exportation. And although the crops of last year were
generally good, never was the farmer better paid for the part he can spare
commerce, as the published price currents abundantly testify. The lands he
possesses are also continually rising in value with the increase of population;
and, on the whole, he is enabled to give such good wages to those who work for
him, that all who are acquainted with the old world must agree, that in no part
of it are the laboring poor so generally well fed, well clothed, well lodged,
and well paid, as in the United States of America.

If we enter the cities, we find that, since the revolution, the owners of
houses and lots of ground have had their interest vastly augmented in value;
rents have risen to an astonishing height, and thence encouragement to increase
building, which gives employment to an abundance of workmen, as does also the
increased luxury and splendor of living of the inhabitants thus made richer.
These workmen all demand and obtain much higher wages than any other part of
the world could afford them and are paid in ready money. This rank of people
therefore do not, or ought not, to complain of hard times; and they make a very
considerable part of the city inhabitants.

At the distance I live from our American fisheries, I cannot speak of them
with any degree of certainty; but I have not heard that the labor of the
valuable race of men employed in them is worse paid, or that they meet with
less success, than before the revolution. The whale-men indeed have been
deprived of one market for their oil; but another, I hear, is opening for them,
which it is hoped may be equally advantageous; and the demand is constantly
increasing for their spermaceti candles, which there bear a much higher price
than formerly.

There remain the merchants and shopkeepers. Of these, though they make but a
small part of the whole nation, the number is considerable, too great indeed
for the business they are employed in; for the consumption of goods in every
country has its limits; the faculties of the people, that is, their ability to
buy and pay, is equal only to a certain quantity of merchandise. If merchants
calculate amiss on this proportion, and import too much, they will of course
find the sale dull for the overplus, and some of them will say that trade
languishes. They should, and doubtless will, grow wiser by experience, and
import less. If too many artificers in town, and farmers from the country,
flattering themselves with the idea of leading easier lives, turn shopkeepers,
the whole natural quantity of that business divided among them all may afford
too small a share for each, and occasion complains that trading is dead; these
may also suppose that it is owing to scarcity of money, while in fact, it is
not so much from the fewness of buyers, as from the excessive number of
sellers, that the mischief arises; and, if every shopkeeping farmer and
mechanic would return to the use of his plough and working tools, there would
remain of widows, and other women, shopkeepers sufficient for the business,
which might then afford them a comfortable maintenance.

Whoever has traveled through the various parts of Europe, and observed how
small is the proportion of people in affluence or easy circumstances there,
compared with those in poverty and misery; the few rich and haughty landlords,
the multitude of poor, abject, rack-rented, tythe-paying tenants, and half-paid
and half-starved ragged laborers; and views here the happy mediocrity that so
generally prevails throughout these states, where the cultivator works for
himself, and supports his family in decent plenty; will, methinks, see abundant
reason to bless Divine Providence for the evident and great difference in our
favor, and be convinced that no nation known to us enjoys a greater share of
human felicity.

It is true, that in some of the states there are parties and discords; but let
us look back, and ask if we were ever without them? Such will exist wherever
there is liberty; and perhaps they help to preserve it. By the collision of
different sentiments, sparks of truth are struck out, and political light is
obtained. The different factions, which at present divide us, aim all at the
public good; the differences are only about the various modes of promoting it.
Things, actions, measures, and objects of all kinds, present themselves to the
minds of men in such a variety of lights, that it is not possible we should all
think alike at the same time on every subject, when hardly the same man retains
at all times the same ideas of it. Parties are therefore the common lot of
humanity; and ours are by no means more mischievous or less beneficial than
those of other countries, nations, and ages, enjoying in the same degree the
great blessing of political liberty.

Some indeed among us are not so much grieved for the present state of our
affairs, as apprehensive for the future. The growth of luxury alarms them, and
they think we are from that alone in the high road to ruin. They observe, that
no revenue is sufficient without economy, and that the most plentiful income
of a whole people from the natural productions of their country may be
dissipated in vain and needless expenses, and poverty be introduced in the
place of affluence. -- This may be possible. It however rarely happens: for
there seems to be in every nation a greater proportion of industry and
frugality, which tend to enrich, than of idleness and prodigality, which
occasion poverty; so that upon the whole there is a continual accumulation.
Reflect that Spain, Gaul, Germany, and Britain were in the time of the Romans,
inhabited by people little richer than our savages, and consider the wealth
they at present possess, in numerous well built cities, improved farms, rich
movables, magazines stocked with valuable manufactures, to say nothing of
plate, jewels, and coined money; and all this, notwithstanding their bad,
wasteful, plundering governments, and their made destructive wars; and yet
luxury and extravagant living has never suffered much restraint in those
countries. Then consider the great proportion of industrious frugal farmers
inhabiting the interior parts of these American states, and of whom the body of
our nation consists, and judge whether it is possible that the luxury of our
seaports can be sufficient to ruin such a country. -- If the importation of
foreign luxuries could ruin a people, we should probably have been ruined long
ago; for the British nation claimed a right, and practiced it, of importing
among us not only the superfluities of their own production, but those of every
nation under heaven; we bought and consumed them, and yet we flourished and
grew rich. At present our independent governments may do what we could not then
do, discourage by heavy duties, or prevent by heavy prohibitions, such
importations, and thereby grow richer; if, indeed, which may admit of dispute,
the desire of adorning ourselves with fine clothes, possessing fine furniture,
with elegant houses, etc. is not, by strongly inciting to labor and industry,
the occasion of producing a greater value than is consumed in the gratification
of that desire.

The agriculture and fisheries of the United States are the great sources of
our increasing wealth. He that puts a seed into the earth is recompensed,
perhaps by receiving forty out of it; and he who draws a fish out of our water,
draws up a piece of silver.

Let us (and there is no doubt but we shall) be attentive to these, and then
the power of rivals, with all their restraining and prohibiting acts, cannot
much hurt us. We are sons of the earth and seas, and, like Antaeus in the
fable, if in wrestling with a Hercules we now and then receive a fall, the
touch of our parents will communicate to us fresh strength and vigor to renew
the contest.

INFORMATION TO THOSE WHO WOULD REMOVE TO AMERICA.
MANY persons in Europe having, directly, or by letters, expressed to the
writer of this, who is well acquainted with North America their desire of
transporting and establishing themselves in that country; but who appear to him
to have formed, through ignorance, mistaken ideas and expectations of what is
to be obtained there; he thinks it may be useful, and prevent inconvenient,
expensive, and fruitless removals and voyages of improper persons, if he gives
some clearer and truer notions of that part of the world, than have hitherto
prevailed.

He finds it imagined by numbers, that the inhabitants of North America are
rich, capable of rewarding, and disposed to reward, all sorts of ingenuity;
that they are at the same time ignorant of all the sciences, and consequently
that strangers, possessing talents in the belles-letters, fine arts, etc. must
be heighly esteemed, and so well paid as to become easily rich themselves; that
there are also abundance of profitable offices to be disposed of, which the
natives are not qualified to fill; and that having few persons of family among
them, strangers of birth must be greatly respected, and of course easily obtain
the best of those offices, which will make all their fortunes; that the
governments too, to encourage emigrations from Europe, not only pay the expense
of their personal transportation, but give lands gratis to strangers, with
negroes to work for them, utensils of husbandry, and stocks of cattle. These
are all wild imaginations; and those who go to America with expectations
founded upon them, will surely find themselves disappointed.

The truth is, that though there are in that country few people so miserable as
the poor of Europe, there are also few that in Europe would be called rich; it
is rather a general happy mediocrity that prevails. There are few great
proprietors of the soil, and few tenants: most people cultivate their own
lands, or follow some handicraft or merchandise; very few rich enough to live
idly upon their rents or incomes, or to pay the high prices given in ^urope for
painting, statues, architecture, and the other works of art that are more
curious than useful. Hence the natural geniuses that have arisen in America,
with such talents, have uniformly quitted that country for Europe, where they
can be more suitably rewarded. It is true that letters and mathematical
knowledge are in esteem there but they are at the same time more common than is
apprehended; there being already existing nine colleges, or universities, viz.
four in New England, and one (...) each of the provinces of New York,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia, all furnished with learned
professors; besides a number of smaller academies: these educate many of their
youth in the languages, and those sciences that qualify men for the professions
of divinity, law, or physic. Strangers indeed are by no means excluded from
exercising those professions; and the quick increase of inhabitants every where
gives them a chance of employ, which they have in common with the natives. Of
civil officers, or employments, there are few; no superfluous ones as in
Europe; and it is a rule established in some of the states, that no office
should be so profitable as to make it desirable. The 36th article of the
constitution of Pennsylvania runs expressly in these words: "As every freeman,
to preserve his independence, (if he has not a sufficient estate) ought to have
some profession, calling, trade, or farm, whereby he may honestly subsist,
there can be no necessity for, nor use in establishing offices of profit; the
usual effects of which are dependence and servility, unbecoming freemen, in the
possessors and expectants; faction, contention, corruption, and disorder among
the people. Wherefore, whenever an office, through increase of fees or
otherwise, becomes so ^^^fitable as to occasion many to apply for it, the
profits ought to be lessened by the legislature."

These ideas prevailing more or less in all the United States, it cannot be
worth any man's while who has a means of living at home, to expatiate himself
in hopes of obtaining a profitable civil office in America; and as to military
offices, they are at an end with the war, the armies being disbanded. Much less
is it advisable for a person to go thither, who has no other quality to
recommend him but his birth. In Europe, it has indeed its value; but it is a
commodity that cannot be carried to a worse market than to that of America,
where people do not enquire concerning a stranger, What is he? but What can he
do? If he has any useful art, he is welcome; and if he exercises it, and
behaves well, he will be respected by all that know him; but a mere man of
quality, who on that account wants to live upon the public by some office or
salary, will be despised and disregarded. The husbandman is in honor there,
and even the mechanic, because their employments are useful. The people have a
saying, that God Almighty is himself a mechanic, the greatest in the universe:
and he is respected and admired more for the variety, ingenuity, and utility of
his handiworks, than for the antiquity of his family. They are pleased with the
observation of a negro, and frequently mention it, that Boccarorra (meaning the
white man) make de black man workee, make de horse workee, make de ox workee,
make every ting workee; only de hog. He de hog, no workee; he cat, he drink, he
walk about, he go to sleep when he please, he libb like a gentleman. According
to these opinions of the Americans, one of them would think himself more
obliged to a genealogist, who could prove for him that his ancestors and
relations for ten generations had been ploughmen, smiths, carpenters, turners,
weavers, tanners, or even shoemakers, and consequently that they were useful
members of society; than if he could only prove that they were gentlemen, doing
nothing of value, but living idly on the labor of others, mere feuges
consumere nati........born
Merely to eat up the corn.
WATTS.
, and otherwise good for nothing, till by their death their estates, like the
carcass of the negro's gentleman-hog, come to be cut up.

With regard to encouragements for strangers from government, they are really
only what are derived from good laws and liberty. Strangers are welcome because
there is room enough for them all, and therefore the old inhabitants are not
jealous of them; the laws protect them sufficiently, so that they have no need
of the patronage of great men; and every one will enjoy securely the profits of
his industry. But if he does not bring a fortune with him, he must work and be
industrious to live. One or two years residence give him all the rights of a
citizen; but the government does not at present, whatever it may have done in
former times, hire people to become settlers, by paying their passages, giving
land, negroes, utensils, stock, or any other kind of emolument whatsoever. In
short, America is the land of labor, and by no means what the English call
Lubberland, and the French Pays de Co^^gne, where the streets are said to be
paved with half-peck loaves, the houses tiled with pancakes, and where the
fowls fly about ready roasted, crying, Come eat me!

Who then are the kind of persons to whom an emigration to America would be
advantageous? And what are the advantages they may reasonably expect?

Land being cheap in that country, from the vast forests still void of
inhabitants, and not likely to be occupied in an age to come, insomuch that the
property of an hundred acres of fertile soil full of wood may be obtained near
the frontiers, in many places, for eight or ten guineas, hearty young laboring
men, who understand the husbandry of corn and cattle, which is nearly the same
in that country an in Europe, may easily establish themselves there. A little
money saved of the good wages they receive there while they work for others,
enables them to buy the land and begin their plantation, in which they are
assisted by the good will of their neighbors, and some credit. Multitudes of
poor people from England, Ireland, Scotland, and Germany, have* by this means
in a few years become wealthy farmers, who in their own countries, where all
the lands are fully occupied and the wages of labor low, could never have
emerged from the mean condition wherein they were born.

From the salubrity of the air, the healthiness of the climate, the plenty of
good provisions, and the encouragement to early marriages, by the certainty of
subsistence in cultivating the earth, the increase of inhabitants by natural
generation is very rapid in America, and becomes still more so by the accession
of strangers; hence there is a continual demand for more artisans of all the
necessary and useful kinds, to supply those cultivators of the earth with
houses, and with furniture and utensils of the grosser sorts, which cannot so
well be brought from Europe. Tolerable good workmen in any of those mechanic
arts, are sure to find employ, and to be well paid for their work, there being
no restraints preventing strangers from exercising any art they understand, nor
any permission necessary. If they are poor, they begin first as servants or
journeymen; and if they are sober, industrious, and frugal, they soon become
masters, establish themselves in business, marry, raise families, and become
respectable citizens.

Also, persons of moderate fortunes and capitals, who having a number of
children to provide for, are desirous of bringing them up to industry, and to
secure estates for their posterity, have opportunities of doing it in America,
which Europe does not afford. There they may be taught and practice profitable
mechanic arts, without incurring disgrace on that account; but on the contrary
acquiring respect by such abilities. There small capitals laid out in lands,
which daily become more valuable by the increase of people, afford a solid
prospect of ample fortunes thereafter for those children. The writer of this
has known several instances of large tracts of land, bought our what was then
the frontier of Pennsylvania, for ten pounds per hundred acres which, after
twenty years, when the settlements had been extended far beyond them, sold
readily, without any improvement made upon them, for three pounds per acre. The
acre, in America, is the same with the English acre, or the acre of Normandy.

Those who desire to understand the state of government in America, would do
well to read the constitutions of the several states, and the articles of
confederation that bind the whole together for general purposes, under the
direction of one assembly, called the Congress. These constitutions have been
printed, by order of Congress, in America; two editions of them have also been
printed in London; and a good translation of them into French, has lately been
published at Paris.

Several of the princes of Europe having of late, from an opinion of advantage
to arise by producing all commodities and manufactures within their own
dominions, so as to diminish or render useless their importations have
endeavored to entice workmen from other countries, by high salaries,
privileges, etc. Many persons pretending to be skilled in various great
manufactures, imagining that America must be in want of them, and that the
Congress would probably be disposed to imitate the princes above mentioned,
have proposed to go over, on condition of having their passages paid, land
given, salaries appointed, exclusive (...) for terms of years, etc. Such
persons, on reading the articles of confederation, will find that the Congress
have no power committed to them, or money put into their hands for such
purposes; and that if any such encouragement is given, it must be by the
government of some particular state. This, however, has rarely been done in
America; and when it has been done, it has rarely succeeded, so as to establish
a manufacture, which the country was not yet so ripe for as to encourage
private persons to set it up; labor being generally too dear there, and hands
difficult to be kept together every one desiring to be a master, and the
cheapness of land inclining many to leave trades for agriculture. Some indeed
have met with success, and are carried on to advantage; but they are generally
such as require only a few hands, or wherein great part of the work is
performed by machines. Goods that are bulky, and of so small value as not well
to bear the expense of freight may often be made cheaper in the country, than
they can be imported; and the manufacture of such goods will be profitable
wherever there is a sufficient demand. The farmers in America produce indeed a
good deal of wool and flax; and none is exported, it is all worked up; but it
is in the way of domestic manufacture, for the use of the family. The buying up
quantities of wool and flax, with the design to employ spinners weavers, etc.
and form great establishments, producing quantities of linen and woollen goods
for sale, has been several times attempted in different provinces; but those
projects have generally failed, goods of equal value being imported cheaper.
And when the governments have been solicited to support such schems by
encouragements, in money, or by imposing duties on importation of such goods,
it has been generally refused, on this principle, that if the country is ripe
for the manufacture, it may be carried on by private persons to advantage; and
if not, it is a folly to think of forcing nature. Great establishments of
manufacture, require great numbers of poor to do the work for small wages;
those poor are to be found in Europe, but will not be found in America, till
the lands are all taken up and cultivated, and the excess of people who cannot
get land want employment. The manufacture of silk, they say, is natural in
France, as that of cloth in England, because each country produces in plenty
the first material: but if England will have a manufacture of silk as well as
that of cloth, and France of cloth as well as that of silk, these unnatural
operations must be supported by mutual prohibitions, or high duties on the
importation of each other's goods; by which means the workmen are enabled to
tax the home consumer by greater prices, while the higher wages they receive
makes them neither happier nor richer, since they only drink more and work
less. Therefore the governments of America do nothing to encourage such
projects. The people, by this means, are not imposed on, either by the merchant
or mechanic: if the merchant demands too much profit on imported shoes they buy
of the shoemaker; and if he asks too high a price, they take them of the
merchant; thus the two professions are checks on each other. The shoemaker,
however, has, on the whole a considerable profit upon his labor in America,
beyond what he had in Europe, as he can add to his price a sum nearly equal to
all the expenses o^ freight and commission, risque or insurance, etc.
necessarily charged by the merchant. And it is the same with every other
machanic art. Hence it is that artisans generally live better and more easily
in America than in Europe; and such as are good oecconomists make a comfortable
provision for age, and for their children. Such may, therefore remove with
advantage to America.

In the old long-settled countries of Europe, all arts, trades, professions,
farms, etc. are so full, that it is difficult for a poor man who has children
to place them where they may gain, or learn to gain a decent livelihood. The
artisans, who fear creating future rivals in business, refuse to take
apprencices, but upon conditions of money, maintenance, or the like, which the
parents are unable to comply with. Hence the youth are dragged up in ignorance
of every gainful art, and obliged to become soldiers, or servants, or thieves,
for a subsistence. In America, the rapid increase of inhabitants takes away
that fear of rivalship, and artisans willingly receive apprentices from the
hope of profit by their labor, during the remainder of the time stipulated,
after they shall be instructed. Hence it is easy for poor families to get their
children instructed; for the artisans are so desirous of apprentices, that many
of them will even give money to the parents, to have boys from ten to fifteen
years of age bound apprentices to them, till the age of twenty-one; and many
poor parents have, by that means, on their arrival in the country, raised money
enough to buy land sufficient to establish themselves, and to subsist the rest
of their family by agriculture. These contracts for apprentices are made before
a magistrate, who regulates the agreement according to reason and justice; and
having in view the formation of a future useful citizen, obliges the master to
engage by a written indenture, not only that, during the time of service
stipulated, the apprentice shall be duly provided with meat, drink, apparel,
washing, and lodging, and at its expiration with a complete new suit of
clothes, but also that he shall be taught to read, write and cast accounts; and
that he shall be well instructed in the art or profession of his master, or
some other, by which he may afterward gain a livlihood, and be able in his
return to raise a family. A copy of this indenture is given to the apprentice
or his friends, and the magistrate keeps a record of it, to which recourse may
be had, in case of failure by the master in any point of performance. This
desire among the masters to have more hands employed in working for them,
induces them to pay the passages of young persons, of both sexes, who, on their
arrival, agree to serve them one, two, three, or four years: those who have
already learned a trade, agreeing for a shorter term, in proportion to their
skill, and the consequent immediate value of their service: and those who have
none, agreeing for a longer term, in consideration of being taught an art their
poverty would not permit them to acquire in their own country.

The almost general mediocrity of fortune that prevails in America, obliging
its people to follow some business for subsistence, those vices that arise
usually from idleness, are in a great measure prevented. Industry and constant
employment are great preservatives of the morals and virtue of a nation. Hence
bad examples to youth are more rare in America, which must be a comfortable
consideration to parents. To this may be truly added, that serious religion,
under its various denominations, is not only tolerated, but respected and
practiced. Atheism is unknown there; infidelity rare and secret; so that
persons may live to a great age in that country without having their piety
shocked by meeting with either an atheist or an infidel. And the Divine Being
seems to have manifested his approbation of the mutual forbearance and kindness
with which the different sects treat each other, by the remarkable prosperity
with which he has been pleased to favor the whole country.

FINAL SPEECH OF DR. FRANKLIN IN THE LATE FEDERAL CONVENTION Our reasons for
ascribing this speech to Dr. Franklin, are its internal evidence, and its
having appeared with his name, during his lifetime, uncontradicted, in an
American periodical publication.
.
MR. PRESIDENT,
I CONFESS that I do not entirely approve of this constitution at present: but,
Sir, I am not sure I shall never approve it; for having lived long, I have
experienced many instances of being obliged by better information, or further
consideration, to change opinions even on important subjects, which I once
thought right, but found to be otherwise. It is, therefore, that the older I
grow, the more apt I am to doubt my own judgment, and to pay more respect to
the judgment of others. Most men, indeed, as well as most sects of religion;
think themselves in possession of all truth, and that whenever others differ
from them, it is so far error. Steel, a protestant, in a dedication, tells the
pope, that "the only difference between our two churches, in their opinions of
the certainty of their doctrines, is, the Romish church is infallible and the
church of England never in the wrong." But, though many private persons think
almost as highly of their own infallibility as of that of their sect, few
express it so naturally as a cirtain French lady, who, in a little dispute with
her sister, said, I don't know how it happens, sister, but I meet with nobody
but myself that is always in the right. Il n'y a que moi qui a toujours raison.
In these sentiments, Sir I agree to this constitution, with all its faults, if
they are such; because I think a general government necessity for us, and there
is no form of government, but what may be a blessing, if well administered; and
I believe farther, that this is likely to be well administered for a course of
years, and can only end in despotism, as other forms have done before it, when
the people shall become so corrupted as to need despotic government, being
incapable of any other. I doubt too, whether any other convention we can
obtain, may be able to make a better constitution. For when you assemble a
number of men, to have the advantage of their joint wisdom, you assemble with
those men, all their prejudices, their passions, their errors of opinion, their
local interests, and their selfish views. From such an assembly can a perfect
production be expected? It therefore astonishes me, Sir, to find this system
approaching so near to perfection as it does; and I think it will astonish our
enemies, who are waiting with confidence, to hear that our councils are
confounded, like those of the builders of Babylon, and that our states are on
the point of separation, only to meet hereafter for the purpose of cutting each
other's throats.

Thus I consent, Sir, to this constitution because I expect no better, and
because I am not sure that this is not the best. The opinions I have had of its
errors, I sacrifice to the public good. I have never whispered a syllable of
them abroad. Within these walls they were born: and here they shall die. If
every one of us, in returning to our constituents, were to report the
objections he has had to it, and endeavor to gain partisans in support of
them, we might prevent its being generally received and thereby lose all the
salutary effects and great advantages resulting naturally in our favor among
foreign nations, as well as among ourselves, from our real or apparent
unanimity. Much of the strength or efficiency of any govenment, in procuring
and securing happiness to the people, depends on opinion; on the general
opinion of the goodness of that government, as well as of the wisdom and
integrity of its governors.

I hope, therefore, that for our own sakes as a part of the people, and for the
sake of our posterity we shall act heartily and unanimously in recommending
this constitution, wherever our influence may extend, and turn our future
thoughts and endeavors to the means of having it well administered.

On the whole, Sir, I cannot help expressing a wish, that every member of the
convention, who may still have objections, would with me on this occasion,
doubt a little of his own infallibility, and to make manifest our unanimity,
put his name to this instrument.

[The motion was then made for adding the last formula, viz.

Done in Convention, by the unanimous consent* etc. which was agreed to, and
added accordingly.]

SKETCH OF AN ENGLISH SCHOOL. For the Consideration of the Trustees of the
Philadelphia Academy This piece did not come to hand till the volume had been
some time at the press. This was the case also with several other papers, and
must be our apology for any defect that may appear in the arrangement
.
IT is expected that every scholar to be admitted into this school, be at least
able to pronounce and divide the syllables in reading, and to write a legible
hand. None to be received that are under years of age.

FIRST, OR LOWEST CLASS.
Let the first class learn the English Grammar rules, and at the same time let
particular care be taken to improve them in orthography. Perhaps the latter is
best done by pairing the scholars; two of those nearest equal in their spelling
to be put together. Let these strive for victory; each propounding ten words
every day to the other to be spelled. He that spells truly most of the other's
words, is victor for that day; he that is victor most days in a month, to
obtain a prize, a pretty neat book of some kind, useful in their future
studies. This method fixes the attention of children extremely to the
orthography of words, and makes them good spellers very early. It is a shame
for a man to be so ignorant of this little art in his own language, as to be
perpetually confounding words of like sound and different significations; the
consciousness of which defect makes some men, otherwise of good learning and
understanding, averse to writing even a common letter.

Let the pieces read by the scholars in this class be short; such as Croxal's
fables and little stories. In giving the lesson, let it be read to them; let
the meaning of the difficult words in it be explained to them; and let them con
over by themselves before they are called to read to the master or usher; who
is to take particular care that they do not read too fast, and that they duly
observe the stops and pauses. A vocabulary of the most usual difficult words
might be formed for their use, with explanations; and they might daily get a
few of those words and explanations by heart, which would a little exercise
their memories* or at least they might write a number of them in a small book
for the purpose, which would help to fix the meaning of those words in their
minds, and at the same time furnish every one with a little dictionary for his
future use.

THE SECOND CLASS
To be taught reading with attention, and with proper modulations of the voice;
according to the sentiment and subject.

Some short pieces, not exceeding the length of a Spectator, to be given this
class for lessons (and some of the easier Spectators would be very suitable for
the purpose). These lessons might be given every night as tasks; the scholars
to study them against the morning. Let it then be required of them to give an
account, first of the parts of speech and construction of one or two sentences.
This will oblige them to recur frequently to their grammar, and ^ix its
principal rules in their memory. Next, of the intention of the writer, or the
scope of the piece, the meaning of each sentence, and of every uncommon word.
This would early acquaint them with the meaning and force of words, and give
them that most necessary habit, of reading with attention.

The master then to read the piece with the proper modulations of voice, due
emphasis, and suitable action, where action is required; and put the youth on
imitating his manner.

Where the author has used an expression not the best, let it be pointed out;
and let his beauties be particularly remarked to the youth.

Let the lessons for reading be varied, that the youth may be made acquainted
with good styles of all kinds in prose and verse, and the proper manner of
reading each kind -- sometimes a well-told story, a piece of a sermon, a
general's speech to his soldiers, a speech in a tragedy, some part of a comedy,
an ode, a satire, a letter, blank verse, Hudi^rastic, heroic, etc. But let such
lessons be chosen for reading, as contain some useful instruction, whereby the
understanding or morals of the youth may at the same time be improved.

It is required that they should first study and understand the lessons, before
they are put upon reading them properly; to which end each boy should have an
English dictionary, to help him ^ver difficulties. When our boys read English
to (...), we are apt to imagine they understand what they read, because we do,
and because it is their mother tongue. But they often read, as parrots speak,
knowing little or nothing of the meaning. And it is impossible a reader should
give the due modulation to his voice, and pronounce properly, unless his
understanding goes before his tongue, and makes him master of the sentiment.
Accustoming boys to read aloud what they do not first understand, is the cause
of those even set tones so common among readers, which, when they have once got
a habit of using, they find so difficult to correct; by which means, among
fifty readers we scarcely find a good one. For want of good reading, pieces
published with a view to influence the minds of men, for their own or the
public benefit, lose half their force. Were there but one good reader in a
neighborhood, a public orator might be heard throughout a nation with the same
advantages, and have the same effect upon his audience, as if they stood within
the reach of his voice.

THE THIRD CLASS
To be taught speaking properly and gracefully; which is near akin to good
reading, and naturally follows it in the studies of youth. Let the scholars of
this class begin with learning the elements of rhetoric from some short system,
so as to be able to give an acount of the most useful tropes and figures. Let
all their bad habits of speaking, all offenses against good grammar, all
corrupt or foreign accents and all improper phrases, be pointed out to them.
Short speeches from the Roman or other history, or from the parliamentary
debates, might be got by heart, and delivered with the proper action, etc.
Speeches and scenes in our best tragedies and comedies (avoiding things that
could injure the morals of youth) might likewise be got by rote, and the boys
exercised in delivering or acting them; great care being taken to form their
manner after the truest models.

For their farther improvement, and a little to vary their studies, let them
now begin to read history, after having got by heart a short table of the
principal epochas in chronology. They may begin with Rollin's ancient and Roman
histories, and proceed at proper hours, as they go through the subsequent
classes, with the best histories of our own nation and colonies. Let emulation
be excited among the boys, by giving weekly, little prizes, or other small
encouragements, to those who are able to give the best account of what they
have read, as to times, places, names of persons, etc. This will make them read
with attention, and imprint the history well in their memories. In remarking on
the history, the master will have fine oportunities of instilling instruction
of various kinds, and improving the morals, as well as the understandings of
youth.

The natural and mechanic history, contained in the Spectacle de la Nature,
might also be began in this class, and continued through the subsequent classes
by other books of the same kind; for, next to the knowledge of duty, this kind
of knowledge is certainly the most useful, as well as the most entertaining.
The merchant may thereby be enabled better to understand many commodities in
trade; the handicraftsman to improve his business by new instruments, mixtures
and materials; and frequently hints are given for new manufactures* or new
methods of improving land, that may be set on foot greatly to the advantage of
the country.

THE FOURTH CLASS
To be taught composition. Writing one's own language well, is the next
necessary accomplishment after good speaking. It is the writing-master's
business to take care that the boys make fair characters, and place them
straight and even in the lines; but to form their style, and even to take care
that the stops and capitals are properly disposed, is the part of the English
master. The boys should be put on writing letters to each other on any common
occurrences, and on various subjects, imaginary business, etc. containing
little stories, accounts of their late reading, what parts of authors please
them, and why; letters of congratulation, of compliment, of request, of thanks,
of recommendation, of admonition, of consolation, of expostulation, excuse,
etc. In these they should be taught to express themselves clearly, concisely
and naturally without affected words or high flown phrases. All their letters
to pass through the master's hand, who is to point out the faults, advise the
corrections, and commend what he finds right. Some of the best letters
published in our own language, as Sir, William Temple's, those of Pope and his
friends, and some others, might be set before the youth as models, their
beauties pointed out and explained by the master, the letters themselves
transcribed by the scholar.

Dr. Johnson's Ethices Elementa, or First Principles of Morality, may now be
read by the scholars, and explained by the master to lay a solid foundation of
virtue and piety in their minds. And as this class continues the reading of
history, let them now, at proper hours, receive some farther instruction in
chronology, and in that part of geography (from the mathematical master) which
is necessary to understand the maps and globes. They should also be acquainted
with the modern names of the places they find mentioned in ancient writers. The
exercises of good reading, and proper speaking, still continued at suitable
times.

FIFTH CLASS
To improve the youth in composition, they may now, besides continuing to write
letters, begin to write little essays in prose, and sometimes in verse; not to
make them poets, but for this reason, that nothing acquaints a lad so speedily
with variety of expression as the necessity of finding such words and phrases
as well suit the measure, sound and rhyme of verse, and at the same time well
express the sentiment. These essays should all pass under the master's eye, who
will point out their faults, and put the writer on correcting them. Where the
judgment is not ripe enough for forming new essays, let the sentiments of a
Spectator be given, and required to be clothed in the scholar's own words: or
the circumstances of some good story; the scholar to find expression Let them
be put sometimes on abridging a paragraph of a diffuse author: sometimes on
dilating or amplifying what is wrote mere closely. And now let Dr. Johnson's
Noetica, or First Principles of Human Knowledge, containing a logic, or art of
reasoning, etc. be read by the youth, and the difficulties that may occur to
them be explained by the master. The reading of history, and the exercises of
good reading and just speaking, still continued.

SIXTH CLASS.
In this class besides continuing the studies of the preceding in history,
rhetoric, logic, moral and natural philosophy, the best English authors may be
read and explained; as Tillotson, Milton Lock, Addison, Pope, Swift, the
higher papers in the Spectator and Guardian, the best translations of Homer,
Virgil and Horace, of Telemachus, Travels of Cy^us, etc.

Once a year let there be public exercises in the hall; the trustees and
citizens present. Then let fine gilt books be given as prizes to such boys as
distinguish themselves, and excel the others in any branch of learning, making
three degrees of comparison: giving the best prize to him that performs best; a
less valuable one to him that comes up next to the best: and another to the
third, Commendations, encouragement, and advice to the rest; keeping up their
hopes, that, by industry, they may excel another time. The names of those that
obtain the prize, to be yearly printed in a list.

The hours of each day are to be divided and disposed in such a manner as that
some classes may be with the writing-master, improving their hands; others with
the mathematical master, learning arithmetic, accounts, geography, use of (...)
(...), drawing, mechanics, etc. while the rest are in the English school, under
the English master's care.

Thus instructed, youth will come out of this school fitted for learning any
business, calling, or profession, except such wherein languages are required;
and thou unacquainted with any ancient or foreign to (...), they will be
masters of their own, which is of more immediate and general use; and withal
will have attained many other valuable accomplishments: the time usually spent
in acquiring those languages, often without success, being here employed in
laying such a foundation of knowledge and ability, as properly improved, may
qualify them to pass through and execute the several offices of civil life,
with advantage and reputation to themselves and country.

FINIS.
The Book-Binders will please to observe, and fold Signature A 3, out, in vol.
1 st. In vol. 2 d. there are two Signature F'

CONTENTS.
VOLUME I.
Page Life of Dr. Franklin, as written by himself 1 -- 105 Continuation of his
Life, by Dr. Stuber 106 -- 162 Extracts from his Will 163 -- 172.
VOLUME II.
On Early Marriages 3 On the Death of his Brother, Mr. John Franklin 5 To the
late Doctor Mather of Boston 7 The Whistle, a true Story; written to his Nephew
9 A Petition of the Left Hand 11 The handsome and deformed Leg 13 Conversation
of a Company of Ephemeroe, with the Soliloquy of one advanced in age 16 Morals
of Chess 18 The Art of procuring pleasant Dreams 23 Advice to a young Tradesman
30 Necessary Hints to those that would be rich 32 The Way to make Money plenty
in every Man's Pocket 34 An oeconomical Project 35 On modern Innovations in the
English Language, and in Printing 42 An Account of the highest Court of
Judicature in Pennsylvania, viz. The Court of the Press 49 Paper: a Poem 54 On
the Art of Swimming 56 New Mode of Bathing 59 Observations on the generally
prevailing Doctrines of Life and Death 61 Precautions to be taken by those who
are about to undertake a Sea Voyage 63 On Luxury, Idleness, and Industry 70 On
the slave Trade 75 Observations on War 80 On the Impress of Seamen 82 On the
Criminal Laws, and the Practice of Privateering 86 Remarks concerning the
Savages of North America 95 To Mr. Dubourg, concerning the Dissentions between
England and America 103 A Comparison of the conduct of the ancient Jews, and of
the Antifederalists of the United States of America 104 The internal State of
America: being a true Description of the Interest and Policy of that vast
Continent 110 Information to those who would remove to America 117 Final Speech
of Dr. Franklin in the late Federal Convention 128 Sketch of an English School
131

