THE Trial of Daniel Isaac Eaton FOR PUBLISHING A SUPPOSED LIBEL COMPARING The
King of ENGLAND TO A Game Cock.

Printed at the Office of John Buel, 152, Water-street.

BOOKS FOR SALE BY L. WAYLAND, NO. 151, Water-street.
1. WAKEFIELD's Answer to Paine's AGE of REASON, price One Fourth of a Dollar.
2. Thirteen ORIGINAL LETTERS, by the Rev. Mr. FLETCHER. Price One Eighth of a
Dollar. 3. DIALOGUES on FREE WILL, price One Sixteenth of a Dollar. 4. TRIAL of
the KING and QUEEN of FRANCE, on a large Sheet; with Copper-plate Likenesses,
and a View of the Guillotine. Price One Eighth of a Dollar. 5. Description of
the SLAVE TRADE, and WEST INDIA SLAVERY. Price One Eighth of a Dollar. 6.
LETTERS from a PARENT to her CHILDREN, price Five Eighths of a Dollar. 7. PETER
PINDAR's POEMS, 3 vols the last London Edition. 8. PARLIAMENTARY REGISTERS from
1780 to 1793, 6 volumes. 9. Ancient and Modern UNIVERSAL HISTORY, 60 vols. 10.
Gibbon and Ferguson's ROME, 9 vols. 4to. 11. Stevens's SHAKESPEARE, 15 vols.
elegant edition.
L. WAYLAND has likewise large Quantity of BOOKS, new and second-hand, in Arts,
Sciences, Divinity, Physic, Husbandry, Architecture, etc. Also SCHOOL, BOOKS,
BIBLES, DICTIONARIES, etc. which he is selling remarkably low, for Cash or
short Credit, well worth the Attention of the Booksellers in general.

THE Trial of DANIEL ISAAC EATON, For Publishing a Supposed Libel, Comparing
the King of England to a Game Cock In a Pamphlet Entitled POLITICS FOR THE
PEOPLE OR HOG's WASH At Justice Hall in the Old Bailey, February Twenty-Fourth,
1794

King and Game Cock.


LONDON, Published New York Reprinted for L. Wayland. 1794

THE KING AGAINST DANIEL ISAAC EATON. INDICTMENT.
LONDON. At the General Sessions of Oyer and Terminer of our Lord the King,
holden for the City of London, at Justice Hall, in the Old Baily, within the
parish of Saint Sepulcher, in the Ward of Farringdon Without, in London
aforesaid, on Wednesday the fourth Day of December, in the Thirty-fourth Year
of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord George the Third, King of Great Britain,
etc.
LONDON TO WIT. THE Jurors of our Lord the King, upon their Oath present, THAT
DANIEL ISAAC EATON, late of LONDON, Bookseller, being a malicious, seditious,
and evil-disposed, Person, and greatly disaffected to our said Lord the King,
and to his administration of Government of this Kingdom, and unlawfully,
maliciously, and sediously contriving, devising, and intending to scandalize,
traduce, and villify our said Lord the King, and the regal Power and Office
established by Law within this Realm, and to represent our said Lord the King,
as sanguinary, tyrannical, oppressive, cruel, and despotic; and thereby to stir
up and excite Discotents and Seditious amongst the Subjects of our said Lord
the King, and to alienate and withdraw the Fidelity, Affection, and Allegiance
of His said Majesty's Subjects from His said Majesty's Person and Government,
on the Eighteenth Day of November, in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Ninety-three, at London aforesaid, in the Parish of St.
Mary-le-Bow, in the Ward of Cheap, unlawfully, maliciously, and seditiously did
publish, and cause to be published a certain Pamphlet, entitled, "POLITICS FOR
THE PEOPLE; Or, HOG'S WASH," containing therein, among other Things, certain
scandalous, malicious, inflammatory and seditious matters, of and concerning
our said Lord the King: That is to say,

You must known then, [meaning know] that I used, together with a variety of
youthful attachments, to be very fond of birds and poultry; and among other
things of this kind I had a very fine majestic kind of animal, a Game cock,
[meaning thereby to denote and represent our said Lord the King] a haughty,
sanguinary tyrant, nursed in blood and slaughter from his infancy, fond of
foreign wars and domestic rebellions, into which he would sometimes drive his
subjects, by this oppressive obstinacy, in hopes that he might increase his
power and glory, by their suppression; now, this haughty old Tyrant [again
meaning our said Lord the King] would never let my farm yard be quiet, nor
content with devouring, by far, the greater part of the grain that was
scattered for the morning and evening repast, and snatching at every little
treasure, that the toil of more industrious birds might happen to scratch out
of the bowels of the earth, the restless Despot [meaning our said Lord the
King] must be always picking and cuffing at the poor Doves and Pullets, and
little defenseless Chickens, so that they could never eat the scanty remnant
which his inordinate taxation left them, in peace and quietness: now, though
there were some aristrocratic prejudices hanging about me from my education, so
that I could not help looking with some considerable reverence upon the
majestic decorations of the person of King Chaunticlere, [meaning our said Lord
the King] such as his ermine spotted breast, the fine gold trappings about his
neck and shoulders, the flowing robe of plumage tucked up at his rump, and,
above all, that fine ornamented thing about his head there, his Crown or
Coxcomb, I believe you call it, (however, the distinction is not very
important) yet I had even at that time, some lurking principles ot aversion to
barefaced Despotism struggling at my heart, which would some times whisper to
me, that the best thing one could do, either for cocks and hens, or men or
women, was to rid the world of Tyrants, [meaning our said Lord the King, among
others] whose shrill martial clarions (the provocatives to same and murder)
disturbed the repose, and destroyed the happiness of their respective
communities; so I believe, if guillotines had been in fashion, I should
certainly have guillotined him, being desirous to be merciful even in the
stroke of death: and knowing, the instant the brain is separated from the heart
(which with this instrument is done in a moment,) pain and consciousness is at
an end, while the lingering torture of the rope may procrastinate the pang for
half an hour; however, I managed the business very well, for I caught Mr.
Tyrant by the head, and dragging him immediately to the block with a heavy
knife in my hand, separated his neck at a blow; and what will surprise you
much, when his fine trappings were stripped off, I found he was no better than
a common scratch dunghill pullet; no nor half so good; for he was tough and
oily, and rank, with the pollutions of his luxurious vice; in contempt of our
said Lord the King, and his Laws, to the evil and pernicious example of all
others in the like case offending, and against the Peace of our said Lord the
King, his Crown and Dignity. And the Jurors aforesaid, upon their Oath
aforesaid, do further present, that the said Daniel Isaac Eaton, so being such
person aforesaid, and so devising, contriving, and intending, as aforesaid,
afterward, to wit, on the said eighteenth Day of November, in the said year of
our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Ninety-three, at London aforesaid, in
the Parish and Ward aforesaid, unlawfully, maliciously, and seditiously did
publish, and cause, and procure to be published, certain other printed
Pamphlet, containing therein, amongst other Things, certain scandalous,
malicious, inflammatory, and seditious Matters, of and concerning our said Lord
the King, according to the Tenor and Effect following; that is to say: I had a
very fine majestic kind of animal, a game cock, [meaning thereby to denote and
represent our said Lord the King] a haughty, sanguinary tyrant, nursed in blood
and slaughter, from his infancy; fond of foreign wars and domestic rebellions,
into which he [meaning our said Lord the King] would sometimes drive his
subjects by his obstinacy, in hopes that he might increase his power and glory
by their suppression; in contempt of our said Lord the King, and his Laws, to
the evil and pernicious example of all others, in the like case offending, and
against the peace of our said Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity.

And the Jurors aforesaid, upon their Oath aforesaid, do further present, that
the said Daniel Isaac Eaton, so being such person aforesaid, and so devising,
contriving, and intending, as aforesaid, afterward, to wit, on the said
eighteenth Day of November, in the said year of our Lord One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Ninety-three, at London aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward
aforesaid, unlawfully, maliciously, and seditiously did publish, and cause, and
procure to be published, certain other printed Pamphlet, containing therein,
amongst other Things, certain scandalous, malicious, inflammatory, and
seditious Matters, of and concerning our said Lord the King, according to the
Tenor and Effect following; that is to say:

I had a very fine majestic kind of animal, a game cock, [meaning thereby to
denote and represent our said Lord the King] a haughty, sanguinary tyrant,
nursed in blood and slaughter, from his infancy; fond of foreign wars and
domestic rebellions, into which he [meaning our said Lord the King] would
sometimes drive his subjects by his obstinacy, in hopes that he might increase
his power and glory by their suppression; in contempt of our said Lord the
King, and his Laws, to the evil and pernicious example of all others, in the
like case offending, and against the peace of our said Lord the King, his Crown
and Dignity.

And the Jurors aforesaid, upon their Oath aforesaid, do further present, That
the said Daniel Isaac Eaton, so being such a person as aforesaid, and so
devising, contriving, and intending, as aforesaid, afterward to wit, on the
same eighteenth Day of November in the said year of our Lord One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Ninety-three, at London aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward
aforesaid, unlawfully, maliciously, and seditiously, did publish, and cause to
be published, a certain other printed Pamphlet, containing therein, among other
things, certain scandalous, malicious and inflammatory Matters, of and
concerning our Lord the King among others, according to the Tenor and effect
following: That is to say,

"THE REFLECTIONS OF A TRUE BRITON." -- Kings, [meaning among others, our
sovereign Lord the King] are wolf shepherds; Homer styles them devourers of the
people; and they do not appear to have lost their original taste; in contempt
of our said Lord the King, and his Laws, to the evil and pernicious example of
all others, in the like Case offending, and against the Peace of our said Lord
the King, his Crown, and Dignity,

Counsel for the Prosecution. Mr. FIELDING, Mr. KNOWLYS, Mr. RAIN.
Solicitor. Mr. WHITE, Solicitor to the Treasury. Counsel for the Defendant.
Mr. FELIX VAUGHAN, Mr. GUERNEY, Mr. WOODHOUSE.
Solicitor. Mr. BONNEY, Percy-street.
ADVERTISEMENT
THE Indictment was found by the Grand Jury in December Sessions 1793; as soon
as it was returned into Court, Mr. Knowlys, of Counsel for the Crown, moved Mr.
Justice Ash^^^^^ to direct in what Sum the Defendant should be held to (...)
Indictment was read, and the Sum named by Mr (...) ^^^hurst was, THE DEFENDANT
HIMSELF IN ONE (...) POUNDS, AND TWO SURETIES IN FIVE HUNDRED POUNDS EACH. The
same Night the Defendant was apprehended and lodged in Newgate, where he lay
till the next Session, not being able to procure Bail to so large an amount.

When the Trial was to have come on. Mr. Vaughan was too ill to conduct the
Defense; it therefore devolved on Mr. Gurney.

In January Session the Defendant was put to the Bar, and the Jury were about
to be sworn, when the Defendant challenged two of the Jurors preremptorily; the
Recorder disallowed preremptory Challenges, and called upon him to assign a
Cause; the Cause the Defendant assigned was, that those Jurymen had made
declarations which rendered them unfit to sit upon a Jury to try a Man charged
with having published a Libel. Though the Defendant had no proof of these
declarations having been made, Mr. Fielding very liberally consented to allow
the Challenges; the remainder of the Jury having been discharged, the trial
went off for defect of Jurors to February Session, and the Defendant was
remanded to Newgate.

As Mr. Gurney had prepared himself to lead the Defense at the January Session,
Mr. Vaughan, in compliment to him, would not resume it afterward.

SESSONS-HOUSE. OLD-BAILEY. FEBRUARY 24, 1794.
DANIEL ISAAC EATON WAS PUT TO THE BAR.

Mr.RECORDER. I Have ordered the whole panel to attend in consequence of the
defendant having challenged some of the Jurymen on a former day; therefore the
Jury should be called, not as they have served, but as they stand upon the
panel.


The panel was called, and the following twelve Gentlemen, being the first who
appeared, were sworn:

JURY.
Robert Ryder, Thomas Manly, Joseph Stafford, James Chabot, William Hopkins,
James Alex. Dixwell, Thomas Nelson, John Capron, John Thomas, George
Higginbottom, John Farmar, Joseph Harris.
The Indictment was read at length by the Clerk of Arraigns, at the desire of
the Counsel for the defendant.

The Indictment was opened by Mr. Rain.

Mr. FIELDING. Gentlemen of the jury,

Your attention, as a Jury of the City of London, is called to another
prosecution for the publication of a mischievous and seditious Libel. I say
another, for true it is there have been many prosecutions for offenses of this
description, and unless it be that your servants, the servants of the public in
responsible situations in Government, and particularly that servant of the
public, the Attorney General, should be remiss where he ought to be active
should be sluggish where he ought to be alert, or be asleep when he ought to be
awake, prosecutions of this nature must come before you. When they do come
before you, they come before the tribunal best calculated to determine upon
every thing that such a prosecution imputes, and before the tribunnal best
calculated to determine upon the innocence or guilt of the accused.

Gentlemen. I take upon me to assure myself, that you are all well aware of the
nature and extent of the duty you are now exercising. There have been
agitations lately about the power of a Jury, and the interposition of a Court;
the differences always seemed to me extremely trifling; but now there is no
kind of hesitation as to the extent of the proper province of a Jury upon such
occasions as the present: -- it is this, and God forbid it should be otherwise,
that in the very frame work of the crime, the Jury should have a full
cognizance of it, and a full jurisdiction over it: that the Jury should be
alone the judges, as to the nature and extent of the criminality charged; that
neither the book itself nor a paragraph extracted from the book, nor any
expression shall be said to be criminal, unless the Jury go with that idea,
which forms a part of the Indictment, imputing to the publisher the criminal
intention ascribed upon that Indictment. God be praised, that power is fully
acknowledged. All that the officer of the Crown has done in this instance is,
and with a vigilance becoming him, to see that the matter imputed to the
prisoner now, should come before a Jury of the City of London for their
determination. What the duty of the Attorney General was, in the first
instance, is as it were your duty now. You are to look at the circumstances as
he has done; but you have a greater power than he has, for you are to determine
upon the guilt or innoeence of the party accused.

Gentlemen, I confess in the agitation of questions relative to libel, it has
frequently struck my mind, some things perhaps had been better without
prosecution, and that prosecutions ought to be directed against others; but in
the result of all these enquiries as far as my mind has enabled me to come to a
result, I can only lament the imperfection of all possible human establishments.

If sedition were suffered to be scattered abroad among the people in any
possible way, to be sure any man of common sense must easily and readily go
along with me in saying, that infinite mischief must follow. What then is to be
done? It is the duty of that great law cfficer of the country, the
Attorney General, when he has information from the different persons who are
employed under him, and by his directions to inform him of those things that
are going on in society; if they should appear to have a dangerous tendency, it
highly becomes him to put them in a state of inquiry, that punishment may
follow where punishment is deserved, and that punishment may follow under the
administration of justice in this country according only to the law; that idea
is conveyed in a short Latin sentence, which I will beg leave to translate:
Punishment is only intended "ut paena in paucas metus in omnes incidat;" that
is, that the punishment which must follow the conviction of the crime, should
only fall upon a few, and falling upon a few glaring offenders, that all should
apprehend the danger of transgressing.

The Attorney General, who cannot do himself the honor of attending before you
today, and therefore it devolves upon me, in my humble station, to represent
this case to you, he would have said this if he had been here, which I will say
for him. I have now discharged my duty, I only submit the question to you, and
it is for you to decide; he can do no more, and I am sure you will do your
duty, as he has done his.

Gentlemen, the particular charge which has been stated by my friend, and had
before been stated to you by the Officer of the Court, I shall beg the liberty
of calling your attention to again. But before I do this, let me remark, that
when a man is prosecuted for words spoken, it seldom happens, unless the
behavior of the person has furnished evidence against himself, either by the
manner in which he has spoken the words, the place in which he has spoken the
words, or other circumstances, that the evidence of intention can so fairly be
got at, as to leave no doubt what ever. In a publication, likewise, it may some
times be difficult to come at the intent of the author; but in order to do
that, you must necessarily go into the context, and into the whole publication.
Where it can arise as a defense for the man accused, that the words which are
selected for prosecution convey a different meaning when taken in detached
sentences, from what they bear in connection with the general context, it is
fair that he should have that defense; he should have the advantage of the
whole taken together. So on the contrary, if the whole being taken together
manifests the intention of a part, it is equally proper, that as the evidence
on one side may be in his savor, so on the other side it is to be considered
whether it is not against him.

Gentlemen, the paragraphs selected here, and which are stated upon this
Indictment by necessary innuendos, as they are called in law, that is when a
part n said to be offensive, it is necessary, in point of law, that that very
expression should be so pointed out, and should be said to be so far criminal,
as that it means so and so; whether the meaning be fair or not, it is you
province to determine. Now, Gentlemen, in the present instance the paragraph
which has been selected is of this nature.

You must know then that I used, together with a variety of youthful
attachments, to be very fond of birds and poultry, and among other things of
this kind I had a very fine majesty kind of animal, a Game Cock, -- meaning
thereby, as we have taken upon us to state upon this record, to allude to the
person of his Majesty. -- Gentlemen, this is the meaning which is ascribed to
it, whether it bears this meaning is your province as I said before to
determine. Then Gentlemen, you are to judge of it in this way; it makes it is
appearance in a pamphlet, price twopence, entitled -- "Politics for the
People." -- Politics for the People -- For whom is it meant? Is it not meant to
be circulated among the people? according to the common acceptance of the term
people. Politics -- circumstances of public agitation submitted to the
consideration of the lowest class of society.

Then the first part of the title is -- "Politics for the People," it goes on
"or Hog's Wash." I dare say, Gentlemen, hat many of you can account for the
adoption of that term, Hog's Wash. I confess it strikes me that, it has been
taken up by the author of this book, as a sort of comment upon a term or terms
which escaped in the heat of debate in parliament from some member there. I
remember some expression being made use of which has undergone a variety of
comments, where the SWINISH MULTITUDE had been the term used. I confess I would
not have been the person to have made use of such an expression; but, however,
it does not seem to me to convey such an idea as justifies the following it up
with such comments, for it has been followed up with a continuance of comment
which has extended the meaning, I am persuaded, infinitely beyond the mind of
the Gentleman who made use of it; it might have been reprehensible, I do not
say but it was reprehensible, but the intention ascribed here is infinitely
worse, using the words in this way is much more likely to produce the very
effect which we say this libel is calculated to produce.

Gentlemen, yon see the title of this pamphlet is -- Politics for the people;
or, Hog's Wash; indeed it is entitled number 8, so as to manifest that there
have been many preceding this publication; its price is two pence. It begins
indeed with poetry, which you will have an opportunity of seeing by and by if
you please, but as I have much to say to you upon the present prosecution, I
will not waste your time by adverting to circumstances that are immaterial. The
poetry in the first part, I am contended you shall read at your leisure: if
there is any thing that can render it pleasant to the imagination* or improving
to the mind, or in any shape have a tendency to favor the defendant in the
least degree, I beseech you to read it, and give him the advantage of it.

Gentlemen, then we come to the second page, at the top of which there appears
this -- King Chaunteclere, or the Fate of Tyranny; and it is supposed to be An
anecdote related by Citizen Thelwall at the Capel Court Society, during the
discussion of a question relative to the comparative influence of the Love of
Life and Liberty, and of the Fair Sex, on the actions of mankind. I shall not
waste much of your time in commenting upon either the passage I have read, or
what follows, saving this, that Mr. Thelwall is represented as discussing this
question, and as discussing those matters which may be supposed to relate to
the love of life and the love of liberty; and if you can put any other
interpretation upon it than that which readily starts into my mind, for God's
sake do it: but see if it be not this, if the very agitation of that question
is not to beget a sort of indifference about the shedding of human blood,
driving, as it were, the mind to a contempt of danger, and setting up an ideal
liberty, not a real one; but making von suppose, or attempting to make you
suppose, that every other thing but liberty, as they are pleased to call it, is
to be held in contempt; that every thing which stands in the way of it, that
any thing which may under any possibility be deemed likely to beget tyranny, is
to be got rid of, inasmuch as it is in the way of that liberty; and that Kings
are in the way of liberty, and are only to be got rid of by death, by cutting
off the head.

Gentlemen, it would be impertinent in me to suppose that you were not as
conversant as myself with the evils that pervade a neighboring country. It
would be impertinent in me to suppose you are not equally apprized of the fatal
and melancholy catastrophe attending the late King of France: but before I
comment further upon this passage, let me call your attention to another little
paragraph appearing in this book, which I declare to God when I first read I
could not get over without tears. The circumstance is mentioned in such a
flippant way* and so opposite to the feelings of a man of common humanity, that
I think you will go with me in your feelings as soon as ever I state this
little paragraph to you.

You have heard that there was a man on the other side of the water of the name
of Monsieur Condorcet. This is a paragraph that the author of this book has
inserted under the title of "Reflections of a True Briton:" but before I read
the paragraph, I will confess that my mind is relieved a little in not being
obliged to lock upon that man as the author. I prosecute him only as the
publisher. If I were to look upon him as the author, my eye could I hardly turn
toward him without a flash of indignation: but I am relieved from that by his
being prosecuted as the publisher, and not as the author. Now, Gentlemen,
observe the flippant, the unfeeling, the cruel manner in which a transaction
like that to which I have alluded is mentioned -- Monsieur Condorcet, when he
announced in his gazette that our (...) had been shut up on the news of Louis
Capet's death, pleasantly observed, That it was not the common players who
acted in the farce of that day.

Now what does this betoken? A min^ looking at a transaction of that sort with
a degree of pleasure and unconcern. There is a common idea, and I am sure it is
impressed upon every man's mind, from the highest to the lowest in society, and
which frequently manifests itself in an expression of that sort -- Had my dog
met with such a fate, I should have regretted him: but, heavenly God! can we
divest ourselves of those feelings that grow up with us in society, and under
the indulgence of which we are indebted for every possible human felicity: for
without feelings of tenderness and compassion, what would the human being be?
Gentlemen, we have at this day but too many opportunities of seeing what a
beast a human being is, when he breaks loose from the bonds of society, and
betakes himself to those courses which follow from anarchy and confusion.

This paragraph, therefore, is found in this book; I say, that is lamentable
indeed; but it is found in a chapter thus described, "The Reflections of a True
Briton." God forbid that that character, which stands almost above all others
in the world, a Briton, a manly, a true Briton, God forbid that he should ever
be found to have a heart like that, a characteristic which impeaches the
humanity and feeling of the (...) that can never be the reflection of a true
Briton: bur the author, whoever he be, that has assumed this character, has
traduced the name and character of a true Briton, when he assumes himself to be
such, and follows a course like that which I have represented to you.

Gentlemen, this chapter contains that which is the subject of another count in
this indictment: "Kings are wolf shepherds." Will you permit me for a moment to
digress a little into that which I hope will ever remain a subject unattacked?
Shall it be allowed to a man to impose upon fair anderstandings, having
mischief in his mind, and having no possible earthly good purpose; shall it be
allowed to such a man to say, Here I am as a friend of mankind agitating a fair
question? God forbid that fair discussion should be ever the subject of an
attack, or should ever call upon you for your deliberation. Fair discussion
upon points of government is as open to the subject and as allowable as the
agitation of any other questions; and I will be bold to say, that never yet was
it supposed, from the beginning of civil society to the present hour, that the
man who meant fairly, whose heart moved honestly, who was an useful member of
society, who could be said to be a good father, a good husband, a kind
neighbor, and who was endowed with the common social feelings, it never yet
was said that there could be a doubt whether such a man meant fairly when
discussing topics of this description.

Many attempts have been made to pervert the understanding of those who have
the ultimate jurisdiction: for, God knows, it has happened but too frequently
in our profession, that ingenuity has been carried to the utmost height, a
thing allowable in the advocate, to give the most plausible interpretation, or
the most favorable comment, where there has been any pretense for calling the
work under prosecution, fair discussion. But I need not trouble you on this
subject, inasmuch as this varies as much from every species of libel of that
kind, as any thing the most insignificant can from the most important.

Gentlemen, now let me call your attention a little to that which is the
specific subject of the indictment, and see whether you can affix any other
than that very meaning that is put upon the whole of this sentence by the
inuendoes. If you can, you will: but judge of it fairly, and see if it does not
import this, for I think it cannot import any thing else. You must know then
that I used, together with a variety of youthful attachments, to be very fond
of birds and poultry; and, among other things of this kind, I had a very fine
majestic kind of animal, a game cock, a haughty sanguinary tyrant, nursed in
blood and slaughter from his infancy, fond of foreign wars and domestic
rebellions, into which he would sometimes drive his subjects by his oppressive
obstinacy, in hopes that he might increase his power and glory by their
suppression.

Gentlemen, without going any further in stating that which is the particular
and specific ground of this indictment, can you have a doubt upon this? Then so
far I am sure I may take the liberty of saying, that I have not a doubt (...)
your minds will go with me as to the meaning which is affixed to these words.

Then we come to that which is the main part of the enquiry, and of every
jury's enquiry upon a subject of this sort, the intention of the man. If the
author were standing before you, it would be impossible in the nature of things
for any ingenuity upon earth to say that he had a fair, a kind, or a good
intention. What is it calculated, what is it intended for? To go among the
people, to be bought up by them at twopence a-peece. So it is to be
circulated; and whatever is to be inferred from this story is to bt impressed
upon their minds.

Gentlemen, I confess very lately when I was looking over a French publication,
a pamphlet of Monsieur Brissot's, there was a passage in it that struck me with
astonishment at the neatness of the description and the justness of the remark,
as to the consequence which must take place wherever the circumstances exist
which gave rise to the observation; it struck me, I say, with astonishment. He
is speaking of the terrible want of order in that country, of the manner in
which discontents are disseminated; and he carries his attention down to the
poor cottager, who being poisoned himself, carries the contagion not only to
his own home, but spreads it around his little hut. So it is with every thing
of this sort, so it is indeed, to make use of a simile: if a stone be thrown
into the water, at first we perceive a little circle upon the surface, another
still succeeds, and then another, till the whole circumference, which is
immense, is described in that circle. And, Gentlemen, when we look at the
possibility of disseminating discontents, we must always see that the beginning
must be of this nature.

What then is this calculated for? Not to meet the eye, not to reach the ear,
not to be an object of search of any man of literature, of any gentlemen such
as you: but it is calculated to find its way among the lowest of the people, to
excite them to discontents and commotions. Such* and such only, can be its
purpose. The very nature of the publication, the price, the title of it, all
manifest this If it were to come to the attention, if it were to fall before
the eye of any men better informed than the rude and vulgar, perhaps they would
have looked upon it as contemptible. But although it is so contemptible, it
does not follow that it is not the less mischievous. The observation I make to
you for your approbation is, that it is infinitely more mischievous, the more
the thing is calculated to harrass and disturb the lower order of the people.

Gentlemen, no man is hardy enough to expose himself at once to the immediate
fang of the law. Bad minds have always their contrivances about them: but God
be praised, for the benefit of society, those contrivances seldom are capable
of avail: they frequently expose their authors to punishment. So it is here.
Not that this man, or the author, whoever he may have been, would dare openly
to have attacked the King of this country, or would dare openly to say to any
part of the multitude, Do this or that; nor would he do so in his writing: but
there is a contrivance made use of, it is written in a species of fable; a
species of simile or allegory, as it is called, is used to convey those
sentiments. But whatever the contrivance may be, we are to resort to that which
is capable of unravelling the mystery in both instances; namely, the fair and
sober enquiry of a jury. And whatever the nature of the concealment may be, if
a man makes use of a similitude, if he is charged with meaning the King by the
character of a Cock, it is for you fairly to say whether he had not this
meaning; and therefore it is that there is no possible device or artifice of a
man that shall screen him from the investigation of a jury: and if a jury
conceive he has so wrought up this matter by putting upon it any sort of flimsy
concealment, they will strip the veil from it, they will look at it, and see
what the matter is that is so concealed. So in this case the author has
endeavored, by alluding to a game cock, to conceal his intention.

But, Gentlemen, I call your attention most earnestly to that which Citizen
Thelwall, as he is supposed to be, is discussing in this libel. You will see
from the part which precedes, and the circumstances that follow, there could
have been no other object in the mind of the author than those objects to which
I have alluded.

Gentlemen, when you travel a little further on in this publication (the book
is not large, it would not take you up above ten minutes to read it all
through) I will not indeed insult you by supposing that any of you have read it
with any attention, though it may have got by accident into your hands very
fairly, and you may have looked at it, and may have laughed at part of it: but
you will find another part which manifests what the intention of the man is. He
is first of all commenting upon the nature of the right which every subject has
in this country, to insist upon a free and open discussion. God forbid that
free and open discussion should ever be abridged. And how can it be abridged?
It can never be but by those men who are the worst enemies to society, abusing
the liberty of discussion. So it is with the liberty of the press, the most
invaluable blessing, at the mention of which every man is alive. There is no
man can check another's publication of his thoughts, whatever his thoughts may
be: but if those thoughts turn out to be mischievous to the public, and,
instead of serving the purposes of mankind, threaten their ruin and
destruction, God forbid that those thoughts so promulgated should not provoke
an enquiry, for then they become the fair objects of punishment.

The liberty of the press, that boast, and highest boast almost of an
Englishman, how is that to be endangered? It may be in danger, for aught I
know, in succeeding generations; and I am sure, if ever it is put in danger, it
will be by the abuses of ^^^se who are the greatest enemies to it, at the very
time they are putting on the audacious effrontery of pretendiug to be its
friends. Those men who are the authors and publishers of things like this, are
at all times the men to stand forward with the most unblushing effrontery, and
say, the liberty of the press is violated in our persons; conscious as they are
that they are the men whose conduct, originating in the worst motives, is
calculated to produce mischiefs innumerable in society; well knowing that they
deserve no protection, being in the very abuse of that which ought to be looked
upon as the chiefest blessing of the country. So it is with publications of
this sort. This circumstance is assumed in another part of the book. Mr.
Thelwall, the character supposed to be in being here, and upon the scene, is
represented as attacked during the discussion of the question; and there is a
sentiment which he brings forward in consequence of that attack, which is of an
extremely dangerous nature indeed. After having mentioned what had passed in
the society, he says, -- These circumstances are important to be generally
known; since they prove that notwithstanding the false appearances which have
been artfully assumed by intriguing and interested individuals, pretending to
more authority than they have, there is no power in this country that can
openly and legally interfere to prevent the freedom of political discussion, if
individuals will have spirit enough to assert it.

What is this but saying, to any parcel of people that may be collected
together in any place, "Gentlemen, if you have individually spirit enough to
assert, and insist upon any sort of freedom that you think proper, have but
that spirit in the individual, the accumulated spirit of those individuals must
be capable of carrying into effect whatever your intention may be." Is it any
thing else, is it short of that? Then you see that these few pages contain
nothing but political matters, and nothing on those subjects but such sort of
ideas as are calculated to disturb and harrass the public mind. What is this?
It is called, "Politics for the people" -- to be scattered among the people.

Gentlemen, I think I need not further advert either to the pamphlet, to the
charge, or to that which arises out of the pamphlet, or out of the charge. I
will make a few observations upon the nature of these prosecutions, and upon
the defenses set up. These prosecutions, I say, must be instituted, because
there is no other mode in this country, or upon earth, by which publications of
this sort can be checked. If you think fit, or if you think society would be
benefited by these things having their free course uninterrupted, your wishes,
if they should incline that way, may, for what I know, act upon your minds so
as to prevail upon you to believe that there can be no harm in this pamphlet:
but I am persuaded that is impossible in minds like yours.

It has been said, and truly, that whenever a libel is prosecuted, it draws it
into a second course of agitation; and that the very observations made upon the
lible in a court of justice, become, as it were a promulgation of the libel
itself. That is extremely true, and it has happened over and over again; it has
happened within my own time, and happened, I am sure, in times before, that the
matter being brought forth, and the observations made upon it, which are indeed
necessary, and my learned friend, who is of counsel for the defendant today, I
am sure will exercise his ingenuity; and in doing so, he will do no more than
his duty to his client. H^^ ingenuity is equal to much. I venture to think his
display of talents upon this occasion will be such as to excite admiration; and
the more admiration it is attended with, I hope I know myself when I say, the
more pleasure I shall feel. I shall be extremely happy to find that my friend,
in the observations he can possibly offer to you upon the present occasion,
shall deserve your approbation, and shall deserve your admiration.

Gentlemen, whatever the talents may be when they are exerted in a case where
exertion can hardly produce any effect, and where the influence of that
exertion, however you may admire the talents of the advocate, cannot possibly
go the length of convincing your judgments, or in any measure of altering the
determination you are to make; we admire the advocate who is on the wrong side
of the question, for the eloquence and learning which he shows: but, thank God,
in this country there is a tribunal which is to decide, after all the exertions
of the advocate. You will enquire into the naked fact. The present case is
indeed more complicated: but in the examination you are to make, the question
must be stripped at last of all the observations that I can make, feeble as
they are, and it will be equally stripped of all the observations my learned
friend will make, strong as they will be, putting all those out of the case, at
the same time judging and determining whether I have called upon you to
exercise either your feelings or your judgments, and understandings, in any way
but in a fair and impartial manner, you will decide this. case.

Gentlemen, I have not read the whole of the passage to you that is selected
from this pamphlet, and put upon the record, because it goes down at last to
those allusions which are so palpable, that it is impossible, in the nature of
things, that they can be mistaken. The trappings of rovalty are mentioned;
there is every sort of similitude, and every sort of allusion, from whence to
infer that the trapping are meant to apply to royalty, and royalty as existing
in this country; that the King himself is that species of tyrant that ought to
be got rid of, and that is only to be got rid of by that instument which is
alluded to in another part of the little book, which you, I am sure, will see
when you come to look at it, to be the unavoidable meaning to be affixed to it.

Gentlemen, I would not wish to aggravate any case to you; but does not this
appear to he ferocious and savage? Supposing it to have that allusion which I
have attributed to it, and to be distributed among the people, what are the
ends that the writer proposes by it? The ends of it are to render the people
ferocious, to render them bloody, to render them cruel, and to dispose them to
carry into effect such an act of cruelty at would plunge this country into a
state of wretchedness indeed. This I would say it the end proposed the
inevitable consequences that must take place from the circulation of a book of
this sort among the people. I have stated that it is most evidently calculated
for the lowest of the people, and not to reach any higher circles; and
therefore it is infinitely more mischievous than any libel, except one, that
was ever prosecuted, which was calculated for another purpose, and that was
defended under an idea of the freedom of discussion, though not justified.
Justification will hardly ever follow; and I am sure when minds like yours view
the subject fairly, and see that when what is said it not to be palliated, is
not to be excused, and cannot be justified, something may be said upon a
question, however obvious it may be, however plain a proposition may be to my
mind, something may be said upon it; and I may hesitate a little; but with the
fair discussion of a common understanding, looking at all points which are the
fair objects of human contemplation, the human mind will be at last capable of
coming to a true conclusion.

Without reading any more of this book to you, which you will read after you
have referred to those parts to which I have more immediately alluded, the
conclusion seems to present itself to the mind in only one shape; and it is not
in the power of quibble, of ingenuity, or wit, or any species of faculty that
belongs to the human mind, to put any other interpretation upon it than that
given by the record.

Gentlemen, there will be one more subject of your enquiry, and of your
attention: but as I am perfectly assur^^ that observations relative to that
will come from the learned judge who tries this indictment, with infinitely
more force than they can come from me, I may spare you the time of attending to
such observations as these that is upon the nature and the character of the
first magistrate in this country. It is highly indecorous, that I am sure you
will go with me in saying, for any one in the least degree to speak
disrespectfully of another against whom he can have no cause of complaint: but
to speak disrespectfully of the first magistrate of this country, is deemed
highly indecorous and indecent, and his character therefore is for the wisest
purposes particularly protected.

Then tracing this from the lowest degree of misdemeanor that can be committed
against the King, tracing it from the lowest state to the highest, passing over
the intermediate degrees of offenses, many of them that are trifling, and still
stopping short of that which comes within the verge of treason, can there be an
offense more aggravated in its kind than this? It is not only treating
disrespectfully, but it is treating with a degree of sarcasm in the first
instance, which manifests a strong malevolence to the character; and in the
next place, it is giving to the mind of every man, that can be impressed by
such a publication as this, not only an indifference to the character of the
King, but a perfect detestation of such character, and suggesting that the
means of getting rid of such a character must be by a stroke similar to that
which has taken place in a neighboring unhappy country.

Gentlemen, I shall therefore abstain from all observations upon the royal
character, as to the manner in which it is protected here, as to the utility of
the office, and as to the benefit and the advantage derived from it by the
inhabitants of this country, because sure I am you are equally conversant with
the intercourses of commerce, and with the vast and important objects that
result from commercial inrercourse, under the blessings of a free constitution
like ours, where respect to government insures that tranquillity under which
alone those commercial benefits can arise, and happiness to man take place. I
say, therefore, with the effects of the constitution, you are much better
acquainted than I am; my walk is in a more confined way than yours; I see not
so much of the manufactures and merchandise of the country, as day after day
are to be found in the city of London, and which I will be bold to say are only
to be found in this city; and I will be bold again to say, that it is alone
owing to the form of government that we live under: and again, that unless the
royal person, the sovereign of this country, were at the head of that
constitution, the effects would not be what they are.

Then, Gentlemen, to what other circumstances need I advert? I am sure my
friend, who is advocate for the defendant, will never suppose, that by calling
your attention to these words he can fritter them away. I think it may be
suggested, because I have heard it before suggested, that here, where the cock
is mentioned, and we say in our indictment that it means the King; good God!
the advocate may say (because an advocate can always affect astonishment), why
should you suppose the King is meant by this cock? I can only say I will leave
it to the determination of 12 gentlemen, to say whether it be so or not, I am
sure if cannot be otherwise. And though he may please to say, by your legal
operation of an inuendo, you may charge that the cock means the King; why you
are the libeller yourself, by putting it upon the record: I can only observe,
it is extremely ingenious; but you, Gentlemen, will be to determine between us:
therefore let ingenuity be exercised, let it have its fair course. I am sure my
friend will be ingenious. I am sure in his address to you there will be much to
admire: but it happens, indeed, to be a subject where there cannot be any great
benefit resulting to his client from it. When my friend has done his duty, I do
confess, feeling this prosecution as a matter of infinite importance, I shall
look with extreme earnestness for your verdict. I presume I shall not have any
occasion to trouble you again, therefore it is fit I should make all the
observations I have to offer now; it is upon that account you will pardon me
for the length of time I have taken up.

I have already hinted to you, that we prosecute this man as the publisher.
Now, Gentlemen, when the book is sold at his house, if he be not there he is as
much guilty as if he were. This is a matter very well known to be law from the
earliest time; it is one of the cases in law, where a master may be criminated
by the act of his servant, even though he himself he not present. If his wife
sells the libel, he is criminal; and unless it were so, the law would, you see,
be frustrated in thousands of instances. The law is, that the owner, of the
shop, the man having the profit of the business, shall be answerable. But here
the book appears to be printed for the very man at the bar, and I dare say he
will hardly deny it; from the manner in which he bears himself, I do not know
whether he might not absolutely triumph in it. But, however, with respect to
the criminality, and the law attaching upon that criminality, there can be no
doubt.

The evidence I shall have to lay before you will be the most simple
imaginable, that is, that the book was bought at his shop. What relates to the
manner in which his business is generally carried, on, I forbear to state. You
perceive that with respect to these two charges, I have not even stated them at
full length, because the book, if you please to have it, may be delivered to
you, and you may there satisfy your own curiosity.

I have said before, I felt myself relieved that I had not to prosecute that
man as the author. He may not be the author: I hope in God he is not. Although
he is criminal as the publisher, and although the publisher does infinitely
more mischief sometimes than the author, and often has it happened that the
publisher is a stimulator to the author; yet I hope he has not the heart to be
the author of some of these paragraphs.

Gentlemen, you have the case before you. I have done my duty, the attorney
general has done his, and those gentlemen who have been engaged in order to
bring the prosecution into a shape before you, discharge their duty when they
submit it to you; and it would be most impertinent in me to suggest a
possibility of your doing otherwise than your duty.


THE Evidence for the Prosecution.
JOHN BOULT. (Sworn.)

Examined by Mr. Knowlys.

Q. Be so good as to look it that book, and tell me whether you bought it, and
where?


A. Yes, I bought it.


Q. Where?


A. At No. 81, Bishopsgate-street.


Q. At the time you bought it, did you make any writing upon it, to enable you
to know it again?


A. Yes, within half an hour afterward.


Q. Is that your writing?


A. Yes.


Q. Who kept that shop?


A. Daniel Isaac Eaton.


Q. The defendant at the bar?


A. Yes.


Q. When did you buy it?


A. On the 18th of November last. I bought numbers 6, 7. and 8, for a
gentleman, at the same time.


Q. Of Politics for the People, or Hog's Wash?


A. Yes.


Q. Was this aseparate number at the time you bought it?


A. Yes.


Q. And you bought other numbers of the same sort at the same time?


A. Yes, numbers 6, 7, and 8.


Mr. Recorder. The pamphlet he is now prosecuted for is number 8.


Mr. Knowlys. It is.


Cross-Examination, by Mr. Woodhouse.
Q. What are you?


A. A news-carrier.


Q. You get your livelihood by that?


A. Yes.


Q. What induced you to go for these books?


A. I went to buy them for a gentleman.


Q. Who was that gentleman?


A. One Mr. Bevan.


Q. Is he a news-carrier?


A. No.


Q. Did you ever appear here before (...)


A. No.


Q. You get your livelihood solely by selling books?


A. Yes.


Q. That is your sole trade?


A. Yes.


Q. You never got any thing by informing, I suppose?


A. No, never.


Mr. Knowlys. The gentleman has asked you why you went to that shop. Did not
you go to it because it was the shop when those things were sold?


A. Yes.


Mr. Gurney. I desire that the whole of the speeh of Mr. Thelwall may be read,
a part only of which is included in the indictment.


Mr. Fielding. You may read it as part of your evidence.


Mr. Gurney. I know I may: but I conceive I have a right to have it read as
part of yours. Whenever a part of a paper is read in evidence by one party, the
other party has a right to insist upon the whole being read at that time.


Mr. Recorder. I think you must read it as part of your evidence if you wish to
have it read.


Mr. Gurney. It is scarcely worth contesting; I am sure the jury will read the
whole.


Mr. Recorder. You certainly have a right to have the whole pamphlet laid
before the jury.


The paragraphs included in the indictment were read.

Mr. GURNEY.
Gentlemen of the Jury,
It is extremely unfortunate for the defendant, Mr. Eaton, it is perhaps not
less unfortunate for me, that the indisposition of my learned leader Mr.
Vaughan, in the first instance, and his delicacy in the second, occasion the
task of addressing you this day to devolve upon me. It is unfortunate for the
defendant, because he loses the benefit; of those splendid talents which have
been exerted once and again in his behalf, not without success: It is
unfortunate for me, because it sets those splendid talents, to a certain
degree, in contrast with talents of a very opposite description. But I feel
myself consoled, I feel myself animated by this consideration, that,
notwithstanding all you have hitherto heard to the defense of this indictment,
the meanest talents are more than equal.

If this prosecution could assume a shape other than the most disgusting, it
would undoubtedly receive it from the very liberal, able, and eloquent manner
in which it has been opened by my learned friend. But to fix an agreeable mask
upon it, is not within the compass even of his transcendent abilities.

Gentlemen, it is so common a topic of complaint in these prosecutions, that I
should have been surprised if it had been omitted today, that this is
peculiarly and emphatically an age of sedition, that the press teems with
libels calculated to vilify every thing that is great and good, libels designed
to subvert the foundation of all government, to dissolve the bonds of society,
and to introduce confusion and anarchy. If I had not received the respectable
assurance I have upon this subject, if I had been left to form my opinion upon
what I see on the record yon have to try. I should have formed an opinion that
the fact was totally different. I should have supposed that libels had become
so scarce a commodity, that with all the industry of that numerours herd of
Spies, Informers, and Inquisitors, with which this metropolis now abounds, none
could be found -- not one; and therefore, in onder to keep business alive,
these ingenious gentlemen had set themselves to work to make one. For if they
had not so done, Mr. Eaton would not now he standing at that bar.

My learned friend has made a liberal use of that talent which he so eminently
possesses, of working upon your passions and upon that of the audience, and in
so doing he has acted judiciously, because without captivating your passions,
he can have no hope of convincing your judgment. But, Gentlemen, sustaining the
sacred character you do at this moment sustain, I call upon you to set a guard
upon those passions which are so liable to seduction, and which, when seduced,
lead the judgment captive at their will. I call upon you, to apply to the
consideration of this case, a judgment equally unimpassioned and unprejudiced.
In order that you should do so, it becomes me now to state, that the defense of
my client does not impose upon me, as you may have imagined, the necessity of
endeavoring to cool the fervor of your affection for the person of the king,
or to lessen your attachment to his government. If the defense of Mr. Eaton had
made it requisite to avow that a man has a right to call the king an haughty
and sanguinary tyrant, I should have told him he must have recourse to some
other counsel, for that in the discharge of my duty as an advocate, I could not
forget my duty as an Englishman. No, Gentlemen, I conjure yon with equal
earnestness to that of my learned friend, I wish I could do it with equal
eloquence, to foster and cherish every sentiment and every feeling of affection
for your king, and in the very fervor of your passion I will call upon you,
and call upon you with considence of success, to condemn this indictment, and
to acquit this defendant.

But this prosecution would have been incomplete, it would have been an anomaly
in the prosecutions of the present day, if the affairs of France had not been
introduced. And why are they introduced? Because it is supposed that you will
so far forget your duty and your oaths, as to apply any opinion which you may
have formed upon them to the injury of the defendant in this cause. If
considered rightly, I think the result will not be unfavourable to the
defendanr. Whatever disorders may have tarnished the French Revolution, they
afford an argument to Englishmen to prize and maintain every liberty they
possess, and above all the liberty of the press.

If the French, after having been kept in darkness for ages, were, when the
light first beamed upon their astonished fight, dazzled with its luster, and
therefore mistook one object for another, it is not they whom we ought so
severely to censure, as the detested monsters who had so long veiled their
eyes. If after having been for ages instructed in lessons of barbarity, from
the open and unauthorised exercise of which they were restrained, is it so very
extraordinary that when that restraint was removed, some of them should
practice the lessons their former masters had taught them? It in their progress
from slavery to freedom they have had to traverse a narrow and a slippery path,
assailed by idea without and by traitors within, is it to be wondered at that
many of them should stumble and should fall?

But is liberty to be descried, because at any time, or upon any occasion,
licentiousness has assumed its name? No: it ought rather to stimulate every
people who possess it, to preserve it in its pristine purity; above all, it
ought to stimulate them to the preservation of that part, without which they
would sink into a state of stupid ignorance, and consequently of abject slavery.

Gentlemen, in the fulfillment of the solemn and sacred duties of jurymen, there
are few case which have a stronger claim upon your attention than prosecution
for political libel. A prosecution for a political libel is a charge not of the
of a common wrong, but of the abuse of a common right. I do not mean to say,
that the abuse of a common right may not amount to the commission of a
commonordinary commission wrong, but that it is a charge of a different
description, requiring stonger evidence to support it, and to be decided by the
application of different principles. The ordinary commission of a common wrong,
is the doing an act which the law has expressly forbidden, and for which
therefore, when the party does it, he knows he is amenable to the law. The
abuse of a common and acknowledged right, may proceed from a mind deeply
impressed with the importance of the right, and eagerly employed in its
exercise, not being sufficiently acquainted with its bounds and limits. If
there is any common right, into the abuse of which we should not enquire with
extraordinary rigor, it is that right, the exercise of which is called in
question this day, not only on account of its infinite moment to the public,
but because its limits have never yet been ascertained with precision. So far
indeed are they from having heen ascertained with precision, that no two men,
no two lawyers, are agreed upon the subject.

But, Gentlemen, I have not in this case to implore mercy or indulgence for
excess. I have only to clain your justice. For of all the prosecutions for
libels that ever came into a court of justice I will venture to say this is the
most extraordinary, I will add it is the most alarming. For I have no
hesitation to assert, that if it were to succeed, the freedom of the press
could not survive a single hour.

Having stated this proposition broadly and boldly, I come immediately to the
proof of it.

The charge contained in this indictment is, that the defendant, being a
malicious, seditious, and evil-disposed person, and greatly disaffected to our
lord the king, and to his administration of the government of this kingdom, and
unlawfully, maliciously, and seditiously contriving, devising, and Intending to
scandalize, traduce, and vilify our said lord the king, and the regal power and
office established by law within this realm* and to represent our said lord the
king as sanguinary, tyrannical, oppressive, cruel, and despotic, and thereby to
stir up and excite discontents and seditions amongst the subjects of our said
lord the king, and to alienate and withdraw the fidelity, affection, and
allegiance of his said majesty's subjects from hit said majesty's person and
government, unlawfully, maliciously, and seditiously, did publish a certain
printed pamphlet, entitled, POLITICS FOR THE PEOPLE, or HOG'S WASH, containing
certain scandalous, malicious, inflammatory, and seditious matters of and
concerning our said lord the king.

My learned friend has animadverted with some severity upon the title of this
pamphlet, "Politics for the People, or Hog's Wash." The latter part is a play
upon a phrase which has been used to describe the People, not as my learned
friend has supposed, an incautious expression in the heat of parliamentary
debate, but an expression deliberately and solemnly recorded in a book which
has run through ten or twelve editions, and which retains its place in that
book to the present hour. Now if the people are the "Swinish Multitude," I do
not think Mr. Eaton is deserving of punishment for supplying them with food
adapted to their nature. "Politics for the People." Whom are politics for, but
for the people? Are politics for placemen and pensioners only? Are they only
blessed with understandings fitted to the investigation of this sublime and
mysterious science? Or is it not, or at least ought it not to be, a subject
within the comprehension of every man? But the price is twopence, binc illae
lachrymae. If it be a crime to sell a political pamhlet cheap, Mr. Eaton must
plead guilty to that charge; but so far from confessing it as a crime, I state
it as a merit, I challenge for him applause. Political pamphlets, I think,
should be cheap. I am very sure that public order and tranquillity will never be
maintained so well as when every man reads and understands political pamphlets;
because there is no obedience to law so exemplary, there is no attachment to a
good costitution so strong, as that which results from a knowledge of the
reason and obligation of law, and the true; principles as well as beneficial
effects of the constitution.

Gentlemen, you perceive that in the paper which this man has published is not
a single syllable "of and concerning our sovereign lord the king;" but that
every thing which is said of this famous game cock is charged by the indictment
to have been meant of him, and is in words applied to him in a number of
parentheses that you will find in the indictment, which parentheses we call
inuendos.

Inuendos have in former times gone such lengths as to draw down some degree of
ridicule upon them, but never before I believe have they gone the length of the
inuendos in this indictment. The sole purpose of an inuendo, is to six the true
meaning. An inuendo is not to be an arbitrary thing at the pleasure of the
drawer of an indictment: it must be warranted by the context; it must be
conformable to the sense of the paper: the sense of the paper must not be
forced or strained; it must be the natural, the plain, the obvious, the
necessary sense.

This art of drawing indictments, and contriving inuendos, and so manufacturing
libels, is indeed a curious art. I do not know, and I really am at a loss to
conjecture, who could have been the drawer of this indictment. From its
internal evidence, I am led to suppose it must have been the author of the
Arabian Nights Entertainment, or some person equally conversant in the wild and
extravagant fictions of the east. He must have given unbridled and unbounded
license to an imagination the most wanton and the most heated, before he could
have sat down to ascribe meanings to this paper so foreign and indeed so
ridiculous. All of the inuendos, in my opinion, are far from innocent, but one
of them contains the most seditious assertion I have ever seen.

The drawer of this indictment might must as well have employed himself, like
Dean Swift's projector, in attempting to extract sunbeams from cucumbers, as in
attempting to extract sedition from this story of the game cock.

This story of the game cock appears to have been related at a debating
society, in answer to a story that had been told of a negro slave enduring the
tortures of a drying pan. The story was aptly introduced to answer the purpose
of the moment, in reply to a preceding speaker. But as the story of the negro
stave did naturally introduce the story of the game cock, the allusion to it is
not included in this indictment, because it was the business of this indictment
to conceal from you the real intention with which the story was introduced, in
order to impose upon you a belief that it was then told, and afterward
published, with the criminal intentions imputed. With this view the story of
the game cock is not only introduced into the indictment abruptly, but it
closes abruptly too; for it stops short at that part which applies it to the
preceding story of the slave. These observations will be impressed more
forcibly upon your minds, if when you retire to deliberate on your verdict, you
take with you the pamphlet itself, and compare it with a copy of the indictment.

But, Gentlemen, I do not mean to contend that the author of this story
intended merely to allude to the immediate subject before him, the tyranny
exercised on a negro slave. No -- the defense of my client calls not on me to
attempt to circumscribe, far less to explain away any meaning which these
words, taken in their utmost latitude, can imply. I will concede that the mind
of the speaker, in adverting to one species of tyranny, was naturally, and I
maintain laudably led to contemplate tyranny in general, and that this story
which he relates was calculated to expose the evil consequences of tyranny, and
to point out the just punishment of tyrants. And surely Englishmen must have
undergone a strange transformation, if they can endure to hear the right of
doing this called in question. Why do we look back to our ancestors with such
enthusiasm and veneration? but because in opposing tyranny and tyrants they
fought, they bled, they conquered. It was their ardent love of liberty, it was
their undaunted courage, it was their unshaken fortitude, it was their profound
wisdom, that combined to rear that grand political fabric, the constitution of
our country, which we have been accustomed to view with equal reverence and
delight, upon the possession of which we have prided ourselves, but which I am
sure we shall not transmit to our posterity, if we suffer the liberty of the
press, which is its cornerstone, to be rudely torn away; and torn away it will
be, if such prosecutions as these can succeed.

What language do our ancestors hold out to us by Magna Charta, by the Habeas
Corpus Act, by the Bill of Rights, and above all by the Revolution, but this,
"We have found monarchy, unlimited and unfettered, incompatible with rational
freedom and social order; we have therefore prescribed limits to it, that you
our posterity may be free and happy." It is not necessary for me to go so far
back as the Revolution for this language; it has been held in a feebler tone
perhaps, certainly with less effect within the memory of most of us. In the
year 1782 the House of Commons voted "that the influence of the Crown had
increased, was increasing and ought to be diminished." Whether they followed up
that vote with such restrictions as were requisite to curtail and check that
increasing influence, is not now a subject of enquiry. But it affords all I
want for my argument, that every complaint of unlimited power, or of limited
power transgressing the limits assigned to it, every detection of the fact, and
every exposure of the consequence, is consistent with the spirit of the
constitution, is warranted by precedents the most approved, and is allowed by
law. It is not merely allowed, it is commanded by a law that is paramount to
all human law, the law written by the finger of God on the heart of man.

But why is it to be supposed that this game cock, who is described as an
haughty and sanguinary tyrant, nursed from his infancy in blood and slaughter,
must necessarily mean the present mild and merciful king of Great Britain? If
we survey the immense continent of Asia, nay if we confine our view to the
continent of Europe, shall we find no tyrants whom this game cock may be
intended to denote? None "fond of foreign wars," if not of "domestic
rebellions?" None who devour "the greater part of the grain scattered" by
Providence "for the morning and evening repast" of their fellow creatures? None
who are always "picking and cuffing" at those about them, who have not strength
to defend themselves? Shall we find none who have sported with obligations the
most solemn, who have trampled on rights the most sacred, who in the pursuit of
their fell and foul conspiracies against the peace and happiness of the human
race, have disregarded every principle of justice, have outraged every feeling
of humanity, have defied every mandate of their God?

But this speaker says, he thinks the best thing one could do for men and women
is to rid the world of tyrants. It that so criminal? Then I am criminal; for I
think so too. Tyrants, in any form, I believe, are much too bad to be mended,
and I think the best way of disposing of them is to send them out of a world to
which they are a curse, and which they can benefit only by leaving it. If this
lesson were learned and were practiced by every people groaning under tyranny,
soon would freedom, which is now confined to a narrow spot, diffuse her
blessings through the world.

The first political truth that is engraven on the soul of man, is, that all
power flows from the people, and is a trust for their benefit, and that when
that trust is abused, resistance is not only a right but a duty. The Revolution
of 1688 was a practical essay upon that principle. Then was that right
exercised, then was that duty fulfilled. The trust reposed in a king was
abused, the king became a tyrant, the people expelled him; and if he had ever
dared to return, he would have expiated, and justly expiated, his crimes upon
the scaffold.

But why, I ask again, is it to be supposed that the king of Great Britain is
meant by this tyrant of the farm-yard? Is there any thing in the animal
selected for this story being a cock? That will not serve the purpose of the
prosecution. For never was the king of Great Britain represented by the emblem
of a cock. The king of Great Britain has always been denoted by a lion, and the
king of France by a cock: the reason of which, I suppose, was, that Ga^^us, as
you well know, is latin for a cock. None of us, I am sure, can have forgot that
which we were taught in our youth, that the crowing of the Gallic cock should
be silenced by the tremendous roaring of the British lion.

Gentlemen, we have just passed the anniversary of an event to which my learned
friend has adverted, I mean the execution of the last monarch of France. The
application of this story to that tragical event, cannot fail to strike every
mind that pauses a moment for reflection; and if the author had a view to any
person in particular, unquestionably it must have been to him: and whatever you
or I may think of that monarch or his fate, we cannot deny to any man the right
of thinking or speaking of him and of his fate as he pleases.

But if when any man publishes a paper on tyranny in general, or Louis the
sixteenth in particular, he is to be charged by an inuendo of this sort with
meaning king George the third, what will become of the security and peaceful
exercise of the freedom of the, press? If when any man becomes obnoxious to the
ministry every thing he says or publishes is to be thus strained and perverted
for the purpose of ministerial vengeance, who can be sale? It is not
booksellers only who are liable to prosecution for publishing, any of you who
may happen to give a book to one of your children may be prosecuted, and your
children may be dragged into this court to lay you in gaol by their evidence;
and this, perhaps, for giving them a book which no disinterested* no impartial
man would conjecture to have any tendency to sedition, or even any relation to
politics.

Upon the principle of this prosecution, if it has any principle, a book which,
I dare say, once afforded us much pleasure and instruction, I mean Aesop's
Fables, is the most seditious book that ever was published. Woe to Mr. Eaton,
if he has ever sold that book; woe to any man that has sold it, if he has given
offense to the ministers, or to any of those spies and informers who now infest
this country as locusts or the plague do some other. There is scarcely a fable
that will not furnish an indictment. One of them occurs to me at this moment:
it is the fable of the Ape who was made king. To punish him for his presumption
in aspiring to that character, the fox led him into a trap; and when reproached
by the ape for disloyalty, he went off with a sneer, saying, "You a king, and
not understand trap?" Put this fable into an indictment, and call it "a
scandalous, malicious, inflammatory and seditious libel, of and concerning our
sovereign lord the king;" state in the inuendoes that the ape is intended to
denote our said lord the king; and that not understanding trap, means ignorance
of the regal functions; and garnish all this with "against the peace of our
said lord the king, his crown and dignity;" and then you have patched up a most
notable libel. With this receipt for drawing indictments, I could go through
the book, and draw five hundred.

Gentlemen, in this way a man may be prosecuted for publishing the sacred
scriptures themselves. For wherever mention is made of a wicked king, and
mention is made of many wicked kings, an indictment may be drawn, charging it
to be a libel upon the king of Great Britain, and by inuendos applying the
expressions to him. But I ask again, what man can be safe, if meanings like
these are to be affixed to every thing he publishes, or every thing he says?

Let us look at the language of the story, and see the meanings which are
affixed by the indictment. -- You must know then that I used, together with a
variety of youthful attachments, to be very fond of birds poultry; and, among
other things of this kind, I had a very fine majestic kind of animal, a game
cock ( meaning thereby, says the indictment, to denote and represent our said
lord the king) an haughty sanguinary tyrant, nursed in blood and slaughter from
his infancy, fond of foreign wars and domestic rebellions, into which he would
sometimes drive his subjects by his oppressive obstinacy, in hopes that he
might increase his power and glory by their suppression. Now this haughty old
tyrant -- ( again, says the indictment, meaning our said lord the king.) Never,
I believe, since prosecutions for libels had existence, has such an indictment,
containing such inuendos as these, made its appearance in an English court of
justice. The only ground on which these inuendos can be attempted to be
supported, is a ground which the prosecution will not venture to state, a
ground which they cannot state; namely, that there is so palpable a resemblance
of character and conduct in this game cock so our sovereign lord the king, that
that man must be blind who does not see the real object, and the true
application.

If the inuendos had stopped here, I should have thought this indictment by no
means an innocent production. But what must I think, what must you think, when
you find an inuendo in terms the most unequivocal, charging the king with being
a tyrant. Yet I had even at that time some lurking principles of aversion to
barefaced despotism struggling at my heart, which would sometimes whisper to
me that the best thing one could do either for cocks and hens, or men and
women, was to rid the world of tyrants -- meaning, the indictment says, our
said lord the king, among others. -- Which is the libel now? Not that paper
published by Mr. Eaton: for if all that is charged could be substantiated, its
guilt would sink into nothing in comparison with the guilt of this indictment,
which contains a libel upon record, in a court of justice, that will be handed
down to the latest posterity.

Gentlemen, I now come to the close of this indictment, and it is a close
worthy of it. A little detached sentence of three lines is logged in to bolster
up this miserable prosecution. Kings are wolf shepherds. Homer styles them
devourers of the people, and they do not appear to have lost their original
taste. To the four first words of this, "Kings are Wolf Shepherds," the
indictment has applied an inuendo, "meaning, among othters, our sovereign lord
the king." Never was a proposition stated more evidently false than that a
general remark must have an universal application. If I speak of kings in
general, am I to be understood to speak of all kings? Certainly not. My
omitting to say al kings, demonstrates that I mean to exclude some; if to
exclude any, clearly to exclude those to whom the remark is no longer
applicable.

The Empress of Russia is the shepherdess of a vast flock; but as it was not
sufficiently numerous for the exercise of her boundless philanthropy, she has
lately, by a little gentle compulsion, augmented it by a considerable number of
the Polish breed. She, and our worthy ally the king of Prussia, have gone hand
in hand in this blessed work of increasing their flocks. Possibly neither you
nor I should choose to call these two monarchs "Wolf Shepherds;" but I fancy we
should none of us be disposed to punish very severely the man who did.

All mankind have found by fatal experience that kings are wolf shepherds, if
they are suffered to possess unlimited power; and therefore our ancestors
employed themselves very wisely in fastening limitations on their power. But it
is of kings whose power is not limited that this sentence speaks. For it is
illustrated by an expression of Homer's, "devourers of the people," which
applies to kings whose powers are not limited as the powers of the king of
Great Britain are. The king of Great Britain sustains a character totally
different from that of any other king, and therefore general observations upon
kings never have been, and never can be understood to apply to him. On the
contrary, they necessarily exclude him. It is not long since such an
application would have been considered as libellous, and I rely with confidence
on the spirit and loyalty of Britons for repelling an application so unfounded
and a comparison so degrading -- degrading not only to the king, but to the
people. For if it were admitted that cur king resembled kings in general, it
would be admitted that he was a despot, from which it would follow, as a
necessary consequence, that the people were slaves.

I have bestowed some pains in searching for an indictment like the present,
and I can find none even in that sink of iniquity, the collection of
indictments in the reign of Charles the second. I believe neither the records
of the Star chamber, nor the annals of Jefferies, will furnish an indictment in
which a general reflection upon the nature and tendency of tyranny, or the
desert of tyrants, has been deemed a libel upon the king of Great Britain.

Gentlemen of the Jury, In every case where a charge is made, that an act has
been done which the law forbids, after it has been ascertained that the act has
been done, and done by the party accused, the next question is, with what
intention he did the act. It is the intention which clothes the act with
innocence or guilt. If you try a man for murder, you do not content yourselves
with ascertaining the fact of the deceased having been killed, and killed by
the prisoner you are trying; but you examine into the circumstances of the
case, to know the intention with which he killed him. If you find his intention
was malicious, you pronounce him guilty of murder; if he was provoked by a
certain degree of irritation, you pronounce him guilty of manslaughter; but if
you find he did it accidentally, or in self-defence, you pronounce him not
guilty. If this be so in a matter of such deep importance to he public as the
loss of a citizen, and where prima facie so black a crime as murder has been
perpetrated, how much more in the case of a misdemeanor, a misbehaviour, which
is an offense of the most trivial nature that the law takes cognizance of? If
this be so in a matter where at first view the motives are the most diabolical
that can predominate in the human breast, how much more in a case where the
intention is on the first blush indifferent, and where it is always with
hesitation and doubt that a jury will pronounce it to be criminal? In a case
where though one may consider it to be criminal, another will think it
innocent, and a third will believe it to be meritorious, according to the
different political principles they have embraced, according to the extent and
range which in their respective opinions ought to be allowed to political
discussion.

Gentlemen, when you are traveling in this dark and intricate road, you will
proceed with the utmost possible circumspection, left you should be entangled
in an inextricable labyrinth. When you are called upon to penetrate into the
inmost recesses of a man's soul, and decide on what passes there, with what awe
will you address yourselves to the task?

Recollect what is required of you by the prosecutors. You are required to
determine upon the inspection of this paper, that the defendant maliciously and
seditiously contriving, devising, and intending to scandalize, traduce, and
vilify our lord the king. and the regal power and office established by law
within this realm, and to represent our said lord the king as sanguinary.
tyrannical, oppressive, cruel, and despotic; and thereby to stir up and excite
discontents and seditions amongst the subjects of our said lord the king, and
to alienate and withdraw the fidelity affection and allegiance of his said
majesty's subjects from his said majesty's person and government, unlawfully,
maliciously, and seditiously did publish this pamphlet. Can you, as honest and
conscientious men, can you, as men who have duties to fulfill, as men who have
rights to guard, bring your minds to propositions so monstrous and so
extravagant?

But if this construction were not so evidently ridiculous and absurd, if it
were only doubtful, and doubtful in the mind of any one of you, then you are
bound to acquit the defendant. By that admirable institution, Trial by Jury, no
man can be found guilty but by the unanimous, the decided, and undoubting
opinion of twelve of his equals. Where there exists a particle of doubt, it is
your duty, as you have been frequently told from the bench, to lean to the side
of mercy.

Gentlemen, some cases have lately occurred which make it incumbent on me to
say a word or two respecting the verdicts of juries in cases of libel.

Whenever the exercise of a right has suffered interruption, its revival is
attended with some inconveniences and some errors. That has been the case with
respect to the functions of juries in cases of libel. The ancient law of libel
did not differ from other criminal law, but when the invention of printing had
introduced political discussion, and when seditious publications (that is to
say, publications exposing the corruptions and abuses of government, and the
profligacy of ministers) made their appearance, the control of the press was
placed in admirable hands, a licenser, the king's attorney general, and a court
of inquisition called the Star Chamber. The licenser was to stifle in its birth
every thing obnoxious to the ministers. But if any thing happened to escape his
hands, then the attorney general, by his information ex officio, carried the
unfortunate author or publisher before the board of inquisitors, who never
failed to administer a sentence adapted by its severity to deter others from
similar efforts to enlighten the people.

It was in that infernal inquisition that the purity of the law of libel was
debauched. It was there that that monstrous maxim was firstbroached, that Truth
could be a false, scandalous, malicious, and seditious libel.

Thank God, iniquity always defeats itself. The intolerable oppression of this
inquisition brought on its violent, I cannot say untimely death. But
unfortunately some of its practices survived it. The attorney general was
allowed still to carry his informations ex officio into the court of King's
Bench, and the doctrines of the Star Chamber were after a very long interval
revived, and continued in existence till within these two years, when they
were, I trust, completely destroyed by that act of parliament, for which we are
indebted to the bright ornament of the English bar, and the model of its
eloquence -- an act which has assured and confirmed to every Englishman the
right of being tried by a jury of his equals, when accused of having written or
published a libel.

Gentlemen, That act of parliament enacts, that a jury may give a verdict "upon
the whole matter put in issue by the indictment," Of what does that "whole
matter" consist? It proposes four questions to the consideration of the jury.

The first question you are asked is, Did the defendant publish the pamphlet
that has been produced in evidence? If he did not, you must acquit him.

Secondly, Is the sense ascribed to the passage inserted in the indictment by
the inuendos, the true, the genuine, the necessary sense? If it is not, you
must acquit him.

Thirdly, Is the pamphlet, even if that sense be the proper one, a "scandalous,
malicious, inflammatory, and seditious" libel? If it is not, you must acquit
him.

Fourthly and lastly, Did the defendant publish the pamphlet with the criminal
motives and intentions imputed by this indictment? If he did not, even then you
must acquit him.

Gentlemen, In saying this, I am sure I shall not he contradicted by the bench,
that a verdict of guilty must be compounded of an answer to each of those four
questions in the affirmative, and that if you disbelieve any one of the
imputations, nay if you doubt any one, you are bound to acquit the defendant.

It is the practice that had obtained before the passing of the libel bill,
that has introduced any confusion into this plain and simple matter. Juries
were directed by the judges to find the defendant guilty, if the fact of
publication was proved, and they believed the meaning assigned by the inuendos
was correct, and thence juries have erroneously thought that if the fact of
publication was proved they were bound to find the defendant guilty of
publishing. Gentlemen, there is no guilt in publishing. Merely publishing a
paper is in itself innocent. It is only the bad quality of the paper published,
and the evil intention with which it is published, that can make a publication
criminal. Therefore it is the duty of a jury, unless they are clearly
convinced, not only of the fact of publication, but of the truth of the
inuendos, and of the paper being a libel, and of the intention of the defendant
being criminal, to pronounce him not guilty.

Gentlemen, these prosecutions are totally unlike all other prosecutions that
come before you. All those indictments that you have hitherto tried, were
preferred for purposes of public justice, to vindicate offended law, and punish
the violation of public order and private property. These prosecutions are
always brought forward to answer the temporary and interested purpose of the
party in possession of power; and if it should so happen that that party before
it had attained its power had propagated principles to which their present
practices are hostile, the publication of those principles is then deemed
seditious, and the publishers are prosecuted. The prosecutions of the present
day are indeed part of the ways and means of carrying on this disastrous war.
They were not opened by the minister with his budget, because they are means
which he has not yet the courage to avow.

I understand that the reason why Mr. Eaton is singled out and prosecuted with
such unexampled severity, is, that he has committed that sin which is not to be
forgiven. Convinced by Mr. Pitt's speeches and the Duke of Richmond's letters
that the political salvation of this country depends on a parliamentary reform,
he has frankly declared that conviction. That has been caught up by one of
these sedition hunters, who are hired to prowl about the streets, who dropped
the information into the lion's mouth at the Crown and Anchor.

Gentlemen, we look back to the prosecutions for sedition in the reigns of the
Stuarts with detestation and horror. Are we absolutely certain that our
posterity will look back upon the prosecutions of the present day with very
favorable sentiments? There was then the same cry of sedition, there was then
the same pretense of conspiracies and plots, when all the time the sedition was
the sedition of the ministers against the people, and the conspiracies and
plots were theirs, to subvert the constitutional liberty of the country.

Has this prodigious dread of sedition slept from the time of Charles the
second until now, and is it to awake precisely at the present moment? Were
libels so abundant then? Have they been so scarce from that time to this? and
do they now suddenly abound again? No such thing. Publications reprobating
tyranny and tyrants, and arraigning the conduct of ministers, have never failed
to issue from the press. But it is not all ministers who have been troubled
with the same irritability of temper, or been haunted with the same dread of a
free discussion of their merits and demerits.

It is a bad omen when ministers wish to stop the current of free enquiry. It
is a sure sign that their conduct is such as will not stand the test of that
enquiry. There have been ministers of this country who have thought a free
press their best safeguard, who have seared no libels, because their conduct
challenged investigation, and would pass the fiery ordeal with honor. If this
is no longer the case, if the ministers of the present day dread the
consequence of a rigid examination and comparison of their professions and
their actions, if they wish to shut out the sun because they cannot bear the
light, let them be open and honest, let them avow their meaning, let them speak
out; let them not, because the great pillar that supports the British
constitution is hateful to them, seek, upon false pretenses, to level the
glorious fabric with the dust.

But I am sure the lofty and intrepid spirit of Britons is not to be subdued by
any such means. I am sure the means are very ill adapted to the end. Never yet
was the frequency of political publications lessened by prosecution, but on the
contrary they have always been increased ten-fold.

If the ministers wish to extract the sting from these publications, they
should adopt a system exactly the reverse of that which has provoked them. Let
them not cherish every canker that has crept into the constitution, which mars
its beauty, and is eating out its vitals. Let them not cling to every
corruption and every abuse, as if corruption and abuse were the end and
perfection of government. Let them not pursue those measures which induce the
necessity of increasing that heavy load of taxes which extorts from the poor
the scanty subsistence that their labor can procure. Above all, let them not
pursue those measures which deprive the industrious poor of those very means of
subsistence, and throw them upon the benevolence of a generous public for their
very bread. If they will avoid splitting upon these rocks, they will disarm
political publications of every thing offensive, and we shall then hear no more
of the prevalence of libels.

But allow me to enquire why prosecutions are all on one side, why it is that
those pamphlets only are prosecuted as libels which reflect or are supposed to
reflect upon the regal or aristocratical branches of the constitution? Does it
not hence appear that to prosecute libels upon the constitution is no part of
the system of administration? For if a man will but exalt the regal and
aristocratical parts of the constitution at the expense of the democratical
part, he may libel the constitution with impunity. The democratical part of the
constitution is not a favorite sufficient, at present, with those who have the
management of affairs, to induce them to stand forward as it avengers.

The "MAJESTY OF THE PUBLIC"-(Gentlemen, I am not using an expresson coined by
the republicans and levellers of the day, if any such there be; I am using the
expression of that great lawyer Mr. Justice Blackstone, whose authority is
constantly appealed to on these occasions by the counsel for the crown) -- "The
Majesty of the Public" may be libelled. "The Majesty of the Public" has no
attorney -- general to file informations ex officio against the libeller. The
sacred rights of the people may be insulted, degraded, and vilified, and no
prosecution is thought of. Yet let but a sarcasm be thought to fall on the
power and authority of kings or nobles, and ministerial vengeance is instantly
hurled at the head of the unfortunate offender.

Gentlemen, are such prosecutions as these for calling tyranny by its name,
intended to spread that torpor over the mind which is requisite to its
introduction? Are they designed "to stop the current of all the passioas but
fear?" Let us then resolve rather to cease to live than live in chains.

View in ancient history the glorious effects of freedom. See the heroic
actions it inspired. See the consequences in the perfection of every art and
science that could confer dignity on man, or contribute to his comfort. Observe
the dreadful contrast that is now exhibited by those countries which have lost
it. Where you saw blooming fields slately edifices, commercial cities, you now
see a desert. Where you saw a people, adorned by every manly and social
excellence, whose examples we to this day hold up to our youth as objects of
admiration and imitation, you now see a degenerate race of beings, possessing
the form indeed, bat devoid of the principles and feelings of men.

To what is it was owe the unexampled elevation which we have attained, but
that transcendent freedom which has made us the envy and admiration of the
world?

What is it that enables North America to proceed with such gigantic strides to
a state of prosperity at which Europe will soon gaze with wonder and
astonishment, but the invincible energies of freedom? What is it that renders
South America such a dreadful reverse of that happy state, but the ignorance
and consequent slavery in which the people are held by their unfeeling tyrants?

To attack the freedom of the press, and I conceive it is attacked most
violently by this prosecution, is to aim a fatal stroke at liberty itself.

And is it now at the close of the eighteenth century, in an age which boasts
of being the most enlightened the world ever saw, that liberty is to be
proscribed in its most favored residence? No, Gentlemen, so long as we
preserve those bulwarks of our constitution, the liberty of the press, and
trial by jury, and juries preserve their independence, I am sure all the
efforts of tyranny to obtain a footing in this island will prove abortive.

Gentlemen, this is not vain and empty declamation. The existence of every
right we possess depends in the first instance upon the freedom of the press.
While we possess that unimpaired, we can never be enslaved. If we lose it we
cannot be free. While the press, which has been beautifully and emphatically
styled the eye of the political body, continues to inspect and watch with
diligence the administration of public affairs, some hope remains that those
affairs may be administered with some attention to the public interest. But if
it is destroyed, or constantly harrassed in the performance of its necessary
functions, we may abandon ourselves to despondency and despair.

Gentlemen, if you find the defendant guilty, consider what you determine,
under the awful sanction of an attestation of the Supreme Being. You swear to
the truth of every word and syllable in this indictment. You swear that by this
game cock, this haughty and sanguinary tyrant, nursed from his infancy in blood
and slaughter, is meant the king of Great Britain, and no other. You swear too
that that king is a tyrant, for so the indictment charges him to be. You swear
that an observation on kings in general must necessarily include him. Besides
that, you not only swear that you so understand all this, but that so did the
defendant mean.

Can you lay your hands upon your hearts, and swear all this? Can you lie down
upon your pillows without feeling thorns in the reflection, that that man who
has already been imprisoned near three months upon this indictment, is to be
imprisoned two or three years longer, and his wife and children reduced to
beggary and want, because you have fancied that a sense prima facie so foreign,
may possibly belong to this paper?

Why is it that that institution, Trial by Jury, has challenged such universal
admiration? Because men are called upon to try others by the same law by which
they may themselves be tried, and therefore it is concluded that no man would
be so mad or so wicked as to wrest the law either for acquittal or conviction;
because in the former case he would suffer as a member of that political
society which cannot exist if its laws are not enforced; in the latter Case he
would be exposed to the hazard of suffering as an individual, and becoming the
victim of his own guilt.

Where that man stands today, you yourselves may stand tomorrow. For there is
not a word you utter which may not be tortured into sedition, with as much
reason as the paper now under your consideration.

In pronouncing your verdict upon this case, you will recollect that
ever-applicable precept of the great Author of our religion -- "Do unto others
as you would wish them to do unto you." Sitting in the judgment seat, you will
mete out to the defendant the same measure of justice which you would think he
ought to mete out to you, were you in his situation and he in yours. If you
were standing at that bar, accused of having uttered general expressions,
prompted by the generous feelings of your hearts, in detestation of tyranny and
tyrants, to which the despotic ingenuity of a Special Pleader had affixed a
seditious meaning by such inuendos as appear upon this indictment, would you
not claim as a first principle of justice that your words should be taken in
the most favorable sense, and not be perverted from their primary meaning, for
the purpose of incarcerating you in that strong mansion? I am sure you would,
and therefore I claim the same justice for the defendant. I claim it of YOU,
because the verdict must be yours, and yours alone, as you will answer it to
your country, to your consciences, and your God.

Gentlemen, I have endeavored to discharge my duty. I fear I have done it
feebly and imperfectly. You will nevertheless do yours; and I am confident you
will add to the number of shining instances we have lately witnessed, that an
innocent individual is never more safe than when his conduct is submitted to
the enlightened and impartial judgment of an English jury.

Mr. RECORDER.
Gentlemen of the Jury,
THIS is an indictment against Daniel Isaac Eaton, who is charged with having
published this libel. It cannot be necessary for me to state the charge, you
have heard it opened by the learned counsel for the prosecution, and you have
afterward heard those parts which are offensive, and which charge sedition
upon the prisoner, particularly stated and read to you. The pamphlet has been
produced, and it will be put into your hands, therefore it would be a mere
waste of time for me to run over the words of the charge, I shall take for
granted that you are perfectly masters of them; and being so, the first part of
my duty I conceive to be to state to you what is the evidence in support of
this prosecution; and when I have done that, I shall state more particularly
what I conceive to be the gift of the crime.

To prove the publication they only call one witness. He says he bought it at
the shop which is kept by the defendant in Bishopsgate-street, on the 18th of
November; it is number 8. Upon the cross-examination, he says, he is not an
informer, but a man who lives by carrying about newspapers. This is the whole
evidence of the publication.

Before I state to you the question of publication, for of that you must be
satisfied upon the evidence, I will state what I conceive to be particularly
the nature of the crime, the nature of the sedition imputed to the prisoner. It
is, as charged in the indictment, that of vilifying and traducing the king and
the regal office, as established by law.

Now as to the first, traducing the king, the last count in the indictment
seems to apply particularly to that: the part I allude to is this -- Kings are
wolf shepherds: Homer styles them devourers of the people, and they do not
appear to have lost their original taste.

Now, Gentlemen, as to this part of the question, by the constitution of this
country, and by the settled law of this country, to write any thing positively
and decidedly disrespectful, to vilify or traduce, to render ignoble, or
disgrace in the eyes of the people who are governed, the first branch of the
legislature, the king, is by the law of the land an offense, and this is the
offense imputed to the prisoner. The fort of sedition imputed to him is, that
he endeavored thereby to weaken the hands of government.

You know very well, Gentlemen, that this constitution is formed of King,
Lords, and Commons; and it is very necessary, the law has considered it such,
and wisdom and policy require that it should be so, that every branch of the
legislature should be held in equal respect. I have no doubt to state to you,
that in a state of civil society, where there exists a government, there must
be superioriry and inferiority; it is for the advantage and the good of the
whole that it should exist; and it is for that reason that the constitution and
the law of this country have fortified and given a particular and strong
protection to the character which commands as the chief magistrate, and
controuls those who are governed in this country. I do not enlarge upon this
subject, because I am sure the learned advocate for the defendant cannot
controvert this; that being so, you will be to judge whether, upon the reading
this pamphlet, which you ought to read, in my opinion, with your minds not all
heated either with the address of the counsel on the part of the prosecution,
or with the address of the counsel on the part of the defendant, but you should
read the book precisely in the way as if you had it in your own private
chamber, and wished to make yourselves completely matters of the whole subject:
see what the impression on your minds is then, and see whether a person using
the language which is used in this second count, does or does not mean to
vilify and traduce that branch of the constitution which the defendant is
charged with doing in the indictment.

You are not only to read the passages charged to be libellous, but to read the
whole pamphlet; and if, upon reading the whole, you can apply this to any thing
but the government of this country, and that branch of it named -- to be sure
it does not impute any thing to the defendant.

An observation occurred to the counsel for the defendant which he urged with
great ingenuity; he thought it his duty to state to you that this has so
general an application that it is not to be applied to the government of this
country. Now you should read a pamphlet of this fort, charged to be a libel,
with exactly the same indifference as you would any other book; then see how
you are to apply that language in the way it is here stated. "The reflections
of a True Briton. Kings are wolf shepherds," and so on. Whether you would not
apply them to all kings?

The learned counsel has told you that the word ALL should have been used for
you to have put that construction upon it. Now that is entirely a matter of
fact upon which you are to decide; but the observation really strikes me the
other way; because it strikes me that if a person uses the general term in that
way, and makes no exception, that it is applicable to all persons of that
description. It appears therefore to me, and you will judge of that, reading
this with the whole of the pamphlet, whether you do not consider this as a
direct attack upon one branch of the legislature, and that the person who wrote
this (I shall come to the publisher by and by) did not thereby mean to say that
kings, this description of people, were devourers of the people, and so on; --
whether being in that general way, it is not in the common construction of
language to be applied to the government of this country? If you think it is,
then it is by the law of the land indisputably a libel: and how far the
prisoner may be answerable for it, it is for you to consider.

I shall make one more observation to you upon this part of the case, that it
is your duty certainly to read the whole pamphlet, because the inuendos, the
sense that is imputed to the person who writes this book, is entirely to be
decided by you. So much for that part of the case which imputes sedition to the
government of this country.

It appears to me that sedition is imputed in another way, and that is upon the
personal executive power, upon the king himself. This indictment charges the
author of this pamphlet with charging the king of England, among others, with
being a tyrant; and after stating that such a tyrant is guilty of oppression by
taxation, and so on, he seems to intimate pretty broadly as his opinion, that
such a person should suffer death by the guillotine. And he says afterward,
describing all this by the figure of a cock, that such a person, when his
trappings were stripped off, was found to be rank with the pollution of his
luxurious vices, and so on. The second count only makes a part of the same
charge; it will be for you to consider, reading the book in an indifferent
manner; for (...) is no evidence given in explanation of the book one way or
other; you have nothing but the speeches of the learned counsel upon it. As to
what passes in the world, you are competent and fair judges. Then reading this
book, called Politics for the People, and the Reflections of a True Briton, and
so on, considering the time when it is published, you will be to decide upon
all the observations you have heard on both sides, whether this is fairly or
not imputable, as it is charged in this indictment, to the king of this
country, and whether the author who wrote it meant to apply it to the king of
this country.

With respect to inuendos, it must be a fact always for a jury to decide what
is the sense and meaning of a libel; for a man in the highest extravagance of
compliment, beyond a doubt may write such a pamphlet as shall be a gross libel.
A man may use such language as in the plain terms of it at first may appear to
be no libel: but yet, perhaps, by looking into some other expression, or taking
the intention of the party in the whole of the book, it will be impossibie not
to see, that though he uses language that is ironical, yet that you perfectly
understand he means exactly the reverse of what he says; and if from the whole
of the work you can collect, and think yourselves bound to collect, reading it
fairly, that such was the intention of the party, that will be a libel.

Gentlemen, it is in matters of sedition as it is in other crimes. Few men are
bold and hardy enough to use language of such sort as will subject them to very
severe penalties, without some sort of cover. God forbid that I should (for it
is not my province) impute that to the defendant upon the present occasion: but
it is my duty to state to you that if a pamphlet is written in that way, you
have a right to take off the mask, if you think it is a mask; and it is your
duty, reading it with indifference and with temper, to see what the intention
is, whatever the veil may be, whatever the cover may be, whether it is under an
ape, or whether it is by allegory, or a figure; whatever color or complexion
the book may take, it is entirely for you to decide what is the fair meaning of
that book, and what is the sense in which the author wrote it.

Gentlemen, you see here is a figurative description of a cock, and so on; and
this is imputed by the indictment to apply to the fovereign of this country,
and to impute to him taxation, and other things, as oppression; and that he
ought to be taken off by the guillotine.

Upon the observations made on both sides of the question, and considering that
the book is entitled, "Politics for the People," and "The Reflections of a True
Briton," you will be to judge whether that is fairly imputable to the sovereign
of this country; if it is not, certainly it is not a libel; if it is, on the
other hand, it is indisputably a libel, and you will find the defendant guilty
of that count.

Gentlemen, you have heard a great many observations in this case respecting
the liberty of the press. I am sure I think it my duty to state, that the
liberty of the press is the greatest blessing this country can enjoy: but on
the other hand I must state to you that the licentiousness of the press is the
greatest curse. And I am sure your good sense will teach you this, that if men
are permitted to say any thing, they will very soon go the length of doing any
thing; and where that is the situation of affairs in any country, there is an
end to all government. And therefore you must judge in a case of this sort of
the sense of the libel, of the intention, of the party, and your decison on
this indictment one way or other will not, in my opinion, affect that question
which has been staced to you of the liberty of the press.

This, you see, is not charged to be a libel upon ministers, but it is a direct
charge, in one part of it, upon one branch of the government, and in another
part of it in an oppressive exercise of the duties of that branch of the
government; and therefore if it fairly applies to the king of this country, it
seems to me very difficult for any jury to say, that a person who writes a book
with an intention to make a direct attack upon the government, or to charge the
executive government of this country with oppression, it seems very difficult
to say that that comes within the liberty or the press. I conceive the law to
be completely otherwise, and that the executive government of the country is
protected by the law, that every individual is protected from such an attack,
and the executive government of a country, the first magistrate, a character
that stand so high, must necessarily be so protected; therefore it comes, and
always must come to the quesion, whether a direct offensive attack is made upon
that government.

If you shall1 be of opinion that this is not written in a mere speculative way,
but that it is written with the intention charged in the indictment, to render
contemptible that character, and to change that character with oppression, it
seems to me that this is no question of speculation which involves the liberty
of the press, but it seems to be that sort of question which gives the go by to
it; and that you must be decided entirely in your opinion upon the evidence
which is before you.

Gentlemen, much has been said about the cheapness of the libel; that is out of
the question; if you should be satisfied upon the whole that it is a libel
applied to the government of this country, it must be an aggravation of the
offense, but that cannot decide the question of libel one way or the other. But
then there is another question for your consideration, and that is the
intention of the party. Now you will observe the person before you is the
publisher, and not the author of the libel: but as to the qnestion of the
sedition in the libel, that must first be disposed of; and it is my duty to
state to you, that if you should think this applicable to the government of
this country, that then the publisher of it, if it is a libel, is answerable
for the consequences of that publication; and it will he very difficult, in my
opinion, for you to say, when once the fact is settled that the work is
libelous, that the person who sends into the world that sort of publication to
disturb the peace of the country, could do it with any very good intention.

The learned counsel for the defendant has told you, that scince the act of
parliament has taken place, this is to be decided in the same way as any other
crime, and he has thought fit to put the crime of murder as the example. Now
taking that as the example, how would it be? Suppose a man commits a murder
with a very offensive weapon, I take it to be clear and settled law that his
evil intent will thereby be presumed; and if the law in the case where a murder
is committed with a very offensive weapon, would presume that the party using
it had an intention to do the mischief, I should think if a man sends poison
into the world that may do a great deal of mischief, that a jury would not go
any great length in presuming upon the evidence, unless he could on nis part
show some evidence to get rid of the presumption that he was influenced by that
criminal intention which the law presumes, in that case, as it does in the case
of libel.

It will be for you, therefore, first to make up your minds upon this pamphlet,
whether it does apply to the king and the government of this country; and if it
does, then the next question for you to consider is, whether the prisoner is
the publisher of it. Now as to that, he certainly is answerable in law as the
publisher, if it is sold in his shop. There has been nothing proved on the part
of the prisoner to show that he is not at all responsible for it; and unless he
disproves the fact of publication, it is a publication for which he is bound to
answer; and as to his intention, I shall certainly leave it to you to determine
upon the case stated by the counsel, if you are satisfied that this is a
libellous work, and if you are satisfied that these inuendos are proper
inuendos, and fairly made out, whether you can think a man publishing such a
pamphlet as this, charged to have, and having in your opinion a seditious
tendency, does it with such an innocent intention as the law will support.

There is one more observation that has been made by the counsel for the
desendant. You have heard a good deal about the Star Chamber, and so on; now I
think it is but fair to say that this has been brought before you by a grand
jury. God forbid that you should decide the question against the prisoner
because a grand jury has found the bill; but so far as concerns the attorney
general, it is on the part of the public certainly the mildest method of
proceeding, because it is giving the prisoner the most favorable opportunity
of being tried by his equals. I cannot, therefore, conceive that this
prosecution can in any way be considered to look at all like any of those
prosecutions of which we have heard so much, because I think all that is done
away by the manner in which the present attorney general has thought fit to
prosecure this man.

There was another observation made by the counsel for the defendant,
respecting the taxes and administration, and so on. I can only say that I think
that observation was a little unfortunate, because the whole of the defense
seemed to me upon this occasion in to turn upon this; and it is the strongest
part of the argument which has been put by the counsel for the defendant, that
these inuendos, applying these passages to the king and government of this
country, are not fairly applied. Now it seems to me, in such a defense are
that, rather an awkward circumstance; and it looks as if the mind, in reading
this pamphlet, could not but feel that it is meant to convey sentiments
unfavourable to the government of this country; and what strengthens that
opinion is, that in the subsequent part something further is stated respecting
those taxes mentioned in this very libel.

You have had another observation made with respect to the state of this man's
family. Now as all that is to be considered as an attack upon your passions,
either on one side or the other, you have too much good sensc to attend to it.
You are to consider the situation of the country at large, the good government
of the Country on one hand, and the situation of the defendant on the other and
I have no doubt that you will do justice between them both, and that you will
not be hurried away by the idea of a family, or any thing of that sort, which
in a criminal case can make no consideration at all. All that the prosecutor
can ask of you, and all that I can ask of you, is this, to read this book as
you would read it if you wanted to make yourselves matters of it in your own
private chambers, see what the impression is on your minds, and if you think
these inuendos are fairly made out, as applied to this pamphlet, they certainly
charge the defendant with publishing a seditious libel. You will judge of the
whole. If you think him guilty, you will find him so; if you think this is not
made out to be applicable to the king and government of this country, you will
then acquit him.

Mr. Gurney I beg the jury may take out with them a copy of the indictment as
well as the pamphlet.


Mr. Fielding. Your lordship will decide upon that.


Mr. Gurney. Upon the trial of this defendant at Guildhall, Lord Kenyon
expressly desired the jury to take with them a copy of the information.


Foreman of the Jury. We beg we may have a copy of the indictment.


Mr. Fielding. Certainly, Gentlemen, you shall.


The jury retired, taking with them the pamphlet and a copy of the indictment;
in about an hour they returned, with a verdict of NOT GUILTY.


