THE REVISED DISCIPLINE APPROVED BY THE YEARLY MEETING OF FRIENDS, HELD IN
BALTIMORE, FOR THE WESTERN-SHORE of MARYLAND, AND THE ADJACENT PARTS OF
PENNSYLVANIA and VIRGINIA, IN THE YEAR ONE THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED AND
NINETY-THREE.

BALTIMORE: PRINTED BY JOHN HAYES, IN SOUTH-STREET. M, DCC, XCIV.

APPEALS.
THOSE who think themselves injured or aggrieved by the judgment of a monthly
meeting, may appeal to the quarterly meeting; provided notice be given of such
intended appeal, in three months after such judgment is given, which
notification the monthly meeting should enter on their minutes, and appoint
four or more friends to attend the quarterly meeting, with a copy of their
records in the case, signed by the clerk, and on the monthly meeting's behalf
give reasons for what is done, as the case may require, submitting the same to
the quarterly meeting. 1719.

Any person dissatisfied with the judgment of a quarterly meeting, may appeal
from such judgment to the yearly meeting, on giving the said quarterly meeting,
or the next ensuing, notice of such intention, which should be entered on the
minutes, and four or more friends appointed to attend the yearly meeting with
the records of both the monthly and quarterly meetings, in the case signed as
aforesaid, to speak to the matter there, where it is to be finally determined.

All persons who may think themselves aggrieved, not pursuing the directions
given with respect to the time of giving notice of their appeals, shall be
excluded from any right of appealing afterward.

In all cases where a meeting is under the necessity of disowning any member,
such member ought to have notice thereof, either by the meeting's acquainting
the party therewith, if present, or, if absent, by sending a friend or two for
that purpose; likewise when the judgment, or testimony is made, a copy should
be delivered, or by two friends sent to the party, with notice of the privilege
of appeal if dissatisfied: Except where the monthly meeting shall judge it too
difficult to give such information in both, or either of the cases aforesaid,
through the absence or the parties.

ARBITRATION.
WHEN any difference arises between friends about their interest, claims, or
properties, the parties are to proceed according to the advice of the apostle,
1 Corinthians, vi. and the ancient christian practices, and not at any time
brother go to law with brother, except on apparent and urgent necessity, as is
hereafter limited and expressed, and permission from the monthly meeting
obtained; but if any professing with us shall arrest, sue, or implead at law
any other person, making the same profession, before he has proceeded in the
method hereafter mentioned, or is so permitted by the monthly meeting; such
ought to be dealt with as other disorderly persons, and give satisfaction to
the meeting, by condemning such conduct, and in case of refusal after
deliberate and tender dealing, they are to be disowned by the meeting to which
they belong.

The manner of proceeding in cases of difference.
The party who finds he has reason of complaint, is first himself in a calm and
friendly manner to speak, or, if at a distance, write to the party by whom he
is injured, or in danger of suffering his just right, and endeavor by gentle
means, in a brotherly manner to obtain his right; but if it is still refused,
or neglected, then let him take one or two with him, either the overseers, or
some other judicious friends, or if they live at a distance, and belong to
different meetings, write to, or empower one to act in like manner on his
behalf, and in the same friendly way make his claim or demand, and friends so
accompanying the complainant, are to give their utmost assistance to have the
matter justly and expeditiously ended, either by the parties themselves, or by
their immediate assistance; and if the matter appears plain, or is an
uncontested debt, or bond against which no reasonable objection is made, those
friends are to advise the party complained of, to make satisfaction without
carrying the matter further, either to arbitration or the meeting; but if there
is either an unsettled difference in accounts, or reason of debate, then if
they cannot persuade the determination thereof by the parties themselves, or
procure it by advice and assistance, they are to persuade the parties to choose
some suitable friends as arbitrators, and engage themselves to stand to, and
abide by the determination of such referrees, as is usual in like cases.

If either of the parties refuse such advice, or endeavors to end the
difference, the one so refusing should be complained of to the monthly meeting,
and notice of such intention of complaint, that they may attend at the time
appointed.

When the case is brought into the meeting, the first enquiry should be,
whether the abovementioned gospel order has been duly observed? If not, the
complaint ought to be returned, and no notice taken of it on the minutes; but
if it has been regularly observed, then the meeting, to avoid as much as
possible, contention and indecent noise, is to direct the hearing and
determination thereof out of the meeting, and in order thereto, the parties may
nominate each, one, or mere friends, as the importance of the matter may
require, and the meeting add, one, or more, as they see occasion in the nature
of the complaint, or for further necessary enquiry; and the committee so
nominated, are to avoid all unnecessary delays, in their determination, and
make report if possible to the ensuing monthly meeting.

If either party refuse to attend the arbitration, and submit their cause, and
stand to, and abide the award, judgment, and determination of the friends so
nominated and appointed, such person must be dealt with as one disorderly, who
regards not peace either in himself, or in the church, and that slights the
love, order, and unity of the brethren; and if, after due admonition, the party
persist therein, let him be disowned and testified against by the meeting;
after which the other friend may apply to the law for remedy.

But if any find themselves aggrieved by such award, judgment, or
determination, and apply to the monthly meeting for a re-hearing, before the
said judgment be confirmed by the meeting, let it be allowed; except in cases
where bonds are entered into by the parties to abide such judgment, in which
cases it ought to be final. And if the party is still dissatisfied with the
judgment of the monthly meeting, and shall notify their intention of making
application to have the cause heard by the quarterly meeting, let it be
permitted, under the same limitations and directions as in cases of offense
against the church. Yet it is advised, that all coolly and weightily consider
the matter, before they give the meeting so much trouble, and not do it through
a perverse, or contentious temper; but only when they have good reason to
believe they have just cause so to do, occasioned by want of due information to
the arbitrators, or manifest mistake, or error in their judgment.

And whereas there may be some cases wherein the foregoing method of proceeding
cannot be complied with, such as the parties absconding with design to defraud
their creditors, or being overloaded with debts, and other creditors generally
coming on him, the claimant must sustain manifest damage by the time it will
take in going through the meetings, or where there may be danger of future
damage, as in case of executors or administrators, or such as act in trust; it
may therefore be necessary, and it is advised, that the monthly meetings
respectively, where such cases happen, and on due enquiry appear truly so,
permit, or hold excused those who are really necessiated, in the two
first-mentioned cases, to proceed otherwise: And in the case of executors or
administrators, where it shall appear to the meeting, that the matter is of
importance, and that it otherwise may be unsafe, and manifestly of dangerous
consequence; such may be permitted to have the matter tried at law, or rather
first in our friendly way, and then by consent confirmed by a judgment, as the
meeting may see occasion upon the matter to advise and direct; with this
caution, that the parties on both sides concerned, still appear and behave
toward each other in brotherly love; and in the management of the cause, or
asserting what they apprehend to be their right, that it be done with decency
and moderation, without any provoking, or unbecoming language: For as a bitter
indecent behavior will cause our profession to be evilly spoken of, so on the
contrary a christian prudence, and meek deportment, will bear a becoming
testimony even in courts, and show that nothing but the nature of the case, and
our common station with our neighbors under the law of the nation, brings any
of us there.

And as it is our duty to seek peace with all men, and to avoid giving
provocation, or just offense to any, it is advised, that friends avoid going to
law with others not of our profession, without due consideration, and good
grounds; having first in a friendly way showed his opponent the justice of his
cause, and offered, where he safely may, if the other makes any reasonable
objection, to submit the matter to a neighbourly reference. That friends, also,
give no just occasion to such to go to law with them, but carefully comply with
their promises and contracts, and where they have any reason for objection to
the demand, that they show a willingness, and readiness to agree it peaceably
between themselves, or submit to a reference.

The method to be observed in proceeding in Arbitrations.
1. The arbitrators should not consider themselves as advocates for the party
by whom they were chosen; but men, whose incumbent duty it is to judge
righteously. They should shun all previous information respecting the case,
that they may not be biassed in their judgments, before they hear both parties
together.

2. The parties to enter into written engagements, or bonds in the usual form,
if either of them require it, to abide by the award of the arbitrators, or a
majority of them, to be made in a limited time.

3. Every meeting of the arbitrators must be made known to the parties
concerned, until they have been fully heard; nor shall there be any separate
private meetings between some of the arbitrators, or with one party separate
from the other on the business referred to them; and no representation of the
case of one party, either by writing or otherwise, be admitted, without its
being fully made known to the other, and, if required, a copy to be delivered
to the other party.

4. The arbitrators are to hear both parties fully, in the presence of each
other, whilst either has any fresh matter to offer, until a certain time
limited, by mutual agreement. Let no evidence be withheld or rejected.

5. If there should appear to the arbitrators, or to any of them, to be any
doubtful point of law, they are jointly to agree upon a case, and consult
council thereon. The arbitrators are not required to express in the award their
reasons for the decision. One writing of the award is to be sealed, and
delivered to each party.

It is recommended to arbitrators to propose to the parties, that they should
give an acknowledgment in writing, before the award is made, that they have
been heartily and fully heard.

BOOKS.
SUCH are to be dealt with as disorderly, who print or publish any books or
writings tending to raise contention, or occasion breach of unity, or that have
not first had the perusal and approbation of some friends appointed by the
yearly meeting for that purpose.

BURIALS.
Whereas at some burials, where people come far, there may be occasion for some
refreshment, yet let that be done with such moderation, gravity, and solidity,
as becomes the occasion; and if any appear otherwise, let such be reproved, and
dealt with as is advised in cases of misbehaviour, or indecencies at marriages:
And it maybe further noted, that any excess in this case, and making so solemn
a time as this ought to be, and in its nature really is, appear as a festival,
must be burdensome and grievous to the sober christian mind, which will of
course, at such times, be under a far different exercise.

CERTIFICATES.
For preserving unity and a good understanding among friends, we desire, that
when any friends intend to remove their habitation within the limits of another
monthly meeting, that they would first acquaint the monthly meeting thereof
whereto they belong, and apply for a certificate of their good life,
conversation and circumstances; and if no objection appear, obtain one to be
produced to the monthly meeting, within the limits of which they are going to
reside: But if any friends in unity, should remove without making such
application, the meeting should, notwithstanding, send such a certificate as
they with truth and justice can give to the meeting, within the limits of which
they are removed, that they, by receiving them as they are, may have a proper
care of them; and, the meeting from which they removed, may be clear of any
reproach their misconduct afterward may bring on the society. But, before the
certificate is given, the meeting should appoint some friends to make the
necessary enquiry into the character and conduct of the person, and if any
obstruction appear, let it be removed, or the party dealt with according to the
circumstances of the case.

When any friends of the ministry purpose to travel in that service, they
should first acquaint the monthly meeting to which they belong, for their
brotherly advice in that respect, and have a minute or certificate of the
meeting's unity, and concurrence with them in their undertaking, and service as
ministers, and that none be permitted to travel abroad and appoint meetings out
of the limits of the quarterly meeting they belong to, without such certificate
or written approbation.

It is further advised, that copies be kept of all certificates of removal.

CONDUCT and CONVERSATION.
We earnestly beseech our friends, especially the youth, to avoid all such
conversation as may tend to draw out their minds into the foolish and wicked
pastimes with which this age abounds, (particularly balls, gaming-places,
horse-races, and play houses) those nurseries of debauchery and wickedness, the
burden and grief of the sober part of other societies, as well as of our own;
practices wholly unbecoming a people under the christian profession, contrary
to the tenor of the doctrine of the gospel, and the examples of pious men in
all ages. For, as "evil communications corrupt good manners," so it is the duty
of men professing religion, who live in this world, in order to obtain a
better, not only to "shake their hands from holding of bribes, and stop their
ears from hearing of blood;" but also," to shut their eyes from seeing evil."
Isa. xxxiii. 15.

That none accustom themselves to vain and idle company, sipping and tippling
of drams, and strong-drink at inns or elsewhere.

That such be dealt with, who are given to excess of drinking, swearing,
cursing, lying, unlawful or unseemly company keeping with women, or any other
scandalous practices. And where any professing truth, are guilty of such
disorderly or indecent practices, as shall give or occasion public scandal, if
they are brought to a sense thereof, either by the overseers or other friends
dealing with them as before advised and directed, or by compunction, or true
sight in themselves, such ought as soon as possible, to appear at the monthly
meeting to which they belong, and there acknowledge and condemn the offense in
writing under their hand, to the satisfaction of the meeting, and that the
scandal may be removed, let such acknowledgment or condemnation be published by
the said meeting, in such manner as may probably become as public as the
offense has been: And where any such offender refuses to acknowledge, and
condemn the fault, then the monthly meeting ought speedily to testify upon
record, against the party, and the fact, and publish the testimony so far as
shall appear requisite for the clearing of truth.

And although there is no reason to disown such offenders as condemn their own
scandalous actions to the satisfaction of the meeting, yet such ought not to be
immediately accounted as members in full unity; but it is fit that some time
should pass for the trial of their sincerity, until friends may become sensible
of their real contrition. But if the offense committed, be only against the
church, and not a public scandal, acknowledgment, and condemnation by the party
under hand, and entered en the monthly meeting book only, is sufficient,
without further publication; and on the offender's refusal, the meeting ought
also, after deliberate dealing and due admonition, to testify against the party
according to the nature of the offense, and enter it on their own minutes,
whereby such persons stand disowned, till they shall repent, and give
satisfaction.

CORRESPONDENCE.
See Institution of the Meeting for Sufferings.

DAYS and TIMES.
ADVISED that friends keep to their wonted example, and testimony against the
superstitious observation of days. L. P. E. 1691.

That all friends keep to the simplicity of truth, and our ancient testimony,
in calling the months and days by scripture names, and not by heathen. 1697.

We think it may be useful and expedient to revive in your remembrance, some of
the motives which induced our ancient friends to forbear the vulgar
appellations of the months and days, and to observe in their conversations, and
writings, such names as were agreeable to scripture, and the practice of good
men therein recorded.

The children of Israel, the people whom God chose out of all the families of
the earth, to place his name among, and to make himself known unto, were
strictly commanded, not only to abstain from the idolatrous practices of the
nations in the midst of whom they dwelt, but were enjoined to be " circumspect
in all things that the Lord commanded," and even to " make no mention of the
names of other gods, neither to let it be heard out of their mouth." Exodus
xxiii. 13. This injunction was not relative to any legal or typical rites,
external ceremonies, or institutions of the law peculiar to the Jewish nation;
but was a perpetual command, and standing ordinance, respecting the honor of
the one Almighty Being, the same yesterday, today, and forever; and as such
ought to be regarded by us, and by all the generations of those who with the
heart believe, as well as with the tongue confess, " that the Lord he is God,
and that there is none else besides him." Deuteronomy iv. 35. Who has declared, " I
am the Lord, that is my name, and my glory will I not give to another, neither
my praise to graven images." Isaiah xlii. 8. Convinced of this great and
everlasting truth, both by the testimony of the holy scripture, and the
manifestation of that divine principle, which leads those who are faithful to
its teachings, from all that would dishonor the name of God, either in word or
deed; our ancient friends were conscientiously concerned to refrain from the
use of those names of months, and days, which had been ascribed by way of
honor to the idols of the heathen, and in conformity to their false worships:
This concern rested upon them from a firm persuasion, that the glorious gospel
day, and time was come, wherein the Lord was fulfilling his covenant with
Israel, viz. " I will take away the names of This word Baalim, being the plural
number of Baal, signifying Lord, has relation to the names of diverse idols of
the heathen, worshipped in several places.
Baalim out of his mouth, and they shall no more be remembered by their names."
Hosea ii. 17.

And that you may the more clearly discern the importance of that christian
testimony, borne by our predecessors in this case, we recommend what follows to
your serious consideration, viz.

A brief account of the origin of the names of some months of the year, and of
all the days of the week, now customarily and commonly used.

I. January, was so called from Janus, an ancient king of Italy, whom
heathenish superstition had deified, to whom a temple was built and this month
dedicated. II. February, was so called from Februa, a word denoting purgation
by sacrifices; it being usual in this month for the priests of the heathen god,
Pan, to offer sacrifices, and perform certain rites, conducing, as was
supposed, to the cleansing, or purgation of the people. III. March, was so
denominated from Mars, feigned to be the god of war, whom Romulus, founder of
the Roman empire, pretended to be his father. IV. April, is generally supposed
to derive its name from the Greek appellation of Venus, an imaginary goddess
worshipped by the Romans. V. May, is said to have been so called, from Maia,
the mother of Mercury, another of their pretended ethnic deities, to whom in
this month they paid their devotions. VI. June, is said to take its name from
Juno, one of the supposed goddesses of the heathen. VII. July, so called from
Julius Caesar, one of the Roman emperors, who gave his own name to this month,
which before was called Quintilis, or the fifth. VIII. August, so named in
honor of Augustus Caesar, another of the Roman emperors; this month was before
called Sextilis, or the sixth.
The other four months, namely, September, October, November, December, still
retain their numerical Latin names, which according to the late regulation of
the Calendar, will for the future be improperly applied, however from the
continued use of them hitherto, as well as from the practice of the Jews,
before the Babylonish captivity it seems highly probable, that the method of
distinguishing the months by their numerical order only, was the most ancient,
as it is the most plain, simple, and rational.

As the idolatrous Romans thus gave names to several of the months, in honor
of their pretended deities, so the like idolatry prevailing among our Saxon
ancestors, induced them to call the days of the week, by the name of the idol,
which on that day they peculiarly worshipped. Hence

The First day of the week, was by them called Sunday, from their customary
adoration of the Sun upon that day. The Second day of the week, they called
Monday, from their usual custom of worshipping the Moon on that day. The Third
day of the week, they named Tuesday, in honor of one of their idols called
Tuisco. The Fourth day of the week, was called Wednesday, from the appellation
of Woden, another of their idols. The Fifth day of the week, was called
Thursday, from the name of an idol called Thor, to whom they paid their
devotions upon that day. The Sixth day of the week, was termed Friday, from the
name of Friga, an imaginary goddess by them worshipped. The Seventh day, they
styled Saturday, as is supposed from Saturn, or Seater, by them then
worshipped.
In the ages of Popish superstition, not only the use of such heathenish names
and customs were indulged, but also other unsound and unscriptural practices in
religion were invented and introduced. For when the profession of the christian
religion became national, multitudes of heathen priests, whose interest lay in
the performance of rites, ceremonies, and sacrifices, embraced prevailing
christianity with selfish views, and labored early with too much success to
find employment for themselves, by imposing on the people a new set of
ceremonies and sacrifices, bearing some resemblance to those, which in their
former state of heathenism they had been accustomed to. From this corrupt
source sprang the popish sacrifice of the mass, the celebration of which, at
particular times, and on particular occasions, gave rise to the vulgar names of
Michaelmas, Martinmas, Christmas, and the like.

Seeing therefore that these appellations and names of days, months, and times,
are of an idolatrous or superstitious original, contrary to the divine command,
the practice of good and holy men in former ages, and repugnant to the
christian testimony borne by our faithful friends and predecessors in the
truth, for the sake of which they patiently endured many revilings; let neither
the reproach of singularity, nor the specious reasonings of such as would evade
the cross of Christ, turn you aside from the simplicity of the gospel, nor
discourage you from keeping to the language of truth, in denominating the
months and days, according to the plain and scriptural way of expression,
thereby following the example of our worthy elders, and coming up in a noble
and honorable testimony against these, and all other remains of idolatry and
superstition.

Where there is disagreement in the conduct of friends, respecting the
observance of days appointed by the government for fasts, and the illumination
of the windows of their houses, upon what are called rejoicing nights, which
not only affords occasion of triumph to the enemies of truth, but likewise
increases the weight of the sufferings of such friends as are conscientiously
concerned to maintain inviolably our ancient and christian testimony in these
respects; it is desired and advised, that where a defection of this kind
appears, some solid and weighty friends be appointed by the respective monthly
meetings, to treat with the unfaithful herein, in a spirit of love and
tenderness, in order that such may be awakened to a serious consideration of
their duty, and encouraged to a faithful discharge thereof. (...)

DISCIPLINE.
ADVISED that friends exert good endeavors and care in all meetings of
business, for the preservation of good order and wholesome discipline; that
their hands slack not therein; that they, every where, may apply to the Lord,
who gives wisdom, and will not fail those who seek it in humility and fear, so
that overseers and heads of families may be enabled respectively to discharge
their duties and trust, in a christian meek spirit, for it is that gives weight
and success to our labors; let us all therefore guard against the warmth of
our own spirits, and let love, the mark of our discipleship, govern in all our
behavior one toward another.

The love and friendship of this world, and spirit of it, covetousness, pride,
self-interest and inordinate pursuit after lawful things, not only obstruct the
growth of truth in some hearts; but also hinder many from coming forward as
they otherwise might do, to carry on the good work of discipline, and perform
other offices of love and service in the church of Christ: Let us therefore
earnestly seek to the searcher of all hearts, for his divine aid to divest
ourselves of these, and all other hindering things, that many more laborers
may be fitted and made willing to come forward in this part of the Lord's
harvest; that where any are found weak or faulty, they may without partiality
be admonished in the spirit of love and divine charity, so that it may be seen
by all, that the restoring spirit of meekness and christian love abound before
church censure comes, and that a gospel spirit is the spring and motive of all
our performances, as well in discipline as worship. But if any decline or let
fall any branch of our testimony, they are to be speedily dealt with, according
to the good order and discipline established among us. See meetings for
discipline.

In order to unite us the more nearly one to another, as members of the same
body, and to strengthen our hands to promote the general cause of truth; it is
recommended to friends, to stand open to the leadings of the love of God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord: And when they feel drawings in their minds to
sit with any of their neighboring monthly or quarterly meetings, that they
attend thereto; and that such monthly or quarterly meetings as are so visited,
receive such as they know to be well approved at home, in the love of God, and
not to look upon them as intruders: so shall mutual help be given and received
amongst us, and we truly be a people led by one and the same spirit. 1759.

Let a necessary enquiry be raised in the minds of all members of the church,
who have had any part of the Lord's work upon them, how they have acquitted
themselves therein, and discharged themselves in the sight of God; forasmuch as
a day comes on apace, in which an account of our stewardship will be required
at our hands. The discipline of the society would again be revived, and
strengthened, if this awful sense of rendering an account of our trust, and the
importance of being clear from the blood of all men, were enough impressed upon
all minds. And, dear friends, as it is the Lord's work, let it be done as in
his sight. Let all our answers to the queries be plain and explicit. Let a due
sense of the state of the church prevail on your minds, rather than an
unwillingness to appear deficient among your brethren. May a suitable
engagement of mind prevail on all the active members of the church, to acquit
themselves with faithfulness, that they may at last receive the crown of
righteousness, which will never fade away.

DIVERSIONS.
See Conduct and Conversation.

ELDERS.
IT is recommended that in each particular meeting, one, or more suitable
friend, or friends, of either or both sexes, be appointed by the monthly
meeting, as standing elders, to sit in the select meeting with such ministers
as are in unity, (and none other shall be accounted proper members of that
meeting) to encourage and help young ministers, and give advice to all as
occasion may require, whether such ministers be members of the same meeting, or
travel amongst them in the service of truth. And when any young ministers give
satisfactory proof of their call and qualification to that service, the monthly
meeting to which they belong, are desired to recommend them to the care of the
quarterly meeting of ministers and elders, and return their names to the said
meeting*

And we earnestly request, that the elders in quarterly and monthly meetings,
would be ready to help and inform the weak, when suitable opportunities
present, that both ministers and hearers pursuing one and the same end, namely,
the glory of God, and the good and welfare one of another, the church may be
edified, increase and flourish, to the consolation of the faithful.

FAMILIES.
Let the christian duty of visiting the sick, be timely remembered and
practiced; it having often left comfort, ease and sweetness upon the spirits of
many to their very end. 1710.

GRAVE-STONES.
IT appears to this meeting, to be wrong and of evil tendency, to have hewn or
carved grave-stones, or any other sort of superfluous or ornamental monuments
over, or about the graves in any of friends burying-grounds.

GOVERNMENT.
Advised to walk wisely and circumspectly toward all men, in the peaceable
spirit of Christ; to give no offense, or occasion, to those in outward
government; to avoid the controversies, heats, and distractions of this world;
to pray for the good of all, and submit to that divine power, which rules over
the kingdoms of men. 1689.

INDIANS.
It is the solid sense and judgment of this meeting, that friends should not
purchase, nor remove to settle such lands, as have not been fairly and openly
first purchased from the Indians, by those persons who are, or may be fully
authorized by the government to make such purchase, and that monthly meetings
should be careful to excite their members to a strict observance of this
advice; and where any so remove contrary to the advice of their brethren, they
should not give certificates to such persons; but endeavor to persuade them to
avoid the danger to which they expose themselves, and to convince them of the
inconsistency of their conduct with our christian profession.

LAW.
See Arbitrations.

MARRIAGES.
IT is the advice and direction of this meeting, according to the approved
practice, which has been so long honorable, and the orderly and decent care
used among friends, that no man propose his intentions of marriage, or any
woman receive or countenance such proposition, where either or both have
parents, or guardians, and are under their tuition and care, without first
acquainting their parents or guardians therewith, and duly waiting on them for
their consent, and agreement therein. And it is also the advice and judgment of
this meeting, that where parents or guardians have once consented to, or
approved of the visits, and addresses of a man on that account, or to a young
woman's admitting of such addresses, that they do not retract without giving
such reasons as shall appear sufficient, and to the satisfaction of the monthly
meeting to which they belong. If any man or woman so concerned, know of any
reasonable or just objection to their proceeding; such as the want of consent
of parents, or guardians, pre-engagements, or the want of a certificate where
either have resided in another country, or the man belong to another monthly
meeting, and is sensible of any cause of difficulty in obtaining one from the
said meeting, it is advised that endeavors be used to remove such obstructions
to their proceedings, before they propose their intentions of marriage to the
monthly meeting.

That all, according to the usual custom, propose their intentions of marriage
to two monthly meetings, and that the second time be the next succeeding
meeting to the first, unless sickness or some material cause prevents.

The parties intending to join in marriage, are to declare their intention in
terms of the following import, viz. The man: That he intends marriage with
(...) if the Lord permit. The woman: That she intends marriage with (...) if
the Lord permit. These declarations are to be made first before the women's
meeting, and then before the men's.

At the first meeting, the appearance should be minuted, and enquiry made
concerning consent of parents or guardians, if either have any; and if the man
belongs to the same meeting, two friends appointed to enquire into his
clearness from others, and make report to the next monthly meeting. The like to
be done by the women friends concerning the woman. But if either of the parties
belong to another monthly meeting, let enquiry be made for a certificate from
such meeting of his or her clearness from others in relation to marriage
engagements, etc. And where none is produced, let the party be informed, that
the marriage cannot be allowed of without one. But if the meeting to which the
person belongs is within such distance, that it may probably be obtained, so as
to be produced at the next meeting, and nothing else appear to obstruct, it may
then pass for the first time.

At the second meeting, if what is above expressed be done, and all appear
clear, the parties are then to express, first before the women's meeting, and
then before the men's, the continuance of their intention of marriage with each
other; then let the entry be made of their second appearance, and the couple
left to their liberty to consummate their marriage according to the good order
used among friends.

At, or near the conclusion of a meeting, either appointed on purpose, or on
the usual weekday, after it has been held the usual time, the parties are to
stand up, and taking each other by the hand, declare in an audible and solemn
manner, to the following effect; the man first, viz. Friends, in the Here may
be a few more words added if the parties appear in a disposition suitable.
(...) presence of this assembly, I take this my friend (...) to be my wife,
promising, with divine assistance, to be to her a loving and faithful husband,
till death shall separate us. And then the woman in like manner: Friends, in
the (...) presence of this assembly, I take this my friend (...) to be my
husband, promising, with divine assistance, to be to him a loving and faithful
wife, until death shall separate us.

A certificate in the following usual form of words, is then to be audibly
read, by some proper person, the express names and description of the parties
being first inserted: They are then to sign the same, the man first, the woman
with the assumed name of her husband, the relations next, and such others
present as think proper.

The Form of the Certificate.
A. B. of (...) son of D. B. of (...) and E. his wife, and S. T. daughter of M.
T. of (...) and M. his wife, having declared their intentions of taking each
other in marriage before several monthly meetings of the people called Quakers,
in the county of (...) the proceedings of the said A. B. and S. T. after due
enquiry and deliberate consideration, were allowed by the said meetings, they
appearing clear of all others, and having consent of parents and parties
concerned.

Now these are to certify, whom it may concern, that for the accomplishing
their said marriage, this (...) they, the said A. B. and S. T. appeared in a
public assembly of the aforesaid people, and others, in their meeting house, at
(...) in the county aforesaid; and he the said A. B. taking the said S. T. by
the hand, did openly and solemnly declare as follows: (...) And the said S. T.
did then and there in the said assembly, declare as follows: (...) And the said
A. B. and S. T, (she according to the custom of marriage, assuming the name of
her husband) as a full confirmation thereof, and in testimony thereto, did then
and there to these presents set their hands.

A. B. S. B.

We who were present, among others, at the above marriage, have also subscribed
our names as witnesses thereto, the day and year aforesaid.



It is further pressed and advised, that the said consummation be performed
decently and weightily; that the parties themselves, their parents, or others
concerned, take care at their houses, or places they are at after the meeting
is over, that no reproach arise, or occasion be given by any intemperate or
immoderate jesting, drinking, or unseemly wanton discourse or actions; but that
all behave with such modesty and sobriety, as becomes a people fearing God. And
for the assistance of those immediately concerned, let the monthly meeting,
where the marriage is allowed, appoint two men friends, and two women friends,
to attend and take care, as much as they can, that all behave as is above
advised; and if any thing to the contrary is observed, let them, as soon as
they can with convenience, and decency, take such as make such breach on good
order, moderation or modesty, aside, and in love and tenderness admonish and
caution them to better behavior, and to be more watchful over their words and
actions: And the said friends are to make report to the next monthly meeting,
respecting the decency and order observed at the marriage; and the monthly
meeting is also to take the needful care that the certificate be properly
recorded in a book to be kept for that purpose.

It is advised that friends avoid all unnecessary preparations and invitations
at marriages.

Inasmuch as any marriage of near kindred, in the times of the law, was in
condescension, and upon such extraordinary occasions as holding up their
tribes, and that the nearer their marriages were the more unholy they were
accounted; we, in our day, ought not to approach our near kindred in any such
respect, particularly first cousins, being redeemed out of those kindreds,
tribes, and earthly lots; (for the upholding of which marriages within the
kindred were once dispensed with) and brought to that spiritual dispensation,
which gives dominion over the affections, and leads to those marriages which
are more natural and of better report.

And though some through weakness, have been drawn into such marriages, (which
being done must not be broken) yet let not their practices be a precedent, or
example to any others amongst us for the time to come.

Monthly meetings ought to be careful in passing or allowing of marriages of
near kindred; and, where any uneasiness in this respect appears, take the
advice of the yearly meeting thereon, rather than proceed in doubtful cases.

MEETINGS for WORSHIP.
AS it has been our care and practice from the beginnings, that (...) open
testimony for the Lord should be borne, and a public standard for truth and
righteousness upheld in the power and spirit of God, by our open and known
meetings, against the spirit of persecution, that in all ages has sought to
lay waste God's heritage, and as only through faithfulness, constancy, and
patience, victory has been and is obtained, so it is our advice and judgment,
that all friends gathered in the name of Jesus, keep up these public
testimonies in their respective places, and not decline, forsake, or remove
their public assemblies, because of times of sufferings, as worldly, fearful
and politic professors have done, because of informers and the like
persecutors; for such practices are not consistent with the nobility of the
truth, and therefore not to be owned in the church of Christ.

As it has pleased divine goodness clearly to manifest amongst us the way of
life and salvation, and to instruct us where and how to wait for him, prize, we
beseech you, these precious privileges, keep all your meetings in the name of
the Lord, and let your minds be established in an humble waiting upon him with
reverence and fear; so shall strength be added to strength, and being more
closely united to him, you will experience the indwelling of his blessed spirit.

When gathered in your religious assemblies, be truly concerned to retire to
the divine and heavenly gift, which will minister to every state and condition,
though you may perhaps have no outward teaching, and will direct you to wait
without being restless or uneasy, till it be a proper time to break up your
meetings with that decency and solemnity, which should attend our minds in such
service; and be not apt, as the manner of some is, at the close of your
meetings, hastily to enter into discourses about the affairs of this life, much
less the vain amusements thereof; a practice inconsistent with that christian
gravity, which at such time ought, in an especial manner, to season the minds
of persons so lately assembled for the worship of God in spirit and in truth.

MEETINGS for DISCIPLINE.
AGREED, that no quarterly meeting be set up, or laid down without the consent
of the yearly meeting; no monthly, preparative, or other meeting of business,
or worship, without application to, and consent of the quarterly meeting.

These meetings are subordinate, and accountable to each other in the following
order, viz. The preparative to the monthly, the monthly to the quarterly, and
the quarterly to the yearly meeting: So that if the yearly meeting is at any
time dissatisfied with the proceedings of any of the said meetings, or the
quarterly with that of the monthly, or the monthly with the preparative, within
their limits, such meetings ought respectively, with readiness to render a
satisfactory account.

Let each preparative meeting choose two men friends, and two women friends, to
attend the monthly meeting, and present on behalf, and by order of said
preparative meeting, what shall be given in charge; each monthly meeting a
sufficient number, to attend the quarterly meeting to which they belong, and
present on behalf of the respective monthly meeting, what shall be given them
in charge, which ought to be in writing and for the like service let each
quarterly meeting appoint at least four friends of each sex, as representatives
to the yearly meeting.

Let minutes, or due entries be made in every monthly, and quarterly meeting,
of all such matters as come before them, and are determined, or that may be
removed from the monthly to the quarterly, or from that to the yearly meeting.

Let all marriages, marriage-certificates, births and burials, be recorded in
each monthly meeting; also an account of friends sufferings, for their
testimony against hireling ministers, and war, which ought to be transferred to
the quarterly, and from thence to the yearly meeting.

If any monthly or quarterly meeting have occasion for, and request any of the
records of another monthly or quarterly meeting, it is desired that the meeting
so requesting may be furnished with such copies.

That full endeavors be used in every monthly meeting, to end, with the utmost
dispatch, all business that arises or is brought for their determination, and
if any matter be referred from one meeting to another, let the reason be
minuted why it is referred; but if they find any thing too weighty or
inconvenient for them to determine, they may move it to the quarterly meeting,
and after due care and endeavors to end any matter, or difference, the
quarterly meeting may move it to the yearly meeting.

The method of dealing with disorderly persons, or such as give offense, either
to the church, or particular members, is very excellently prescribed by the
savior of mankind. Matthew, xviii. 15, 16, 17. If thy brother shall trespass
against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone, if he shall
hear thee, thou have gained thy brother; but if he will not hear thee, then
take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses
every word, may be established, and if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it
to the church; but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be to thee as an
heathen man, and a publican.

The eminent apostle in his epistle to the Philippians, has these expressions:
Chap. iv. 8. Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any
virtue, if there be any praise, think, on these things. Now whatsoever appears
in any contrary to these, may in general, be said to come under the notice of
friends, overseers, and meeting. And although it is a duty incumbent on
meetings, and every faithful member, where any discords, or unbecoming
practices come to their knowledge, to advise, admonish, or treat with such as
are guilty, yet that it may not be neglected, it ought to be, more particularly
and directly the business and service of the overseers.

And it is advised, that in speaking to, or dealing with any, it may be done in
a christian spirit of love and tenderness, by laying the evil before them,
laboring in meekness to bring such to a sense of it in themselves, that they
may, if possible, be restored. And although such as transgress or loose their
hold of truth are apt, while in that condition, to oppose or be testy; yet we
ought patiently and meekly to instruct and advise them, so that we may not only
have a testimony of peace in ourselves, but may so affect the spirits of those
to whom we speak, as that they may be sensible we have performed a truly
christian duty toward them in brotherly love; after which tender dealing, if
any reject the admonition or counsel, the overseers or such as deal with them,
are to acquaint the preparative meeting thereof, that further care may be
taken, according to the established rule among friends.

Besides, all other notorious crimes or gross wickedness, if any happen, the
following practices ought zealously to be taken care of and suppressed, viz.
Excessive drinking, swearing, cursing, lying, unlawful or unseemly keeping
company with women, or any other scandalous practices.

And it is the business of the overseers, or other weighty friends, to speak
to, or deal with such as are at difference or strife, either about their
interest in worldly affairs, or other resentments, advising an agreement among
themselves and speedy reconciliation, to avoid if possible, bringing any
troublesome business to meetings which may be otherwise ended; but if they
cannot prevail, they are then to take the methods prescribed for proceeding in
such case. -- See conduct and conversation.

Such as frequently neglect, or do not in due time, attend meetings, those on
weekdays as well as first-days, but stay away on light trivial, or ordinary
occasions; a constant, or frequent neglect being a mark of declension, and when
it becomes remarkable, such should be more earnestly dealt with and admonished;
also, if any, old or young, when come to meeting fall asleep, go out and in
frequently, or otherwise disturb the meeting, let them be rebuked and
cautioned, first privately, and all parents, masters and mistresses ought to
have a care over their children and servants in that respect, and caution them
accordingly.

Such as keep company in order for marriage with those not of our profession,
or with any servant or apprentice without the consent of the master or
mistress. Such as marry out of the unity of friends, or any method but the
decent and orderly way used amongst friends. Such as go themselves, or suffer
their children to go to marriages consummated contrary to the rules of our
discipline, either of those that have professed with us, or those of other
societies, without giving a satisfactory reason for their going, as the levity
and wanton behavior too frequently at such times, may be a means of corrupting
the minds of youth, and strengthening them in that disorder which is not
consistent with our holy profession. Such as do not keep themselves and their
children to moderation and plainness, in jesture, speech and apparel, in
furniture of houses, and such things as have been cautioned against, either by
the yearly meeting in London, or the yearly meeting here. Such as trade by sea
or land, or buy or contract beyond their abilities, and such as keep not their
words or engagements in their dealing, these being a reproach to truth, and a
manifest injury, are to be speedily advised, and if they do not amend they are
further to be proceeded against. Such as run races on horseback, or on foot,
lay wages, or use any gaming, or needless and vain sports and pastimes. Such as
do not maintain our ancient christian testimonies against taking oaths,
military services, bearing arms, clandestine or illicit trade, purchasing prize
goods, and being concerned in lotteries of any kind. Such as are guilty of
tattling, tale-bearing, reproaching, backbiting, evilspeaking of their
brethren or neighbors, or busily meddling with the affairs of others, where
they are not concerned; the tendency of which being to raise strife and
discord, or cause disesteem among brethren and neighbors. Such as write,
print, or publish, any books or writings, tending to raise contention, or
occasion breach of unity, that have not first had the approbation of some
friends appointed by the yearly meeting for that purpose. If any shall take
upon them publicly to oppose any ministering friend (in unity, or not disowned)
in exhortation, or preaching; keep on the hat, or show any other remarkable
dislike in time of prayer, let them be speedily dealt with as disorderly
persons, who endanger the peace, and oppose the charity and brotherhood of the
church, unless they condemn the same in such manner as the meeting may think
requisite; but if they have any reasonable objection against what was
delivered, they are first to speak to the friend privately, and proceed orderly.

MINISTERS.
MINISTERS are to be approved by the monthly meeting of which they are members,
and by them recommended before they are permitted to sit in the meetings of
ministers and elders, or to travel abroad as ministers.

The spirit of God being the foundation of all true knowledge and experience,
both in ministers and hearer, we earnestly exhort that all would diligently
wait upon and mind it: Ministers, in their public services especially, ought
always to attend closely to their several and peculiar gifts, and minister the
word faithfully as it is manifested and revealed to them; observing a decent
and modest behavior, in the exercise of their ministrv, and not entangling;
themselves with the affairs of this life, that they may the better answer the
holy warfare in which they are engaged, and let the hearers be watchful over
their own spirits, and not forwardly judge, or censure the testimonies which
may be delivered amongst them; for if they be not very careful and diligent in
attending upon the Lord in meetings, they are liable to mistake in the judgment
they may pass on the ministry.

Now this being a matter of great moment, for the preservation of love and
concord, in the churches; and knowing the danger and ill consequences, which
attend a hasty and censorious judging of the ministry, we think it necessary to
caution friends not to let their own spirits sway them, but let the spirit of
God rule and reign in their hearts; for this will preserve all in sweetness,
and tenderness one toward another: The due observance of which, will be a
great help to ministers in the discharge of their duty, and the service to
which they are called.

We further advise all monthly meetings, to take great care in giving
certificates to those who travel, to prevent the uneasiness which sometimes
falls on the church, from a weak and unskilful ministry; and let the elders,
when they see occasion, advise ministers to be very prudent in their conduct,
not as busy-bodies, nor meddling with family, or personal affairs, in which
they are not concerned, or required to be assisting; that they be very tender
of one another's reputation, and that of friends among whom they travel;
neither giving ear to, nor spreading reports tending to raise in the minds of
others a disesteem of any; and as soon as their service in the ministry is
over, that they return to their habitations, and there take a reasonable and
prudent care of their own business, household, and family.

That there be held in each monthly meeting, a select meeting of ministers and
elders, once in three months; when being met together, after some time spent in
solid retirement, they may proceed to read and consider the queries annexed,
and form general answers, to the first, second and third quarterly meetings of
ministers and elders; but to the quarterly meeting preceding the yearly
meeting, they should all be clearly and distinctly answered, and as near in the
words of the query as may be; that a suitable number be appointed as
representatives to the quarterly meeting, and by the quarterly meeting, to the
yearly meeting of ministers and elders.

QUERIES of the MEETING of MINISTERS and ELDERS.
I. Are ministers and elders careful duly to attend all their meetings for
worship and discipline, manifesting a religious care to encourage their
families in that important duty, and are they good examples in humble waiting
therein, in not giving way to drowsiness?

II. Are ministers found in word and doctrine, careful to minister in divine
ability, and thereby kept from burthening the living?

III. Are the lives and conversations of ministers and elders clean and
blameless amongst men? are they in unity one with another, and the meeting they
belong to, harmoniously laboring together for truth's honor, and careful to
give no just occasion of offense to any?

IV. Do they rule their own families well, bringing them up in plainness which
truth requires, in dress, language, and true moderation, and are they
themselves good examples in those respects?

V. Are they peacemakers in families and in the church, not concerned in
raising or spreading evil reports, or busy-bodies where they have no proper
business.

VI. Are they careful to maintain the discipline in every part thereof, not
even to hide their own families from truth's judgment, if occasion be given,
but impartially to minister justice, as faithful servants.

It is also recommended, that ministers and elders, watch over one another for
good, helping those who are exercised in the ministry in the right line;
discouraging forward spirits that run into words without life and power;
advising against affectation of tones, gestures, and every thing that would
hurt their service; yet encouraging the humble, careful traveller, speaking a
word in season to them that are weary; and let all dwell in that which gives
ability to labor successfully in the church of Christ; adorning the doctrine
they deliver to others; being examples to the believers, in conversation, in
charity, in spirit, in faith, and in purity.

MOURNING.
Advised against imitating the vain custom of wearing, or giving mourning, and
all extravagant expenses about the interment of the dead.

NEGROES.
Where any members refuse to execute proper instruments of writing, for
releasing from a state of slavery, such as are in their power, or on whom they
have any claim, whether arrived to full age, or, in their minority, and no
hopes of the continuance of friends labor being profitable to them, monthly
meetings after having discharged a christian duty to such should testify their
disunion with them. P. 1776.

N. B. It is recommended that a regular record be kept of the manumissions
already executed, and of such as may hereafter be executed, for slaves set at
liberty, in a book to be provided for that purpose, by each monthly meeting,
where there is occasion for such record.

It is also the solid sense and judgment of this meeting, that friends ought
not by any means, to be concerned in hireing any of those who are held as
slaves, where the wages are to be received by those who claim a right to hold
them as such; that friends be careful not to act as overseers, where slaves are
put under their care, and as it is necessary we should be uniform in our
conduct respecting the time of granting slaves their freedom, it is our sense
and judgment, that the age of twenty-one for males, and eighteen for females,
ought to be strictly observed. M. 1778.

OATHS.
Advised that our christian testimony be faithfully maintained against the
burden and imposition of oaths, according to the express prohibition of
Christ, and the apostle James, viz. Ye have heard that it has been said by
them of old time, Thou shall not forswear thyself, but shall perform unto the
Lord thine oaths: But I say unto you, swear not at all: neither by heaven; for
it is God's throne: nor by the earth; for it is his footstool: neither by
Jerusalem; for it is the city of the great King. Neither shall thou swear by
thy head, because thou can not make one hair white or black. But let your
communication be Yea, yea; Nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than these comes
of evil. -- Matt. v. 33 -- 37.

But above all things, my brethren, swear not; neither by heaven, neither by
the earth, neither by any other oath: but let your yea be yea; and your nay,
nay; least ye fall into condemnation. James, v. 12. -- London P. E. 1693.

OVERSEERS.
Let each monthly meeting choose two, or more, sober, judicious men friends,
and also two, or more, women friends, from time to time, as they may see fit to
change them, for the ease and experience of the members, to be overseers within
the limits of each particular meeting, who ought to render an account of their
services and duties to the preparative and monthly meeting, at any time when
required. -- See meetings for discipline.

PLAINNESS.
Advised that friends take care to keep to truth, and plainness in language,
habit, deportment, and behavior; that the simplicity of truth in these things,
may not wear out, or be lost in our days, nor in those of our posterity.

Let all be examples to their children in wisdom, moderation and plainness in
language and habit; and not exemplary only, but also restrain them from any
thing that might be to their hurt; neither providing for them costly and gaudy
attire, unbecoming godliness, nor letting them have money to gratify themselves
therein.

It is our concern to exhort all friends, both men and women, to watch against
the growing sin of pride, and beware of adorning themselves in a manner
disagreeable to the plainness and simplicity of the truth, we make profession
of.

As vain habits and needless fashions frequently change; so the vain and wanton
mind in our youth, and others, is too apt to be taken with them; it is
therefore hoped, and presumed, that as such things shall appear, friends will
be stirred up in the wisdom of truth, to take due and prudent care therein.

PRIESTS WAGES.
Let us ever keep in remembrance, that it is under the immediate teaching and
influence of the holy spirit, that all acceptable worship is performed, and all
true gospel ministry supplied; that this pure and powerful influence, in
vessels sanctified and prepared by the divine hand, is the essential
qualification to that work; that as the gift is divine, the service is freely
and faithfully to be discharged, without any view to reward from man; and
therefore should we voluntarily, either by open or collusive means, contribute
to the maintenance of such as preach for hire; we should be guilty of
inconsistency in practice, by supporting, as ministers of Christ, those whom we
do not believe to be sent by him, and upholding them in a conduct contrary to
his command, which is, "Freely ye have received, freely give." Matt. x. 8. And
this practical opposition to his gospel law, we cannot but look upon as denying
him before men, and therefore in us antichristian.

POOR.
Advised, that where friends want ability in the world, their monthly meetings
assist them, that the children of the poor may have due help of education,
instruction, and necessary learning.

QUERIES.
It is the sense and judgment of the yearly meeting, that it will tend to the
benefit of the society, to have the following queries read and answered, in the
quarterly, monthly, and preparative meetings:

I. Are all meetings for worship and discipline duly attended; the hour
observed, and are friends preserved from all unbecoming behavior therein?

II. Are friends careful to maintain love and unity as becomes the followers of
Christ? are tale-bearing, backbiting, and spreading evil reports discouraged,
and where any differences arise, are endeavors used speedily to end them?

III. Are friends careful to bring up those under their direction, to the due
attendance of meetings, to plainness of speech, behavior and apparel; in
frequently reading the holy scriptures; to restrain them from reading
pernicious books, and the corrupt conversation of the world?

IV. Are friends careful to live within the bounds of their circumstances, to
avoid involving themselves in business beyond their ability to manage? are they
just in their dealings, and punctual in fulfilling their contracts; and where
any give reasonable ground of fear in these respects, are they timely labored
with for their preservation or recovery: And where any have failed, is there a
strict enquiry made into their conduct, and are they dealt with according to
our discipline?

V. Do you bear a faithful testimony against a hireling ministry, taking or
administering oaths, military services, being concerned in any fraudulent or
clandestine trade, purchasing prize-goods, or encouraging lotteries of any kind?

VI. Are friends careful to settle their outward affairs, and make their wills
in time of health, to inspect the necessities of the poor, to relieve and
assist them in such business as they are capable of; do their children freely
partake of learning, to fit them for business; and are they, and other friends
children, placed among friends?

VII. Are friends clear of importing, vending, distilling, and the unnecessary
use of spirituous liquors; frequenting places of diversion, or taverns
unnecessarily; and do they keep to moderation and temperance on all occasions?

VIII. Are friends careful to bear a testimony against slavery; do they provide
in a suitable manner, for those under their direction, who have had their
freedom secured; and are they instructed in useful learning?

IX. Do you take due care to deal with all offenders in the spirit of meekness
and wisdom, without partiality or unnecessary delay?

That the first, second, and ninth queries, be answered in the first, second,
and third quarters; and that they all, with the four following, be answered at
the quarterly meeting preceding the yearly meeting; and that such answers be
clear and distinct, and as near in the words of the query as may be.

ANNUAL QUERIES.
I. WHAT ministers and elders deceased, and when, and what memorials concerning
them, or other deceased friends, that may be profitable to survivors?

II. What new meeting houses built, or meetings settled?

III. What convincement since last year, and where, in each quarter?

IV. Are the queries recommended to the quarterly, monthly and preparative
meetings, read, and answered agreeable to the direction or the yearly meeting.

REMOVALS.
See Certificates

SCRIPTURES.
Recommended as an incumbent duty on friends, to cause their children to be
frequent in reading the holy scriptures; observing to them the examples of such
children as are recorded to have early learned the fear of the Lord, and
hearkened to his counsel; impressing on their spirits, reverence toward him,
from whom they have their daily support; and that they ought not to offend, but
love, serve and honor him in whole hand all blessings are, London P. E. 1709.

It is also seriously advised, that no friends suffer romances, play-books, or
other vain and idle pamphlets in their houses or families.

SCHOOLS.
ADVISED, that schoolmasters and mistresses, who are faithful friends, and
well qualified, be encouraged in all places where there may be need; and that
care be taken that poor friends children may freely partake of such education
as may tend to their benefit and advantage, in order to apprenticeship. 1695.

STOCK.
Advised, that a collection be occasionally made in the several meetings, for
defraying the expenses of the society, and conveyed by the monthly to the
quarterly meeting, and thence to the treasurer of the yearly meeting.

SORCERY.
If any professing truth, shall apply to such as by any art or skill whatever,
pretend knowledge to discover things hiddenly transacted, or where things lost
or stolen may be found, or foretell future events; or if any under our
profession, shall pretend to such art or skill; we hereby in a just abhorrence
of such doings, direct that the offenders be speedily dealt with and brought
under censure.

SUFFERINGS.
It is the sense of this meeting, that friends should keep an account of any
sufferings they may be subjected to, for the testimony of truth, and that the
monthly meeting transmit such accounts to the quarterly meetings, to be by them
forwarded yearly, for the inspection of such as may be appointed for that
purpose by the yearly meeting.

INSTITUTION of the MEETING for SUFFERINGS, for the YEARLY MEETING in MARYLAND.
To the YEARLY MEETING now Sitting in BALTIMORE.
THE united committees of the yearly meeting having met, and solidly attended
to the several matters to them referred, agree to propose, first, that a
meeting for sufferings be instituted, and appointed agreeable to the sense of
the meeting yesterday expressed: That the said meeting be composed of eight
solid, faithful friends, to be named out of the yearly meeting at large, and
four friends, to be appointed by each quarterly meeting as their
representatives therein.

The said meeting for sufferings are to exercise care, and interpose in such
cases where the testimony of truth may be affected, and also to advise and
assist friends who may be brought under sufferings for the testimony of a good
conscience: To examine and adjust the accounts of sufferings for our religious
testimony, after the same have been approved by the monthly and quarterly
meetings where they arise: To examine and correct memorials concerning deceased
friends, preparatory to their being laid before the yearly meeting, and also
examine and correct such manuscripts and writings respecting our religious
testimony, and principles, as are intended for publication, and to suppress
such as may be improper, or not thought necessary to publish; and also to
direct the re-printing and distribution of such books as they may think
expedient and useful; and generally to exercise vigilance and care on all
occasions where our religious testimony may be advanced or affected; and also,
as wisdom may direct, to hold a brotherly correspondence with such other
meetings for sufferings as are, or may be established under the authority of
any other yearly meeting of our religious society, and appear on our behalf, on
all occasions, during the recess of the yearly meeting. Also, to give attention
to the temporal concerns of the society as occasions may require, and from time
to time to draw on the treasurer of the yearly meeting, for such sums as may be
necessary in the course of the discharge of the trust in them reposed.

But the said meeting is not to have power, or authority, to alter or vary from
the rules and discipline of the society, as established by the yearly meeting;
but are to be governed as a subordinate meeting by the rules of the body, and
every year to lay the minutes of their proceedings before the yearly meeting of
business, who have a right to continue, or discontinue, the said meeting for
sufferings, and to approve or disapprove their proceedings; and generally to
give instructions and advice to said meeting as occasions may require.

It is also proposed, that said meeting be held quarterly, and alternately at
Baltimore and Pipe-Creek, viz. At Baltimore the second day after the quarterly
meeting, in the second and eighth months, at the tenth hour in the morning; and
at Pipe-Creek the sixth day before the quarterly meeting, in the fifth and
eleventh months, at the same hour, with liberty to meet on their own
adjournments, or call a special meeting when any four of the members of the
said meeting shall judge it necessary.

That the style of said meeting be, " The Meeting for Sufferings for the Yearly
Meeting in Maryland," and that a less number than eight friends, be not
authorized to hold such meeting.

Signed on behalf, and by direction of said committees, OLIVER MATTHEWS, ISAAC
EVERITT, JOHN HOUGH.

Baltimore, 6 th mon. 9 th, 1790.

Which being read and considered, is approved.

SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS.
A weighty concern being revived, on consideration of the pernicious effects of
the use of spirituous liquors, on the morals and health of the people of this
country; although it appears on the account given, that the members of our
religious society in general, are preserved from intemperance; it is
nevertheless earnestly recommended to friends individually, to forbear being in
any respect accessory to the promotion of the sorrowful consequences which are
observable by the use of this article; either by importing, or seiling it in
less or larger quantities; or in the unnecessary distillation thereof from
grain or other produce; and as it has heretofore been made use of in the time
of harvest, to the manifest injury of the laborers, many brethren have, of
late years, found it expedient to forbear the use of it at that time, and
express much satisfaction therein. And by substituting cooling liquors in stead
thereof, the laborers in the field, have been enabled to perform their work
with more real advantage to themselves and their employers. It is therefore
desired, that quarterly and monthly meetings may dwell under a religious
concern, and care for the advancement of our christian testimony against this
evil; whereby we may become instruments of good to others by convincing them of
the destructive tendency of the practice, and lead them to refrain it.

TAXES.
See War.

TALE-BEARING and BACKBITING.
Advised, that such as are guilty thereof, be dealt with. -- See meetings for
discipline.

TAVERNS.
Advised, that none amongst us, be concerned in keeping taverns, or otherwise
retailing strong drink.

TRADE.
ADVISED, that none launch into trade and worldly business beyond what they can
manage honestly, and with reputation; so that they may keep their words with
all men, that their yea, may prove yea indeed, and their nay, nay; for
whatsoever is otherwise comes of evil; and that they use few words in their
dealings, lest they bring dishonor to the truth of God through their
forwardness; and such who make themselves guilty, by thus dishonouring God, and
the holy profession of his name and truth, are for judgment, and the judgment
of truth ought to be set over them, that those who abide and walk in the truth
may be clear of their iniquities. L. 1675.

WAR.
With desires for the present and future prosperity of truth amongst us, and
the preservation of individuals, on the true foundation of our christian
fellowship and communion; we advise friends not to accept of, or continue in
the exercise of any office or station in civil government, by which they may in
any respect be subjected to the necessity of enforcing the compliance of their
brethren, or others, with any act which they conscientiously scruple to
perform; and if any professing with us, should after the advice and admonitions
of their brethren, persist in a conduct so repugnant to that sincerity,
uprightness, and self-denial, incumbent on us, it is the sense and judgment of
this meeting, that such should not be allowed to sit in our meetings of
discipline, nor be employed in the affairs of truth, till they are brought to a
sense and acknowledgment of their error. P. 1758.

We also earnestly and affectionately desire that friends in all places, may be
particularly careful to live near the divine principle, which, if faithfully
attended to, and followed, will preserve us in a conduct becoming our holy
profession, and teach us to avoid mixing with those in their human policy and
contrivance, who are not convinced of our religious principles, and to seek
after quietude and calmness of mind, in order that under the direction of true
wisdom, we may be enabled to administer advice to any of our brethren, who may
be inadvertently drawn aside to join with, or countenance by conversation, or
otherwise, the commotions prevailing; thus we may demonstrate to the world, our
regard to our christian testimony and profession, and give no just occasion to
any of accusing us, of deviating from the principles and conduct of our worthy
predecessors, who in times of the greatest difficulties, manifested union among
themselves, and that they steadily preferred the cause and reputation of truth
to every other consideration. P. 1770.

WILLS.
It is recommended that care be taken in each monthly meeting, that friends who
have estates to dispose of, be advised to make their wills in time of health,
and strength of judgment, and to dispose of their substance, as in justice and
wisdom may be to their satisfaction; to prevent the inconveniences, loss, and
trouble that may fall upon their relations and friends, through their dying
intestate.

YEARLY MEETING,
Agreeable to an arrangement which took place in 1790. The yearly meeting, in
Maryland, is to be held in Baltimore, on the second firstday in the tenth
month, composed of representatives from the quarterly meetings on the
western-shore, and the adjacent parts of Pennsylvania and Virginia. A public
meeting for worship to be held at the tenth hour in the morning, another at the
third hour in the afternoon; another public meeting at the tenth hour on
second-day morning. The meeting for discipline, to be opened at the third hour
in the afternoon, and at the conclusion of the first sitting for discipline,
the representatives are annually to choose a clerk and report to the next
sitting.

Advised, that the quarterly meetings be careful annually to depute such
friends to attend the service of the yearly meeting, as are of good report, and
diligent attenders of meetings for discipline at home, whose practice and
conversation is answerable to the testimony they profess to bear, men known to
be faithful and conscientious.

That no representative withdraw from the yearly meeting, or any other meeting
for discipline, before the meeting ends, without leave first requested and
granted, that the service of such meetings may not be neglected.

FINIS.

