Engraved by (...) and Vallance Philad. 1794.

BENJ. FRANKLIN, L.L.D.


THE LIFE OF DR. BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.

WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.

SECOND AMERICAN EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR BENJAMIN JOHNSON, No. 147, HIGH STREET. M,DCC,XCIV.

PREFACE.
IT is already known to many, that Dr. Franklin amused himself, toward the
close of his life, with writing memoirs of his own history. These memoirs were
brought down to the year 1757. Together with some other manuscripts they were
left behind him at his death, and were considered as constituting part of his
posthumous property. It is a little extraordinary that, under these
circumstances, interesting as they are, from the celebrity of the character of
which they treat, and from the critical situation of the present times, they
should so long have been withheld from the Public: A translation of them
appeared in France near two years ago, coming down to the year 1731. There can
be no sufficient reason, that what has thus been submitted to the perusal of
Europe, should not be made accessible to those to whom Dr. Franklin's language
is native. The first part of the history of his life is translated from that
publication.

The style of these memoirs is uncommonly pleasing. The story is told with the
most unreserved sincerity, and without any false coloring or ornament. We see,
in every page, that the author examined his subject with the eye of a master,
and related no incidents, the springs and origin of which he did not perfectly
understand. It is this that gives such exquisite and uncommon perspicuity to
the detail and delight in the review. The translator has endeavored, as he
went along, to conceive the probable manner in which Dr. Franklin expressed his
ideas in his English manuscript, and he hopes to be forgiven if this enquiry
shall occasionally have subjected him to the charge of a style in any respect
bald or low: to imitate the admirable simplicity of the author, is no easy task.

The public will be amused with following a great philosopher in relaxations,
and observing in what respects his philosophy tends to elucidate and improve
the most common subjects.

The editor subjoins a letter from the late celebrated and amiable Dr. Price,
to a gentleman in Philadelphia, upon the subject of Dr. Franklin's memoirs of
his own life.

Hackney, June 19, 1790. DEAR SIR,
I AM hardly able to tell you how kindly I take the letters with which you
favor me. Your last, containing an account of the death of our excellent
friend Dr. Frankling, and the circumstances attending it, deserves my
particular gratitude. The account which he has left of his life will show, in a
striking example, how a man, by talents, industry, and integrity, may rise from
obscurity to the first eminence and consequence in the world; but it brings his
history no lower than the year 1757, and I understand that since he sent over
the copy, which I have read, he has been able to make no additions to it. It is
with a melancholy regret I think of his death; but to death we are all bound by
the irreversible order of nature, and in looking forward to it, there is
comfort in being able to reflect -- that we have not lived in vain, and that
all the useful and virtuous shall meet in a better country beyond the grave.

Dr. Franklin, in the last letter I received from him, after mentioning his age
and infirmities, observes, that it has been kindly ordered by the Author of
nature, that, as we draw nearer the conclusion of life, we are furnished with
more helps to wean us from it, among which one of the strongest is the loss of
dear friends. I was delighted with the account you gave in your letter of the
honor shown to his memory at Philadelphia, and by Congress; and yesterday I
received a high additional pleasure, by being informed that the National
Assembly of France had determined to go in mourning for him. -- What a glorious
scene is opened there! The annals of the world furnish no parallel to it. One
of the honors of our departed friend is, that he has contributed much to it.

I am, with great respect, Your obliged and very humble servant, RICHARD PRICE.


THE LIFE OF DR. BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.
MY DEAR SON,

I HAVE amused myself with collecting some little anecdotes of my family. You
may remember the enquiries I made, when you were with me in England, among such
of my relations as were then living; and the journey I undertook for that
purpose. To be acquainted with the particulars of my parentage and life, many
of which are unknown to you; I flatter myself, will afford the same pleasure to
you as to me. I shall relate them upon paper: it will be an agreeable
employment of a week's uninterrupted leisure, which I promise myself during my
present retirement in the country. There are also other motives which induce me
to the undertaking. From the bosom of poverty and obscurity, in which I drew my
first breath and spent my earliest years, I have raised myself to a state of
opulence and to some degree of celebrity in the world. A constant good fortune
has attended me through every period of life to my present advanced age; and my
descendants may be desirous of learning what were the means of which I made
use, and which, thanks to the assisting hand of Providence, have proved so
eminently successful. They may also, should they ever be placed in a similar
situation, derive some advantage from my narrative.

When I reflect, as I frequently do, upon the felicity I have enjoyed, I
sometimes say to myself, that, were the offer made me, I would engage to run
again, from beginning to end, the same career of life. All I would ask should
be the privilege of an author, to correct, in a second edition, certain errors
of the first. I could wish, likewise, if it were in my power, to change some
trivial incidents and events for others more favorable. Were this however
denied me, still would I not decline the offer. But since a repetition of life
cannot take place, there is nothing which, in my opinion, so nearly resembles
it, as to call to mind all its circumstances, and, to render their remembrance
more durable, commit them to writing. By thus employing myself, I shall yield
to the inclination, so natural to old men, to talk of themselves and their
exploits, and may freely follow my bent, without being tiresome to those who,
from respect to my age, might think themselves obliged to listen to me; as they
will be at liberty, to read me or not as they please. In fine -- and I may well
avow it, since nobody would believe me were I to deny it -- I shall perhaps, by
this employment, gratify my vanity. Scarcely indeed have I ever heard or read
the introductory phrase, "I may say without vanity," but some striking and
characteristic instance of vanity has immediately followed. The generality of
men hate vanity in others, however strongly they may be tinctured with it
themselves; for myself, I pay obeisance to it wherever I meet with it,
persuaded that it is advantageous, as well to the individual it governs, as to
those who are within the sphere of its influence. Of consequence, it would, in
many cases, not be wholly absurd, that a man should count his vanity among the
other sweets of life, and give thanks to Providence for the blessing.

And here let me with all humility acknowledge, that to Divine Providence I am
indebted for the felicity I have hitherto enjoyed. It is that power alone which
has furnished me with the means I have employed, and that has crowned them with
success My faith in this respect leads me to hope, though I cannot count upon
it, that the divine goodness will still be exercised toward me, either by
prolonging the duration of my happiness to the close of life, or by giving me
fortitude to support any melancholy reverse, which may happen to me, as to so
many others. My future fortune is unknown but to him in whose hand is our
destiny, and who can make our very afflictions subservient to our benefit.

One of my uncles, desirous like myself, of collecting anecdotes of our family,
gave me some notes, from which I have derived many particulars respecting our
ancestors. From these I learn, that they had lived in the same village (Eaton
in Northamptonshire) upon a freehold of about thirty acres, for the space at
least of three hundred years. How long they had resided there prior to that
period, my uncle had been unable to discover; probably ever since the
institution of surnames, when they took the appellation of Franklin, which had
formerly been the name of a particular order of individuals As a proof that
Franklin was anciently the common name of an order or rank in England, see
Judge Fortescue, De l^^ dio^s legum Angliae, written about the year 14^2 in
which is the following passage, to show that good juries might easily be formed
in any part of England.

Regio etiam illa, ita respersa refertaque est ^^s-^^orth^s ter^ arum et
^grorum, quod in ea villula tam parva reperir^ non (...), in qua non est mi^es,
armiger, vel p^^er-familias, quali^ ibidem franklin vulgaritur nuncupatur,
magnis ditatus possessionibus, nec non libere, tenentes et alii valecti
plurimi, suis patrimoniis sufficientes, ad faciendum juratum, in forma
praenotata.

Moreover, the same country is so filled and replenished with landed men,
that therein so small a thorpe cannot be found wherein dwells not a knight,
an esquire, or such a householder as is there commonly called a franklin,
enriched with great possessions; and also other freeholders and many yeomen,
able for their livelihoods to make a jury in form aforementioned.

OLD TRANSLATION. Chaucer too calls his country gentleman a franklin, and after
describing his good housekeeping, thus characterises him: This worthy franklin
bore a purse of silk,
Fixed to his girdle, white as morning milk.
Knight of the shire, first justice at the assize,
To help the poor, the doubtful to advise.
In all employments, generous, just he proved,
Renowned for courtesy, by all beloved.



.

This petty estate would not have sufficed for their subsistence, had they not
added the trade of blacksmith, which was perpetuated in the family down to my
uncle's time, the eldest son having been uniformly brought up to this
employment: a custom which both he and my father observed with respect to their
eldest sons.

In the researches I made at Eaton, I found no account of their births,
marriages, and deaths, earlier than the year 1555; the parish register not
extending farther back than that period. This register informed me, that I was
the youngest son of the youngest branch of the family, counting five
generations. My grandfather, Thomas, who was born in 1598, living at Eaton till
he was too old to continue his trade, when he retired to Banbury in
Oxfordshire, where his son John, who was a dyer, resided, and with whom my
father was apprenticed. He died, and was buried there: we saw his monument in
1758. His eldest son lived in the family house at Eaton, which be bequeathed,
with the land belonging to it, to his only daughter; who, in concert with her
husband, Mr. Fisher of Wellingborough, afterward sold it to Mr. Ested, the
present proprietor.

My grandfather had four surviving sons, Thomas, John, Benjamin, and Josias. I
shall give you such particulars of them as my memory will furnish, not having
my papers here, in which you will find a more minute account, if they are not
lost during my absence.

Thomas had learned the trade of blacksmith under his father; but possessing a
good natural understanding, he improved it by study, at the solicitation of a
gentleman of the name of Palmer, who was at that time the principal inhabitant
of the village, and who encouraged in like manner all my uncles to improve
their minds. Thomas thus rendered himself competent to the functions of a
country attorney; soon became an essential personage in the affairs of the
village; and was one of the chief movers of every public enterprise, as well
relative to the country as the town of Northampton. A variety of remarkable
incidents were told us of him at Eaton. After enjoying the esteem and patronage
of Lord Halifax, he died, January 6, 1702, precisely four years before I was
born. The recital that was made us of his life and character, by some aged
persons of the village, struck you, I remember, as extraordinary, from its
analogy to what you knew of myself "Had he died," said you, "just four years
later, one might have supposed a transmigration of souls."

John, to the best of my belief, was brought up to the trade of a wool-dyer.

Benjamin served his apprenticeship in London to a silk-dyer. He was an
industrious man: I remember him well; for, while I was a child, he joined my
father at Boston, and lived for some years in the house with us. A particular
affection had always subsisted between my father and him; and I was his godson.
He arrived to a great age. He left behind him two quarto volumes of poems in
manusscript, consisting of little fugitive pieces addressed to his friends. He
had invented a shorthand, which he taught me, but having never made use of it,
I have now forgotten it. He was a man of piety, and a constant attendant on the
best preachers, whose sermons he took a pleasure in writing down according to
the expeditory method he had devised. Many volumes were thus collected by him.
He was also extremely fond of politics, too much so perhaps for his situation.
I lately found in London a collection which he had made of all the principal
pamphlets relative to public affairs, from the year 1641 to 1717. Many volumes
are wanting, as appears by the series of numbers; but there still remain eight
in folio, and twenty four in quarto and octavo. The collection had fallen into
the hands of a second-hand bookseller, who, knowing me by having sold me some
books, brought it to me. My uncle, it seems, had left it behind him on his
departure for America, about fifty years ago. I found various notes of his
writing in the margins. His grandson, Samuel, is now living at Boston.

Our humble family had early embraced the Reformation. They remained faithfully
attached during the reign of Queen Mary, when they were in danger of being
molested on account of their zeal against popery. They had an English Bible,
and, to conceal it the more secure^y, they conceived the project of fastening
it, open, with pack-thread^ across the leaves, on the inside of the lid of a
close-stool. When my great-grandfather wished to read to his family, he
reversed the lid of the close-stool upon his knees, and passed the leaves from
one side to the other, which were held down on each by the pack-thread. One of
the children was stationed at the door, to give notice if he saw the proctor
(an officer of the spiritual court) make his appearance: in that case, the lid
was restored to its place, with the Bible concealed under it as before. I had
this anecdote from my uncle Benjamin.

The whole family preserved its attachment to the Church of England till
toward the close of the reign of Charles II. when certain ministers, who had
been ejected as non-conformists, having held conventicles in Northhamptonshire,
they were joined by Benjamin and Josias, who adhered to them over after. The
rest of the family continued in the episcopal church.

My father, Josias, married early in life. He went with his wife and three
children, to New England, about the year 1682. Conventicles being at that time
prohibited by law, and frequently disturbed, some considerable persons of his
acquaintance determined to go to America, where they hoped to enjoy the free
exercise of their religion, and my father was prevailed on to accompany them.

My father had also by the same wife four children born in America, and ten
others by a second wife, making in all seventeen. I remember to have seen
thirteen seated together at his table, who all arrived to years of maturity,
and were married. I was the last of the sons, and the youngest child, excepting
two daughters. I was born at Boston in New England. My mother, the second wife,
was Abiah Folger, daughter of Peter Folger, one of the first colonists of
New England, of whom Cotton Mather makes honorable mention, in his
Ecclesiastical History of that province, as "a pious learned Englishman," if I
rightly recollect his expressions. I have been told of his having written a
variety of little pieces; but there appears to be only one in print, which I
met with many years ago. It was published in the year 1675, and is in familiar
verse, agreeable to the taste of the times and the country. The author addresses
himself to the governors for the time being, speaks for liberty of conscience,
and in favor of the anabaptists, quakers and other sectaries, who had suffered
persecution. To this persecution he attributes the wars with the natives, and
other calamities which afflicted the country, regarding them as the judgments
of God in punishment of so odious an offense, and he exhorts the government to
the repeal of laws so contrary to charity. The poem appeared to be written with
a manly freedom and a pleasing simplicity. I recollect the six concluding
lines, though I have forgotten the order of words of the two first; the sense
of which was, that his censures were dictated by benevolence, and that, of
consequence, he wished to be known as the author; because said he, I hate from
my very soul dissimulation; From Sherburne, Town in the Island of Nantucket.
where I dwell,
I therefore put my name,
Your friend, who means you well,
PETER FOLGER.

My brothers were all put apprentice to different trades. With respect to
myself, I was sent, at the age of eight years, to a grammar school. My father
destined me for the church, and already regarded me as the chaplain of the
family. The promptitude with which from my infancy I had learned to read, for I
do not remember to have been ever without this acquirement, and the
encouragement of his friends, who assured him that I should one day certainly
become a man of letters, confirmed him in this design. My uncle Benjamin
approved also of the scheme, and promised to give me all his volumes of
sermons, written, as I have said, in the shorthand of his invention, if I would
take the pains to learn it.

I remained however scarcely a year at grammar school, although, in this short
interval, I had risen from the middle to the head of my class, from thence to
the class immediately above, and was to pass, at the end of the year, to the
one next in order. But my father, burdened with a numerous family, found that
he was incapable, without subjecting himself to difficulties, of providing for
the expense of a collegiate education; and considering besides, as I heard him
say to his friends, that persons so educated were often poorly provided for, he
renounced his first intentions, took me from the grammar school, and sent me to
a school for writing and arithmetic, kept by a Mr. George Brownwel, who was a
skilful master, and succeeded very well in his profession by employing gentle
means only, and such as were calculated to encourage his scholars. Under him I
soon acquired an excellent hand; but I failed in arithmetic, and made therein
no sort of progress.

At ten years of age, I was called home to assist my father in his occupation*
which was that of soap-boiler and tallow-chandler; a business to which he had
served no apprenticeship, but which he embraced on his arrival in New England,
because he found his own, that of a dyer, in too little request to enable him
to maintain his family. I was accordingly employed in cutting the wicks,
filling the moulds, taking care of the shop, carrying messages, etc.

This business displeased me, and I felt a strong inclination for a sea life;
but my father set his face against it. The vicinity of the water, however, gave
me frequent opportunities of venturing myself both upon and within it, and I
soon acquired the art of swimming, and of managing a boat. -- When embarked
with other children, the helm was commonly deputed to me, particularly on
difficult occasions; and, in every other project, I was a almost always the
leader of the troop, whom I sometimes involved in embarrassments. I shall give
an instance of this, which demonstrates an early disposition of mind for public
enterprise, though the one in question was not conducted by justice.

The mill-pond was terminated on one side by a marsh, upon the borders of which
we were accustomed to take our stand, at high water, to angle for small fish.
By dint of walking, we had converted the place into a perfect quagmire. My
proposal was to erect a wharf that should afford us firm footing and I pointed
out to my companions a large heap of stones, intended for building a new house
near the marsh, and which were well adapted for our purpose. Accordingly, when
the workmen retired in the evening, I assembled a number of my play^ellows, and
by laboring diligently, like ants, sometimes four of us uniting our strength
to carry a single stone, we removed them all, and constructed our little quay.
The workmen were surprised the next morning at not finding their stones, which
had been conveyed to our wharf. Enquiries were made respecting the authors of
this conveyance; we were discovered; complaints were exhibited against us; many
of us underwent correction on the part of our parents; and though I strenuously
defended the utility of the work, my father at length convinced me, that
nothing which was not strictly honest could be useful.

It will not, perhaps, be uninteresting to you to know what sort of a man my
father was. He had an excellent constitution, was of a middle size, but well
made and strong, and extremely active in whatever he undertook. He designed
with a degree of neatness, and knew a little of music. His voice was sonorous
and agreeable; so that when he sung a psalm or hymn with accompaniment of his
violin, as was his frequent practice in an evening when the labors of the day
were finished, it was truly delightful to hear him. He was versed also in
mechanics, and could upon occasion, use the tools of a variety of trades. But
his greatest excellence was a sound understanding and solid judgment in matters
of prudence, both in public and private life. In the former indeed he never
engaged, because his numerous family and the mediocrity of his fortune, kept
him unremittingly employed in the duties of his profession. But I very well
remember that the leading men of the place used frequently to come and ask his
advice respecting affairs of the town, or of the church to which he belonged,
and that they paid much difference to his opinion. Individuals were also in the
habit of consulting him in their private affairs, and he was often chosen
arbiter between contending parties.

He was fond of having at his table, as often as possible, some friends or
well-informed neighbors capable of rational conversation, and he was always
careful to introduce useful or ingenious topics of discourse, which might tend
to form the minds of his children. By this means he early attracted our
attention to what was just, prudent, and beneficial in the conduct of life. He
never talked of the meats which appeared upon the table, never discussed
whether they were well or ill dressed, of a good or bad flavor, high-seasoned
or otherwise, preferable or inferior to this or that dish of a similar kind.
Thus accustomed, from my infancy, to the utmost inattention as to these
objects, I have always been perfectly regardless of what kind of food was
before me; and I pay so little attention to it even now, that it would be a
hard matter for me to recollect, a few hours after I had dined, of what my
dinner had consisted. When traveling, I have particularly experienced the
advantage of this habit; for it has often happened to me to be in company with
persons, who, having a more delicate, because a more exercised taste, have
suffered in many cases considerable inconvenience; while, as to myself, I have
had nothing to desire.

My mother was likewise possessed of an excellent constitution. She suckled all
her ten children, and I never heard either her or my father complain of any
other disorder, than that of which they died: my father at the age of
eighty-seven, and my mother at eighty-five. They are buried at Boston, where, a
few years ago, I placed a marble over their grave, with this inscription: Here
lie JOSIAS FRANKLIN and ABIAH his wife: They lived together with reciprocal
affection for fifty-nine years; and without private fortune, without lucrative
employment, by assiduous labor and honest industry, decently supported a
numerous family, and educated, with success, thirteen children, and seven
grandchildren. Let this example, reader, encourage thee diligently to
discharge the duties of thy calling, and to rely on the support of divine
providence.

He was pious and prudent, She discreet and virtuous. Their youngest son, from
a sentiment of filial duty, consecrated this stone To their memory.

I perceive, by my rambling digressions, that I am growing old. But we do not
dress for a private company as for a formal ball. This deserves perhaps the
name of negligence.

To return. I thus continued employed in my father's trade for the space of two
years; that is to say, till I arrived at twelve years of age. About this time
my brother John, who had served his apprenticeship in London, having quitted my
father, and being married and settled in business on his own account at
Rhode Island, I was destined, to all appearance, to supply his place, and be a
candle-maker all my life: but my dislike of this occupation continuing, my
father was apprehensive, that, if a more agreeable one were not offered me, I
might play the tru^^t and escape to sea; as, to his extreme mortification, my
brother Josias had done. He therefore took me sometimes to see masons, coopers,
braziers, joiners, and other mechanics, employed at their work; in order to
discover the bent of my inclination, and fix it if he could upon some
occupation that might retain me on shore. I have since, in consequence of those
visits, derived no small pleasure from seeing skilful workmen handle their
tools; and it has proved of considerable benefit, to have acquired thereby
sufficient knowledge to be able to make little things for myself, when I have
had no mechanic at hand, and to construct small machines for my experiments,
while the idea I have conceived has been fresh and strongly impressed on my
imagination.

My father at length decided that I should be a cutler, and I was placed for
some days upon trial with my cousin Samuel, son of my uncle Benjamin, who had
learned this trade in London, and had established himself at Boston. But the
premium he required for my apprenticeship displeasing my father, I was recalled
home.

From my earliest years I had been passionately fond of reading, and I laid out
in books all the little money I could procure. I was particularly pleased with
accounts of voyages. My first acquisition was Bunyan's collection in small
separate volumes. These I afterward sold in order to buy an historical
collection by R. Burton, which consisted of small cheap volumes, amounting in
all to about forty or fifty. My father's little library was principally made up
of books of practical and polemical theology. I read the greatest part of them.
I have since often regretted, that at a time when I had so great a thirst for
knowledge, more eligible books had not fallen into my hands, as it was then a
point decided that I should not be educated for the church. There was also
among my father's books ^lutarch's L^ves in which I read continually, and I
still regard as advantageously employed the time I devoted to them. I found
besides a work of De Fou's, entitled, and Essay on Projects, from which,
perhaps, I derived impressions that have since influenced some of the principal
events of my life.

My inclination for books at last determined my father to make me a printer,
though he had already a son in that profession. My brother had returned from
England in 1717, with a press and types, in order too establish a
printing house at Boston. This business pleased me much better than that of my
father, though I had still a predilection for the sea. To prevent the effects
which might result from this inclination, my father was impatient to see the
engaged with my brother. I held ba^^ for some time; at length however I
suffered myself to be persuaded, and signed my indentures, being then only
twelve years of age. It was agreed that I should serve as apprentice to the age
of twenty-one, and should receive jorneyman's wages only during the last year.

In a very short time I made great proficiency in this business, and became
very serviceable to my brother. I had now an opportunity of procuring better
books. The acquaintance I necessarily formed with bookseller's apprentices,
enabled me to borrow a volume now and then, which I never failed to return
punctually and without injury. How often has it happened to me to pass the
greater part of the night in reading by my bedside, when the book had been
lent me in the evening, and was to be returned the next morning, lest it might
be missed or wanted.

At length, Mr. Matthew Adams, an ingenious tradesman, who had a handsome
collection of books, and who frequented our printing house, took notice of me.
He invited me to see his library, and had the goodness to lend me any books I
was desirous of reading. I then took a strange fancy for poetry, and composed
several little pieces. My brother, thinking he might find his account in it,
encouraged me, and engaged me to write two ballads. One, called the Lighthouse
Tragedy, contained an account of the shipwreck of captain Worthilake and his
two daughters; the other was a sailor's song on the capture of the noted pirate
called Teach, or Black-beard. They were wreched verses in point of style, mere
blind-men's ditties. When printed, he dispatched me about the town to sell
them. The first had a prodigious run, because the event was recent, and had
made a great noise.

My vanity was flattered by this success; but my father checked my exultation,
by ridiculing my productions, and telling me that versifiers were always poor.
I thus escaped the misfortune of being, probably, a very wretched poet* but as
the faculty of writing prose has been of great service to me in the course of
my life, and principally contributed to (...) advancement, I shall relate by
what mean^, situated as I was, I acquired the small skill (...) may possess in
that way.

There was in the town another young man, a great lover of books, of the name
of John Collins, with whom I was intimately connected. We frequently engaged in
dispute, and were indeed so fond of argumentation, that nothing, was so
agreeable to us as a war (...) words. This contentious temper, I would observe
by the bye, is in danger of becoming a very bad habit, and frequently renders
(...) a man's company insupportable, as being (...) otherwise capable of
indulgence than by indiscriminate contradiction. Independently (...) the
acrimony and discord it introduces in^^ conversation, it is often productive of
dislike and even hatred, between persons to who^ friendship is indispensibly
necessary. I acquired it by reading, while I lived with my father, books of
religious controversy. I have since remarked, that men of sense seldom fall
into this error; lawyers, fellows of universities, and persons of every
profession educated at Edinburgh, excepted.

Collins and I one day in an argument relative to the education of women;
namely whether it were proper to instruct them in the sciences, and whether
they were compete^^ to the study. Collins supported the negative and affirmed
that the task was beyond their c^pacity. I maintained the opposite opinion,
(...) little perhaps for the pleasure of disputing. He was naturally more
eloquent than I; words flowed copiously from his lips; and frequently I thought
myself vanquished, more by his volubility than by the force of his arguments.
We separated without coming to an agreement upon this point; and as we were not
to see each other again for some time, I committed my thoughts to paper, made a
fair copy, and sent it him. He answered, and I replied. Three or four letters
had been written by each, when my father chanced to light upon my papers and
read them. Without entering into the merits of the cause, he embraced the
opportunity of speaking to me upon my manner of writing. He observed, that
though I had the advantage of my adversary in correct spelling and pointing,
which I owed to my occupation, I was greatly his inferior in elegance of
expression, in arrangement, and perspicuity. Of this he convinced me by several
examples. I felt the justice of his remarks, became more attentive to language,
and resolved to make every effort to improve my style. Amidst these resolves an
odd volume of the Spectator fell into my hands. This was a publication I had
never seen. I bought the volume, and read it again and again. I was enchanted
with it, thought the style excellent, and wished it were in my power to imitate
it. With this view I selected some of the papers, made short summaries of the
sense of each period, and put them for a few days aside. I then, without
looking at the book, endeavored to restore the essays to their true form, and
to express each thought at length, as it was in the original, employing the
most appropriate words that occurred to my mind. I afterward compared my
Spectator with the original; I perceived some faults, which I corrected: but I
found that I wanted a fund of words, if I may so express myself, and a facility
of recollecting and employing them, which I thought I should by that time have
acquired, had I continued to make verses. The continual need of words of the
same meaning, but of different lengths for the measure, or of different sounds
for the rhyme, would have obliged me to seek for a variety of synonymes, and
have rendered me master of them. From this belief, I took some of the tales of
the Spectator, and turned them into verse; and after a time, when I had
sufficiently forgotten them, I again converted them into prose.

Sometimes also I mingled all my summaries together; and a few weeks after,
endeavored to arrange them in the best order, before I attempted to form the
periods and complete the essays. This I did with a view of acquiring method in
the arrangement of my thoughts. On comparing afterward my performance with the
original, many faults were apparent, which I corrected; but I had sometimes the
satisfaction to think, that, in certain particulars of little importance, I had
been fortunate enough to improve the order of thought or the style; and this
encouraged me to hope that I should succeed, in time, in writing the English
language, which was one of the great objects of my ambition.

The time which I devoted to these exercises, and to reading, was the evening
after my day's labor was finished, the morning before it began, and Sundays
when I could escape attending divine service. While I lived with my father, he
had insisted on my punctual attendance on public worship, and I still indeed
considered it as a duty, but a duty which I thought I had no time to practice.

When about sixteen years of age, a work of Tryon fell into my hands, in which
he recommends vegetable diet. I determined to observe it. My brother, being a
bachelor, did not keep house, but boarded with his apprentices in a
neighboring family. My refusing to eat animal food was found inconvenient, and
I was often scolded for my singularity. I attended to the mode in which Tryon
prepared some of his dishes, particularly how to boil potatoes and rice, and
make hasty puddings. I then said to my brother, that if he would allow me per
week half what he paid for my board, I would undertake to maintain myself. The
offer was instantly embraced, and I soon found that of what he gave me I was
able to save half. This was a new fund for the purchase of books; and other
advantages resulted to me from the plan. When my brother and his workmen left
the printing house to go to dinner, I remained behind; and dispatched my frugal
meal, which frequently consisted of a biscuit only, or a slice of bread and a
bunch of raisins, or a bun from the pastry cook's, with a glass of water, I had
the rest of the time, till their return, for study; and my progress therein was
proportioned to that clearness of ideas, and quickness of conception, which are
the fruit of temperance in eating and drinking.

It was about this period that, having one day been put to the blush for my
ignorance in the art of calculation, which I had twice failed to learn while at
school, I took up Cocker's Treatise of Arithmetic, and went through it by
myself with the utmost ease, I also read a book of Navigation by Seller and
Sturmy, and made myself master of the little geometry it contains, but I never
proceeded far in this science. Nearly at the same time I read Lock on the
Human Understanding, and the Art of Thinking by Messrs. du Port Royal.

While laboring to form and improve my style, I met with an English Grammar,
which I believe was Greenwood's, having at the end of it two little essays on
rhetoric and logic. In the latter I found a model of disputation after the
manner of Socrates. Shortly after I procured Xenophon's work, entitled,
Memorable Things of Socrates, in which are various examples of the same method.
Charmed to a degree of enthusiasm with this mode of disputing, I adopted it,
and renouncing blunt contradiction, and direct and positive argument, I assumed
the character of a humble questioner. The perusal of Shaftsbury and Collins had
made me a skeptic; and being previously so as to many doctrines of
Christianity, I found Socrates's method to be both the safest for myself, as
well as the most embarrassing to those against whom I employed it. It soon
afforded me singular pleasure; I incessantly practiced it; and became very
adroit in obtaining, even from persons of superior understanding, concessione
of which they did not foresee the consequences. Thus I involved them in
difficulties from which they were unable to extricate themselves, and sometimes
obtained victories, which neither my cause nor my arguments merited.

This method I continued to employ for some years; but I afterward abandoned
it by degrees, retaining only the habit of expressing myself with modest
diffidence, and never making use, when I advanced any proposition which might
be controverted, of the words certainly, undoubtedly, or any others that might
give the appearance of being obstinately attached to my opinion. I rather said,
I imagine, I suppose, or it appears to me, that such a thing is so or so, for
such and such reasons; or it is so, if I am not mistaken. This habit has, I
think, been of considerable advantage to me, when I have had occasion to
impress my opinion on the minds of others, and persuade them to the adoption of
the measures I have suggested. And since the chief ends of conversation are, to
inform or be informed, to please or to persuade, I could wish that intelligent
and well-meaning men would not themselves diminish the powers they possess of
being useful, by a positive and presumptuous manner of expressing themselves,
which scarcely ever fails to disgust the hearer, and is only calculated to
excite opposition, and defeat every purpose for which the faculty of speech has
been bestowed upon man. In short, if you wish to inform, a positive and
dogmatical manner of advancing your opinion may provoke contradiction, and
prevent your being heard with attention. On the other hand, if, with a desire
of being informed, and of benefiting by the knowledge of others, you express
yourselves as being strongly attached to your own opinions, modest and sensible
men, who do not love disputation, will leave you in tranquil possession of your
errors. By following such a method, you can rarely hope to please your
auditors, conciliate their goodwill, or work conviction on those whom you may
be desirous of gaining over to your views. Pope judiciously observes, Men must
be taught as if you taught them not,
And things unknown proposed as things forgot.
And in the same poem he afterward advises us,
To speak, though sure, with seeming diffidence.
He might have added to these lines, one that he has coupled elsewhere, in my
opinion, with less propriety. It is this: For want of modesty is want of sense.
If you ask why I say with less propriety, I must give you the two lines
together: Immodest words admit of no defense,
For want of decency is want of sense.
Now want of sense, when a man has the misfortune to be so circumstanced, is it
not a kind of excuse for want of modesty? And would not the verses have been
more accurate, if they had been constructed thus: Immodest words admit but this
defense.
That want of decency is want of sense.
But I leave the decision of this to better judges than myself.

In 1720, or 1721, my brother began to print a new public paper. It was the
second that made its appearance in America, and was entitled the New England
Courant. The only one that existed before was the Boston News-Letter* Some of
his friends, I remember, would have dissuaded him from this undertaking, as a
thing that was not likely to succeed; a single newspaper being, in their
opinion, sufficient for all America. At present, however, in 1777, there are no
less than twenty-five. But he carried his project into execution, and I was
employed in distributing the copies to his customers, after having assisted in
composing and working them off.

Among his friends he had a number of literary characters, who, as an
amusement, wrote short essays for the paper, which gave it reputation and
increased its sale. These gentlemen came frequently to our house. I heard the
conversation that passed, and the accounts they gave of the favorable
reception of their writings with the public. I was tempted to try my hand among
them; but, being still a child as it were, I was fearful that my brother might
be unwilling to print in his paper any performance of which he should know me
to be the author. I therefore contrived to disguise my hand, and having written
an anonymous piece, I placed it at night under the door of the printing house,
where it was found the next morning. My brother communicated it to his friends,
when they came as usual to see him, who read it, commented upon it within my
hearing, and I had the exquite pleasure to find that it met with their
approbation, and that, in the various conjectures they made respecting the
author, no one was mentioned who did not enjoy a high reputation in the country
for talents and genius. I now supposed myself fortunate in my judges, and began
to suspect that they were not much excellent writers as I had hitherto supposed
them. Be that as it may, encouraged by this little adventure, I wrote and sent
to the press, in the same way, many other pieces, which were equally approved;
keeping the secret till my slender stock of information and knowledge for such
performances was pretty completely exhausted, when I made myself known.

My brother, upon this discovery, began to entertain a little more respect for
me; but he still regarded himself as my master, and treated me like an
apprentice. He thought himself entitled to the same services from me as from
any other person. On the contrary, I conceived that, in many instances, he was
too rigorous, and that, on the part of a brother, I had a right to expect
greater indulgence. Our disputes were frequently brought before my father; and
either my brother was generally in the wrong, or I was the better pleader of
the two, for judgment was commonly given in my favor. But my brother was
passionate, and often had recourse to blows; a circumstance which I took in
very ill part. This severe and tyrannical treatment contributed, I believe, to
imprint on my mind that aversion to arbitrary power, which during my whole life
I have ever preserved. My apprenticeship became insupportable to me, and I
continually sighed for an opportunity of shortening it, which at length
unexpectedly offered.

An article inserted in our paper upon some political subjects which I have now
forgotten, gave offense to the Assembly. My brother was taken into custody,
censured, and ordered into confinement for a month, because, as I presume, he
would not discover the author. I was also taken up, and examined before the
council; but, though I gave them no satisfaction, they contented themselves
with reprimanding, and then dismissed me; considering me probably as bound, in
quality of apprentice, to keep my master's secrets.

The imprisonment of my brother kindled my resentment, notwithstanding our
private quarrels. During its continuance the management of the paper was
entrusted to me, and I was bold enough to insert some pasquerades against the
governors; which highly pleased my brother, while others began to look upon me
in an unfavourable point of view, considering me as a young wit inclined to
satire and lampoon.

My brother's enlargement was accompanied with an arbitary order from the house
of Assembly, That James Franklin should no longer print the newspaper entitled
the New England Courant. In this conjuncture, we held a consultation of our
friends at the printing house, in order to determine what was proper to be
done. Some proposed to evade the order, by changing the title of the paper; but
my brother foreseeing inconveniences that would result from this step, thought
it better that it should in future be printed in the name of Benjamin Franklin;
and to avoid the censure of the Assembly, who might charge him with still
printing the paper himself, under the name of his apprentice, it was resolved
that my old indentures should be given up to me, with a full and entire
discharge written on the back, in order to be produced upon an emergency: but
that, to secure to my brother the benefit of my service, I should sign a new
contract, which should be kept secret during the remainder of the term. This
was a very shallow arrangement. It was, however, carried into immediate
execution, and the paper continued, in consequence, to make its appearance for
some months in my name. At length a new difference arising between my brother
and me, I ventured to take advantage of my liberty, presuming that he would not
dare to produce the new contract, It was undoubtedly dishonorable to avail
myself of this circumstance, and I reckon this action as one of the first
errors of my life; but I was little capable of estimating it as its true value,
embittered as my mind had been by the recollection of the blows I had received.
Exclusively of his passionate treatment of me, my brother was by no means a man
of an ill temper, and perhaps my manners had too much of impertinence not to
afford it a very natural pretext.

When he knew that it was my determination to quit him, he wished to prevent my
finding employment elsewhere. He went to all the printing-houses in the town,
and prejudiced the masters against me; who accordingly refused to employ me.
The idea then suggested itself to me of going to New York, the nearest town in
which there was a printing-office. Farther reflections confirmed me in the
design of leaving Boston, where I had already rendered myself an object of
suspicion to the governing party. It was probable, from the arbitrary
proceedings of the Assembly in the affair of my brother, that by remaining, I
should soon have been exposed to difficulties, which I had the greater reason
to apprehend, as, from my indiscreet disputes upon the subject of religion, I
begun to be regarded, by pious souls, with horror, either as an apostate or an
a^heist. I came therefore to a resolution; but my father, in this instance,
siding with my brother, I presumed that if I attempted to depart openly,
measures would be taken to prevent me. My friend Collins undertook to favor my
flight. He agreed for my passage with the captain of a New York sloop, to whom
he represented me as a young man of his acquaintance, who had an affair with a
girl of bad character, whose parents wished to compel me to marry her, and that
of consequence I could neither make my appearance nor go off publicly. I sold
part of my books to procure a small sum of money, and went privately on board
the sloop. By favor of a good wind, I found myself in three days at New York,
nearly three hundred miles from my home, at the age only of seventeen years,
without knowing an individual in the place, and with very little money in my
pocket.

The inclination I had felt for a seafaring life was entirely subsided, or I
should now have been able to gratify it; but having another trade, and
believing myself to be a tolerable workman, I hesitated not to offer my
services to the old Mr. William Bradford, who had been the first printer in
Pennsylvania, but had quitted that province on account of a quarrel with George
Keith, the governor. He could not give me employment himself, having little to
do, and already as many persons as he wanted; but he told me that his son, a
printer at Philadelphia, had lately lost his principal workman, Aquilla Rose,
who was dead, and that if I would go thither, he believed that he would engage
me. Philadelphia was a hundred miles farther. I hesitated not to embark in a
boat in order to repair, by the shortest cut of the sea, to Amboy, leaving my
trunk and effects to come after me by the usual and more tedious conveyance. In
crossing the bay we met with a squall, which shattered to pieces our rotten
sails, prevented us from entering the Kill, and threw us upon Long Island.

During the squall a drunken Dutchman, who like myself was a passenger in the
boat, f^ll into the sea. At the moment that he was sinking, I seized him by the
fore-top, saved him, and drew him on board. This immersion sobered him a
little, so that he fell asleep, after having taken from his pocket a volume,
which he requested me to dry. This volume I found to be my old favorite work,
Bunyan's Voyages, in Dutch, a beautiful impression on fine paper, with
copperplate engravings; a dress in which I had never seen it in its original
language. I have since learned that it had been translated into almost all the
languages of Europe, and next to the Bible, I am persuaded, it is one of the
books which has had the greatest spread. Honest John is the first, that I know
of, who has mixed narrative and dialogue together; a mode of writing very
engaging to the reader, who in the most interesting passages, finds himself
admitted as it were into the company, and present at the conversation. De Foe
has imitated it with success in his Robinson Cruso, his Moll Flanders, and
other works; as also has Richardson in his Pamela, etc.

In approaching the island we found that we had made a part of the coast where
it was not possible to land, on account of the strong breakers produced by the
rocky shore. We cast anchor and veered the cable toward the shore. Some men,
who stood upon the brink, hallooed to us, while we did the same on our part;
but the wind was so high, and the waves so noisy, that we could neither of us
hear each other. There were some canoes upon the bank, and we called out to
them, and made signs to prevail on them to come and take us up; but either they
did not understand us, or they deemed our request impracticable, and withdrew.
Night came on, and nothing remained for us but to wait the subsiding of the
wind; till when we determined, that this, the pilot and I, to sleep if
possible. For that purpose we went below the hatches along with the Dutchman,
who was drenched with water. The sea broke over the boat, and reached us in our
retreat, so that we were presently as completely ^reached as he.

We had very little repose during the whole night: but the wind abating the
next day, we succeeded in reaching Amboy before it was dark, after having
passed thirty hours without provisions, and with no other drink than a bottle
of bad rum, the water upon which we roved being salt. In the evening I went to
bed with a very violent fever. I had somewhere read that cold water, drank
plentifully, was a remedy in such cases. I followed the prescription, was in a
profuse sweat for the greater part of the night, and the fever left me. The
next day I crossed the river in a ferry-boat, and continued my journey on foot.
I had fifty miles to walk, in order to reach Burlington, where I was told I
should find passage-boats that would convey me to Philadelphia. It rained hard
the whole day, so that I was wet to the skin. Finding myself fatigued about
noon, I stopped at a paltry inn, where I passed the rest of the day and the
whole night, beginning to regret that I had quitted my home. I made besides so
wretched a figure, that I was suspected to be some runaway servant. This I
discovered by the questions that were asked me; and I felt that I was every
moment in danger of being taken up as such. The next day, however I continued
my journey, and arrived in the evening at an inn, eight or ten miles from
Burlington, that was kept by one Dr. Brown.

This man entered into conversation with me while I took some refreshment, and
perceiving that I had read a little, he expressed toward me considerable
interest and friendship. Our acquaintance continued during the remainder of his
life. I believe him to have been what is called an itinerant doctor; for there
was no town in England, or indeed in Europe, of which he could not give a
particular account. He was neither deficient in understanding nor literature,
but he was a sad infidel; and, some years after, undertook to travesty the
Bible in burlesque verse, as Cotton has travestied Virgil. He exhibited, by
this means, many facts in a very ludicrous point of view, which would have
given umbrage to weak minds, had his work been published, which it never was.

I spent the night at his house, and reached Burlington the next morning. On my
arrival, I had the mortification to learn that the ordinary passage-boats had
sailed a little before. This was on a Saturday, and there would be no other
boat till the Tuesday following. I returned to the house of an old woman in the
town who had sold me some gingerbread to eat one of my passage, and I (...) her
advice. She invited me to take up my abode with her till an opportunity offered
for me to embark. Fatigued with having traveled so far on foot, I accepted her
invitation. When she understood that I was a printer, she would have persuaded
me to stay at Burlington, and set up my trade: but she was little aware of the
capital that would be necessary for such a purpose! I was treated while at her
house with true hospitality. She gave me, with the utmost goodwill, a dinner of
beef-steaks, and would accept of nothing in return but a pint of ale.

Here I imagined myself to be fixed till the Tuesday in the ensuing week; but
walking out in the evening by the river side, I saw a boat with a number of
persons in it approach. It was going to Philadelphia, and the company took me
in. As there was no wind, we could only make way with our oars. About midnight,
not perceiving the town, some of the company were of opinion that we must have
passed it, and were unwilling to row any farther; the rest not knowing where we
were it was resolved that we should stop. We drew toward the shore, entered a
creek, and landed near some old palisades, which served us for firewood, it
being a cold night in October. Here we stayed till day, when one of the company
found the place in which we were to be Cooper's Creek, a little above
Philadelphia; which in reality we perceived the moment we were out of the
creek. We arrived on Sunday abought eight or nine o'clock in the morning, and
landed on Market-street wharf.

I have entered into the particulars of my voyage, and shall in like manner
describe my first entrance into this city, that you may be able to compare
beginnings so little auspicious, with the figure I have since made.

On my arrival at Philadelphia I was in my working dress, my best clothes being
to come by sea. I was covered with dirt; my pockets were filled with shirts and
stockings; I was unacquainted with a single soul in the place, and knew not
where to seek for a lodging. Fatigued with walking, rowing, and having passed
the night without sleep, I was extremely hungry, and all my money consisted of
a Dutch dollar, and about a shilling's worth of coppers, which I gave to the
boatmen for my passage. As I had assisted them in rowing, they refused it at
first; but I insisted on their taking it. A man is sometimes more generous when
he has little, than when he has much money; probably because, in the first
case, he is desirous of concealing his poverty.

I walked toward the top of the street, looking eagerly on both sides, till I
came to Market-street, where I met a child with a loaf of bread. Often had I
made my dinner on dry bread. I enquired where he had bought it, and went
straight to the baker's shop which he pointed out to me. I asked for some
biscuits, expecting to find such as we had at Boston; but they made, it seems,
none of that sort at Philadelphia. I then asked for a three-penny loaf. They
made no loaves of that price. Finding myself ignorant of the prices, as well as
of the different kinds of bread, I desired him to let me have three pennyworth
of bread of some kind or other. He gave me three large rolls. I was surprised
at receiving so much: I took them, however, and having no room in my pockets, I
walked on with a roll under each arm, eating the third. In this manner I went
through Market-street to Fourth street, and passed the house of Mr. Read, the
father of my future wife. She was standing at the door, observed me, and
thought, with reason, that I made a very singular and grotesque appearance.

I then turned the corner, and went through Chesnut-street, eating my roll all
the way; and having made this round, I found myself again on Market-street
wharf, near the boat in which I had arrived. I stepped into it to take a
draught of river-water; and finding myself satisfied with my first roll, I gave
the other two to a woman and her child, who had come down the river with us in
the boat, and was waiting to continue her journey. Thus refreshed, I regained
the street, which was now full of well-dressed people, all going the same way.
I joined them, and was thus led to a large Quakers' meeting house near the
marketplace. I sat down with the rest, and after looking round me for some
time, hearing nothing said, and being drowsy from my last night's labor and
want of rest, I fell into a sound sleep. In this state I continued till the
assembly dispersed, when one of the congregation had the goodness to wake me.
This was consequently the first house I entered, or in which I slept at
Philadelphia.

I began again to walk along the streets by the river side; and looking
attentively in the face of every one I met, I at length perceived a young
quaker, whose countenance pleased me. I accosted him, and begged, him to inform
me where a stranger might find a lodging. We were then near the sign of the
Three Mariners. They receive travelers here, said he, but it is not a house
that bears a good character; if you will go with me, I will show you a better
one. He conducted me to the Crooked Billet, in Water-street. There I ordered
something for dinner, and during my meal, a number of curious questions were
put to me; my youth and appearance exciting the suspicion of my being a
runaway. After dinner my drowsiness returned, and I threw myself upon a bed
without taking off my clothes, and slept till six o'clock in the evening, when
I was called to supper. I afterward went to bed at a very early hour, and did
not awake till the next morning.

As soon as I got up I put myself in as decent a trim as I could, and went to
the house of Andrew Bradford the printer. I found his father in the shop, whom
I had seen at New York. Having traveled on horseback, he had arrived at
Philadelphia before me. He introduced me to his son, who received me with
civility, and gave me some breakfast; but told me he had no occasion for a
journeyman, having lately procured one. He added, that there was another
printer newly settled in the town, of the name of Keimer, who might perhaps
employ me; and in case of a refusal, I should be welcome to lodge at his house,
and he would give me a little work now and then, till something better should
offer.

The old man offered to introduce me to the new printer. When we were at his
house: "Neighbor," said he, I bring you a young man in the printing business;
perhaps you may have need of his services.

Keimer asked me some questions, put a composing stick in my hand to see how I
could work, and then said, that at present he had nothing for me to do, but
that he should soon be able to employ me. At the same time taking old Bradford
for an inhabitant of the town well-disposed toward him, he communicated his
project to him, and the pospect he had of success. Bradford was careful not to
discover that he was the father of the other printer; and from what Keimer had
said, that he hoped shortly to be in possession of the greater part of the
business of the town, led him by artful questions, and by starting some
difficulties, to disclose all his views, what his hopes were founded upon, and
how he intended to proceed. I was present, and heard it all. I instantly saw
that one of the two was a cunning old fox, and the other a perfect novice.
Bradford left me with Keimer, who was strangely surprised when I informed him
who the old man was.

I found Keimer's printing materials to consist of an old damaged press, and a
small cast of worn-out English letters, with which he was himself at work upon
an elegy on Aquila Rose, whom I have mentioned above, an ingenious young man,
and of an excellent character, highly esteemed in the town, secretary to the
Assembly, and a very tolerable poet Keimer also made verses, but they were
indifferent ones. He could not be said to write in verse, for his method was to
take and set the lines as they flowed from his muse; and as he worked without
copy, had but one set of letter-cases, and the elegy would probably occupy all
his type, it was impossible for any one to assist him. I endeavored to put his
press in order, which he had not yet used, and (...) which indeed he understood
nothing: and having promised to come and work off his elegy as soon as it
should be ready, I returned to the house of Bradford, who gave me ^ome trifle
to do for the present, for which I had my board and lodging.

In a few days Keimer sent for me to print off his elegy. He had now procured
another set of letter-cases, and had a pamphlet to reprint, upon which he set
me to work.

The two Philadelphia printers appeared destitute of every qualification
necessary in their profession. Bradford had not been brought up to it, and was
very illiterate. Keimer, though he understood at little of the business, was
merely a compositor, and wholly incapable of working at the press. He had one
of the French prophets, and knew how to imitate their supernatural agitations.
At the time of our first acquaintance he professed no particular religion, but
a little of all upon occasion. He was totally ignorant of the world, and a
great knave at heart, as I had afterward an opportunity of experiencing.

Keimer could not endure that, working with him, I should lodge at Bradford's.
He had indeed a house, but it was unfurnished; so that he could not take me in.
He procured me a lodging at Mr. Read's, his landlord, whom I have already
mentioned. My trunk and effects being now arrived, I thought of making, in the
eyes of Miss Read, a more respectable appearance than when chance exhibited me
to her view, eating my roll, and wandering in the streets.

From this period I began to contract acquaintance with such young people of
the town as were fond of reading, and spent my evenings with them agreeably,
while at the same time I gained money by my industry, and thanks to my
frugality, lived contented. I thus forgot Boston as much as possible, and
wished every one to be ignorant of the place of my residence, except my friend
Collins, to whom I wrote, and who kept my secret.

An incident, however arrived, which sent me home much sooner than I had
proposed. I had a brother-in-law, of the name of Robert Holmes, master of a
trading sloop from Boston to Delaware. Being at Newcastle, forty miles below
Philadelphia, he heard of me, and wrote to inform me of the chagrin which my
sudden departure from Boston had occasioned my parents, and of the affection
which they still entertained for me, assuring me that, if I would return, every
thing should be adjusted to my satisfaction; and he was very pressing in his
entreaties. I answered his letter, thanked him for his advice, and explained
the reasons which had induced me to quit Boston, with such force and clearness,
that he was convinced I had been less to blame than he had imagined.

Sir William Keith, governor of the province was at Newcastle at the time.
Captain Holmes, being by chance in his company when he received my letter, took
occasion to speak of me, and showed it him. The governor read it, and appeared
surprised when he learned my age. He thought me, he said, a young man of very
promising talents, and that, of consequence, I ought to be encouraged; that
there were at Philadelphia none but very ignorant printers, and that if I were
to set up for myself, he had no doubt of my success; that, for his own part, he
would procure me all the public business, and would render me every other
service in his power. My brother-in-law related all this to me afterward at
Boston; but I knew nothing of it at the time; when one day Keimer and I being
at work together near the window, we saw the governor and another gentleman,
colonel French of Newcastle, handsomely dressed, cross the street, and make
directly for our house. We heard them at the door, and Keimer, believing it to
be a visit to himself, went immediately down: but the governor enquired for me,
came up stairs, and, with a condescension and politeness to which I had not at
all been accustomed, paid me many compliments, desired to be acquainted with
me, obligingly reproached me for not having made myself known to him on my
arrival in the town and wished me to accompany him to a tavern, where he and
colonel French were going to taste some excellent Madeira wine.

I was, I confess, somewhat surprised, and Keimer appeared thunderstruck. I
went however with the governor and the colonel to a tavern at the corner of
Third-street, where, while we were drinking the Madeira, he proposed to me to
establish a printing house. He set forth the probabilities of success, and
himself and colonel French assured me that I should have their protection and
influence in obtaining the printing of the public papers of both governments;
and as I appeared to doubt whether my father would assist me in this enterprise
Sir William said that he would give me a letter to him, in which he would
represent the advantages of the scheme, in a light which he had no doubt would
determine him. It was thus concluded that I should return to Boston by the
first vessel, with the letter of recommendation from the governor to my father.
Meanwhile the project was to be kept secret, and I continued to work for Keimer
as before.

The governor sent every now and then to invite me to dine with him. I cosiderd
this as a very great honor; and I was the more sensible of it, as he conversed
with me in the most affable, familar, and friendly manner imaginable.

Toward the end of April 1724, a small vessel was ready to sail for
Boston-(...) too^ leave of Keimer, upon the pretext of going to see my parents.
The governor gave me a long letter, in which he said many flattering things of
me to my father; and strongly recommended the project of my settling at
Philadelphia, as a thing which could not fail to make my fortune.

Going down the bay we struck on a flat, and sprung a leak. The weather was
very tempestuous, and we were obliged to pump without intermission; I took my
turn. We arrived however safe and sound at Boston, after about a fortnight's
passage.

I had been absent seven complete months and my relations, during that
interval, ha^ received no intelligence of me; for my brother-in-law, Holmes,
was not yet returned, and had not written about me. My unexpected appearance
surprised the family; but they were all delighted at seeing me again, and,
except my brother, welcomed me home. I went to him at the printing-office. I
was better dressed than I had ever been while in his service; I had a complete
suit of clothes, new and neat, a watch in my pocket, and my purse was furnished
with nearly five pounds sterling in money. He gave me no very civil reception;
and having eyed me from head to foot, resumed his work.

The workmen asked me with eagerness where I had been, what sort of a country
it was, and how I liked it. I spoke in the highest terms of Philadelphia, the
happy life we led there, and expressed my intention of going back again. One of
them asked what sort of money we had, I displayed before them a handful of
silver, which I drew from my pocket. This was a curiosity to which they were
not accustomed, paper being the current money at Boston. I failed not after
this to let them see my watch; and at last, my brother continuing sullen and
out of humor, I gave them a shilling to drink, and took my leave. This visit
stung my brother to the soul; for when, shortly after, my mother spoke to him
of a reconciliation, and a desire of seeing us upon good terms, he told her
that I had so insulted him before his men, that he would never forget or
forgive it: in this, however, he was mistaken.

The governor's letter appeared to excite in my father some surprise; but he
said little. After some days, Capt. Holmes being returned, he showed it him,
asking him if he knew Keith, and what sort of a man he was: adding, that, in
his opinion, it proved very little discernment to think of setting up a boy in
business, who for three years to come would not be of an age to be ranked in
the class of men. Holmes said every thing he could in favor of the scheme; but
my father firmly maintained its absurdity, and at last gave a positive refusal.
He wrote, however, a civil letter to Sir William, thanking him for the
protection he had so obligingly offered me, but refusing to assist me for the
present, because he thought me too young to be entrusted with the conduct of so
important an enterprise, and which would require so considerable a sum of money.

My old comrade Collins, who was a clerk in the post office, charmed with the
account I gave of my new residence, expressed a desire of going thither; and
while I waited my father's determination, he set off before me, by land, for
Rhode Island, leaving his books, which formed a handsome collection in
mathematics and natural philosophy, to be conveyed with mine to New York, where
he purposed to wait for me.

My father, though he could not approve Sir William's proposal, was yet pleased
that I had obtained so advantageous a recommendation as that a person of his
rank, and that my industry and economy had enabled me to equip myself so
handsomely in so short a period* Seeing no appearance of accommodating matters
between my brother and me, he consented to my return to Philadelphia, advised
me to be civil to every body, to endeavor to obtain general esteem, and avoid
satire and sarcasm, to which he thought I was too much inclined; adding, that,
with perseverance and prudent economy, I might, by the time I became of age,
save enough to establish myself in business; and that if a small sum should
then be wanting, he would undertake to supply it.

This was all I could obtain from him, except some trifling presents, in token
of friendship from him and my mother. I embarked once more for New York,
furnished at this time with their approbation and blessing. The sloop having
touched at Newport in Rhode Island, I paid a visit to my brother John, who had
for some years been settled there, and was married. He had always been attached
to me, and received me with great affection. One of his friends, whose name was
Vernon, having a debt of about thirty-six pounds due to him in Pennsylvania,
begged me to receive it for him, and keep the money till I should hear from
him: accordingly he gave me an order for that purpose. This affair occasioned
me, in the sequel, much uneasiness.

At Newport we took on board a number of passengers; among whom were two young
women, and a grave and sensible quaker lady with her servants. I had shown an
obliging forwardness in rendering the quaker some trifling services, which led
her, probably, to feel some interest in my welfare; for when she saw a
familiarity take place, and every day increase, between the two young women and
me, she took me aside and said, "Young man, I am in pain for thee. Thou have no
parent to watch over thy conduct, and thou seem to be ignorant of the world,
and the snares to which youth is exposed. Rely upon what I tell thee: those are
women of bad characters; I perceive it in all their actions. If thou do not
take care, they will lead thee into danger. They are strangers to thee, and I
advise thee, by the friendly interest I take in thy preservation, to form no
connection with them." As I appeared at first not to think quite so ill of them
as she did, she related many things she had seen and heard, which had escaped
my attention, but which convinced me she was in the right. I thanked her for
her obliging advice, and promised to follow it.

When we arrived at New York, they informed me where they lodged, and invited
me to come and see them. I did not however go, and it was well I did not; for
the next day, the captain, missing a silver spoon and some other things which
had been taken from the cabin, and knowing these women to be prostitutes,
procured a search warrant, found the stolen goods upon them, and had them
punished. And thus, after having been saved from one rock concealed under
water, upon which the vessel struck during our passage, I escaped another of a
still more dangerous nature.

At New York I found my friend Collins, who had arrived some time before. We
had been intimate from our infancy, and had read the same books together; but
he had the advantage of being able to devote more time to reading and study,
and an astonishing disposition for mathematics, in which he left me far behind.
When at Boston, I had been accustomed to pass with him almost all my leisure
hours. He was then a sober and industrious lad; his knowledge had gained him a
very general esteem, and he seemed to promise to make an advantageous figure in
society. But, during my absence, he had unfortunately addicted himself to
brandy, and I learned, as well from himself as from the report of others, that
every day since his arrival at New York he had been intoxicated, and had acted
in a very extravagant manner. He had also played, and lost all his money; so
that I was obliged to pay all his expenses at the inn, and to maintain him
during the rest of the journey; a burden that was very inconvenient to me.

The governor of New York, whose name was Burrent, hearing the captain say that
a young man who was a passenger in his ship had a great number of books, begged
him to bring me to his house. I accordingly went, and should have taken Collins
with me, had he been sober. The governor treated me with great civility, showed
me his library, which was a very considerable one, and we talked for some time
upon books and authors. This was the second governor who had honored me with
his attention; and to a poor boy, a^ I then was, these little adventures did
not fail to be pleasing.

We arrived at Philadelphia. On the way I received Vernon's money, without
which we should have been unable to have finished our journey.

Collins wished to get employment as a merchant's clerk; but either his breath
or his countenance betrayed his bad habit; for, though he had recommendations,
he met with no success, and continued to lodge and eat with me, and at my
expense. Knowing that I had Vernon's money, he was continually asking me to
lend him some of it; promising to repay me at he should get employment. At last
he had drawn so much of this money, that I was extremely alarmed at what might
become of me, should he ^a^l to make good the deficiency. His habit of drinking
did not all diminish, and was a frequent source of discord between us for when
he had drank a little too much, h^ was very headstrong.

Being one day in a boat together, on the Delaware, with some other young
persons, he refused to take his turn in rowing. You shall row for me, said he,
till we get home. -- No, I replied, we will not row for you. -- You shall, said
he, or remain upon the water all night. -- As you please. -- Let us row, said
the rest of the company: what signifies whether he assists or not. But, already
angry with him for his conduct in other respects, I persisted in my refusal. He
then swore that he would make me row, or would throw me out of the boat; and he
made up to me. As soon as he was within my reach I took him by the collar, gave
him a violent thrust, and threw him head-foremost into the river. I knew that
he was a good swimmer, and was therefore under no apprehensions for his life.

Before he could turn himself, we were able, by a few strokes of our oars, to
place ourselves out of his reach; and whenever he touched the boat, we asked
him if he would row, striking his hands with the oars to make him let go his
hold. He was nearly suffocated with rage, but obstinately refused making any
promise to row. Perceiving at length that his strenght began to be exhausted,
we took him into the boat, and conveyed him home in the evening, completely
drenched. The utmost coldness subsisted between us after this adventure. At
last the captain of a West India ship, who was commissioned to procure a tutor
for the children of a gentleman at Barbados, meeting with Collins, offered him
the place. He accepted it and took his leave of me, promising to discharge the
debt he owed me with the first money he should receive; but I have heard
nothing of him since.

The violation of the trust reposed in me by Vernon, was one of the first great
errors of my life; and it proves that my father was not mistaken when he
supposed me too young to be entrusted with the management of important affairs.
But Sir William, upon reading his letter, thought him too prudent. There was a
difference, he said, between individuals years of maturity were not always
accompanied with discretion, neither was youth in every instance devoid of it.
Since your father added he, will not set you up in business, (...) will do it
myself. Make out a list of what will be wanted from England, and I will send
for the articles. You shall repay me whe^^ you can. I am determined to have a
good printer here, and I am sure you will succeed. This was said with so much
seeming cordiality, that I suspected not for an instant the sincerity of the
offer. I had hitherto kept the project, with which Sir William had inspired me,
of settling in business, a secret at Philadelphia, and I still continued to do
so. H^^ my reliance on the governor been known some friends, better acquainted
with his character than myself, would doubtless have advi^ed me not to trust
him; for I afterward lear^ed that he was universally known to be liber^^ of
promises, which he had no intention to perform. But having never solicited him,
how could I suppose his offers to be deceitful? On the contrary, I believed him
to be the best man in the world.

I gave him an inventory of a small printing-office; the expense of which I had
calculated at about a hundred pounds sterling. He expressed his approbation;
but asked if my presence in England, that I might choose the characters myself,
and see that every article was good in its kind, would not be an advantage. You
will also be able, said he, to form some acquaintance there, and establish a
correspondence with stationers and booksellers. This I acknowledged was
desirable. That being the case, added he, hold yourself in readiness to go with
the Annis. This was the annual vessel, and the only one, at that time, which
made regular voyages between the ports of London and Philadelphia. But the
Annis was not to sale for some months. I thefore continued to work with Keimer,
unhappy respecting the sum which Collins had drawn from me, and almost in
continual agony at the thoughts of Vernon, who fortunately made no demand of
his money till several years after.

In the account of my first voyage from Boston to Philadelphia, I omitted I
believe a trifling circumstance, which will not perhaps be out of place here.
During a calm which stopped us above Block-Island, the crew employed themselves
in fishing for cod, of which they caught a great number. I had hitherto adhered
to my resolution of not eating any thing that had possessed life; and I
considered on this occasion, agreeably to the maxims of m^ master Tryon, the
capture of every fish as a sort of murder, committed without provocation, since
these animals had neither done, nor were capable of doing, the smallest injury
to any one that should justify the measure. This mode of reasoning I conceived
to be unanswerable. Meanwhile I had formerly been extremely fond of fish; and
when one of these cod was taken out of the drying pan, I thought its flavor
delicious. I hesitated some time between principle and inclination, till at
last recollecting, that when the cod had been opened, some small fish had been
found in his belly, I said to mysef, If you eat one another I see no reason why
we may not eat you. I accordingly dined on the cod with no small degree of
pleasure, and have since continued to eat like the rest of mankind, returning
only occasionally to my vegetable plan. Ho^ convenient does it prove to be a
rational animal, that knows how to find or invent a plausible pretext for
whatever it has an inclination to do!

I continued to live upon good terms with Keimer, who had not the smallest
suspicion of my projected establishment. He still retained a portion of his
former enthusiasm; and being fond of argument, we frequently disputed together.
I was so much in the habit of using my Socratic method, and had so frequently
puzzled him by my questions, which appeared at first very distant from the
point in debate, yet nevertheless led to it by degrees, involving him in
difficulties and contradictions from which he was unable to extricate himself,
that he became at last ridiculously cautious, and would scarcely answer the
most plain and familiar question without previously asking me -- What would you
infer from that? Hence, he formed so high an opinion of my talents for
refutation, that he seriously proposed to me to become his colleague in the
establishment of a new religious sect. He was to propagate the doctrine by
preaching, and I to refute every opponent.

When he me explained to his tenets, I sound many absurdities which I refused
to admit, unless he would agree in turn to adopt some of my opinions. Keimer
wore his beard long, because Moses had somewhere said, Thou shall not mar the
corners of thy beard. He likewise observed the Sabbath; and these were with him
two very essential points. I disliked them both; but I consented to adopt them,
provided he would abstain from animal food. I doubt, said he, whether my
constitution will be able to support it. I assured him on the contrary, that he
would find himself the better for it. He was naturally a glutton, and I wished
to amuse myself by starving him. He consented to make trial of this regimen, if
I would bear him company; and in rea^^y we continued it for three months. A
woman in the neighborhood prepared and brought us our victuals, to whom I gave
a list of forty dishes, in the composition of which there entered neither flesh
nor fish. This fancy was ^^e more agreeable to me, as it turned to good
account, for the whole expense of our living did not exceed for each
eighteen-pence a week.

I have since that period observed several Lents with the greatest strictness,
and had suddenly returned again to my ordinary diet, without experiencing the
smallest inconvenience; which has led me to regard as of no importance the
advice commonly given, of introducing gradually such alterations of regimen.

I continued it cheerfully; but poor Keimer suffered terribly. Tired of the
project, he sighed for the flesh pots of Egypt. At length he ordered a roast
pig, and invited me and two of our female acquaintance to dine with him; but
the pig being ready a little too soon, he could not resist the temptation, and
eat it all up before we arrived.

During the circumstances I have related, I had paid some attentions to Miss
Read. I entertained for her the utmost esteem and affection; and I had reason
to believe that these sentiments were mutual. But we were both young, scarcely
more than eighteen years of age; and as I was on the point of undertaking a
long voyage, her mother thought it prudent to prevent matters being carried to^
far for the present, judging that if marriage was our object, there would be
more propriety in it after my return, when, as at least I expected, I should be
established in my business. Perhaps also (...) thought that my expectations
were not so well-founded as I imagined.

My most intimate aquaintance at this time were Charles Osborne, Joseph Watson,
and James Ralph; young men who were all fond of reading. The two first were
clerks to Mr. Charles Brockdon, one of the principal attorneys in the town, and
the other clerk to a merchant. Watson was an upright, pious and sensible young
man: the others were somewhat more loose in their principles of religion,
particularly Ralph, whose faith, as well as that of Collins, I had contributed
to shake; each of whom made me suffer a very adequate punishment. Osborne was
sensible, and sincere and affectionate in his friendships, but too much
inclined to the critic in ^^^tters of literature. Ralph was ingenious and
shrewd, genteel in his address, and extremely eloquent. I do not remember to
have met will a more agreeable speaker. They were both enamoured of the muses,
and had already evinced their passion by some small poetical productions.

It was a custom with us to take a charming w^^k on Sundays, in the woods that
bordered on the Schuylkill. Here we read together, and afterward conversed on
what we read. Ralph was disposed to give himself up entir^^^ to poetry. He
flattered himself that he should arrive at great eminence in the art, and even
acquire a fortune. The sublimest poets, he pretended, when they first began to
write, committed as many faults as himself. Osborne endeavored to dissuade him
from it, by a^suring him that he had no genius for poetry and advised him to
stick to the trade in which he had been brought up. In the road of commerce,
said he, you will be sure, by diligen^ and assiduity, though you have no
capital, (...) so far succeeding as to be employed as a fa^tor, and may thus,
in time, acquire the means of setting up for yourself. I conc^^red in these
sentiments, but at the same ti^^ expressed my approbation of amusing oursel^^
sometimes with poetry, with a view to impro^^^ our style. In consequence of
this it was proposed, that, at our next meeting, each of (...) should bring a
copy of verses of his own composition. Our object in this competition (...) to
benefit each other by our mutual remarks, criticisms and corrections; and as
style (...) expression were all we had in view, we excluded every idea of
invention, by agreeing that our task should be a version of the eigh^ teenth
psalm, in which is described the desce^^ of the Deity.

The time of our meeting drew near, when Ralph called upon me, and told me his
pie^^ was ready. I informed him that I had be^^ idle, and, not much liking the
task, had do^^ nothing. He showed me his piece, and asked what I thought of it.
I expressed myself in terms of warm approbation; because it really appeared to
have considerable merit. He then said: Osborne will never acknowledge the
smallest degree of excellence in any production of mine. Envy alone dictates to
him a thousand animadversions. Of you he is not so jealous: I wish therefore,
you would take the verses, and produce them as your own. I will pretend not to
have had leisure to write any thing. We shall then see in what manner he will
speak of them. I agreed to this little artifice, and immediately transcribed
the verses (...) prevent all suspicion.

We met. Watson's performance was the (...) that was read. It had some
beauties, but many faults. We next read Osborne's, which was much better. Ralph
did it justice, remarking a few imperfections, and applauding such parts as
were excellent. He had himself nothing to show. It was now my turn. I made some
difficulty; seemed as if I wished to be excused; pretended that I had had no
time to make corrections, etc. No excuse, however, was admissible, and the
piece must be produced. It was read and re-read. Watson and Osborne immediately
resigned the palm, and united in applauding it. Ralph alone made a few remarks,
and proposed some alterations; but I defended my text. Osborne agreed with me,
and told Ralph he was no more able to criticize than he was able to write.

When Osborne was alone with me, he expressed himself still more strongly in
favor of what he considered as my performance. He pretended that he had put
some restrain^ on himself before, apprehensive of my construing his
commendation into flattery. But who would have supposed, said he, Franklin to
be capable of such a composition? What painting, what energy, what fire! He has
surpassed the original. In his common conversation he appears not to have
choice of words; he hesitates, and is at a loss; and yet, good God, how he
writes!

At our next meeting Ralph discovered the trick we had played Osborne, who was
ra^lied without mercy.

By this adventure Ralph was fixed in his resolution of becoming a poet. I left
nothing unattempted to divert him from his purpose; but he persevered, till at
last the reading of Pope Probably the Dunciade, where we find him thou
immortalised by the author: Silence ye wolves, while RALPH to Cynthia howls!
And makes night hideous, answer him, yet owl^!
effected his cure: he became, however, a very tolerable pro^e writer. I shall
speak more of him hereafter; but as I shall probably have no farther occasion
to mention the other two, I ought to observe here, that Watson died a few years
after in my arms. He was greatly regretted; for he was the best of our society.
Osborne went to the islands, where he gained considerable reputation as a
barrister, and was getting money; but he died young. We had seriously engaged,
that whoever died first should return, if possible, and pay a friendly visit to
the survivor, to him an account of other world; but he has never fulfilled his
engagement.

The governor appeared to be fond of my company, and frequently invited me to
his house. He always spoke of his intention of settling me in business, as a
point that was decided. I was to take with me letters of recommendation to a
number of friends; and particularly a letter of credit, in order to obtain the
necessary sum for the purchase of my press, types and paper. He appointed
various times for me to come for these letters, which would certainly be ready;
and when I came, always put me off to another day.

These successive delays continued till the vessel, whose departure had been
several times deferred, was on the point of setting sail; when I again went to
Sir William's house to receive my letters and take leave of him. ^ saw his
secretary, Dr. Bard, who told me that the governor was extremely busy writing,
but that he would be down at Newcastle before the vessel, and that the letters
would be delivered to me there.

Ralph, though he was married and had a child, determined to accompany me in
this voyage. His object was supposed to be the establishing a correspondence
with some mercantile houses, in order to sell goods by commission; but I
afterward learned, that having reason to be dissatisfied with the parents of
his wife, he proposed to himself to leave her on their hands, and never return
to America again.

Having taken leave of my friends, and interchanged promises of fidelity with
Mi^^ Read, I quitted Philadelphia. At Newcastle the vessel came to anchor. The
governor was arrived, and I went to his logdings. His secretary received me
with great civilty, told me on the part of the govorner that he could not ^or
me then, as he was engaged in affairs of the utmost importance, but that he
would send the letters on board, and that he wished me, with all his heart, a
good voyage and speedy return I returned somewhat astonished, but still with
out entertaining the slightest suspicion.

Mr. Hamilton, a celebrated barrister of Philadelphia, had taken a passage to
England for himself and his son, and, in conjunction with Mr. Denham a quaker,
and Messrs. Oniam and Russel, proprietors of a forge in Maryland, had agreed
for the whole cabin, so that Ralph and I were obliged to take up our lodging
with the crew. Being unknown to every body in the ship, we were looked upon as
the common order of people: but Mr. Hamilton and his son (it was James, who was
afterward governor) left us at Newcastle, and returned to Philadelphia, where
he wa^ recalled, at a very great expense, to plead the cause of a vessel that
had been seized; and just as we were about to sail, colonel Finch came on
board, and showed me many civilities. The passengers upon this paid me more
attention, and I was invited, together with my friend Ralph, to occupy the
place in the cabin, which the return of the Mr. Hamiltons had made vacant; an
offer which we very readily accepted.

Having learned that the dispatches of the governor had been brought on board
by colonel Finch, I asked the captain for the letters that were to be entrusted
to my care. He told me that they were all put together in the bag, which he
could not open at present; but before ^e reached England, he would give me an
opportunity of taking them out. I was satisfied with this answer, and we
pursued our voyage.

The company in the cabin were all very sociable, and we were perfectly well
off as to provisions, as we took the advantage of the whole of Mr. Hamilton's
who had laid in a very plentiful stock. During the passage Mr. Denham
contracted a friendship for me, which ended only with his life: in other
respects the voyage was by no means an agreeable one, as we had much bad
weather.

When we arrived in the river, the captain was as good as his word, and allowed
me to search the bag for the governor's letters. I could not find a single one
with my name written on it, as committed to my care; but I selected six or
seven, which I judged from the direction to be those that were intended for me;
particularly one to Mr. Basket the king's printer, and another to a stationer,
who was the first person I called upon. I delivered him the letter as coming
from governor Keith. I have no acquaintance (said he) with any such person; and
opening the letter, Oh, it is from Riddlesden! he exclaimed. I have lately
discovered him to be a very arrant knave, and I wish to have nothing to do
either with him or his letters. He instantly put the letter in my hand, turned
upon his heel, and left me to serve some customers.

I was astonished at finding these letters were not from the governor.
Reflecting, and ^^^^ting circumstances together, I then began to doubt his
sincerity. I rejoined my friend Denham, and related the whole affair to him. He
let me at once into Keith's character, told me there was not the least
probability of his having written a single letter; that no one who knew him
ever placed any reliance on him, and laughed at my credulity in supposing that
the governor would give me a letter of credit, when he had no credit for
himself. As I showed some uneasiness respecting what step I should take, he
advised me to try to get employment in the house of some printer. You may
there, said he, improve yourself in business, and you will be able to settle
yourself the more advantageously when you return to America.

We knew already, as well as the stationer, attorney Riddlesden to be a knave.
He had nearly ruined the father of Miss Read, by drawing him in to be his
security. We learned from his letter, that he was secretly carrying on an
entrigue, in concert with the governor, to the prejudice of Mr. Hamilton, who
it was supposed would by this time be in Europe. Denham, who was Hamilton's
friend, was of opinion that he ought to be made acquainted with it: and in
reality, the instant he arrived in England, which was very soon after, I waited
on him, and, as much from good will to him as from resentment against the
governor, put the letter into his hands. He thanked me very sincerely, the
information it contained being of consequence to him; and from that moment
bestowed on me his friendship, which afterward proved on many occasions
serviceable to me.

But what are we to think of a governor who could play so scurvy a trick, and
thus grossly deceive a poor young lad, wholly destitute of experience? It was a
practice with him. Wishing to please every body, and having little to bestow,
he was lavish of promises. He was in other respects sensible and judicious, a
very tolerable writer, and a good governor for the people; though not so for
the proprietaries, whose instructions he frequently disregarded. Many of our
best laws were his work, and established during his administration.

Ralph and I were inseparable companions. We took a lodging together at three
and s^^^ pence a week, which was as much as (...) could afford. He met with
some relations (...) London, but they were poor, and not able (...) assist him.
He now, for the first time, informed me of his intention to remain in England,
and that he had no thoughts of ev^^ returning to Philadelphia. He was total^
without money; the little he had been (...) to raise having barely sufficed for
his passage I had still fifteen pistoles remaining; and (...) me he had from
time to time recourse, which he tried to get employment.

At first, believing himself possessed of ^^lents for the stage, he thought of
turning actor; but Wilkes, to whom he appli^^ frankly advised him to renounce
the idea, (...) it was impossible to succeed. He next proposed to Roberts, a
bookseller in Pate^noster-Row, to write a weekly paper in the manner of the
Spectator, upon terms (...) which Roberts would not listen. Lastly, (...)
endeavored to procure employment as (...) copyist, and applied to the lawyers
and sta^^oners about the Temple; but he could find no vacancy.

As to myself, I immediately got engaged at Palmer's, at that time a noted
printer i^ Ba^^holomew Close, with whom I continued nearly a year. I applied
very assiduously (...) my work; but I expended with Ralph almost all that I
earned, Plays and other places amusement which we frequented together, saving
exhausted my pistoles, we lived after this from hand to mouth. He appeared to
have entirely forgotten his wife and child, as I also, by degrees, forgot my
engagements with Miss Read, to whom I never wrote more than one letter, and
that merely to inform her that I was not likely to return soon. This was
another grand error of my life, which I should be desirous of correcting, were
I to begin my career again.

I was employed at Palmer's on the second adition of Woolaston's Religion of
Nature. Some of his arguments appearing to me not to be well founded, I wrote a
small metaphysical treatise, in which I animadverted on those passages. It was
entitled a Dissertation on Liberty and Necessity, Pleasure and Pain. I
dedicated it to my friend Ralph, and printed a small number of copies. Palmer
upon this treated me with more consideration and regarded me as a young man of
talents; though ^e seriously took me to task for the principles of my pamphlet,
which he looked upon as ^^ominable. The printing of this work was another error
of my life.

While I lodged in Little Britain I formed acquaintance with a bookseller of
the name of Wilcox, whose shop was next door to me. Circulating libraries were
not then in use. He had an immense collection of books of all sorts. We agreed
that, for a reasonable retribution, of which I have now forgotten the price, I
should have free access to his library, and take what books I pleased, which I
was to return when I had read them. I considered this agreement as a very great
advantage; and I derived from it as much benefit as was in my power.

My pamphlet falling into the hands of a surgeon, of the name of Lions, author
of a book entitled Infallibility of Human Judgment, was the occasion of a
considerable intimacy between us. He expressed great esteem for me, came
frequently to see me, it order to converse upon metaphysical subjects, and
introduced me to Dr. Mandeville, author of the Fable of Bees, who had
instituted a club at a tavern in Cheapside, (...) which he was the soul: he was
a facetious and very amusing character. He also introduced me, at Baston's
coffee-house, to Dr. Pemberton, who promised to give me an opportunity of
seeing Sir Isaac Newton, which I very ardently desired; but he never kept his
word.

I had brought some curiosities with me from America; the principal of which
was a purse made of Asbestos, which fire only purifies. Sir Hans Sloane hearing
of it, called upon me, and invited me to his house in Bloomsbury square, where,
after showing me every thing that was curious, he prevailed on me to add this
piece to his collection* for which he paid me very handsomely.

There lodged in the same house with us a young woman, a milliner, who had a
shop by the side of the Exchange. Lively and sensible, and having received an
education somewhat above her rank, her conversation was very agreeable. Ralph
read plays to her every evening. They became intimate. She took another
lodging, and he followed her. They lived for some time together; but Ralph
being without employment, she having a child, and the profits of her business
not sufficing for the maintenance of three, he resolved to quit London, and try
a country school. This was a plan in which he thought himself likely to
succeed, as he wrote a fine hand, and was versed in arithmetic and accounts.
But considering the office as beneath him, and expecting some day to make a
better figure in the world, when he should be ashamed of its being known that
he had exercised a profession so little honorable, he changed his name, and
did me the honor of assuming mine. He wrote to me soon after his departure,
informing me that he was settled at a small village in Berkshire. In his letter
he recommended Mrs. T***, the milliner, to my care, and requested an answer,
directed to Mr. Franklin, schoolmaster at N***.

He continued to write to me frequently, sending me large fragments of an epic
poem he was composing, and which he requested me to criticize and correct. I
did so, but not without endeavoring to prevail on him to renounce this
pursuit. Young had jus^ published one of his Satires. I copied and sent him a
great part of it; in which the author demonstrates the folly of cultivating the
Muses, from the hope, by their instrumentality, of rising in the world. It was
all to no purpose; paper after paper of his poem continued to arrive every post.

Meanwhile Mrs. T*** having lost, on his account, both her friends and her
business was frequently in distress. In this dilemma she had recourse to me;
and to extricate her from her difficulties, I lent her all the money I could
spare. I felt a little too much fondness for her. Having at that time no ties
of religion, and taking advantage of her necessitous situation, I attempted
liberties (another error of my life) which she repelle^ with becoming
indignation. She informed Ralph of my conduct; and the affair occasioned a
breach between us. When he returned to London, he gave me to understand that he
considered all the obligations he owed me as annihilated by this proceeding*
whence I concluded that I was never to expect the payment of what money I had
lent him, or advanced on his account. I was the less afflicted at this, as he
was unable to pay me; and as, by losing his friendship, I was relieved at the
same time from a very heavy burden.

I now began to think of laying by some money. The printing house of Watts,
near Lincoln's Inn-Fields, being a still more con^^derable one than that in
which I worked, it was probable I might find it more advantageous to be
employed there. I offered myself, and was accepted; and in this house I
continued during the remainder of my stay in London.

On my entrance I worked at first as a pressman, conceiving that I had need of
bodily exercise, to which I had been accustomed in America, where the printers
work alternately as compositors and at the press^^ drank nothing but water. The
other workmen, to the number of about fifty, were great drinkers of beer. I
carried occasionally a large form of letters in each hand, up and down stairs,
while the rest employed both hands to carry one. They were surprised to see, by
this and many other ^^amples, that the American Aquatic, as they used to call
me, was stronger than those who drank porter. The beer-boy had sufficient
employment during the whole day in serving that house alone. My fellow-pressman
drank every day a pint of beer before breakfast, a pint with bread and cheese
for breakfast, one between breakfast and dinner, one at dinner, one again about
six o'clock in the afternoon, and another after he had finished his day's work.
This custom appeared to me abominable; but he had need, he said, of all this
beer, in order to acquire strength to work.

I endeavored to convince him that bodily strength furnished by beer, could
only be in proportion to the solid part of the barley dissolved in the water of
which the beer was composed; that there was a larger portion of flour in a
penny loaf, and that consequently if he eat this loaf, and drank a pint of
water with it, he would derive more strength from it than from a pint of beer.
This reasoning, however, did not prevent him from drinking his accustomed
quantity of beer, and paying every Saturday night a score of four or five
shillings a week for this cursed beverage; an expense from which I was wholly
exempt. Thus do these poor devils continue all their lives in a state of
voluntary wretchedness and poverty.

At the end of a few weeks, Watts having occasion for me above stairs as a
compositor, I quitted the press. The compositors demanded of me garnish-money
afresh. This I considered as an imposition, having already paid below. The
master was of the same opinion, and desired me not to comply. I thus remained
two or three weeks out of the fraternity. I was consequently looked upon as
excommunicated; and whenever I was absent, no little trick that malice could
suggest was left unpractised upon me. I found my letters mixed, my pages
transposed, my matter broken, etc. etc. all which was attributed to the spirit
that haunted the chapel, Printing-houses in general are thus denominated by the
workmen; the spirit they call by the name of Ralph.
and tormented those who were not regularly admitted. I was at last obliged to
submit to pay, notwithstanding the protection of the master; convinced of the
folly of not keeping up a good understanding with those among whom we were
destined to live.

After this I lived in the utmost harmony with my fellow laborers, and soon
acquired considerable influence among them. I proposed some alterations in the
laws of the chapel, which I carried without opposition. My example prevailed
with several of them to renounce their abominable practice of bread and cheese
with beer; and they procured, like me, from a neighboring house, a good basin
of warm gruel, in which was a small slice of butter, with toasted bread and
nutmeg. This was a much better breakfast, which did not cost more than a pint
of beer, namely, three-halfpence, and at the same time preserved the head
clearer. Those who continued to gorge themselves with beer, often lost their
credit with the publican, from neglecting to pay their score. They had then
recourse to me, to become security for them; their light, as they used to call
it, being out. I attended at the pay-table every Saturday evening, to take up
the little sum which I had made myself answerable for; and which sometimes
amounted to near thirty shillings a week.

This circumstance, added to my reputation of being a tolerable good gabber,
or, in other words, skilful in the art of burlesque, kept up my importance in
the chapel. I had besides recommended myself to the esteem of my master by my
assiduous application to business never observing Saint Monday. My
extraordinary quickness in composing always procured me such work as was most
urgent, and which is commonly best paid; and thus my time passed away in a very
pleasant manner.

My lodging in Little Britain being to far from the printing house, I took
another in Duke-street, opposite the Roman Chapel. It was the back of an
Italian warehouse. The house was kept by a widow, who had a daughter, a
servant, and a shop boy; but the latter slept out of the house. After sending
to the people with whom I lodged in Little Britain, to enquire into my
character, she agreed to take me at the same price, three-and-sixpence a week;
contenting herself, she said, with so little, because of the security she would
derive, as they were all women, from having a man to lodge in the same house.

She was a woman rather advanced in life, the daughter of a clergyman. She had
been educated a Protestant; but her husband, whose memory she highly revered,
had converted her to the Catholic religion. She had lived in habits of intimacy
with persons of distinction; of whom she knew various anecdotes as far back as
the time of Charles II. Being subject to fits of the gout, which often confined
her to her room, she was sometimes disposed to see company. Hers was so amusing
to me, that I was glad to pass the evening with her as often as she desired it.
Our supper consisted only of half an anchovy a piece, upon a slice of bread and
butter, with half a ^^nt of ale between us. But the entertainment was in her
conversation.

The early hours I kept, and the little trouble I occasioned in the family,
made her loath to part with me; and when I mentioned another loding I had
found, nearer the printing house, at two shillings a week, which fell in with
my plan of saving, she persuaded me to give it up, making herself an abatement
of two shillings: and thus I continued to lodge with her, during the remainder
of my abode in London, at eighteen-pence a week.

In a garret of the house there lived, in the most retired manner, a lady
seventy years of age, of whom I received the following account from my
landlady. She was a Roman Catholic. In her early years she had been sent to the
continent, and entered a convent with the design of becoming a nun; but the
climate not agreeing with her constitution, she was obliged to return to
England, where, as there were no monasteries, she made a vow to lead a monastic
life, in as rigid a manner as circumstances would permit. She accordingly
disposed of her property to be applied to charitable uses, reserving to herself
only twelve pounds a year; and of this small pittance she gave a part to the
poor, living on water gruel, and never making use of fire but to boil it. She
had lived in this garret a great many years, without paying rent to the
successive Catholic inhabitants that had kept the house; who indeed considered
her abode with them as a blessing. A priest came every day to confess her. I
have asked her, said my landlady, how, living as she did, she could find so
much employment for a confessor? To which she answered, that it was impossible
to avoid vain thoughts.

I was once permitted to visit her. She was cheerful and polite, and her
conversation agreeable. Her apartment was neat; but the whole furniture
consisted of a mattrass, a table, on which were a crucifix and a book, a chair,
which she gave me to sit on, and over the mantle-piece a picture of St.
Veronica displaying her handkerchief, on which was seen the miraculous
impression of the face of Christ, which she explained to me with great gravity.
Her countenance was pale, but she had never experienced sickness; and I may
adduce her as another proof how little is sufficient to maintain life and
health.

At the printing house I contracted an intimacy with a sensible young man of
the name of Wygate, who, as his parents were in good circumstances, had
received a better education than is common with printers. He was a tolerable
Latin scholar, spoke French fluently, and was fond of reading. I taught him, as
well as a friend of his, to swim, by taking them twice only into the river;
after which they stood in need of no farther assistance. We one day made a
party to go by water to Chelsea, in order to see the College, and Don Soltero's
curiosities. On our return, at the request of the company, whose curiosity
Wygate had excited, I undressed myself, and leaped into the river. I swam from
near Chelsea the whole way to Black-friars Bridge, exhibiting, during my
course, a variety of feats of activity and address, both upon the surface of
the water, as well as under it. This sight occasioned much astonishment and
pleasure to those to whom it was new. In my youth I took great delight in this
exercise. I knew, and could execute, all the evolutions and positions of
Thevenot; and I added to them some of my own invention, in which I endeavored
to unite gracefulness and untility. I took a pleasure in displaying them all on
this occasion, and was highly flattered with the admiration they excited.

Wygate, besides his being desirous of perfecting himself in this art, was the
more attached to me from there being, in order respects, a conformity in our
tastes and studies. He at length proposed to me to make the tour of Europe with
him, maintaining ourselves at the same time by working at our profession. I was
on the-point of consenting, when I mentioned it to my friend Denham, with whom
I was glad to pass an hour whenever I had le^sure. He dissuaded me from the
project, and advised me to return to Philadelphia which he was about to do
himself. I must relate in this place a trait of this worthy man's character.

He had formerly been in business at Bristol, but failing, he compounded with
his creditors and departed for America, where, by assiduous application as a
merchant, he acquired in a few years a very considerable fortune. Returning to
England in the same vessel with myself, as I have related above, he invited all
his old creditors to a feast. When assembled, he thanked them for the readiness
with which they had received his small compositions and, while they expected
nothing more than a simple entertainment, each found under his plate, when it
came to be removed, a draft upon a banker for the residue of his debt with
interest.

He told me it was his intention to carry back with him to Philadelphia a great
quantity of goods, in order to open a store; and he offered to take me with him
in the capacity of a clerk, to keep his books, in which he would instruct me,
copy letters and superintend the store. He added, that, as soon as I had
acquired a knowledge of mercantile transactions, he would improve my situation
by sending me with a cargo of corn and flour to the American islands, and by
procuring me other lucrative commissions; so that, with good management and
economy, I might in time begin business with advantage for myself.

I relished these proposals. London began to tire me; the agreeable hours I had
passed at Philadelphia presented themselves to my mind, and I had wished to see
them revive. I consequently engaged myself to Mr. Denham, at a salary of fifty
pounds a year. This was indeed less than I earned as a compositor, but then I
had a much fairer prospect. I took leave, therefore, as I believed forever, of
printing, and gave myself up entirely to my new occupation, spending all my
time either in going from house to house with Mr. Denham to purchase goods, or
in packing them up, or in expediting the workmen, etc. etc. When every thing
was on board, I had at last a few days leisure.

During this interval, I was one day sent for by a gentleman, whom I knew only
by name. It was Sir William Wyndham. I went to his house. He had by some means
heard of my performances between Chelsea and Blackfriers, and that I had taught
the art of swimming to Wygate and another young man in the course of a few
hours. His two sons were on the point of setting out on their travels; he was
desirous that they should previously learn to swim, and offered me a very
liberal reward if I would undertake to instruct them. They were not yet arrived
in town, and the stay I should make myself was uncertain; I coud not therefore
accept his proposal. I was led however to suppose from this incident, that if I
had wished to remain in London, and open a swimming-school, I should perhaps
have gained a great deal of money. This idea struck me so forcibly, that, had
the offer been made sooner, I should have dismissed the thoughts of returning
as yet to America. Some years after, you and I had a more important business to
settle with one of the sons of Sir William Windham, then Lord Egremont. But let
us not anticipate events.

I thus passed a bout eighteen months in London, working almost without
intermission at my trade, avoiding all expense on my own account, excepting
going now and then to a play, and purchasing a few books. But my friend Ralph
kept me poor. He owed me about twenty-seven pounds, which was so much money
lost; and when considered taken from my little savings, was a very great sum. I
had, notwithstanding this, a regard for him, as he possessed many amiable
qualities. But though I had done nothing for myself in point of fortune, I had
increased my stock of knowledge, either by the many excellent books I had read,
or the conversation of learned or literary persons with whom I was acquinted.

We sailed from Gravesend the 23d of July 1726. For the incidents of my voyage
I re^^fer you to my Journal, where you will fi^^^ all the circumstances
minutely related. We landed at Philadelphia on the 11th of the following
October.

Keith had been deprived of his office of governor, and was succeeded by Major
Gordon. I met him walking in the streets as a private individual. He appeared a
little ashamed at seeing me, but passed on without saying any thing.

I should have been equally ashamed myself at meeting Miss Read, had not her
family, justly desparing of my return after reading my letter, advised her to
give me up, and marry a potter, of the name of Rogers; (...) which she
consented: but he never made (...) happy, and she soon separated from him,
refusing to cohabit with him, or even bate his name, on account of a report
which prevailed, of his having another wife. His skill in his profession had
seduced Miss Read's, parents; but he was as bad a subject as he was excellent
as a workman. He involved himself i^ debt, and fled, in the year 1727 or 1728
to the West Indies, were he died.

During my absence Keimer had taken a more considerable house, in which he kept
a shop, that was well supplied with paper, and various other articles. He had
produced some new tipes, and a number of workmen; among whom, however, there
was not one who was good for any thing; and he appeared not to want business.

Mr. Denham took a warehouse in Water-street, where we exhibited our
commodities. I applied myself closely, studied accounts, and became in a short
time very expert in trade. We lodged and eat together. He was sincerely
attached to me, and acted toward me as if he had been my father. On my side, I
respected and loved him. My situation was happy; but it was a happiness of no
long duration.

Early in February 1727, when I entered into my twenty-second year, we were
both taken ill. I was attacked with a pleurisy, which had nearly carried me
off; I suffered terribly, and considered it as all over with me. I felt indeed
a sort of disappointment when I found myself likely to recover, and regretted
that had still to experience, sooner or later, the same disagreeable scene
again.

I have forgotten what was Mr. Denham's disorder; but it was a tedious one, and
at last sunk under it. He left me a small legacy in his will, as a testimony of
his friendship; and I was once more abandoned to myself in the wide world, the
warehouse being confided to the care of the testamentary executor, who
dismissed me.

My brother-in-law, Holmes, who happened to be at Philadelphia, advised me to
return to my former profession; and Keimer offered me a very considerable
salary if I would undertake the management of his printing-office, that he
might devote himself entirely to the superintendance of his shop. His wife and
relations in London had given me a bad character of him; and I was loath, for
the present, to have any concern with him. I endeavored to get employment as a
clerk to a merchant; but not readily finding a situation, I was induced to
accept Keimer's proposal.

The following were the persons I found in his printing house:

Hugh Meredith, a Pennsylvanian, about thirty-five years of age. He had been
brought up to husbandry, was honest, sensible, had some experience, and was
fond of reading: but too much addicted to drinking.

Stephen Potts, a young rustic, just broke from school, and of rustic
education, with endowments rather above the common order, and a competent
portion of understanding and gaiety; but a little idle. Keimer had engaged
these two at very low wages, which he had promised to raise every three months
a shilling a week, provided their improvement in the typographic art should
merit it. This future increase of wages was the bait he made use of to ensnare
them. Meredith was to work at the press, and Po^ts to bind books, which he had
engaged to teach them, though he understood neither himself.

John Savage, an Irishman, who had been brought up to no trade, and whose
service, for a period of four years, Keimer had purchased of the captain of a
ship. He was also to be a pressman.

George Webb, an Oxford scholar, whose time he had in like manner bought for
four years, intending him for a compositor. I shall speak more of him presently.

Lastly, David Harry, a country la^, who was apprenticed to him.

I soon perceived that Keimer's intention, in engaging me at a pr^^^ so much
above what he was accustomed to give, was, t^^^ I might form all these raw
journeymen and apprentices, who scarcely cost him any thing, and who, being
indentured, would, as soon as they should be sufficiently instructed, enable
him to do without me. I nevertheless adhered to my agreement. I put the office
in order, which was in the utmost confusion, and brought his people, by
degrees, to pay attention to their work, and to execute it i^ a more masterly
manner.

It was singular to see an Oxford scholar in the condition of a purchased
servant. He was not more than eighteen years of age, and the following are the
particulars he gave me of himself. Born at Gloucester, he had been educated at
a grammar school, and had distinguished himself among the scholars by his
superior style of acting, when they represented dramatic performances. He was
member of a literary club in the town; and some pieces of his composition, in
prose as well as in verse, had been inserted in the Gloucester papers. From
hence he was sent to Oxford, where he remained about a year; but he was not
consented; and wished above all things (...) ^^e London, and become an actor.
At length, having received fifteen guineas to pay his quarter's board, he
decamped with the money from Oxford, hid his gown in a hedge, and traveled to
London. There, having no friend to direct him, he fell into bad company, soon
squandered his fifteen guineas, could find no way of being introduced to the
actors, became contemptible, pawned his clothes, and was in ^^nt of bread. As
he was walking along the streets, almost famished with hunger, and not knowing
what to do, a recruiting bill was put into his hand, which offered an immediate
treat and bounty-money to whoever was disposed to serve in America. He
instantly repaired to the house of rendezvous, inlisted himself, was put on
board a ship and conveyed to America, without ever writing to inform his
parents what was become of him. His mental vivacity, and good natural
disposition, made him an excellent companion; but he be was indolent,
thoughtless, and to the last degree imprudent.

John, the Irishman, soon ran away. I began to live very agreeably with the
rest. They inspected me, and the more so as they found Keimer incapable of
instructing them, and as they learned something from me every day. We never
worked on a Saturday, it being Keimer's sabbath; so that I had two days a week
for reading.

I increased my acquaintance with persons of knowledge and information in the
town. Keimer himself treated me with great civilit^^ and apparent esteem; and I
had nothing to give me uneasiness but my debt to Vernon, which I was unable to
pay, my savings as yet being very little. He had the goodness, however, not to
ask me for the money.

Our press was frequently in want of the necessary quanty of letter; and there
was no such trade as that of letter-founder in America I had seen the practice
of this art at the house of James, in London; but at the same time paid it very
little attention. I however contrived to fabricate a mould. I made use of such
letters of lead in matrices of clay, and thus supplied, in a tolerable manner,
the wants that were most pressing.

I also, upon occasion, engraved various ornaments, made ink, gave an eye to
the shop; in short, I was in every respect the factotum. But useful as I made
myself, I perceived that my services became every day of le^s importance, in
proportion as the other men improved; and when Keimer paid me my second
quarter's wages, he gave me to understand that they were too heavy, and that he
thought I ought to make an abatement. He became by degrees le^s civil, and
assumed more the tone of master. He frequently found fault, was difficult to
please, and seemed always on the point of coming to an open quarrel with me.

I continued, however, to bear it patiently, conceiving that his ill-humour was
partly occasioned by the derangement and embarrassment of his affairs. At last
a slight incident broke our connection. Hearing a noise in the neighborhood, I
put my head out of the window to see what was the matter. Keimer being in the
street, observed me, and in a lound an angry tone, told me to mind my work;
adding some reproachful words, which piqued me the more as they were uttered in
the street; and the neighbors, whom the same noise had attracted to the
windows, were witnesses of the manner in which I was treated. He immediately
came up to the printing-room, and continued to exclaim against me. The quarrel
became warm on both sides, and he gave me notice to quit him at the expiration
of three months, as had been agreed between us; regretting that he was obliged
to give me so long a term. I told him that his regret was superfluous, as I was
ready to quit him instantly; and I took my hat and came out of the house,
begging Meredith to take care of some things which I left, and bring them to my
lodgings.

Meredith came to me in the evening. We talked for some time upon the quarrel
that had taken place. He had conceived a great veneration for me, and was sorry
I should quit the house while he remained in it. He ^issuaded me from returning
to my native country, as I began to think of doing. He reminded me that Keimer
owed more than he possessed; that his creditors began to be alarmed; that he
kept his shop in a wretched state, often selling things at prime cost for the
sake (...) ready money, and continually giving credit without keeping any
accounts; that of consequence he must very soon fail, which would occasion a
vacancy from which I might derive advantage. I objected my want of money. Upon
which he informed me that his father had a very high oppinion of me, and, from
a conversation that had passed between them, he was sure that he would advance
whatever might be necessary to establish (...) if I was willing to enter into
partnership with him. "My time with Keimer," added he "will be at an end next
spring. In the me^^ time we may send to London for our press a^^ types. I know
that I am no workman; but if you agree to the proposal, your skill in the
business will be balanced by the capital I will furnish, and we will share the
profits equally. His proposal was reasonable, and I fell in with it. His
father, who was then in the tow^, approved of it. He knew that I had some
ascendency over his son, as I had been able (...) prevail on him to abstain a
long time from drinking brandy; and he hoped that, when more closely connected
with him, I should cure him entirely of this unfortunate habit.

I gave the father a list of what it would be necessary to import from London.
He took it to a merchant, and the order was given. We agreed to keep the secret
till the arrival of the materials, and I was in the mean time is procure work,
if possible, in another printing house; but there was no place vacant, and I
remained idle. After some days, Keimer having the expectation of being employed
to ^^nt some New Jersey money-bills, that would ^quire types and engravings
which I only could furnish, and fearful that Bradford, by engaging me, might
deprive him of the undertaking, sent me a very civil message, telling me that
old friends ought not to be dis^^ted on account of a few words, which were the
effect only of a momentary passion, and inviting me to return to him. Meredith
persuaded me to comply with the invitation, par^ularly as it would afford him
more opportunities of improving himself in the business by means of my
instructions. I did so, and we lived upon better terms than before our
^^paration.

He obtained the New Jersey business; and, in order to execute it, I
constructed a copper^^te printing-press; the first that had been seen in the
country. I engraved various ornaments and vignettes for the bills; and we
repaired to Burlington together, where I executed the whole to the general
satisfaction; and he received a sum of money for his work, which enabled him to
keep his head above water for a considerable time longer.

At Burlington I formed acquaintance with the principal personages of the
province; many of whom were commissioned by the Assembly to superintend the
press, and to see that no more bills were printed than the law had prescribed.
Accordingly they were constantly with us, each in his turn; and he that came
commonly brought with him a friend or two to bear him company. My mind was more
cultivated by reading than Keimer's; and it was for this reason, probably, that
they set more value on my conversation. They took me to their houses,
introduced me to their friends, and treated me with the greatest civility;
while Keimer, though master, saw himself a little neglected. He was, in fact, a
strange animal, ignorant of the common modes of life, apt to oppose with
rudeness, generally received opinions, an enthusiast in certain points of
religion, disgustingly unclean in his person, and a little knavish withal.

We remain there nearly three months; and at the expiration of this period I
could include in the list of my friends, Judge Allen, Samuel Bustil, secretary
of the province, Isaac Pearson, Joseph Cooper, several of the Smiths, all
members of the Assembly, and Isaac Deacon, inspector-general. The last was a
shrewd and subtle old man. He told me, that, when a boy, his first employment
had been that of carrying clay to brick-makers; that he did not learn to write
till he was somewhat advanced in life; that he was afterward employed as an
underling to a surveyor, who taught him his trade, and that by industry he had
at last acquired a competent fortune. "I for-see," said he, one day to me,
"that you will soon supplant this man," speaking of Keimer, "and get a fortune
in the business at Philadelphia." He was totally ignorant at the time of my
intention of establishing myself there, or any where else. These friends were
very serviceable to me in the end, as was I also, upon occasion, to some of
them; and they have continued ever since their esteem for me.

Before I relate the particulars of my entrance into business, it may be proper
to inform you what was at that time the state of my mind as to moral
principles, that you may see the degree of influence they had upon the
subsequent events of my life.

My parents had given me betimes religious impressions; and I received from my
infancy a pious education in the principles of Calvinism. But scarcely was I
arrived at fifteen years of age, when, after having doubted in turn of
different tenets, according as I found them combated in the different books
that I read, I began to doubt of revelation itself. Some volumes against deism
fell into my hands. They were said to be the substance of sermons preached at
Boyle's lecture. It happened that they produced on me an effect precisely the
reverse of what was intended by the writers; for the arguments of the deists,
which were cited in order to be refuted, appeared to me much more forcible than
the refutation itself. In a word I soon became a perfect deist. My arguments
soon perverted some other young persons; particularly Collins and Ralph. But in
the sequel, when I recollected that they had both used me extremely ill,
without the smallest remorse; when I considered the behavior of Keith, another
free-thinker, and my conduct toward Vernon and Miss Read, which at times gave
me much uneasiness, I was led to suspect that this doctrine, though it might be
true, was not very useful. I began to entertain a less favorable opinion of my
London pamphlet, to which I had prefixed, as a motto, the following lines of
Dryden; Whatever is, is right; though purblind man
Sees but part of the chain, the nearest link,
His eyes not carrying to the unequal beam
That poises all above.
and of which the object was to prove, from the arttributes of God, his
goodness, wisdom, and power, that there could be on such thing as evil in the
world: that vice and virtue did not in reality exist, and were nothing more
than vain distinctions. I no longer regarded it as so blameless a work as I had
formerly imagined; and I suspected some error must have imperceptibly have
glided into my argument, by all the inferences I had drawn from it had been
affected, as frequently happens in metaphysical reasonings. In a word, I was at
last convinced that truth, probity, and sincerity, in transactions between man
and man, were of the utmost importance to the happiness of life; and I resolved
from that moment, and wrote the resolution in my journal, to practice them as
long as I lived.

Revelation indeed, as such, had no influence on my mind; but I was of opinion
that, though certain actions could not be bad merely because revelation
prohibited them, or good, because it enjoined them, yet it was probable that
those actions were prohibited because they were bad for us, or enjoined because
advantageous in their nature, all things considered. This persuasion, divine
Providence, or some guardian angel, and perhaps a concurence of favorable
circumstances in their nature, cooperating, preserved me from all immorality,
or gross and voluntary injustice, to which my want of religion was calculated
to expose me, in the dangerous period of youth, and in the hazardous situation
in which I sometimes found myself, among strangers, and at a distance from the
eye and admonitions of my father. I may say voluntary, because the errors into
which I had fallen, had been in a manner the forced result either of my own
experience, or the dishonesty of others. Thus, before I entered on my new
career, I had imbibed solid principles, and a character of probity. I knew
their value; and I made a solemn engagement with myself never to depart from
them.

I had not long returned from Burlington before our printing materials arrived
from London. I settled my accounts with Keimer, and quitted him with his own
consent, before he had any knowledge of our plan. We found a house near the
market. We took it; and to render the rent less burden some (it was then
twenty-four pounds a year, but have since known it to let for seventy;) we
admitted Thomas Godfrey, glazier, with his family, who eased us of a
considerable part of it; and with him we agreed to board.

We had no sooner unpacked our letters, and put our press in order, than a
person of my acquaintance, George House, brought us a countryman, whom he had
met in the street enquiring for a printer. Our money was almost exhausted by
the number of things we had been obliged to procure. The five shillings we
received from this countryman, the first fruit of our earnings, coming so
seasonably, gave me more pleasure than any sum I have since gained; and the
recollection of the gratitude I felt on this occasion to George House, has
rendered me often more disposed, than perhaps I should otherwise have been, no
encorage young beginners in trade.

There are in every country morose beings, who are always prognosticating ruin.
There was one of this stamp in Philadelphia. He was a man of fortune, declined
in years, had an air of wisdom, and a very grave manner of speaking. His name
was Samuel Mickle. I knew him not; but he stopped one day at my door, and asked
me if I was the young man who had lately opened a new printing house. Upon my
answering in the affirmative he said he was very sorry for me, as it was an
expensive undertaking, and the money that had been laid out upon it would be
lost, Philadelphia being a place falling into decay; its inhabitants having
all, or nearly all of them, been obliged to all together their creditors. That
he knew, from undoubted fact, the circumstances which might lead us to suppose
the contrary, such as new buildings, and the advanced price of rent, to be
deceitful appearances, which in reality contributed to hasten the general ruin;
and he gave me so long a detail of misfortunes, actually existing, or which
were soon to take place, that he left me almost in a state of despair. Had I
known this man before I entered into trade, I should doubtless never have
ventured. He however continued to live in this place of decay, and to declaim
in the same style, refusing for many years to buy a house, because all was
going to wreck; and in the end I had the satisfaction to see him pay five times
as much for one as it would cost him had he purchased it when he first began
his lamentations.

I ought to have related, that, during the autumn of the preceding year, I had
united the majoirity of well-informed persons of my acquaintance into a club,
which we called by the name of the Junto, and the object of which was to
improve our understandings. We met every Friday evening. The regulations I drew
up, obliged every member to propose, in his turn, one or more questions upon
some point of morality, politics, or philosophy, which were to be discussed by
the society; and to read, once in three months, an essay of his own
composition, on whatever subject he pleased. Our debates were under the
direction of a president, and were to be dictated only by a sincere desire of
truth; the pleasure of disputing, and the vanity of triumph having no share in
the business; and in order to prevent undue warmth, every expression which
implied obstinate adherence to an opinion, and all direct contradiction, were
prohibited, under small pecuniary penalties.

The first members of our club were Joseph Breintnal, whose occupation was that
of a scrivener. He was a middle-aged man, of a good natural disposition,
strongly attached to his friends, a great lover of poetry, reading every thing
that came in his way, and writing tolerably well, ingenious in many little
trifles and of an agreeble conversation.

Thomas Godfrey, a skilful, though self-taught mathematician, and who was
afterward the inventer of what goes by the name of Hadley's dial; but he had
little knowledge out of his own line, and was in^upportable in company, always
requiring, like the majority of mathematicians that have fallen in my way, an
unusual precision in every thing that is said, continually contradicting, or
making trifling di^tinctions; a sure way of defeating all the ends of
conversation. He very soon left us.

Nicholas Scull, a surveyor, and who became afterward surveyor-general. He was
fond of books, and wrote verses.

William Parsons, brought up to the trade of a shoemaker, but who, having a
taste for reading, had acquired a profound knowledge of mathematics. He first
studied them with a view to astrology, and was afterward the first to laugh at
his folly. He also became surveyor-general.

William Mawgridge, a joiner, and very excellent mechanic; and in other
respects a man of solid understanding.

Hugh Meredith, Stephen Potts and George Webb, of whom I have already spoken.

Robert Grace, a young man of fortune; generous, animated, and witty; fond of
epigrams, but more fond of his friends.

And lastly, William Coleman, at that time a merchan^'s clerk, and nearly of my
own age. He had a cool^r and clearer head, a better heart, and more scrupulous
morals, than almost any other person I ever met with. He became a very
re^pectable merchant, and one of our provincial judges. Our friendship
subsisted, without interruption, for more than forty years, till the period of
his death; and the club continued to exist almost as long.

This was the best school of politics and philosophy that then existed in the
province; for our questions, which were read a week previous to their
discussion, induced us to peruse attentively such books as were written upon
the subjects proposed, that we might be able to speak upon them more
pertinently. We thus acquired the habit of conversing more agreeably; every
object being discussed conformably to our regulations, and in a manner to
prevent mutual disgust. To this circumstance may be attributed the long
duration of the club; which I shall have frequent occasion to mention as I
proceed.

I have introduced it here, as being one of the means on which I had to count
for my success in my business; every member exerting himself to procure work
for us. Breintnal, among others, obtained for us, on the part of the Quakers,
the printing of forty sheets of their history; the rest of which was to be done
by Keimer. Our execution of this work was by no means masterly; as the price
was very low. It was in folio, upon pro patria paper, and in the pica letter,
with heavy notes in the smallest type. I composed a sheet a day, and Meredith
put it to the press. It was frequently eleven o'clock at night, sometimes
later, before I had finished my distribution for the next day's task; for the
little things which our friends occasionally sent us, kept us back in this
work: but I was so determined to compose a sheet a day, that one evening, when
my form was imposed, and my day's work as I thought, at an end, an accident
having broken this form, and deranged two complete folio pages. I immediately
distributed, and composed them anew before I went to bed.

This unwearied industry, which was perceived by our neigbours, began to
acquire us reputation and credit. I learned, among other things, that our new
printing house being the subject of conversation at a club of merchants, who
met every evening, it was the general opinion that it would fail; there being
already two printing-houses in the town, Keimer's and Bradford's. But Dr. Bard,
whom you and I had occasion to see, many years after, at his native town of St.
Andrew's in Scotland, was of a different opinion. "The industry of this
Franklin (said he, is superior to any thing of the kind I have ever witnessed.
I see him still at work when I return from the club at night, and he is at it
again in the morning before his neighbors are out of bed." This account struck
the rest of the assembly, and shortly after one of its members came to our
house, and offered to supply us with articles of stationary; but we wished not
as yet to embarrass our^elves with keeping a shop. It is not for the sake of
applause that I enter so freely into the particulars of my industry, but that
such of my descendants as shall read there memoirs may know the use of this
virtue, by seeing in the recital of my life the effects it operated in my
favor.

George Webb, having found a friend who lent him the necessary sum to buy out
his time of Keimer, came one day to offer himself to us as a journeyman. We
could not employ him immediately; but I foolishly told him, under the rose,
that I intended shortly to publish a new periodical paper, and that we should
then have work for him. My hopes of success, which I imparted to him, were
founded on the circumstance, that the only paper we had in Philadelphia at that
time, and which Bradford printed, was a paltry thing, miserably conducted, in
no respect amusing, and yet was profitable. I consequently supposed that a good
work of this kind could not fail of success. Webb betrayed my secret to Keimer,
who, to prevent me, immediately published the prospectus of a paper that he
intended to institute himself, and in which Webb was to be engaged.

I was exa^perated at this proceeding and, with a view to counteract them, not
being able at present to institute my own paper, I wrote some humourous pieces
in Bradford's, under the title of the Busy Body A manuscript note in the file
of the America Me^^^ (...) preserved in the Philadelphia Library, say tha^
^ra^k^^n wrote the first five numbers, and pa^ of the eighth.
; and which was continued for several months by Breintnal. I hereby fixed the
attention of the public upon Bradford's paper; and the prospectus of Keimer,
which he turned into ridicule, was treated with contempt. He began,
notwithstanding, his paper; and after continuing it for nine months, having at
most not more than ninety subscribers, he offered it me for a mere trifle. I
had for some time been ready for such an engagement; I therefore instantly took
it upon myself, and in a few years it proved extremely profitable to me.

I perceive that I am apt to speak in the first person, though our partnership
still continued. It is perhaps, because in fact, the whole business devolved
upon me. Meredith was no compositor, and but an indifferent pressman; and it
was rarely that he abstained from hard drinking. My friends were sorry to see
me connected with him; but I contrived to derive from it the utmost advantage
the case admitted.

Our first number produced no other affect than any other paper which had
appeared in the province, as to type and printing; but some remarks, in my
peculiar style of writing, upon the dispute which then prevailed between
governor Burnet, and the Massachusetts assembly, struck some persons as above
mediocrity, caused the paper and its editors to be talked of, and in a few
weeks induced them to become our subscribers. Many others followed their
example; and our subscription continued to increase. This was one of the first
good effects of the pains I had taken to learn to put my ideas on paper. I
derived this farther advantage from it, that the leading men of the place,
seeing in the author of this pu^^ (...) well able to use his pen, thought it
right to encourage and patronise me.

The votes, laws, and other public pieces, were printed by Bradford. An address
of the house of Assembly to the governor had been executed by him in a very
coarse and incorrect manner. We reprinted it with accuracy and neatness, and
sent a copy to every member. They perceived the difference; and it so
strengthened the influence of our friends in the Assembly, that we were
nominated its printer for the following year.

Among these friends I ought not to forget one member in particular, Mr.
Hamilton, whom I have mentioned in a former part of my narrative, and who was
now returned from England. He warmly interested himself for me on this
occasion, as he did likewise on many others afterward; having continued his
kindness to me till his death.

About this period Mr. Vernon reminded me of the debt I owed him, but without
pressing me for payment. I wrote him a handsome letter on the occasion, begging
him to wait a little longer, to which he consented; and as soon as I was able I
paid him, principal and interest, with many expressions of gratitude; so that
this error of my life was in a manner atoned for.

But another trouble now happened to me, which I had not the smallest reason to
expect. Meredith's father, who, according to our agreement, was to defray the
whole expense of our printing materials, had only paid a hundred pounds.
Another hundred was still due, and the merchant being tired of waiting,
commenced a suit against us. We bailed the action, with the melancholy
prospect, that, if the money was not forth coming at the time fixed, the affair
would come to issue, judgment be put in execution, our delightful hopes be
annihilated, and ourselves entirely ruined; as the type and press must be sold,
perhaps at half their value, to pay the debt.

In this distress, two real friends, whose generous conduct I have never
forgotten, and never shall forget while I retain the remembrance of any thing,
came to me separately, without the knowledge of each other, and without my
having applied to them. Each offered me whatever sum might be necessary, to
take the business into my own hands, if the thing was practicable, as they did
not like I should continue in partnership with Meredith, who, they said, was
frequently seen drunk in the streets, and gambling at alehouses, which very
much injured our credit. These friends were William Coleman and Robert Grace. I
told them that while there remained any probability that the Merediths would
fulfill their part of the compact, I could not propose a separation; as I
conceived myself to be under obligations to them for what they had done
already, and were still disposed to do if they had the power: but in the end
should they fail in their engagement, and our partnership be dissolved, I
should then think myself at liberty to accept the kindness of my friends.

Things remained for some time in this state. At last I said one day to my
partner, "Your father is perhaps dissatisfied with your having a share only in
the business, and is unwilling to do for two, what he would do for you alone.
Tell me frankly if that be the case, and I will resign the whole to you, and do
for myself as well as I can." -- " No (said he) my father has really been
disappointed in his hopes; he is not able to pay, and I wish to put him to no
further inconvenience. I see that I am not at all calculated for a printer; I
was educated as a farmer, and it was absurd in me to come here, at thirty years
of age, and bind myself apprentice to a new trade. Many of my countrymen are
going to settle in North Carolina, where the soil is exceedingly favorable. I
am tempted to go with them, and to resume my former occupation. You will
doubtless find friends who will assist you. If you will take upon yourself the
debts of the partnership, return my father the hundred pounds he has advanced,
pay my little personal debts, and give me thirty pounds and a new saddle, I
will renounce the partnership, and consign over the whole stock to you."

I accepted this proposal without hesitation. It was committed to paper, and
signed and ^ealed without delay. I gave him what he demanded, and he departed
soon after for Carolina, from whence he sent me, in the following year, two
long letters, containing the best accounts that had yet been given of that
country, as to climate, soil, agriculture, etc. for he was well versed in these
matters. I published them in my newspaper, and they were received with great
satisfaction.

As soon as he was gone I applied to my two friends, and not wishing to give a
disobliging preference to either of them, I accepted from each half what he had
offered me, and which it was necessary I should have. I paid the partnership
debts, and continued the business on my own account; taking care to inform the
public, by advertisement, of the partnership being dissolved. This was, I
think, in the year 1729, or thereabout.

Nearly at the same period the people demanded a new emission of paper money;
the existing and only one that had taken place in the province, and which
amounted to fifteen thousand pounds, being soon to expire. The wealthy
inhabitants, prejudiced against every sort of paper currency, from the fear of
its depreciation, of which there had been an instance in the province of
New England, to the injury of its holders, strongly opposed the measure. We had
discussed this affair in our junto, in which I was on the side of the new
emission; convinced that the first small sum fabricated in 1723, had done much
good in the province, by favoring commerce, industry and population, since all
the houses were now inhabited, and many others building; whereas I remembered
to have seen, when first I paraded the streets of Philadelphia eating my roll,
the majority of those in Walnut-street, Second-street, Fourth-street, as well
as a great number in Chestnut and other streets, with papers on them signifying
that they were to be let; which made me think at the time that the inhabitants
of the town were deserting it one after another.

Our debates made me so fully master of the subject, that I wrote and published
an anonymous pamphlet, entitled, An Enquiry into the Nature and Necessity of a
Paper Currency. It was very well received by the lower and middling class of
people; but it displeased the opulent, as it increased the clamor in favor of
the new emission. -- Having, however, no writer among them capable of answering
it, their opposition became less violent; an there being in the house of
Assembly a majority for the measure, it passed. The friends I had acquired in
the house, persuaded that I had done the country essential service on this
occasion, rewarded me by giving me the printing of the bills. It was a
lucrative employment, and proved a very seasonable help to me; another
advantage which I derived from having habituated myself to write.

Time and experience so fully demonstrated the utility of paper currency, that
it never after experienced any considerable opposition; so that it soon
amounted to 55,000 l. and in the year 1739 to 80,000 l. It has since risen,
during the last war, to 350,000 l. trade, buildings and population having in
the interval continually increased, but I am now convinced that there are
limits beyond which paper money would be prejudicial.

I soon after obtained, by the influence of my friend Hamilton, the printing of
the Newcastle paper money, another profitable work, as I then thought it,
little things appearing great to persons of moderate fortune; and they were
really great to me, as proving great encouragements. He also procured me the
printing of the laws and votes of that government which I retained as long as I
continued in the business.

I now opened a small stationer's shop. I kept bonds and agreements of all
kinds, drawn up in a more accurate form than had yet been seen in that part of
the world; a work in which I was assisted by my friend Brientnal. I had also
paper, parchment, pasteboard, books, etc. One Whitemash, an excellent
compositor, whom I had known in London, came to offer himself. I engaged him,
and he continued constantly and diligently to work with me, I also took an
apprentice, the son of Aqui^a Rose.

I began to pay, by degrees, the debt I had contracted; and in order to injure
my credit and character as a tradesman. I took care not only to be really
industrious and frugal, but also to avoid every appearance of the contrary. I
was plainly dressed, and never seen in any place of public amusement. I never
went a fishing or hunting: A book indeed enticed me sometimes from my work, but
it was seldom, by stealth, and occasioned no scandal; and to show that I did
not think myself above my profession, I conveyed home sometimes in a
wheelbarrow the paper I purchased at the warehouses.

I thus obtained the reputation of being an industrious young man, and very
punctual in my payments. The merchants who imported articles of stationary
solicited my custom; others offered to furnish me with books, and my little
trade went on prosperously.

Meanwhile the credit and business of Keimer diminished every day, he was at
last forced to sell his stock to satisfy his creditors; and he betook himself
to Barbados, where he lived some time in a very impoverished state. His
apprentice, David Harry, whom I had instructed while I worked with Keimer,
having bought his materials, succeeded him in the business. I was apprehensive
at first of finding in Harry a powerful competitor, as he was allied to an
opulent and respectable family; I therefore proposed a partnership, which,
happily for me, he rejected with disdain. He was extremely proud, thought
himself a fine gentleman, lived extravagantly, and pursued amusements which
suffered him to be scarcely ever at home; of consequence he became in debt,
neglected his business, and business neglected him. Finding in a short time
nothing to be done in the country, he followed Keimer to Barbados, carrying
his printing materials with him. There the apprentice employed his old master
as a journeyman. They were continually quarrelling; and Harry still getting in
debt, was obliged at last to sell his press and types, and return to his old
occupation of husbandry in Pennsylvania. The person who purchased them employed
Keimer to manage the business; but he died a few years after.

I had now at Philadelphia no competitor but Brandford, who, being in easy
circumstances, did not engage in the printing of books, except now and then as
workmen chanced to offer themselves; and was not anxious to extend his trade.
He had, however, one advantage over me, as he had the direction of the
post office, and was of consequence supposed to have better opportunities of
obtaining news. His paper was also supposed to be more advantageous to
advertising customers; an din consequence of that supposition, his
advertisements where much more numerous than mine: this was a source of great
profit to him, and disadvantageous to me. It was to no purpose that I really
procured other papers, and distributed my own, by means of the post; the public
took for granted my inability in this respect; and I was indeed unable to
conquer it in any other mode than by bribing the post-boys who served me only
by stealth, Bradford being so illiberal as to forbid them. -- This treatment of
his excited by resentment; and my disgust was so rooted, that, when I
afterward succeeded him in the post office, I took care to avoid copying his
example.

I had hitherto continued to board with Godfrey, who, with his wife and
children, occupied part of my house, and half of the shop for his business; at
which indeed he worked very little, being always absorbed by mathematics. Mrs.
Godfrey formed a wish of Marrying me to the daughter of one of her relations.
She contrived various opportunities of bringing us together, till she saw that
I was captivated; which was not difficult, they lady in question possessing
great personal merit. The parents encouraged my addresses, by inviting me
continually to supper and leaving us together, till at last it was time to come
to an explanation. Mrs. Godfrey undertook to negociate our little treaty. I
gave her to understand, that I expected to receive with the young lady a sum of
money that would enable me at least to discharge the remainder of my debt for
my printing materials. It was then, I believe, not more than a hundred pounds.
She brought me for answer, that they had no such sum at their di^posal. I
observed that it might ea^ily be obtained, by a mortgage on their house. The
reply of this was, after a few days interval, that they did not approve of the
match; that they had con^^^ted Bradford, ^^d found that the business of a
printer was not lucrative; that my letters would soon be worn out, and must be
supplied by new ones; that Keimer and Harry had failed, and that, probably, I
should do so too. Accordingly the forbade me the house, and the young lady was
confined. I know not if they had really changed their minds, or if it was
merely an artifice, supposing our affections to be too far engaged for us to
desist, and that we should contrive to marry secretly, which would leave them
at liberty to give or not as they pleased. But, suspecting this motive, I never
went again to their house.

Some time after Mrs. Godfrey informed me that they were favorably disposed
toward me, and wished me to renew the acquaintance; but I declared a firm
resolution never to have any thing more to do with the family. The Godfreys
expressed some resentment at this; and as we could no longer agree, they
changed their residence, leaving me in posession of the whole house. I then
resolved to take no more lodgers. This affair having turned my thoughts to
marriage, I looked around me, and made overtures of alliance in other quarters;
but I soon found that the profession of a printer being generally looked upon
as a poor trade, I could expect no money with a wife, at least if I wished her
to possess any other charm. Meanwhile, that passion of youth, so difficult to
govern, had often drawn me into intrigues with despicable women who fell in my
way; which were not unaccompanied with expense and inconvenience, besides the
perpetual risk of injuring my health, and catching a disease which I dreaded
above all things. But I was fotunate enough to escape this danger.

As a neighbor and old acquaintance, I kept up a friendly intimacy with the
family of M^^ Read. Her parents retained an affection for me from the time of
my lodging in their house. I was often invited thither; consulted me about
their affairs, and I had been sometimes serviceable to them. I was touched with
the unhappy situation of their daughter, who was almost always melancholy, and
continually seeking solitude. I regarded my forgetfulness and inconstancy,
during my abode in London, as the principal cause of her misfortune; though her
mother had the candor to attribute the fault to herself, rather than to me,
because, after having prevented our marriage previous to my departure, she had
induced her to marry another in my absence.

Our mutual affection revived; but there existed great obstacles to our union.
Her marriage was considered, indeed, as not being valid, the man having, it was
said, a former wife still living in England; but of this it was difficult to
obtain a proof at so great a distance; and though a report prevailed of his
being dead, yet we had no certainty of it; and supposing it to be true, he had
left many debts, for the payment of which his successor might be sued. We
ventured nevertheless, in spite of all these difficulties, and I married her on
the first of September 1730. None of the inconveniences we had feared happened
to us -- She proved to me a good and faithful companion, and contributed
essentially to the success of my shop. We prospered together, and it was our
mutual study to render each other happy. Thus I corrected, as well as I could,
this great error of my youth.

Our club was not at that time established at a tavern. We held our meetings at
the house of Mr. Grace, who appropriated a room to the purpose. Some member
observed one day, that as our books were frequently quoted in the course of our
discussions, it would be convenient to have them collected in the room in which
we assembled, in order to be consulted upon occasion; and that, by thus forming
a common library of our individual collections, each would have the advantage
of using the books of all the other members, which would nearly be the same as
if he possessed them all himself. The idea was approved, and we accordingly
brought such books as we thought we could spare, which were placed at the end
of the club-room. They amounted not to so many as we expected; and though we
made considerable use of them, yet some inconveniences resulting, from want of
care, it was agreed, after about a year, to destroy the collection; and each
took away such books as belonged to him.

It was now that I first started the idea of e^^tablishing, by subscription, a
public library. (...) drew up the proposals, had them engrossed (...) form by
Brockden the attorney, and my project succeeded, as will be seen in the sequel

[The life of Dr. Franklin, as written by himself, so far as it has yet been
communicated to the world, breaks off in this place. We understand that it was
continued by him somewhat further, and we hope that the remainder will at some
future period, be communicated to the public. We have no hesit^tion in
supposing that every reader will sin^ himself greatly interested by the frank
simplicity and the philosophical discernment by which these pages are so
eminently characterised. We have therefore thought proper, in order as much as
possible to relieve his regret, to subjoin the following continuation, by one
of the doctor's intimate friends. It is extracted from an American periodioal
publication, and was written by the late Dr. Stuber Dr. Stuber was born in
Philadelphia, of Ge^man parents. He was sen^, at an early age, to the
unive^sity, where his genius, diligence and amiable temper soon acquired him
the particular notice and favor of those under whose immediate direction he
was placed. After passing through the common course of study, in a much shorter
time than usual he left the university, at the age of sixteen, with great
reputation. Not long after, he entered on the ^^dy of physic; and the zeal with
which he pursued ^^^d the advances he made, gave his friends reason ^^form the
most flattering prospects of his future, ^^inence and usefulness in the
profession. As Dr. ^^ber's circumstances were very moderate, he did not think
this pursuit well calculated to answer them. (...) therefore reliquished it,
after he had obtained a ^^ree in the profession, and qualified himself to
prac^^^ with credit and success: and immediately enter^^ on the study of Law.
In pursuit of the last men^^ed object, he was prematurely arrested, before
(...) had an opportunity of reaping the fruit of those ^^lents with which he
was endowed, and of a youth ^^ut in the ardent and successful pursuit of useful
(...) elegant literature.
of Philadelphia.]

THE promotion of literature had been ^^e attended to in Pennsylvania. Most of
(...) inhabitants were too much immersed in ^^^iness to think of scientific
pursuits; and ^ose few, whose inclinations led them to ^^dy, found it difficult
to gratify them, from ^e want of sufficiently large libraries. In such
^^cumstances the establishment of a public ^ary was an important event. This
was first (...) on foot by Franklin, about the year 1731. ^^ty persons
subscribed forty shillings each, (...) agreed to pay ten shillings annually. --
(...) number increased; and in 1742, the ^^^pany was incorporated by the name
of "The Library Company of Philadelphia." Se^^al other companies were formed in
this city ^imitation of it. These were all at length uni^^d with the library
company of Philadelphia, which thus received a considerable accession of books
and property. It now contains abo^^ eight thousand volumes on all subjects, a
p^^^losophical apparatus, and a good beginn^^^ ^owards a collection of natural
and artific^^ curiosities, besides landed property of co^^derable value. The
company have late^^ built an elegant house in Fifth-street, in (...) front of
which is erected a marble statue^^ their founder, Benjamin Franklin.

This institution was greatly encouraged (...) the friends of literature in
America and (...) Great Britain. The Penn family distingui^^ed themselves by
their donations. Amon^^ the earliest friends of this institution mu^^ (...)
mentioned the late Peter Collinson, the fri^^^ and correspondent of Dr.
Franklin. He not ^^^ly made considerable presents himself, and ^^^tained others
from his friends, but volunta^^^ undertook to manage the business of the
company in London, recommending books, p^^chasing and shipping them. His
extensi^^ knowledge, and zeal for the promotion (...) science, enabled him to
execute this import^^^ trust with the greatest advantage. He con^^nued to
perform these services for more tha^ thirty years, and uniformly refused to
acc^^ of any compensation. During this time, (...) communicated to the
directors every inform^tion relative to improvements and discover^ in the arts,
agriculture, and philosophy.

The beneficial influence of the instituti^^ was soon evident. The cheapness of
ter^ rendered it accessible to every one. Its adv^^es were not confined to the
opulent. The ^^^ens in the middle and the lower walks of (...) were equally
partakers of them. Hence a de^^e of information extended amongst all clas^ of
people, which is very unusal in other ^^ces. The example was soon followed.
Li^^aries were established in various places, ^^d they are now become very
numerous in (...) United States, and particularly in Penn^^^vania. It is to be
hoped that they will be (...) more widely extended, and that informa^^^ will be
every where increased. This will be (...) best security for maintaining our
liberties. A ^^^ion of well-informed men, who have been ^^^ght to know and
prize the rights which God (...) given them, cannot be inslaved. It is in the
^^^ions of ignorance that tyranny reigns. It (...) before the light of science.
Let the citi^^^s of America, then, encourage institutions ^^culated to diffuse
knowledge amongst the ^^ople; and amongst these, public libraries (...) not the
least important.

In 1732, Franklin beg^n to publish Poor ^^chard's Almanac. This was remarkable
(...) the numerous and valuable concise maxims which it contained, all tending
to exhort to ^^^ustry and frugality. It was continued for ma^^ years. In the
almanac for the last year, all the maxims were collected in an address to the
rea^^r, entitled, The Way to wealth. This has been ^^^slated in various
languages, and inserted (...) different publications. It has also been ^^ated
on a large sheet, and may be seen framed in this city. This address contains,
p^^haps the best practical system of econo^^^ that ever has appeared. It is
written in a m^^^ner intelligible to every one, and which cannot fail of
convincing every reader of the ^^^tice and propriety of the remarks and ad^^^
which it contains. The demand for this al^^nac was so great, that ten thousand
have (...) sold in one year; which must be conside^^^ as a very large number,
especially when (...) reflect, that this country was, at that time, (...)
thinly peopled. It cannot be doubted (...) the salutary maxims contained in
these ^^^^^nacs must have made a favorable impre^^^ upon many of the readers
of them.

It was not long before Franklin enter^^^ upon his political career. In the
year (...) he was appointed clerk to the general assem^^ of Pennsylvania; and
was re-elected by ^^^ceeding assemblies for several years, until (...) was
chosen a representative for the city (...) Philadelphia.

Bradford was possessed of some advantag^^ over Franklin, by being postmaster,
there^^ having an opportunity of circulating his ^^per more extensively, and
thus rendering (...) better vehicle for advertisements, etc. Franklin, in his
turn, enjoyed these advantages, (...) b^ing appointed postmaster of
Philadelp^^^ in 1737. Bradford, while in office, had acted ungenerously toward
Franklin, preventi^^ as much as possible the circulation of his ^^per. He had
now an opportunity of retaliati^^^ ^ut his nobleness of soul prevented him from
making use of it.

The police of Philadelphia had early ap^^inted watchmen, whose duty it was to
^^ard the citizens against the midnight rob^^r, and to give and immediate alarm
in case of fire. This duty is, perhaps, one of the most important that can be
committed to any (...) of men. The regulations, however, were ^ot sufficiently
strict. Franklin saw the dan^ers arising from this cause, and suggested an
alteration, so as to oblige the guardians of ^^e night to be more watchful over
the lives and property of the citizens. The propriety of this was immediately
perceived, and a reform was affected.

There is nothing more dangerous to growing cities than fires. Other causes
operate ^^owly, and almost imperceptibly; but these in a moment render abortive
the labors of ages. On this account there should be, in all cities ample
provisions to prevent fires from spreading. Franklin early saw the necessity of
these; and, about the year 1738, formed the first fire company in this city.
This example was soon followed by others; and there are now numerous
fire-companies in the city and liberties. To these may be attributed in a great
degree, the activity in extinguishing fires, for which the citizens of
Philadelphia are distinguished, and the inconsiderable damage which this city
has sustained from this cause. -- Some time after, Franklin suggested the plan
of an association for insuring houses from fire, which was adopted; and the
association continues to (...) day. The advantages experienced from it have
been great.

From the first establishment of Pennsylvania, a spirit of dispute appears to
have prevailed amongst its inhabitants. During the lifetime of William Penn,
the constitution had been three times altered. After this period, the history
of Pennsylvania is little els^ than a recital of the quarrels between the
proprietaries, or their governors and the Assembly. The proprietaries contended
for the right of exempting their land from taxes; to which the Assembly would
by no means consent. This subject of dispute interfered in almost every
question, and prevented the most salutary laws from being enacted. This at
times subjected the people to great inconveniences. In the year 1744, during a
war between France and Great Britain, some French and Indians had made inroads
upon the frontier inhabitants of the province, who were unprovided for such an
attack. It became necessary that the citizens should arm for their defense.
Governor Thomas recommended to the Assembly, who were then sitting, to pass a
militia law. To this they would agree only upon condition that he should give
his assent to certain laws, which appeared to them calculated to promote the
interest o^ the people. As he thought these laws would be injurious to the
proprietaries, he refused his assent to them; and the Assembly broke up without
passing a militia law. The situation of the province was at this time truly
alarming: exposed to the continual inroads of an enemy, and destitute of every
means of defense. At this crisis Franklin stepped forth and proposed to a
meeting of the citizens of Philadelphia, a plan of a voluntary association for
the defense of the province. This was approved of, and signed by twelve hundred
persons immediately. Copies of it were circulated throughout the province; and
in a short time the number of signers amounted to ten thousand. Franklin was
chosen colonel of the Philadelphia regiment; but he did not think proper to
accept of the honor.

Pursuits of a different nature now occupied the greatest part of his attention
for some years. He engaged in a course of electrical experiments, with all the
ardor and thirst for discovery which characterized the philosophers of that
day. Of all the branches of experimental philosophy, electricity had been least
explored. The attractive power of amber is mentioned by Theophrastus and Pliny,
and, from them, by later naturalists. In the year 1600, Gilbert, an English
physician, enlarged considerably the catalogue of substances which have the
property of attracting light bodies. Boil, Otto Guericke, a burgomaster of
Magdeburg, celebrated as the inventor of the air pump, Dr. Wall, and Sir Isaac
Newton added some facts. Guericke first observed the repulsive power of
electricity, and the light and noise produced by it. In 1709, Hawkesbec
communicated some important observations and experiments to the world. For
several years electricity was entirely neglected, until Mr. Gray applied
himself to it, in 1728, with great assiduity. He, and his friend Mr. Wheeler,
made a great variety of experiments* in which they demonstrated, that
electricity may be communicated from one body to another, even without being in
contact. and in this way may be conducted to a great distance Mr. Gray
afterward found, that, by suspending rods of iron by silk or hair lines, and
bringing an excited tube under them, sparks might be drawn, and a light
perceived at the extremities in the dark. M. Du Faye, intendant of the French
king's gardens, made a number of experiments, which added not a little to the
science. He made the discovery of two kinds of electricity, which he called
vitreous and resinous; the former produced by rubbing glass, the latter from
excited sulphur, sealing-wax, etc. But this idea he afterward gave up as
erroneous. Between the years 1739 and 1742, Desaguliers made a number of
experiments, but added little of importance. He first used the terms conductors
and electrics, perse. In 1742, several ingenious Germans engaged in this
subject. Of these the principal were, professor Boze of Wittemberg, professor
Winkler of Leipsic, Gordon, a Scotch Benedictine monk, professor of philosophy
at Erfurt, and Dr. Ludolf of Berlin. The result of their researches astonished
the philosophers of Europe. Their apparatus was large, and by means of it they
were enabled to collect large quantities of electricity, and thus to produce
phenomena which had been hitherto unobserved. They killed small birds, and set
spirits on fire. Their experiments excited the curiosity of other philosophers.
Collinson, about the year 1745, sent to the library company of Philadelphia an
account of these experiments, together with a tube, and directions how to use
it. Franklin, with some of his friends, immediately engaged in a course of
experiments; the result of which is well known. He was enabled to make a number
of important discoveries, and to propose theories to account for various
phenomena; which have been universally adopted, and which bid fair to endure
for ages. His observations he communicated, in a series of letters, to his
friend Collinson; the first of which is dated March 28, 1747. In these he makes
known the power of points in drawing and throwing off the electrical matter,
which had hitherto escaped the notice of electricians. He also made the grand
discovery of a plus and minus, or of a positive and negative state of
electricity. We give him the honor of this, without hesitation; although the
English have claimed it for their countryman Dr. Watson. Watson's paper is
dated January 21, 1748; Franklin's July 11, 1747 several months prior. Shortly
after, Franklin, from his principles of plus and minus state, explained, in a
satisfactory manner, the phenomena of the Leyden phial, first observed by
professor Muschenbroeck of Leyden, which had much perplexed philosophers. He
showed clearly that the bottle, when charged, contained no more electricity
than before, but that as much was taken from the one side as was thrown on the
other; and that, to discharg it, nothing was necessary but to make a
communication between the two sides, by which the equilibrium might be
restored, and that then no signs of electricity would remain. He afterward
demonstrated, by experiments, that the electricity did not reside in the
coating, as had been supposed, but in the pore^ of the glass itself. After a
phial was charged, he removed the coating, and found that upon applying a new
coating the shock might still be received. In the year 1749, he first suggested
his idea of explaining the phenomena of thunder-gusts, and of the aurora
bor^alis, upon electrical principles. He points out many particulars in which
lightning and electricity agree; and he adduces many facts, and reasoning from
facts, in support of his positions. In the same year he conceived the
astonishingly bold and grand idea of ascertaining the truth of his doctrine, by
actually drawing down the forked lightning, by means of sharp-pointed iron rods
raised into the region of the clouds. Even in this uncertain state, his passion
to be useful to mankind displays itself in a powerful manner. Admitting the
identity of electricity and lightning, and knowing the power of points in
repelling bodies charged with electricity, and in conducting their fire
silently and imperceptibly, he suggests the idea of securing houses, ships,
etc. from being damaged by lightning, by erecting the pointed iron rods, which
should rise some feet above the most elevated part, and descend some feet into
the ground or the water. The effect of these, he concluded, would be either to
prevent a stroke by repelling the cloud beyond the striking distance, or by
drawing off the electrical fire which it contained; or, if they could not
effect this, they would at least conduct the stroke to the earth, without any
injury to the building.

It was not until the summer of 1752, that he was enabled to complete his grand
and unparralleled discovery by experiment. The plan which he had origionally
proposed, was to erect on some high tower, or other elevated place, a centry
box, from which should rise a pointed iron rod, insulated by being fixed in a
cake of resin. Electrified clouds passing over this, would, he conceived,
impart to it a portion of their electricity, which would be rendered evident to
the senses by sparks being emitted, when a key, a knuckle or other conductor,
was presented to it. Philadelphia at this time afforded no opportunity of
trying an experiment of this kind. Whilst Franklin was waiting for the erection
of a spire, it occurred to him, that he might have more ready access to the
region of clouds by means of a common kite. He prepared one by ^^taching two
cross sticks to a silk handkerchief, which would not suffer so much from the
rain as paper. To his upright stick was a^fixed an iron point. The string was,
as usua^, of hemp, excepting the lower end which was silk. Where the hempen
string terminated, a key was fastened. With this apparatus, on the appearance
of a thunder-gust approaching he went out into the commons, accompanied by his
son, to whom alone he communicated his intentions, well knowing the ridicule
which, too generally for the interest of science, waits unsuccessful
experiments in philosophy. He placed himself under a shed to avoid the rain.
His kite was raised. A thunder-cloud passed over it. No sign of electricity
appeared. He almost despaired of success; when suddenly he observed the loose
fibers of his string to move toward an erect position. He now presented his
knuckle to the key, and received a strong spark. How exquisite must his
sensations have been at this moment! On this experiment depended the fate of
his theory. If he succeeded, his name would rank high among those who have
improved science; if he failed, he must be inevitably subjected to the derision
of mankind, or, what is worse, their pity, as a well-meaning man, but a weak
silly projector. The anxiety with which he looked for the result this
experiment, may easily be conceived. ^oubts and despair had begun to prevail,
^hen the fact was ascertained in so clear a ^anner, that even the most
incredulous could a longer withhold their assent. Repeated ^arks were drawn
from the key: a phial was ^arged, a shock given, and all the experiments made,
which are usually performed with electricity.

About a month before this period, some ^^genious Frenchmen had completed the
discovery, in the manner originally proposed (...) Dr. Franklin. The letters
which he sent (...) Mr. Collinson, it is said, were refused a ^ace amongst the
papers of the Royal Soci^ty of London. However this may be, Collinson published
them in a sperate volume, under the title of New Experiments and Observations
on Electricity, made at Philadelphia in America. They were read with avidity,
and ^^on translated into different languages. A ^^ry incorrect French
translation fell into the ^^nds of the celebrated Buffon, who, notwith^^anding
the disadvantages under which the ^ork labored, was much pleased with it, and
repeated the experiments with success. He prevailed upon his friend, M. D'
Alibard (...) give his countrymen a more correct translation of the work of the
American electrician. This contributed toward spreading a knowledge of
Franklin's priciples in France. The King, Louis XV. hearing of these
experiments, ^^pressed a wish to be a spectator of them. A course of
experiments was given at the seat of the Duc D' Again, at St. Germain by M. De
Lor. The applauses which the King bestowed upon Franklin, excited in Buffon, D'
Alibard, and De Lor, an earnest desire of ascertaining the truth of his theory
of thunder-gusts. Buffon erected his apparatus on the tower of Montbar, M. D'
Alibard at Mary-la-ville, and De Lor at his house in the Estrapade at Paris,
some of the highest ground in that capital. D' Alibard's machine first showed
signs of electricity. On the 10th of May, 1752, a thunder-cloud passed over it,
in the absence of M. D' Alibard; and a number of sparks were drawn from it by
Coiffier, a joiner, with whom D' Alibard had left directions how to proceed,
and by M. Roulet, the prior of Mary la-ville. An account of this experiment
given to the Royal Academy of Sciences, in a memoir by M. D' Alibard, dated May
13th, 1752. On the 18 of May, M. De Lor proved equally successful with the
apparatus erected at his own house. These discoveries soon excited the
philosophers of other parts of Europe to repeat the experiment. Amongst these,
none signalized themselves more than Father Beccaria of Turin, to whose
observations science is much indebted. Even the cold regions of Russia were
penetrated by the ardor for discovery. Professor Richman bade fair to add much
to the stock of knowledge on this subject, when an unfortunate flash from his
rod put a period to his existence. The friends of science will long remember
with regret the amiable martyr to electricity.

By these experiments Franklin's theory was established in the most firm
manner. When the thruth of it could no longer be doubted, the vanity of men
endeavored to detract from its merit. That an American, an inhabitant of the
obscurecity of Philadelphia, the name of which was hardly known, should be able
to make discoveries, and to frame theories, which had escaped the notice of the
enlightened philosophers of Europe was too mortifying to be admitted. He must
certainly have taken the idea from sombody else. An American, a being of an
inferior order, make discoveries! Impossible. It was said, that the Abbe
Nollet, in 1748, had suggested the idea of the similarity of lightning and
electricity, in his Legons de Physique. It is true, that the Abbe mentions the
idea, but he throws it out as a bare conjecture, and proposes no mode of
^^certaining the truth of it. He himself acknowledges, that Franklin first
entertained the bold thought of bringing lightning from the heavens, by means
of pointed rods fixed in the air. The similarity of electricity and lightning
is so strong, that we need not be surprised at notice being taken of it, as
soon as electrical phenomina became familiar. We find it mentioned by Dr. Wall
and Mr. Gray, while the science was in its infancy. But the honor of forming a
regular theory of thunder-gusts, of suggesting a mode of determining the truth
of it by experiments, and (...) putting these experiments in practice, a^^ thus
establishing his theory upon a firm a^^ solid basis, is incontestibly due to
Franklin. D' Alibard, who made the experiments in France, says, that he only
followed the track which Franklin had pointed out.

It has been of late asserted, that the honor of completing the experiment with
the electrical kite, does not belong to Franklin. Some late English paragraphs
attributed it to some Frenchman, whose name they do not mention; and the Abbe
Bertholon gives it to M. De Romas, assessor to the presideal of Nerac; the
English paragraphs probably refer to the same person. But a very slight
attention will convince us of the injustice of this procedure: Dr. Franklin's
experiment was made in June 1752; and his letter, giving an account of it, is
dated October 19, 1752, M. De Romas made his first attempt on the 14th of May
1753, but was not successful until the 7th of June; a year after Franklin had
completed the discovery, and when it was known to all the philosophers in
Europe.

Besides these great principles, Franklin's letters on electricity contain a
number of facts and hints, which have contributed greatly toward reducing this
branch of knowledge to a science. His friend, Mr. Kinnersly, communicated to him
a discovery of the different kinds of electricity executed by rubbing glass and
sulphur. This, we have said, was first obser^^d by M. Du Faye; but it was for
many years ^^glected. The philosophers were disposed (...) account for the
phenomena, rather from a difference in the quantity of electricity collec^ed;
and even Du Faye himself seems at last ^o have adopted this doctrine. Franklin
at first entertained the same idea; but upon re^eating the experiments, he
perceived that Mr. Kinnersley was right; and that the vitre^us and resmous
electricity of Du Faye were nothing more than the positive and negative states
which he had before observed; that the glass globe charged positively, or
increased the quantity of electricity on the prime conductor, whilst the globe
of sulphur diminishes its natural quantity, or charged negatively. These
experiments and observations opened a new field for investigation, upon which
electricians entered with avidity; and their labors have added much to the
stock of our knowledge.

In September, 1752, Franklin entered upon a course of experiments, to
determine the state of electricity in the clouds. From a number of experiments
he formed this conclusion: "that the clouds of a thunder-gust are most commonly
in a negative state of electricity, but sometimes in a positive state;" and
from this it follows, as a necessary consequence, "that, for the most part, in
thunder-strokes, it is the earth that strikes into the clouds, and not the
clouds that strike into the earth." The letter containing these observations,
is dated in September, 1753; and yet the discovery of ascending thunder has
been said to be of a modern date, and has been attributed to the Abbe
Bertholon, who published his memoirs on the subject in 1776.

Franklin's letters have been translated into most of the European languages,
and into Latin. In proportion as they have become known, his principles have
been adopted. Some opposition was made to his theories, particularly by the
Abbe Nollet, who was, however, but feebly supported, whilst the first
philosophers of Europe stepped forth in defense of Franklin's principles;
amongst whom D' Alibard and Beccaria were the most distinguished. The
opposition has gradually ceased, and the Franklinian system is now universally
adopted, where science flourishes.

The important practical use which Franklin made of his discoveries, the
securing of houses from injury by lightning, has been already mentioned.
Pointed conductors are now very common in America; but prejudice has hitherto
prevented their general introduction into Europe, notwithstanding the most
undoubted proofs of their utility have been given. But mankind can with
difficulty be brought to lay aside established practices, or to adopt new ones.
And perhaps we have more reason to be surprised that a practice, however
rational, which was proposed about forty years ago, should in that time have
been adopted in so many places, than that it has not universally prevailed. It
is only by degrees that the great body of mankind can be led into knew
practices, however salutary their tendency. It is now nearly eighty years since
inoculation was introduced into Europe and America; and it is so far from being
general at present, that it will, perhaps, require one or two centuries to
render it so.

In the year 1745, Franklin published an account of his new invented
Pennsylvania fireplace, in which he minutely and accurately states the
advantages and disadvantages of different kinds of fire-places; and endeavors
to show that the one which he describes is to be preferred to any other. This
contrivance has given rise to the open stoves now in general use, which however
differ from it in construction, particularly in not having an airbox at the
back, through which a constant supply of air, warmed in its passage, is thrown
into the room. The advantages of this are, that as a stream of warm air is
continually flowing into the room, less fuel is necessary to preserve a proper
temperature, and the room may be so tightened as that no air may enter through
cracks; the consequences of which are colds, toothaches, etc.

Although philosophy was a principal object of Franklin's pursuit for several
years, he confined himself not to this. In the year 1747, he became a member of
the general assembly of Pennsylvania, as a burgess for the city of
Philadelphia. Warm disputes at this time subsisted between the assembly and the
proprietaries; each contending for what they conceived to be their just rights.
Franklin, a friend to the rights of man from his infancy, soon distinguished
himself as a steady opponent of the unjust schemes of the proprietaries. He was
soon looked up to as the head of the opposition; and to him have been
attributed many of the spirited replies of the assembly, to the messages of the
governors. His influence in the body was very great. This arose not from any
superior powers of eloquence; he spoke but seldom, and he never was known to
make any thing like an elaborate harangue. His speeches often consisted of a
single sentence, or of a well told story, the moral of which was always
obviously to the point. He never attempted the flowery fields of oratory. His
manner was plain and mild. His style in speaking was, like that of his
writings, remarkably concise. With this plain manner, and his penetrating and
solid judgment, he was able to confound the most eloquent and subtle of his
adversaries, to confirm the opinions of his friends, and to make converts of
the unprejudiced, who had opposed him. With a single observation, he has
rendered of no avail, an elegant and lengthy discourse, and determined the fate
of a question of importance.

But he was not contented with thus supporting the rights of the people. He
wished to render them permanently secure, which can only be done by making
their value properly known; and this must depend upon increasing and extending
information to every class of men. We have already seen that he was the founder
of the public library, which contributed greatly toward improving the minds of
the citizens. But this was not sufficient. The schools then subsisting were in
general of little utility. The teachers were men, ill qualified for the
important duty which they had undertaken; and, after all, nothing more could be
obtained than the rudiments of a common English education. Franklin drew up a
plan of an academy, to be erected in the city of Philadelphia, suited to "the
state of an infant country;" but in this, as in all his plans, he confined not
his ^ews to the present time only. He looked forward to the period when an
institution on ^n enlarged plan would become necessary. With this view he
considered his academy as "a foundation for posterity to erect a seminary of
learning, more extensive, and suitable to future circumstances." In pursuance
of this plan, the constitutions were drawn up and signed on the 13th of
November 1749. in these, twenty-four of the most respectable citizens of
Philadelphia were named as trustees. In the choice of these, and in the
formation of his plan, Franklin is said to have consulted chiefly with Thomas
Hopkinson, Esquire Rev. Richard Peter's, then secretary of the province, Tench
Francis, Esquire attorney general, and Dr. Phineas Bond.

The following article shows a spirit of benevolence worthy of imitation; and,
for the honor of our city, we hope that it continues to be in force.

"In case of the inability of the rector, or any master, (established on the
foundation by receiving a certain salary) through sickness, or any other
natural infirmity, whereby he may be reduced to poverty, the trustees shall
have power to contribute to his support, in proportion to his distress and
merit, and the stock in their hands."

The last clause of the fundamental rules is expressed in language so tender
and benevolent, so truly parental, that it will do everlasting honor to the
hearts and heads of the founders.

"It is hoped and expected that the trustees will make it their pleasure, and
in some degree their business, to visit the academy often; to encourage and
countenance the youth, countenance and assist the masters, and by all means in
their power advance the usefulness and reputation of the design; that they will
look on the students as, in some measure, their own children, treat them with
familiarity and affection; and when they have behaved well, gone through their
studies, and are to enter the world, they shall zealously unite, and make all
the interest that can be made, to promote and establish them, whether in
business, offices, marriages, or any other thing for their advantage,
preferable to all other persons whatsoever, even of equal merit."

The constitutions being signed and made public, with the names of the
gentlemen proposing themselves as trustees and founders, the design was so well
approved of by the public-spirited citizens of Philadelphia, that the sum of
eight hundred pounds per annum, for five years, was in the course of a few
weeks subscribed for carrying the plan into execution; and in the beginning of
January following (viz. 1750) three of the schools were opened, namely, the
Latin and Greek schools. The Mathematical, and the English schools. In
pursuance of an article in the original plan, a school for educating sixty boys
and thirty girls (in the charter since called the Charitable School) was
opened, and amidst all the difficulties with which the trustees have struggled
in respect to their funds, has still been continued full for the space of forty
years; so that allowing three years education for each boy and girl admitted
into it, which is the general rule, at least twelve hundred children have
received in it the chief part of their education, who might otherwise, in a
great measure, have been left without the means of instruction. And many of
those who have been thus educated, are now to be found among the most useful
and reputable citizens of this state.

The institution, thus successfully begun, continued daily to flourish, to the
great satisfaction of Dr. Franklin; who, notwithstanding the multiplicity of
his other engagements and pursuits, at that busy stage of his life, was a
constant attendant at the monthly visitations and examinations of the schools,
and made it his particular study, by means of his extensive correspondence
abroad, to advance the reputation of the seminary, and to draw students and
scholars to it from different parts of America and the West Indies. Through the
interposition of his benevolent and learned friend, Peter Collinson of London,
upon the application of the trustees, a charter of incorporation, dated July
13, 1753, was obtained from the honorable proprietors of Pennylvania, Thomas
Penn and Richard Penn, Esqrs accompanied with a liberal benefaction of five
hundred pounds sterling; and Dr. Franklin now began in good earnest to please
himself with the ho^es of a speedy accomplishment of his original design, viz.
the establishment of a perfect institution, upon the plan of the European
colleges and universities; for which his academy was intended as a nurs^ry or
foundation. To elucidate this fact, is a matter of considerable importance in
respect to the memory and character of Dr. Franklin, as a philosopher, and as
the friend and patron of learning and science; for, notwithstanding what is
expressly declared by him in the preamble to the constitutions, viz. that the
academy was begun for "teaching the Latin and Greek languages with all useful
branches of the arts and sciences, suitable to the state of an infant country,
and laying a foundation for posterity to erect a seminary of learning more
extensive, and suitable to their future circumstances;" yet it has been
suggested of late, as upon Dr. Franklin's authority, that the Latin and Greek,
or the dead languages, are an encumbrance upon a scheme of liberal education,
and that the engrafting or founding a college, or more extensive seminary, upon
his academy, was without his approbation or agency, and gave him discontent. If
the reverse of this does not al^^ady appear, from what has been quoted above,
the following letters will put the matter beyond dispute. They were written by
him to a gentleman, who had at that time published the idea of a college,
suited to the circumstances of a young country, (meaning New York) a copy of
which having been sent to Dr. Franklin for his opinion, gave use to that
correspondence which terminated about a year afterward, in erecting the
college upon the foundation of the academy, and establishing that gentleman as
the head of both, where he still continues, after a period of thirty-six years,
to preside with distinguished reputation.

From these letters also, the state of the academy, at that time, will be seen.

Philad. April 19, 1753. Sir,
I received your favor of the 11th instant, with your new A general idea of
the college of Marania.
piece on Education which shall carefully peruse, and give you my sentiments of
it, as your desire, by next post.

I believe the young gentlemen, your pupils, may be entertained and instructed
here, in mathematics and philosophy, to satisfaction. Mr. Alison The Rev. and
learned Mr. Francis Alison, afterward D. D. and vice-provost of the college.
(who was educated at Glasgow) has been long accustomed to teach the latter,
and Mr. Grew Mr. Theophilus Grew, afterward professor of mathematics in the
college.
the former; and I think their pupils make great progress. Mr. Alison has the
care of the Latin and Greek school, but as he has now three good assistants,
Those assistants were at that time Mr. Charles Thomsom, late secretary of
congress, Mr. Paul Jackson, and Mr. Jacob Duche.
he can very well afford some hours every day for the instruction of those who
are engaged in higher studies. The mathematical school is pretty well furnished
with instruments. The English library is a good one; and we have belonging to
it a middling apparatus for experimental philosophy, and purpose speedily to
complete it. The Loganian library, one of the best collections in America, will
shortly be opened; so that neither books nor instruments will be wanting; and
as we are determined always to give good salaries, we have reason to believe we
may have always an opportunity of choosing good masters; upon which, indeed,
the success of the whole depends. We are obliged to you for your kind offers in
this respect, and when you are settled in England, we may occasionally make use
of your friendship and judgment, --

If it suits your convenience to visit Philadelphia before you return to
Europe, I shall be extremely glad to see and converse with you here, as well as
to correspond with you after your settlement in England; for an acquaintance
and communication with men of learning, virtue, and public spirit, is one of my
greatest enjoyments.

I do not know whether you ever happened to see the first proposals I made for
erecting this academy. I send them enclosed. They had, (however imperfect) the
desired success, being followed by a subscription of four thousand pounds,
toward carrying them into execution. And as we are fond of receiving advice,
and are daily improving by experience, I am in hopes we shall, in a few years,
see a perfect institution.

I am very respectfully, etc. B. FRANKLIN.

Mr. W. Smith, Long Island.

Philad. May 3d, 1753. Sir,
Mr. Peter's has just now been with me, and we have compared notes on your new
piece. We find nothing in the scheme of education, however excellent, but what
is, in our opinion, very practicable. The great difficulty will be to find the
Aratus, The name given to the principal or head of the ideal college, the
system of education in which has nevertheless been nearly realized, or
followed as a model, in the college and academy of Philadelphia, and some other
American seminaries, for many years past.
and other suitable persons, to carry it into execution; but such may be had if
proper encouragement be given. We have both received great pleasure in the
perusal of it. For my part, I know not when I have read a piece that has more
affected me -- so noble and just are the sentiments, so warm and animated the
language; yet as censure from your friends may be of more use, as well as more
agreeable to you than praise, I ought to mention, that I wish you had omitted
not only the quotation from the Review, The quotation alluded to (from the
London Monthly Review for 1749) was judged to reflect too severely on the
discipline and government of the English universities of Oxford and Cambridge,
and was expunged from the following editions of this work.
which you are now justly dissatisfied with, but those expressions of
resentment against your adversaries, in pages 65 and 79. In such cases, the
noblest victory is obtained by neglect, and by shining on.

Mr. Allen has been out of town these ten days; but before he went he directed
me to procure him six copies of your piece. Mr. Peter's has taken ten. He
purposed to have written to you; but omits it, as he expects so soon to have
the pleasure of seeing you here. He desires me to present his affectionate
compliments to you, and to assure you that you will be very welcome to him. I
shall only say, that you may depend on my doing all in my power to make your
visit to Philadelphia agreeable to you

I am, etc. B. FRANKLIN.

Mr. Smith.

Philad. Nov. 27th, 1753. Dear Sir,
Having written you fully, via Bristol, I have now little to add. Matters
relating to the academy remain in statu quo. The trustees would be glad to see
a rector established there, but they dread entering into new engagements till
they are got out of debt; and I have not yet got them wholly over to my
opinion, that a good professor, or teacher of he higher branches of learning
would draw so many scholars as to pay great part, if not the whole of his
salary. Thus, unless the proprietors (of the province) shall think sit to put
the finishing hand to our institution, it must, I fear, wait some few years
longer before it can arrive at that state of perfection, which to me it seems
now capable of; and all the pleasure I promised myself in seeing you settled
among us, vanishes into smoke.

But good Mr. Collinson writes me word, that no endeavors of his shall be
wanting; and he hopes, with the archbishop's assistance, to be able to prevail
with our proprietors. Upon the application of archbishop Herring and P.
Collinson, esquire at Dr. Franklin's request, (aided by the letters of Mr. Allen
and Mr. Peter's) the Hon. Thomas Penn, esquire subscribed an annual sum, and
afterward gave at least 5000 l. to the founding or engrafting the college upon
the academy.
I pray God grant them success.

My son presents his affectionate regards, with, Dear Sir,

Yours, etc. B. FRANKLIN.
P. S, I have not been favored with a line from you since your arrival in
England.




Philad. April 18th, 1754. Dear Sir,
I have had but one letter from you since your arrival in England, which was a
short one, via Boston, dated October 18th, acquainting me that you had written
largely by Capt. Davis. -- Davis was lost, and with him your letters, to my
great disappointment Mesnard and Gibbon have since arrived here, and I hear
nothing from you -- My comfort is, an imagination that you only omit writing
because you are coming, and purpose to tell me every thing viva voce. So not
knowing whether this letter will reach you, and hoping either to see or hear
from you by the Myrtilla, Capt. Buddon's ship, which is daily expected, I only
^dd, that I am, with great esteem and affection.

Yours, etc. B. FRANKLIN.

Mr. Smith.

About a month after the date of this last letter, the gentleman to whom it was
addressed arrived in Philadelphia, and was immediately placed at the head of
the seminary; whereby Dr. Franklin, and the other trustees were enabled to
prosecute their plan, for perfecting the institution, and opening the college
upon the large and liberal foundation on which it now stands; for which purpose
they obtained their additional charter, dated May 27th, 1755.

Thus far we thought proper to exhibit in one view Dr. Franklin's services in
the foundation and establishment of this seminary. He soon afterward embarked
for England, in the public service of his country; and having been generally
employed abroad, in the like service, for the greatest part of the remainder of
his life (as will appear in our subsequent account of the same) he had but few
opportunities of taking any further active part in the affairs of the seminary,
until his final return in the year 1785, when he found its charters violated,
and his ancient colleagues, the original founders, deprived of their trust, by
an act of the legislature; and although his own name had been inserted among
the new trustees, yet he declined to take his seat among them, or any concern
in the management of their affairs, till the institution was restored by law to
its original owners. He then assembled his old colleagues at his own house, and
being chosen their president, all their future meetings were, at his request,
held there, till within a few months of his death, when with reluctance, and at
their desire, least he might be too much injured by his attention to their
business, he suffered them to meet at the college.

Franklin not only gave birth to many useful institutions himself, but he was
also instrumental in promoting those which had originated with other men. About
the year 1752, an eminent physician of this city, Dr. Bond, considering the
deplorable state of the poor, when visited with disease, conceived the idea of
establishing an hospital. Notwithstanding very great exertions on his part, he
was able to interest few people so far in his benevolent plan, as to obtain
subscriptions from them. Unwilling that his scheme should prove abortive, he
sought the aid of Franklin, who readily engaged in the business, both by using
his influence with his friends, and by stating the advantageous influence of
the proposed institution in his paper. These efforts were attended with
success. Considerable sums were subscribed; but they were still short of what
was necessary. Franklin now made another exertion. He applied to the assembly;
and, after some opposition, obtained leave to bring in a bill, specifying, that
as soon as two thousand pounds were subscribed, the same sum should be drawn
from the treasury by the speaker's warrant, to be applied to the purposes of
the institution. The opposition, as the sum was granted upon a contingency
which they supposed would never take place, were silent, and the bill passed.
The friends of the plan now redoubled their efforts, to obtain subscriptions to
the amount stated in the bill, and were soon successful. This was the
foundation of the Pennsylvania Hospital, which, with the Bettering-house and
Dispensary, bears ample testimony of the humanity of the citizens of
Philadelphia.

Dr. Franklin had conducted himself so well in the office of postmaster, and
had shown himself to be so well acquainted with the business of that
department, that it was thought expedient to raise him to a more dignified
station. In 1753 he was appointed deputy post-master-general for the British
colonies. The profits arising from the postage of the revenue, which the crown
of Great Britain derived from the colonies. In the hands of Franklin, it is
said, that the postoffice in America yielded annually thrice as much as that of
Ireland.

The American colonies were much exposed to depredations on their frontiers, by
the Indians; and more particularly whenever a war took place between France and
England. The colonies, individually, were either too weak to take efficient
measures for their own defense, or they were unwilling to take upon themselves
the whole burden of erecting forts and maintaining garrisons, whilst their
neighbors, who partook equally with themselves, of the advantages, contributed
nothing to the expense. Sometimes also the disputes, which subsisted in between
the governors and assemblies, prevented the adoption of means of defense; as we
have seen was the case in Pennsylvania in 1745. To devise a plan of union
between the colonies, to regulate this and other matters, appeared a desirable
object. To accomplish this, in the year 1754, commissioners from New Hampshire,
Massachusetts, Rhode Island, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Maryland, met at
Albany. Dr. Franklin attended here, as a commissioner from Pennsylvania, and
produced a plan, which, from the place of meeting, has been usually termed "The
Albany Plan of Union." This proposed, that application should be made for an
act of parliament, to establish in the colonies a general government, to be
administered by a president-general, appointed by the crown, and by a grand
council, consisting of members chosen by the representatives of the different
colonies; their number to be in direct proportion to the sums paid by each
colony into the general treasury, with this restriction, that no colony should
have more than seven, nor less than two representatives. The whole executive
authority was committed to the president-general. The power of legislation was
lodged in the grand council and president-general jointly; his consent being
made necessary to ^assing a bill into a law. The power vested in the president
and council were, to declare war and peace, and to conclude treaties with the
Indian nations; to regulate trade with, and to make purchases of vacant lands
from them, either in the name of the crown, or of the union; to settle new
colonies, to make laws for governing these until they ^ould be erected into
separate governments, and to raise troops, build forts, fit out armed vessels
and use other means for the general defense; and to affect these things, a
power was given to make laws, laying such duties, imposts, or taxes, as they
should find ne^^ssary, and as would be least burdensome to the people. All
laws were to be sent to England for the king's approbation; and unless
disapproved of within three years, were (...) remain in force. All officers in
the land (...) sea service were to be nominated by the resident-general, and
approved of by the general council; civil officers were to be nominated by the
council, and approved by the resident. Such are the out-lines of the plan
proposed, for the consideration of the congress, by Dr. Franklin. After several
days discussion, it was unanimously agreed to by the commissioners, a copy
transmitted (...) each assembly, and one to the king's council. The fate of it
was singular. It was disapproved of by the ministry of Great Britain, because
it gave too much power to the representatives of the people; and it was
rejected by every assembly, as giving to the president-general, the
representative of the crown, an influence greater than appeared to them proper,
in a plan of government intended for freemen. Perhaps this rejection, on both
sides, is the strongest proof that could be adduced of the excellence of it, as
suited to the situation of America and Great Britain at that time. It appears
to have steered exactly in the middle, between the opposite interests of both.

Whether the adoption of this plan would have prevented the separation of
America from Great Britain, is a question which might afford much room for
speculation. It may be said, that, by enabling the colonies to defend
themselves, it would have removed the pretext upon which the stamp act,
tea-act, and other acts of the British parliament, were passed: which excited a
spirit of opposition, and laid the foundation for the separation of the two
countries. But, on the other hand, it must be admitted, that the restriction
laid by Great Britain upon our commerce, obliging us to sell our produce to her
citizens only, and to take from them various articles, of which, as our
manufactures were discouraged, we stood in need, at a price greater than that
for which they could have been obtained from other nations, must inevitably
produce dissatisfaction, even though no duties were imposed by the parliament;
a circumstance which might still have taken place. Besides, as the
president-general was to be appointed by the crown, he must, of necessity, be
devoted to its views, and would, therefore, refuse his assent to any laws,
however salutary to the community, which had the most remote tendency to injure
the interests of his sovereign. Even should they receive his assent, the
approbation of the king was to be necessary; who would indubitably, in every
instance, prefer the advantage of his home dominions to that of his colonies.
Hence would ensue perpetual disagreements between the council and the
president-general, and thus, between the people of America and the crown of
Great Britain: While the colonies continued weak, they would be obliged to
submit, and as soon as they acquired strength they would be more urgent in
their demands, until, at length, they would shake off the yoke, and declare
themselves independent.

Whilst the French were in possession of Canada, their trade with the natives
ex^ended very far; even to the back of the British settlements. They were
disposed, from time to time, to establish posts within the territory, which the
British claimed as their own. Independent of the injury to the fur-trade, which
was considerable, the colonies suffered this further inconvenience, that the
Indians were frequently instigated to commit depredations on their frontiers.
In the year 1753, encroachments were made upon the boundaries of Virginia.
Remonstrances had no effect. In the ensuing year, a body of men was sent out
under the command of Mr. Washington, who, though a very young man, had, by his
conduct in the preceding year, shown himself worthy of such an important trust.
Whilst marching to take possession of the post at the junction of the Allegany
and Monongahela, he was informed that the French had already erected a fort
there. A detachment of their men marched against him. He fortified himself as
strongly as time and circumstances would admit. A superiority of numbers soon
obliged him to surrender Fort Necessity. He obtained honorable terms for
himself and men, and returned to Virginia. The government of Great Britain now
thought it necessary to interfere. In the year 1755, General Braddock, with
some regiments of regular troops, and provincial levies, was sent to dispossess
the French of the posts upon which they had seized. After the men were all
ready, a difficulty occurred, which had nearly prevented the expedition. This
was the want of wagons. Franklin now stepped forward, and with the assistance
of his son, in a little time procured a hundred and fifty. Braddock
unfortunately fell into an ambuscade, and perished, with a number of his men.
Washington, who had accompanied him as an aid-de-camp, and had warned him, in
vain, of his danger, now displayed great military talents in effecting a
retreat of the remains of the army, and in forming a junction with the rear,
under coloned Dunbar, upon whom the chief command now devolved. With some
difficulty they brought their little body to a place of safety; but they found
it necessary to destroy their wagons and baggage, to prevent their falling
into the hands of the enemy. For the wagons which he had furnished, Franklin
had given bonds to a large amount. The owners declared their intentions of
obliging him to make a restitution of their property. Had they put their
threats in execution, ruin must inevitably have been the consequence. Governor
Shirley, finding that he had incurred these debts for the service of
government, made arrangements to have them discharged, and released Franklin
from his disagreeable situation.

The alarm spread through the colonies, after the defeat of Braddock, was very
great. Preparations to arm were every where made. In Pennsylvania, the
prevalence of the quaker interest prevented the adoption of any system of
defense, which would compel the citizens to bear arms. Franklin introduced into
the assembly a bill for organizing a militia, by which every man was allowed to
take arms or not, as to him should appear fit. The quakers, being thus left at
liberty, suffered the bill to pass; for although their principles would not
suffer them to fight, they had no objections to their neighbors fighting for
them. In consequence of this act a very respectable militia was formed. The
sense of impending danger infused a military spirit in all, whose religious
tenets were not opposed to war. Franklin was appointed colonel of a regiment in
Philadelphia, which consisted of 1200 men.

The north-western frontier being invaded by the enemy, it became necessary to
adopt measures for its defense. Franklin was directed by the governor to take
charge of this business. A power of raising men, and of appointing officers to
command them, was vested in him. He soon levied a body of troops, with which he
repaired to the place at which their presence was necessary. Here he built a
fort, and placed the garrison in such a posture of defense, as would enable
them to withstand the inroads, to which the inhabitants had previously been
exposed. He remained here for some time, in order the more completely to
discharge the trust committed to him. Some business of importance rendered his
presence necessary in the assembly, and he returned to Philadelphia.

The defense of her colonies was a great expense to Great Britain. The most
effectual mode of lessening this war, was to put arms into the hands of the
inhabitants, and to teach them their use. But England wished not that the
Americans should become acquainted with their own strength. She was
apprehensive, that, as soon as this period arrived, they would no longer submit
to that monopoly of their trade, which to them was highly injurious, but
extremely advantageous to the mother country. In comparison with the profits of
this, the expense of maintaining armies and fleets to defend them was trifling.
She sought to keep them dependent upon her for protection, the best plan which
could be devised for retaining them in peaceable subjection, the least
appearance of a military spirit was therefore to be guarded against, and,
although a war then raged, the act organizing a militia was disapproved of by
the ministry. The regiments which had been formed under it were disbanded, and
the defense of the province entrusted to regular troops.

The disputes between the proprietaries and the people continued in full force,
although a war was raging on the frontiers. Not even the sense of danger was
sufficient to reconcile, for ever so short a time, their jarring interests. The
assembly still insisted upon the justice of taxing the proprietary estates, but
the governors constantly refused to give their assent to this measure, without
which no bill could pass into a law. Enraged at the obstinacy, and what they
conceived to be unjust proceedings of their opponents, the assembly at length
determined to apply to the mother country for relief. A petition was addressed
to the king, in council, stating the inconveniences under which the
inhabitants labored, from the attention of the proprietaries to their private
interests, to the neglect of the general welfare of the community, and praying
for redress. Franklin was appointed to present this address, as agent for the
province of Pennsylvania, and departed from America in June 1757. In conformity
to the instructions which he had received from the legislature, he held a
conference with the proprietaries, who then resided, in England, and
endeavored to prevail upon them to give up the long-contested point. Finding
that they would hearken to no terms of accommodation, he laid his petition
before the council. During this time governor Denny assented to a law imposing
a tax, in which no discrimination was made in favor of the estates of the Penn
family. They, alarmed at this intelligence, and Frankin's exertions, used their
utmost exertions to prevent the royal sanction being given to this law, which
they represented as highly iniquitous, designed to throw the burden, of
supporting government on them, and calculated to produce the most ruinous
consequences to them and their posterity. The cause was amply discussed before
the privy council. The Penns found here so^^ ^^^nuous advocates; nor were there
wanting some who warmly espoused the side of the people. After some time spent
in debate, a proposal was made, that Franklin should solemnly engage, that the
assessment of the tax should be so made, as that the proprietary estates should
pay no more than a due proportion. This he agreed to perform, the Peen family
withdrew their opposition, and tranquillity was thus once more restored to the
province.

The mode in which this dispute was terminated is a striking proof of the high
opinion entertained of Franklin's integrity and honor, even by those who
considered him as inimical to their views. Nor was their confidence
ill-founded. The assessment was made upon the strictest principles of equity;
and the proprietary estates bore only a proportionable share of the expenses of
supporting government.

After the completion of this important business, Franklin remained at the
court of Great Britain, as agent for the province of Pennsylvania. The
extensive knowledge which he possessed of the situation of the colonies, and
the regard which he always manifested for their interests, occasioned his
appointment to the same office by the colonies of Massachusetts, Maryland, and
Georgia. His conduct, in this situation, was such as rendered him still more
dear to his countryman.

He had now an oppertunity of indulging in the society of those friends, whom
his merits had procured him while at a distance. The regard which they had
entertained for him was rather increased by a personal acquaintance. The
opposition which had been made to his discoveries in philosophy gradually
ceased, and the rewards of literary merit were abundantly conferred upon him.
The royal society of London, which had at first refused his performances
admission into its transactions, now thought it an honor to rank him among its
fellows. Other societies of Europe were equally ambitious of calling him a
member. The university of St. Andrew's, in Scotland, conferred upon him the
degree of Doctor of Laws. Its example was followed by the universities of
Edinburgh and of Oxford. His correspondence was sought for by the most eminent
philosophers of Europe. His letters to these abound with true scince, delivered
in the most simple unadorned manner.

The province of Canada was at this time in the possession of the French, who
had originally settled it. The trade with the Indians, for which its situation
was very convenient, was exceedingly lucrative. The French traders here found a
market for their commodities, and received in return large quantities of rich
furs, which they disposed of at a high price in Europe. Whilst the possession
of this country was highly advantageous to France, it was a grievous
inconvenience to the inhabitants of the British colonies. The Indians were
almost generally desirous to cultivate the friendship of the French, by whom
they were abundantly supplied with arms and ammunition, Whenever a war
happened, the Indians were ready to fall upon the frontiers: and this they
frequently did, even when Great Britain and and France were at peace. From
these considerations, it appeared to be the interest of Great Britain to gain
the possession of Canada. But the importance of such an acquisition was not
well understood in England. Franklin about this time published his Canada
pamphlet, in which he, in a very forcible manner, pointed out the advantages
which would result from the conquest of this province.

An expedition against it was planned, and the command given to General Wolf.
His success is well known. At the treaty in 1762, France ceded Canada to Great
Britain, and by her cession of Louisiana, at the same time, relinquished all
her possessions on the continent of America.

Although Dr. Franklin was now principally occupied with political pursuits, he
found time for philosophical studies. He extended his electrical researches,
and made a variety of experiments, particularly an the tourmalin. The singular
properties which this stone possesses of being electrified on one side
positively and on the other negatively, by heat alone, without friction, had
been but lately observed.

Some experiments on the cold produced by evaporation, made by Dr. Cullen, had
been communicated to Dr. Franklin by Professor Simpson of Glasgow. These he
repeated, and found, that, by the evaporation of either in the exhausted
receiver of an air-pump, so great a degree of cold was produced in a summer's
day, that water was converted into ice. This discovery he applied to the
solution of a number of phenomena, particularly a singular fact, which
philosophers had endeavored in vain to account for, viz. that the temperature
of the human body, when in health, never exceeds 96 degrees of Farenheit's
thermometers, although the atmosphere which surrounds it may be heated to a
much greater degree. This he attributed to the increased perspiration, and
consequent evaporation, produced by the heat.

In a letter to Mr. Small of London, dated in May 1760, Dr. Franklin makes a
number observations, tending to show that, in North America, north-east storms
being in the south-west parts. It appears, from actual observation, that a
north-east storm, which extended a considerable distance, commenced at
Philadelphia nearly four hours before it was felt at Boston. He endeavored to
account for this, by supposing that from heat, some rarefaction takes place
about the gulf of Mexico, that the air further north being cooler rushes in,
and is succeeded by the cooler and denser air still further north, and thus a
continued current is at length produced.

The tone produced by rubbing the brim of a drinking glass with a wet finger
had been generally known. A Mr. Puckeridge, and Irishman, by placing on a table
a number of glasses of different sizes, and tuning them by partly filling them
with water, endeavored to form an instrument capable of playing tunes. He was
prevented by an untimely end, from bringing his invention to any degree of
perfection. After his death some improvements were made upon his plan. The
sweetness of the tones induced Dr. Franklin to make a variety of experiments;
and he at length formed that elegant instrument, which he has called the
Armonica.

In the summer of 1762 he returned to America. On his passage he observed the
singular effect produced by the agitation of a vessel, containing oil floating
on water. The surface of the oil remains smooth and undisturbed, whilst the
water is agitated with the utmost commotion. No satisfactory explanation of
this appearance has, we believe, ever been given.

Dr. Franklin received the thanks of the assembly of Pennsylvania, "as well for
the faithful discharge of his duty to that province in particular, as for the
many and important services done to America in general, during his residence in
Great Britain." A compensation of 5000 l. Pennsylvania currency, was also
decreed him for his services during six years.

During his absence he had been annually elected member of the assembly. On his
return to Pennsylvania he again took his seat in this body, and continued a
steady defender of the liberties of the people.

In December 1762, a circumstance which caused great alarm in the province took
place. A number of Indians had resided in the country at Lancaster, and
conducted themselves uniformly as friends to the white inhabitants. Repeated
depredations on the frontiers had exasperated the inhabitants to such a degree,
that they determined to revenge upon every Indian. A number of persons, to the
amount of 120, principally inhabitants of Donnegal and Peckstang or Paxton
townships, in the county of York, assembled; and, mounted on horseback,
proceeded to the settlement of these harmless and defenseless Indians, whose
number had now reduced to about twenty. The Indians received intelligence of
the attack which was intended against them, but disbelieved it. Considering the
white people as their friends, they apprehended no danger from them. When the
party arrived at the Indian settlement, they found only some women and
children, and a few old men, the rest being absent at work. They murdered all
whom they found, and amongst others the chief Shahaes, who had been always
distinguished for his friendship to the whites. This bloody deed excited much
indignation in the well-disposed part of the community.

The remainder of these unfortunate Indians, who, by absence, had escaped the
massacre, were conducted to Lancaster, and lodged in the jail, as a place of
security. The governor issued a proclamation expressing the strongest
disapprobation of the action, offering a reward for the discovery of the
perpetrators of the deed; and prohibiting all injuries to the peaceable Indians
in future. But notwithstanding this, a party of the same men shortly after
marched to Lancaster, broke open the jail, and inhumanly butchered the innocent
Indians who had been placed there for security. Another proclamation was
issued, but had no effect. A detachment marched down to Philadelphia, for the
express purpose of murdering some friendly Indians, who had been removed to the
city for safety. A number of the citizens armed in their defense. The Quakers,
whose principles are opposed to fighting, even in their defense, were most
active upon this occasion. The rioters came to Germantown. The governor fled
for safety to the house of Dr. Franklin, who, with some others, advanced to
meet the Paxton boys, as they were called, and had influence enough to prevail
upon them to relinquish their understanding, and return to their homes.

The disputes between the proprietaries and the assembly, which, for a time,
had subsided, were again revived. The proprietaries were dissatisfied with the
concessions made in favor of the people, and made great struggles to recover
the privilege of exempting their estates from taxation, which they had been
induced to give up.

In 1763 the assembly passed a militia bill, to which the governor refused to
give his assent, unless the assembly would agree to certain amendments which he
proposed. These consisted in increasing the fines, and, in some cases,
substituting death for fines. He wished too that the officers should be
appointed altogether by himself, and not be nominated by the people, as the
bill had proposed. These amendments the assembly considered as inconsistent
with the spirit of liberty. They would not adopt them; the governor was
obstinate, and the bill was lost.

These, and various other circumstances, increased the uneasiness which
subsisted between the proprietaries and the assembly, to such a degree, that,
in 1764, a petition to the king was agreed to by the house, proving an
alteration from a proprietary to a regal government. Great opposition was made
to this measure, not only in the house but in the public prints. A speech of
Mr. Dickenson, on the subject, was published, with a preface by Dr. Smith, in
which great pains were taken to show the impropriety and impolicy of this
proceeding. A speech of Mr. Galloway in reply to Mr. Dickenson was published,
accompained with a preface by Dr. Franklin; in which he ably opposed the
principles laid down in the preface to Mr. Dickenson's speech. This application
to the throne produced no effect. The proprietary government was still
continued.

At the election for a new assembly, in the fall of 1764, the friends of the
proprietaries made great exertions to exclude those of the adverse party, and
obtained a small majority in the city of Philadelphia. Franklin now lost his
seat in the house, which he had held for fourteen years. On the meeting of the
assembly, it appeared that there was still a decided majority of Franklin's
friends. He was immediately appointed provincial agent to the great chagrin of
his enemies, who made a solemn protest against his appointment; which was
refused admission upon the minutes, as being unprecedented. It was, however,
published in the papers, and produced a spirited reply from him, just before
his departure for England.

The desturbances produced in America by Mr. Grenville's stamp act, and the
opposition made to it, are well known. Under the marquis of Rockingham's
administration, it appeared expedient to endeavor to calm the minds of the
colonists; and the repeal of the odious tax was contemplated. Amongst other
means of collecting information on the disposition of the people to submit to
it, Dr. Franklin was called to the bar of the house of commons. The examination
which he here underwent was published, and contains a striking proof of the
extent and accuracy of his information, and the facility with which he
communicated his sentiments. He represented facts in so strong a point of view,
that the inexpediency of the act must have appeared clear to every unprejudiced
mind. The act, after some opposition, was repealed, about a year after it was
enacted, and before it had ever been carried into execution.

In the year 1766, he made a visit to Holland and Germany, and received the
greatest marks of attention from men of science. In his passage through
Holland, he learned from the watermen the effect which a diminution of the
quantity of water in canals has, in impeding the progress of boats. Upon his
return to England, he was led to make a number of experiments; all of which
tended to confirm the observation. These, with an explanation of the
phenomenon, he communicated in a letter to his friend, Sir John Pringle, which
is contained in the volume of his philosophical pieces.

In the following year he traveled into France, where he met with a no less
favorable reception than he had experienced in Germany. He was introduced to a
number of literary characters, and to the king, Louis XV.

Several letters written by Hutchinson, Oliver, and others, to persons in
eminent stations in Great Britain, came into the hands of Dr. Franklin.

These contained the most violent invectives against the leading characters of
the state of Massachusetts, and strenuously advised the prosecution of vigorous
measures, to compel the people to obedience to the measures of the ministry.
These he transmitted to the legislature, by whom they were published. Attested
copies of them were sent to Great Britain, with an address, praying the king to
discharge from office persons who had rendered themselves so obnoxious to the
people, and who had shown themselves so unfriendly to their interests. The
publication of these letters produced a duel between Mr. Whately and Mr.
Temple; each of whom was suspected of having been instrumental in procuring
them. To prevent any further disputes on this subject, Dr. Franklin, in one of
the public papers, declared that he had sent them to America, but would give no
information concerning the manner in which he had obtained them; nor was this
ever discovered.

Shortly after, the petition of the Massachusetts assembly was taken up for
examination, before the privy council. Dr. Franklin attended, as agent for the
assembly; and here a torrent of the most violent and unwarranted abuse was
poured upon him by the solicitor-general, Wedderburne, who was engaged as
council for Oliver and Hutchinson. The petition was declared to be scandalous
and vexatious, and the prayer of it refused.

Although the parliament of Great Britain had repealed the stamp act, it was
only upon the principle of expediency. They still insisted upon their right to
tax the colonies; and, at the same time that the stamp act was repealed, an act
was passed, declaring the right of parliament to bind the colonies in all cases
whatsoever. This language was used even by the most strenuous opposers of the
stamp act; and, amongst others, by Mr. Pit. This right was never recognized by
the colonists; but, as they flattered themselves that it would not be
exercised, they were not very active in remonstrating against it. Had this
pretended right been suffered to remain dormant, the colonists would cheerfully
have finished their quota of supplies, in the mode to which they had been
accustomed; that is, by acts of their own assemblies, in consequence of
requisitions from the secretary of state. If this practice had been pursued,
such was the disposition of the colonies toward the mother country, that,
notwithstanding the disadvantages under which they labored, from restraints
upon their trade, calculated solely for the benefit of the commercial and
manufacturing interests of Great Britain, a separation of the two countries
might have been a far distant event. The Americans, from their earliest
infancy, were taught to venerate a people from whom they were descended; whose
language, laws and manners, were the same as their own. They looked up to them
as models of perfection; and, in their prejudiced minds, the most enlightened
nations of Europe were considered as almost barbarians, in comparison with
Englishmen. The name of an Englishman conveyed to an American the idea of every
thing good and great. Such sentiments instilled into them in early life, what
but a repetition of unjust treatment could have induced them to entertain the
most distant thought of separation! The duties on glass, paper, leather,
painter's colors, tea, etc. the disfranchisement of some of the colonies: the
obstruction to the measures of the legislature in others, by the king's
governors; the contemptuous treatment of their humble remonstrances, stating
their grievances and praying a redress of them, and other violent and
oppressive measures, at length excited an ardent spirit of opposition. Instead
of endeavoring to allay this by a more lenient conduct, the ministry seemed
resolutely bent upon reducing the colonies to the most slavish obedience to
their decrees. But this tended only to aggravate. Vain were all the efforts
made use of to prevail upon them to lay aside their designs, to convince them
of the impossibility of carrying them into effect, and of the mischievous
consequences which must ensue from a continuance of the attempt. They
persevered, with a degree of inflexibility scarcely paralleled.

The advantages which Great Britain derived from her colonies were so great,
that nothing but a degree of infatuation, little short of madness, could have
produced a continuance of measures calculated to keep up a spirit of
uneasiness, which might occasion the slightest wish for a separation. When we
consider the great improvements in the science of government, the general
diffusion of the principles of liberty amongst the people of Europe, the
effects they have already produced in France, and the probable consequences
which will result from them elsewhere, all of which are the offspring of the
American revolution, it cannot but appear strange, that events of so great
moment to the happiness of mankind, should have been ultimately occasioned by
the wickedness or ignorance of a British ministry.

Dr. Franklin left nothing untried to prevail upon the ministry to consent to a
change of measures. In private conversations, and in letters to persons in
government, he continually expatiated upon the impolicy and injustice of their
conduct toward America; and stated, that, notwithstanding the attachment of
the colonists to the mother country, a repetition of ill treatment must
ultimately alienate their affections. They listened not to his advice. They
blindly persevered in their own schemes, and left to the colonists no
alternative, but opposition or unconditional submission. The latter accorded
not with the principles of freedom, which they had been taught to revere. To
the former they were compelled, though reluctantly, to have recourse.

Dr. Franklin, finding all efforts to restore harmony between Great Britain and
her colonies useless, returned to America in the year 1775; just after the
commencement of hostilities. The day after his return he was elected by the
legislature of Pennsylvania a member of congress. Not long after his election a
committee was appointed, consisting of Mr. Lynch, Mr. Harrison, and himself, to
visit the camp at Cambridge, and in conjunction with the commander in chief, to
endeavor to convince the troops, whose term of enlistment was about to expire,
of the necessity of their continuing in the field, and persevering in the cause
of their country.

In the fall of the same year he visited Canada, to endeavor to unite them in
the common cause of liberty; but they could not be prevailed upon to oppose the
measures of the British government. M. Le Roy, in a letter annexed to Abbe
Fauchet's eulogium of Dr. Franklin, states that the ill success of this
negotiation was occasioned, in a great degree, by religious animosities, which
subsisted between the Canadians and their neighbors, some of whom had at
different times burnt their chapels.

When Lord How came to America, in 1776, vested with power to treat with the
colonists, a correspondence took place between him and Dr. Franklin, on the
subject of a reconciliation. Dr. Franklin was afterward appointed, together
with John Adams and Edward Rutledge, to wait upon the commissioners, in order
to learn the extent of their power. These were found to be only to grant
pardons upon submission. These were terms which would not be accepted; and the
object of the commissioners could not be obtained.

The momentous question of independence was shortly after brought into view, at
a time when the fleets and armies, which were sent to enforce obedience, were
truly formidable. With an army, numerous indeed, but ignorant of discipline,
and entirely unskilled in the art of war, without money, without a fleet,
without allies, and with nothing but the love of liberty to support them, the
colonists determined to separate from a country, from which they had
experienced a repetition of injury and insult. In this question, Dr. Franklin
was decidedly in favor of the measure proposed, and had great influence in
bringing over others to his sentiments.

The public mind had been pretty fully prepared for this event, by Mr. Paine's
celebrated pamphlet, Common Sense. There is good reason to believe that Dr.
Franklin had no inconsiderable share, at least, in furnishing materials for
this work.

In the convention which assembled at Philadelphia in 1776, for the purpose of
establishing a new form of government for the state of Pennsylvania, Dr.
Franklin was chosen president. The late constitution of this state, which was
the result of their deliberations, may be considered as a digest of his
principles of government. The single legislature, and the plural executive,
seem to have been his favorite tenets.

In the latter end of 1776, Dr. Franklin was appointed to assist in the
negociatious which had been set on foot by Silas Deane at the court of France.
A conviction of the advantages of a commercial intercourse with America, and a
desire of weakening the British empire by dismembering it, first induced the
French court to listen to proposals of an alliance. But they showed rather a
reluctance to the measure, which, by Dr. Franklin's address, and particularly
by the success of the American arms against general Burgoyne, was at length
overcome; and in February 1778, a treaty of alliance, offensive and defensive,
was concluded; in consequence of which France became involved in the war with
Great Britain.

Perhaps no person could have been found, more capable of rendering essential
services to the United States at the court of France, than Dr. Franklin. He was
well known as a philosopher, and his character was held in the highest
estimation. He was raceived with the greatest marks of respect by all the
literary characters; and this respect was extended amongst all classes of men.
His personal influence was hence very considerable. To the effects of this were
added those of various performances which he published, tending to establish
the credit and charecter of the United States. To his exertions in this way,
may, in no small degree, be ascribed the success of the loans negociated in
Holland and France, which greatly contributed to bringing the war to a happy
conclusion.

The repeated ill success of their arms, and more particularly the capture of
Cornwallis and his army, at length convinced the British nation of the
impossibility of reducing the Americans to subjection. The trading interest
particularly became very clamorous for peace. The ministry were unable longer
to oppose their wishes. Provisional articles of peace were agreed to, and
signed at Paris on the 30th of November, 1782, by Dr. Franklin, Mr. Adams, Mr.
Jay, and Mr. Laurens, on the part of the United States; and by Mr. Oswald on
the part of Great Britain. These formed the basis of the definitive treaty,
which was concluded the 30th of September 1783, and signed by Dr. Franklin, Mr.
Adams, and Mr. Jay, on the one part, and by Mr. David Hartley on the other.

On the 3d of April 1783, a treaty of amity and commerce, betweed the United
States and Sweden, was concluded at Paris, by Dr. Franklin and the Count Von
Kruitz.

A similar trearty with Prussia was concluded in 1785, not long before Dr.
Franklin's departure from Europe.

Dr. Franklin did not fuffer his political pursuits to engross his whole
attention. Some of his performances made their appearance in Paris. The object
of these was generally the promotion of industry and economy.

In the year 1784, when animal magnetism made great noise in the world,
particularly at Paris, it was thought a matter of such importance, that the
king appointed commissioners to examine into the foundation of this pretended
science. Dr. Franklin was one of the number. After a fair and diligent
examination, in the course of which Mesmer repeated a number of experiments, in
the presence of the commissioners, some of which were tried upon themselves,
they determined that it was a mere trick, intended to impose upon the ignorant
and credulous -- Mesmer was thus interrupted in his career to wealth and fame,
and a most insolent attempt to impose upon the human understanding baffled.

The important ends of Dr. Franklin's mission being completed by the
establishment of American independence, and the infirmities of age and disease
coming upon him, he became desirous of returning to his native country. Upon
application to congress to be recalled, Mr. Jefferson was appointed to succeed
him, in 1785. Sometime in September of the same year, Dr. Franklin arrived in
Philadelphia. He was shortly after chosen member of the supreme executive
council for the city; and soon after was elected president of the same.

When a convention was called to meet in Philadelphia, in 1787, for the purpose
of giving more energy to the government of the union, by revising and amending
the articles of confederation, Dr. Franklin was appointed a delegate from the
State of Pennsylvania. He signed the constitution which they proposed for the
union, and gave it the most unequivocal marks of his approbation.

A society for political enquiries, of which Dr. Franklin was president, was
established about this period. The meetings were held at his house. Two or
three essays read in the society were published. It did not long continue.

In the year 1787, two societies were established in Philadelphia, founded on
principles of the most liberal and refined humanity -- The Philadelphia Society
for alleviating the miseries of public prisons; and the Pennsylvania Society
for promoting the abolition of slavery, the relief of free negroes unlawfully
held in bondage, and the improvement of the condition of the African race. Of
each of these Dr. Franklin was president. The labors of these bodies have been
crowned with great success; and they continue to prosecute, with unwearied
diligence, the laudable designs for which they were established.

Dr. Franklin's increasing infirmities prevented his regular attendance at the
council chamger; and, in 1788, he retired wholly from public life.

His constitution had been a remarkably good one. He had been little subject to
disease, except an attack of the gout occasionally, until the year 1781, when
he was first attacked with the symptoms of the calculous complaint, which
continued during his life. During the intervals of pain from this grievous
disease, he spent many cheerful hours, conversing in the most agreeable and
instructive manner. His faculties were entirely unimpaired, even to the hour of
his death.

His name, as president of the Abolition Society, was signed to the memorial
presented to the House of Representatives of the United States, on the 12th of
February 1789, praying them to exert the full extent of power vested in them by
the constitution, in discouraging the traffic of the human species. This was
his last public act. In the debates to which this memorial gave rise, several
attempts were made to justify the trade. In the Federal Gazette of March 25th,
there appeared an essay, signed Historicus, written by Dr. Franklin, in which
he communicated a speech, said to have been delivered in the Divan of Algiers
in 1687, in opposition to the prayer of the petition of a sect called Erika, or
purists, for the abolition of piracy and slavery. This pretended African speech
was an excellent parody of one delivered by Mr. Jackson of Georgia. All the
arguments urged in favor of negroe slavery, are applied with equal force to
justify the plundering and enslaving the Europeans. It affords, at the same
time, a demonstration of the futility of the arguments in defense of the slave
trade, and of the strength of mind and ingenuity of the author, at his advanced
period of life. It furnished too a no less convincing proof of his power of
imitating the style of other times and nations, than his celebrated parable
against persecution. And as the latter led many to search the scriptures with a
view to find it, so the former caused many persons to search the book-stores
and libraries, for the work from which it was said to be extracted.

In the beginning of April following, he was attacked with a fever and
complaint of his breast, which terminated his existence. The following account
of his last illness was written by his friend and physician, Dr. Jones.

"The stone, with which he had been afflicted for several years, had for the
last twelve months confined him chiefly to his bed; and during the extreme
painful paroxysms, he was obliged to take large doses of laudanum to mitigate
his tortures -- still, in the intervals of pain, he not only amused himself
with reading and conversing with his family, and a few friends who visited him,
but was often employed in doing business of a public as well as private nature,
with various persons who waited on him for that purpose; and in every instance
displayed, not only that readiness and disposition of doing good, which was the
distinguishing characteristic of his life, but the fullest and clearest
possession of his uncommon mental abilities; and not unfrequently indulged
himself in those jeux d'esprit and entertaining anecdotes, which were the
delight of all who heard him.

"About sixteen days before his death, he was seized with a feverish
indisposition, without any particular symptoms attending it, till the third or
fourth day, when he complained of a pain in his left breast, which increased
till it became extremely acute, attended with a cough and laborious breathing.
During this state, when the severity of his pains sometimes drew forth a groan
of complaint, he would observe -- that he was afraid he did not bear them as he
ought -- acknowledged his grateful sense of the many blessings he had received
from that supreme being, who had raised him from small and low beginnings to
such high rank and consideration among men -- and made no doubt but his present
afflictions were kindly intended to wean him from a world in which he was no
longer fit to act the part assigned him. In this frame of body and mind he
continued till five days before his death, when his pain and difficulty of
breathing entirely left him, and his family were flattering themselves with the
hopes of his recovery, when an imposthumation, which had formed itself in his
lungs, suddenly burst, and discharged a great quantity of matter, which he
continued to throw up while he had sufficient strength to do it; but, as that
failed, the organs of respiration became gradually oppressed -- a calm
lethargic state succeeded -- and, on the 17th of April, 1790, about eleven
o'clock at night, he quietly expired, closing a long and useful life of
eighty-four years and three months.

"It may not be amiss to add to the above account, that Dr. Franklin, in the
year 1735, had a severe pleurisy, which terminated in an abscess of the left
lobe of his lungs, and he was then almost suffocated with the quantity and
suddenness of the discharge. A second attack of a similar nature happened some
years after this, from which he soon recovered, and did not appear to suffer
any inconvenience in his respiration from these diseases."

The following epitaph on himself, was written by him many years previous to
his death: THE BODY of BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, Printer, (Like the cover of an old
book, Its contents torn out, And stripped of its lettering and gilding) Lies
here, food for worms; Yet the work itself shall not be lost, For it will (as he
believed) appear once more, In a new And more beautiful edition, Corrected and
amended by The AUTHOR.

EXTRACTS from the last Will and Testament of Dr. FRANKLIN.
WITH regard to my books, those I had in France, and those I left in
Philadelphia, being now assembled together here, and a catalogue made of them,
it is my intention to dispose of the same as follows:

My history of the Academy of Sciences, in sixty or seventy volums quarto, I
give to the philosophical society of Philadelphia, of which I have the honor
to be president. My collection in folio of Les Arts and Les Metiers, I give to
the philosophical society, established in New England, of which I am a member.
My quarto edition of the same Arts and Metiers, I give to the library company
of Philadelphia. Such and so many of my books as I shall mark in the said
catalogue, with the name of my grandson, Benjamin Franklin Bache, I do hereby
give to him: and such and so many of my books, as I shall mark in the said
catalogue with the name of my grandson William Bache, I do hereby give to him:
and such as shall be marked with the name of Jonathan Williams, I hereby give
to my cousin of that name. The residue and remainder of all my books,
manuscripts and papers, I do give to my grandson William Temple Franklin. My
share in the library company of Philadelphia I give to my grandson Benjamin
Franklin Bache, confiding that he will permit his brothers and sisters to share
in the use of it.

I was born in Boston, New England, and owe my first instructions in literature
to the free grammar-schools established there. I therefore give one hundred
pounds sterling to my executors, to be by them, the survivors or survivor of
them, paid over to the managers or directors of the free schools in my native
town of Boston, to be by them, or the person or persons who shall have the
superintendance and management of the said schools, put out to interest, and so
continued at interest for ever; which interest annually shall be laid out in
silver medals, and given as honorary rewards annually by the directors of the
said free schools, for the encouragement of scholarship in the said schools,
belonging to the said town, in such manner as to the discretion of the select
men of the said town shall seem meet.

Out of the salary that may remain due to me, as president of the state, I give
the sum of two thousand pounds to my executors, to be by them, the survivors or
survivor of them, paid over to such person or persons as the legislature of
this state, by an act of assembly, shall appoint to receive the same, in trust,
to be employed for making the Schuylkill navigable.

During the number of years I was in business as a stationer, printer, and
postmaster, a great many small sums became due to me, for books,
advertisements, postage of letters, and other matters, which were not
collected, when in 1757, I was sent by the assembly to England as their agent
-- and, by subsequent appointments continued there till 1775 -- when, on my
return, I was immediately engaged in the affairs of congress, and sent to
France in 1776, where I remained nine years, not returning till 1785; and the
said debts not being demanded in such a length of time, are become in a manner
obsolete, yet are nevertheless justly due. -- These, as they are stated in my
great folio ledger, E, I bequeath to the contributors of the Pennsylvania
hospital; hoping that those debtors, and the descendants of such as are
deceased, who now, as I find, make some difficulty of satisfying such
antiquated demands as just debts, may however be induced to pay or give them as
charity to that excellent institution. I am sensible that much must inevitably
be lost; but I hope something considerable may be recovered. It is possible too
that some of the parties charged may have existing old unsettled accounts
against me; in which case the managers of the said hospital will allow and
deduct the amount, and pay the balance, if they find it against me.

I request my friends Henry Hill, Esquire John Jay, Esquire Francis Hopkinson, Esquire and
Mr. Edward Duffield, of Bonfield, in Philadelphia county, to be the executors
of this any last will and testament, and I hereby ^^inate and appoint them for
that purpose.

In would have my body buried with as little expense or ceremony as may be.

Philadelphia, July 17, 1788.

CODICIL.
I Benjamin Franklin, in the foregoing or annexed last will and testament,
having further considered the same, do think proper to make and publish the
following codicil, or addition thereto:

IT having long been a fixed political opinion of mine, that in a democratical
state there ought to be no offices of profit, for the reasons I have given in
an article of my drawing in our constitution, it was my intention, when I
accepted the office of president, to devote the appointed salary to some public
use: accordingly I had already, before I made my last will, in July last, given
large sums of it to colleges, schools, building of churches, etc. and in that
will I bequeathed two thousand pounds more to the state, for the purport of
making the Schuylkill navigable; but understanding since, that such a sum will
do but little toward accomplishing such a work, and that the project is not
likely to be undertaken for ma^^^ ^^rs to come -- and having entertained (...)
^dea, which I hope may be found mo^^ ^^tensively useful, I do hereby revoke and
annul the bequest and direct that the certificates I have for what remains due
to me of that salary, be sold toward raising the sum of two thousand pounds
sterling, to be disposed of as I am now about to order.

It has been an opinion, that he who receives an estate from his ancestors, is
under some obligation to transmit the same to posterity. This obligation lies
not on me, who never inherited a shilling from any ancestor or relation. I
shall, however, if it is not diminished by some accident before my death, leave
a considerable estate among my descendants and relations. The above observation
is made merely as some apology to my family, for my making bequests that do not
appear to have any immediate relation to their advantage.

I was born in Boston, New England, and owe my first instructions in literature
to the free grammar schools established there. I have therefore considered
those schools in my will.

But I am under obligations to the state of Massachusetts, for having, unasked,
appointed me formerly their agent, with a handsome salary, which continued some
years: and although I accidently lost in their service, by transmitting
governor Hutchinson's letters, much more than the amount of what they gave me,
I do not think that ought in the least to deminish my gratitude. I have
considered that, among artisans, good apprentices are most likely to make good
citizens; and having myself been bred to a manual art, printing, in my native
town, and afterward assisted to set up my business in Philadelphia by kind
loans of money from two friends there, which was the foundation of my fortune,
and of all the utility in life that may be ascribed to me -- I wish to be
useful even after my death, if possible in forming and advancing other young
men, that may be serviceable to their country in both these towns.

To this end I devote two thousand pounds sterling, which I give, one thousand
thereof to the inhabitants of the town of Boston, in Massachusetts, and the
other one thousand to the inhabitants of the city of Philadelphia, in trust, to
and for the uses, intents, and purposes, herein after mentioned and declared.

The said sum of one thousand pounds sterling, if accepted by the inhabitants
of the town (...) Boston, shall be managed under the direction of the select
men, united with the ministers of the oldest episcopalian, congregrational, and
presbyterian churches in that town, who are to let out the same upon interest
at five per cent. per annum, to such young married artificers, under the age of
twenty-five years, as have served an apprenticeship in the said town, and
faithfully fulfilled the duties required in their indentures, so as to obtain a
good moral character, from at least two respectable citizens, who are willing
to become sureties in a bond, with the applicants, for the repayment of the
money so lent, with interest, according to the terms herein after prescribed;
all which bonds are to be taken for Spanish milled dollars, or the value
thereof in current gold coin: and the manager shall keep a bound book, or
books, wherein shall be entered the names of those who shall apply for, and
receive the benefit of this institution, and of their sureties, together with
the sums lent, the dates, and other necessary and proper records respecting the
business and concerns of this institution: and as these loans are intended to
assist young married artificers in setting up their business, they are to be
proportioned by the discretion of the managers, so as not to exceed sixty
pounds sterling to one person, nor to be less than fifteen pounds.

And if the number of appliers so entitled should be so large as that the sum
will not suffice to afford to each as much as might otherwise not be improper,
the proportion to each shall be diminished, so as to afford to every one some
assistance. These aids may therefore be small at first, but as the capital
increases by the accumulated interest, they will be more ample. And in order to
serve as many as possible in their turn, as well as to make the repayment of
the principals borrow more easy, each borrower shall be obliged to pay with the
yearly interest one tenth part of the principal; which sums of principal and
interest so paid in, shall be again let out to fresh borrowers. And it is
presumed, that there will be always found in Boston virtuous and benevolent
citizens, willing to bestow a part of their time in doing good to the rising
generation, by superintending and managing this institution gratis; it is hoped
that no part of the money will at any time lie dead, or be diverted to other
purposes, but be continually augmenting by the interest, in which case there
may in time be more than the occasion in Boston shall require^ and then some
may be spared to the neighboring or other towns in the said state of
Massachusetts, which may desire to have it, such towns engaging to pay
punctually the interest, and such proportions of the principal annually to the
inhabitants of the town of Boston, if this plan is executed, and succeeds, as
projected, without interruption, for one hundred years, the sum will be then
one hundred and thirty-one thousand pounds; of which I would have the managers
of the donation to the town of Boston then lay out, at their discretion, one
hundred thousand pounds in public works, which may be judged of most general
untility to the inhabitants; such as fortifications, bridges, aqueducts, public
buildings, baths, pavements, or whatever may make living in the town more
convenient to its people, and render it more agreeable to strangers resorting
thither for health, or a temporary residence. The remaining thirty-one thousand
pounds I would have continued to be let out to interest, in the manner above
directed, for one hundred years; as I hope it will have been found that the
institution has had a good effect on the conduct of youth, and been of service
to many worthy characters and useful citizens. At the end of this second term,
If no unfortunate accident has prevented the operation, the sum will be four
millions and sixty-one thousand pounds sterling; of which I leave one million
and sixty-one thousand pounds to the disposition and management of the
inhabitants of the town of Boston, and the three millions to the disposition of
the government of the state; not presuming to carry my views any father.

All the directions herein given respecting the disposition and management of
the donation to the inhabitants of Boston, I would have observed respecting
that to the inhabitants of Philadelphia; only, as Philadelphia is incorporated,
I request the corporation of that city to undertake the management, agreeable
to the said directions: and I do hereby vest them with full and ample powers
for that purpose. And having considered that the covering its ground-plat with
buildings and pavements, which carry off most rain, and prevent its soaking
into the earth, and renewing and purifying the springs, whence the water of the
wells must gradually grow worse, and in time be unfit for use, as I find has
happened in all old cities; I recommend, that, at the end of the first hundred
years, if not done before, the corporation of the city employ a part of the
hundred thousand pounds in bringing by pipes the water of Wissahickon-creek
into the town, so as to supply the inhabitants, which I apprehend may be done
without great difficulty, the level of that creek being much above that of the
city, and may be made higher by a dam. I also recommend making the Schuylkill
completely navigable. At the end of the second hundred years, I would have the
disposition of the four millions and sixty-one thousand pounds divided between
the inhabitants of the city of Philadelphia and the government of Pennsylvania,
in the same manner as herein directed with respect to that of the inhabitants
of Boston and the government of Massachusetts. It is my desire that this
institution should take place, and begin to operate within one year after my
decease; for which purpose due notice should be publicly given previous to the
expiration of that year, that those for whose benefit this establishment is
intended may make their respective applications: and I hereby direct my
executors, the survivors and survivor of them, within six months after my
decease, to pay over the said sum of two thousand pounds sterling to such
persons as shall be duly appointed by the select men of Boston, and the
corporation of Philadelphia, to receive and take charge of their respective
sums of one thousand pounds each for the purposes aforesaid. Considering the
accidents to which all human affairs and projects are subject in such a length
of time, I have perhaps too much flattered myself with a vain fancy, that these
dispositions, if carried into execution, will be continued without
interruption, and have the effects proposed; I hope, however, that, if the
inhabitants of the two cities should not think fit to undertake the execution,
they will at least accept the offer of these donations, as a mark of my good
will, token of my gratitude, and testimony of my desire to be useful to them
even after my departure. I wish, indeed, that they may both undertake to
endeavor the execution of my project, because I think, that, though unforeseen
difficulties may arise, expedients will be found to remove them, and the scheme
be found practicable. If one of them accepts the money with the conditions and
the other refuses, my will then is, that both sums be given to the inhabitants
of the city accepting; the whole to be applied to the same purposes, and under
the same regulations directed for the separate parts; and if both refuse, the
money remains of course in the mass of my estate, and it is to be disposed of
therewith, according to my will made the seventeenth day of July 1788.

My fine crab-tree walking-stick, with a gold head curiously wrought in the
form of the cap of Liberty, I give to my friend, and the friend of mankind,
General Washington. If it were a scepter, he has merited it, and would become
it.

FINIS.
The following Books may be had at BENJAMIN JOHNSON'S Book-store, No. 147,
Market-Street:
THE Young Book-keeper's Assistant; by Thomas Dilworth (price 6 s. 3 d.) The
Mirror; a Periodical Paper, in two volumes (price 11 s. 3 d.) Knox's Essays, 2
vols. 13 s. 1 d. 1-2 Briggs' new Art of Cookery 10 s. Select Fables of Esop and
other Fabulists; by R. Dodsley 4 s. 8 d. Evelina, 2 vols. 11 s. 3 d. Zelucco, 2
vols. 11 s. 3 d. Paine's Architecture, 30 s. Swan's ditto 37 s. 6 d. Town and
Country Builder's Assistant, 18 s. 9 d. and 22 s. 6 d. The Young Gentleman and
Lady's Monitor, 5 s. 7 d. 1-2 Curiosities of Literature 3 s. 9 d. The Blind
Child; or, Anecdotes of the Wyndham Family 2 s. 6 d. Thoughts on the influence
of the Manners of the Great, on general Society 1 s. 4 d. 1-2 Watts on the Mind
7 s. 6 d. Butler's analogy of Religion to the Constitution and course of Nature
11 s. 3 d. Blair's Lectures abridged 5 s. 7 d. 1-2 Essays on Husbandry, by the
Author of the Farmer's Letters 9 s. A Journey to Margate 6 s. 6 d. Penington's
Chemistry 8 s. 4 d. The Works of Thomas Chalkley 10 s. Barclay's Apology for
the true Christian Divinity 10 s. Crisp's Sermons 6 s. 3 d. and 7 s. 6 d.
Goldsmith's Poems and Essays 5 s. 7 d. 1-2 The Life of Col. Gardner 5 s. The
Ready Reckoner, or Trader's sure Guide 3 s. 9 d. The Life of Baron Trenck,
abridged 2 s. 4 d. In the press, and will be published in a few days,
Reflections and Maxims, by William Penn, to which is added, his Advice to his
Children 4 s. 8 d.

