A DISCOURSE PUBLICLY DELIVERED By a FEMALE FRIEND, From OLD ENGLAND In the
FRIEND'S MEETING HOUSE, in (...) PHILADELPHIA, On the THIRD Day of the 5th
Month, 1769. ALSO A PRAYER, By another FRIEND.

The whole taken down in Characters at the time they were spoken, By WILLIAM
DARRAGH. TO WHICH IS ADDED, A Short PREFACE, By the EDITOR.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JACOB JOHNSON and CO. No. 147 -- MARKET-STREET. --
1794.

THE PREFACE
SINCE the writing the following discourse and prayer, the publisher has been
greatly solicited by many of the auditors, for copies thereof.

Therefore in pursuance to the repeated requests that has been made, the
publisher has made use of the press to convey the same to the public with
hopes it may be useful to some and that no disadvantage will ensue to any
individual.

The publishing of good books has oftentimes been of great service, nay, has
been the means of kindling a holy fire in the hearts of the lukewarm.

It cannot be expected that the reading of the following discourse will be
attended with the same power, as at the time of delivery, except being touched
by that power which caused them to flow forth

It is not the province of the editor to say much or to multiply words, but
hopes the ensuing discourse and prayer may be read with a solid and sober mind.

It is the indispensable duty of every one, to be careful how they handle the
golden vessels (holy words) of the Lord's house, and see that they profane not
the temple of God with unhallowed tongues.

I therefore shall leave the issue to the all-wise disposer of all good things.

The publisher having not seen the author of the following discourse, since she
delivered it, the public cannot expect to have her approbation for publishing
the same; but he has shown it to many who were present at the time of
delivery, and they are unanimous in their opinion it is the substance of what
they heard.

William Darragh.

A DISCOURSE Whatsoever he bids you do, that do.
(These words being most insisted on in the foregoing part of the discourse,
the editor has thought proper to prefix the same.)
IF I mistake not, our dear Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, both he and his
disciples that were with him, were invited to a marriage that was to be in Cana
of Galilee, which place he graciously pleased to honor with his heavenly
presence; and even there manifested himself by his omnipotent and divine power,
in a most wonderful and miraculous manner.

Since my sitting down here amongst you in this meeting, the thoughts of it
came into my mind, without the least study or premeditation. I could not be
silent, thinking it to be my duty, in obedience to the divine will; for I
desired not the sound of my voice to be heard, but would much rather hear than
be heard; but apprehending it to be my duty, as that eminent apostle and
servant of our Lord did, to whom a dispensation of the gospel was committed; who
said, Woe be unto me if I preach not the gospel! I heartily wish, and it is the
earnest desire of my mind, that those that are now concerned, may be
solicitous; and O! that it may be the concern of every individual, that is here
present, to invite this heavenly guest, that we all might be favored with his
heavenly presence, and made to partake of his divine comforts. If we were thus
solicitous and engaged in our minds, we might have great reason to expect his
gracious presence to be with us, as he our dear Lord has promised, saying;
Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there will I be, and bless
them. Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my name (that is, my
power) there will I be in the midst of them, and I will bless them. What
wonderful condescension is this to his children and people, to be so highly
favored with his heavenly prefence!

In this he fulfils his promise which he has made to his disciples, as he
expresses himself in another place, saying I and my Father will come and sup
with them, and we will make our abode with them. O! blessed inhabitant, and
heavenly guest! O! that it may be the happy experience of the present parties
here concerned, and that they may be favored with the heavenly manifestation
of divine love, that they may witness his stupendous power to visit, preserve,
guide and direct them!

We find that at the marriage in Cana there was to be a watch. Whatsoever he
bids you do, that do. Here they were to watch for the divine command. O! that
we may be all a watching and have our eye to him that is both willing and able
to help, and is strength in weakness and riches in poverty; that we may adhere
to his heavenly teaching, which is found to them that seek him, as he himself
has graciously promised who said, He that seeks me, shall find me, and he
that comes to me I will in no wise cast off. Here our blessed Lord shows his
unspeakable love to the sons and daughters of men, to be thus graciously
visited by the Lord of life and glory! O! that thou, O Lord may be invited! and
O! that it may be the solicitation of every mind that is here met, and are
anxious to hear what may be spoken; that, by and through thy inward appearance
in their hearts, they may be brought to know and experience thy divine will.
This was the short prayer of my spirit since my sitting down among you. I
heartily wish it was the concern of every one that is here. If it was the
concern of us all, we should have cause to rejoice in our coming together: and
it would do our souls good to be thus favored by Divine Love, who is the Lord
from Heaven, the Quickening Spirit, the God of Truth. O! may there be a true
and zealous laboring and working to seek to him. O! may we be favored with
his heavenly company, that we may come to know him to be with us; and have the
happy experience to witness his power, and taste of his blessing. By this
experience we shall come to know his heavenly power to preserve, and his divine
instruction to teach us, who speaks as never man spoke, who is the Wonderful
Counselor, the Mighty God, and Prince of Peace, the Everlasting Father, and of
the increase of his government there shall never be an end.

Now what great advantage would this be to the children of men, to know and
witness this great power to rule and reign in them, whose right it is to rule
and reign; and have the experience of his love and favor, who is the Mighty
God, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; that He might take upon him the
government and direct us in his ways.

As we come under his government, and are obedient to his divine and heavenly
instructions, we shall come to know his kingdom to be come, and his will to be
done in us as it is in heaven; and have that excellent prayer of our Lord
answered; Thy kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as is done in heaven. O!
what an excellent and heavenly experience it is to have the mind resigned to
the will of our heavenly father! to know the kingdom of God to be come in
righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost? O! the heavenly rectitude of
mind the people of God enjoy! what sweet tranquillity of mind do they possess
where the kingdom of God is come? where righteousness and peace is known? and
where the Lord Jesus rules and reigns?

It was observed before, that at the marriage which the Lord honored with his
presence, they had a watch. The servants that attended, were to watch and obey
the orders given them, which was, Whatsoever he bids you do, that do. And they
waited for the divine command. Now, here was the advantage they had that were
waiting upon the Lord: by their waiting and watching they come to know the
Lord's will, and obey his orders.

We find that, at the marriage, there was a want of wine. What was the
expression to the servants that attended? It was, Whatsoever he bids do, that
do. And we may remember they were ordered to put water into the pots, which
were not to be handed forth till he ordered: and they waited for the divine
command. Here our Lord showed his miraculous power. Here it was our Blessed
Lord made the water wine, and then ordered the servants that waited to hand it
forth. Observe. The water was first made wine by a miraculous and divine power.
It was then, and not before the servants had to hand it to the company that was
present. How gracious was our Lord, how great was his power, in showing forth
this miracle? I could not but admire his great love and wonderful condescension
to mankind!

Now, let us observe the expression in the orders given, which was, Whatsoever
he bids you do, that do. And he directed the water that had been made wine, to
be handed to the governor of the feast, that he might taste it; and he tasted
it, and those that were at the marriage. What was then expressed? It was The
last wine is the best. O Friends, I cannot but admire the great love and
condescension of our dear Lord, in bestowing his gifts to his children and
people; how he manifested his power amongst them; and how condescending he is
to those who are anxious to know the water being made wine, that the spirits of
the contrite might be revived, and those that are ready to faint might be
refreshed by the handing forth of divine love, which is the wine of his
kingdom, prepared and given by him that is strenth in weakness and riches in
poverty. Our own strength as men and creatures, is as water, be our educacation
ever so high, and our wisdom but foolishness. It is like water and not wine, be
it ever so excellent, till taught of the Lord by his inspeaking word. The Lord
he prepares it. It is his power alone, which is the same that it ever was, that
those who are truly concerned, come to know and witness a true and peaceable
tranquillity of mind. O that his company may be rightly and truly sought after,
that all those that are here present may be solicitous to hear his voice, which
speaks as never man spoke; that every one may attend to his divine teaching
and heavenly instruction: that they may taste of the wine of his preparing, and
when he orders his servants to hand it forth to the people, they may have it to
say (from a true and real experience,) The last wine is the best. This has been
the concern of my spirit among you, that you may witness his power to be with
you, and in the midst of you. It is his power only can do it. It is his power
alone that can effect it.

I have sometimes thought the Lord is wonderfully manifesting his power, even
to the working of miracles. It is he that is the cause of the water being made
wine, not those that hand it forth. If he does not prepare it, if he does not
make it, and if he does not order it to be given, it is but water and not wine,
which cannot profit the people. It is not the quantity but the quality that can
satisfy those that are seeking the Lord for divine help and strength. This has
been upon my mind as I have been engaged amongst you: and I think it was in
some degree a miracle.

I do not want to monopolize other persons places, or to take up the room of
any other here. I could be more willing to hear than to speak; but, methinks
when I feel of the water being made wine, I dare not but hand forth a little of
the divine blessing, in order that the guests which have been here invited, may
partake of the heavenly wine. The Lord prepares it himself. He is inviting his
children to come and refresh themselves with the wine of his kingdom. O, if
people did but see, if their minds were rightly concerned; and if there was but
a true seeking to him, there would be a tasting of the wine of his preparing.

O that the eye of the mind was but single to him, and to his dear Son our
Lord, in whom the father is well pleased, who said, This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased! It is my sincere desire that there may be a hearkening
to him, and a hearing of his heavenly voice, that you may come to be acquainted
with him, and obey his voice that is the true Minister of the Sanctuary and
Bishop of his Church and People, whom God the Father sends, is the earnest
prayer of my spirit.

Now, if the eye were single to him, and our expectations from him, and not
from the arm of flesh; we should know the Lord Jesus, who is all-powerful to be
our redeemer. I say, if there was but a hearing of the voice of him, whom the
prophet spoke of, saying. A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up, like unto
me. Him shall you hear in all things; and he that does not hear him, shall be
cut off from among his people. If we did but hear and obey God, we should come
to know his power to be amongst us. O that there may be a trusting in the Lord,
and a dependence on his spirit and power to teach and instruct us, is the
earnest concern of my mind. Is is he that speaks truth and no lie, for he is
a God of Truth.

As we come to be divested of Self, as there is no leaning on our own
understanding, [ Lean not to your own understanding, but trust in the Lord
(said an eminent servant of God) trust in the Lord, and he will help thee] not
to lean on words nor the acquired arts and parts of the creature, be them ever
so high and excellent; but in true humility of mind, with a perfect resignation
to his will, to wait upon the Lord for his divine appearance in your hearts;
for it is they that seek him shall find him: the humble he will teach his way,
and the meek he will guide in judgment. It is them he will fill with his
heavenly oil; and those that thirst after righteousness he will fill with his
heavenly wine.

But O Friends! there must be a watchfulness and a care not to lean on our own
understanding, or on our own cogitations, that is so apt to fill the mind. If
we come to experience this, O how shall we be taught of the Lord! taught by him
that is truth and no lie, for he is a God of Truth.

It is the true and humble seeking soul shall be blessed of the Lord, and those
that hunger and thirst after righteousness; it is they and they only, that
shall obtain the promise, Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord; but the rich and
full they shall be sent empty away. Those that think great of their abilities,
and they that are lifted up in their own imaginations, they are those that
shall be sent empty away. The ability is not in man, nor is the strength in the
creature, but it is in the God of Truth. Great is the God of Truth! The Lord
from Heaven is above all Gods, and above all beings and principalities, both in
Heaven and Earth. Blessed be the God of truth! It is He that teaches the
people truth, and brings them to be acquainted with himself. It is by the
manifestation of Christ Jesus the truth is come to be known, as he himself has
expressed, saying, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. I am the way; nor is
there any other way to come to the Father, for there is no other name given
amongst men, but the name of Christ, whereby mankind can be saved.

It is Christ Jesus, which is Life and Truth, that would raise us from sin and
death to a life of righteousness. If there was but a seeking to him, and a
desire to be taught by him, what advantage would we then receive! Our sorrow
would be then turned into joy, and our weakness into strength; we should then
come to know the promise of the Lord to be riches in poverty, and strength in
all our weakness. All those that do put their trust in him, and have an eye
single to him, that are solicitous for his divine instruction, and seek him
with all their whole heart, who seeks the doctrine from his mouth, shall be
made to know him that is the God of Truth. If thine eye be single to him, thy
whole body shall be full of light; that is, if thou art singly looking to God,
and to his divine appearance in thine own heart, thou shall come to know him
that is God, whom to know is life eternal, and be made acquainted with his
truth; for what is to be known of God, is made manifest in man. (This is
scripture doctrine.) It is there he is manifesting and revealing himself
against sin and wickedness, and against every evil way.

He that makes manifest is light, and in him there is no darkness at all. If
thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light; thou shall see what
the Lord would have thee to do, and what to leave undone. In him there is no
confusion, but the confusion is in the creature, for want of singly looking to
God; and this want is the cause of the want of a true devotion to, and
worshipping God aright, who is to be worshipped in spirit and in truth; for
such does the father seek to worship him. There must be no dependence on flesh
and blood; for flesh and blood shall never enter into heaven. The apostle Paul
conferred not with flesh and blood, but gave up freely to the heavenly vision,
to the instruction of the Spirit of Christ Jesus, as himself has said. I
conferred not (said he) with flesh and blood, but straightway gave up to the
heavenly vision. He did not receive the gospel from man, but from the Lord from
Heaven. Observe how bold he speaks his own experience, I conferred not with
flesh and blood. I received it not from man, but by adhering to the light of
Christ Jesus, the heavenly instructor; who is the way, the truth, and the
light, that enlighteneth every man that comes into the world; who is the Lord
from Heaven, and King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

We find that it was given to the apostle just mentioned, to preach Christ
Jesus to the Jews as well as the Gentiles; though to the Jews he was a
stumbling block and to the Gentiles foolishness. It was by obedience and a
resignation to the divine truth revealed in him, that he became an excellent
instrument in the hand of God, to discourage vice and immorality, and had to
preach righteousness; for it is the Righteous, my friends, that exalts a
nation, but Sin is a shame to any people. This is instruction to mankind. This
is what the Apostle of our blessed Lord had to distribute. It was the great
business his Master sent him to do, to preach righteousness and discourage
immorality, that Sin might be put an end to, and Righteousness (which exalts
a nation) be established. This was the end for which Christ came into the
world, and was prophesied of him; and that a long time before he came in that
prepared body which he received of the Father; that he was to put an end to sin
and finish transgression, and in the room thereof to establish everlasting
righteousness.

Now, if ever the work of righteousness is done, if ever it be rightly and
truly performed, it must be begun at home, in our own hearts; for (observe)
Christ came to take away sin, and in the room thereof to establish everlasting
righteousness. We may also take notice of another expression of an eminent
servant of our blessed Lord, that God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son -- (what for?) -- to take away sin, in order that he might redeem
to himself a peculiar and holy people, zealous of good works. How can we but be
concerned that the glorious end for which Christ came, might be answered; that
sin, which is a shame, might be put an end to, and transgression finished, that
righteousness which exalts a nation be established.

If we were truly sincere, if we were true ministers of Jesus Christ, how
anxious would we be, how zealously would we labor, that sin might be put an
end to, and transgression finished! There is no room left for sin, nor place
for transgression; but the Lord directs to righteousness, and without holiness
no man shall see the Lord with comfort; for the Lord is of purer eyes than to
behold iniquity with approbation. There is no people that are so beloved of the
Lord, that he can approve of sin in them. It is not forms or modes of religion,
or a formal righteousness, nor the inventions of men will do; but it is through
obedience and sanctification we are made righteous; and by being washed with
the water of regeneration we come to be cleansed from sin and pollution.

If we come to be beloved of the Lord, it must be by experiencing his love in
us, and being obedient to his heavenly will. It is the obedient soul shall
live. It is he that shall eat the good of the land, and drink of the wine of
his kingdom. All those that do his will shall know of his doctrine. It is they
that shall be taught of the Lord, as our dear Lord said, He that does my will
shall know of my doctrine. O may there be a real concern in every heart, and an
earnest desire raised in each of our minds, that sin may be put an end to, and
transgression finished! If we were solicitous enough for this, what a divine
energy and strength would be put into our minds, that everlasting righteousness
might be brought in, and the kingdom of Christ be established.

If we were true Christians taught of the Lord, and solicitous for his honor,
we should be made to know more and more, and be made ready to open to him, and
willing to take on us his heavenly yoke, that would yoke us to his cross, and
draw our inclinations to himself. It is good for a man to bear the yoke in his
youth, says the Scripture of truth. Here is a beautiful comparison. It is
compared to a yoke of young oxen that are yoked together, and are taught to
draw, which they cannot do till they obey the yoke. It is as we come under the
divine yoke, and are yoked to his cross, and made to obey, we are taught to
draw and become serviceable in the creation, and useful to one another; for he
is only fit to live, who is fit to die. For this very end have we a being in
the world, that we might glorify God, who gives us life, breath and being. This
has been the concern of my mind since I entered this city, in the love of my
heavenly Father, to call unto the inhabitants thereof, that they might eat of
the fruit of instruction, which is the way to life, and become obedient to the
voice of wisdom, which is calling them in the secret of their hearts. The Lord
in his mercy, is calling unto the sons and daughters of men; he is calling them
from darkness to light, from the power of sin and Satan to serve the living
God. I cannot but admire his unspeakable love and wonderful mercy that he
bestows on his people! Methinks there is a door of mercy open, which none can
shut but he that has the key of David, who opens and none can shut, and
shuts and none can open. A door of mercy is open, and mercy is handing
forth; and if there be not a complying, if there be not a coming up in
obedience to righteousness, the door of mercy will be shut. This is plainly set
forth in the parable of the virgins.

We may remember, that when the bridegroom came, the foolish virgins had no oil
in their lamps; and they said unto the wise, Give us of your oil. What was the
answer of the wise? It was a very reasonable one, -- Not so, lest there be not
enough for you and us. Go and buy for yourselves. And when they went to buy,
the bridegroom came; and they that were ready went in with them, and the door
was shut; and an answer was made to the foolish virgins, when they wanted to
enter, I know you not. A dismal sentence it was, and will be pronounced to the
wicked, -- Depart from me, I know you not. I hope that this may never be the
case of any that are here. The foolish had a name to virgins as well as the
wise; but that would no^ get them an entrance. Though they had a name to
virgins, it did not prevent the answer, I know you not. Observe: Here was both
a name and profession to religion. Both had the name to virgins but the foolish
wanted oil: they wanted righteousness. The time was elapsed; the door of mercy
was shut; an answer was made; and a woeful sentence pronounced, -- Depart from
me* I know you not.

You have heard of him that speaks as never man spoke, who speaks in the
secret of your hearts. But though you have heard, you may be no better than he
that built his house upon the sand. When the floods came, and the winds blew,
and beat upon that house, it fell, because it was not built upon a rock. So
will it be with those who trust to a name of religion, and a formal
righteousness, but neglect to come up in obedience to the word of grace in
their hearts. I hope, and I earnestly pray, that this may never happen to any
that is in the hearing of my voice. The Lord, in his mercy bless you and keep
you: may his infinite power preserve and protect you!

But he that built his house on the rock, when the floods came, and the winds
blew, and beat upon that house, it fell not, because it was built upon a rock;
so will he stand who builds on the divine rock, Christ Jesus the Son of God,
and sure foundation. Against him the gates of Hell shall never prevail. The
floods may come and the winds may blow, and waves of temptation may raise
themselves high, he shall stand in the day of trial, because he is built on the
Divine and Eternal Rock.

Therefore let none deceive themselves, for such as you sow, such shall you
reap. If you sow to the spirit, you shall of the spirit reap life everlasting;
but if you sow to the flesh, a miserable crop shall you reap. It is by
experiencing the work of righteousness wrought in us we come to taste of the
blessing; and O that it may be the case! is the earnest prayer that accompanies
my mind; and that you may know his gracious favor and mercy to be with you,
and keep you! Suppose I should say it has attended me here, for which my soul
does bless the Lord, who has come down to his people, and is making his power
known in blessing the provision of Zion. We cannot but worship at the throne of
his footstool, who is God over all, blessed in himself. He only is worthy to be
adored, honored and obeyed, not only now, but now, henceforth and for ever
more. Amen.

A PRAYER.
BE pleased, O Lord! to prepare our hearts, and put into our minds, to
commemorate thy goodness. We are made to admire, in a sense of our own
nothingness, and say O Lord! what is man that thou art mindful of him, or the
sons of men that thou thus visitest them! Thy children that love thee in their
hearts, prevail, under the influence of thy heavenly power, and are made
willing to follow thee, and feel after thee, thou Lord God that changest not.
Thou art a God, slow to anger, a God of wonderful love and unspeakable
kindness. Thy truth is gone forth, and we cannot forbear to beseech thee, in
behalf of mankind all the world over (let their names or profession be what it
may) that thousands or tens of thousands may be brought home by thy Son; and
that thou would make thyself known by manifesting thyself to them. Be pleased
to remember, in mercy, those that have much thought of thy name, and also those
that have not enquired after thee; that by and through the discovery of thy
light, O Lord God of Truth, they may come to see thy sacred truth, and be made
to follow thee wheresoever thou go, that thy name, which is holy, may be
glorified. Holy Lord God, as we have known thy infinite mercy to be with us, O
be thou pleased, once more to reach unto the hearts of such as rebel against
thee. It Is thy power alone can effect it. It is the sanctifying by thy divine
power, thy inspeaking word, that can reach every heart, that can turn them from
the evil of their ways, to serve and obey thee, the Living God, that they may
know a sacrificing to thy dear Son, and to Thee, O Lord God. Be pleased to give
them an humble repentance, that they may know thee, O Lord, to be a God of
mercy. O Lord, remember the poor in heart, we humbly beseech thee, even those
whose knees are ready to smite together, that have no might or strength of
their own, and who are ready to perish. All such as rebel against thee, turn
thou, O God, their minds to thee. Thou, O God, art known in thy own temple the
heart. It is there only that thou art to be felt and worshipped. Prepare many
there, yea, many thousands, that they may taste of thy goodness, and hear the
voice of thy High Priest, who speaks as never man spoke. In a sense that thou
art a God that changest not, and that it is therefore the sons of men are not
consumed: in a sense of thy goodness and mercy, we humbly present ourselves
before thee, and beseech thee that many may come to know and praise thy great
name, who alone is worthy to be praised, adored, and magnified, with thy dear
Son immaculate, and holy Spirit for evermore. AMEN.

SOME ACCOUNT OF ISAAC SHOEMAKER, OF THE Township of Cheltenham, in the County
of Philadelphia (Son of JOHN SHOEMAKER of the same Place) who departed this
Life on the 31st Day of the seventh Month 1779, in the twenty fifth Year of his
Age.
HE was a young man of an active disposition and vigourous constitution, who in
the general tenor of his conduct and conversation was preserved from what in
the world's estimation is accounted gross or immoral; yet in his company, dress
and deportment evidence a leaning to levity, and fondness for things in their
nature vain and unsubstantial; of the emptiness and corrupting tendency whereof
he was at time made sensible, by the faithful admonitions of the Divine Monitor
in his own mind, as appears from some of his expressions near his departure out
of time; when through the renewed extendings of heavenly favor, he was
mercifully visited and awakened from a state of insensibility; under the
quickening influences whereof, he had to warn and admonish his former
associates and others, against indulging themselves in the vanities and folies
of a perishing world; some of whom having been measureably reached thereby,
have signified a desire that the weighty expressions uttered by him in that
solemn season, might be communicated and diffused for the benefit of the youth
of his acquaintance and others; which if weighed with becoming seriousness and
depth of attention, might minister profitable instruction, and tend to lasting
edification. This instance of heavenly condescension and divine regard
affording renewed cause in humble admiration to say, Great and mavelous are
thy works, Lord God Almighty! just and true are thy ways thou King of Saints!
Rev. xv. 3.

About ten days before his decease, between the hours of eight and nine in the
evening he fell into a state of silence, and became speechless and incapable of
bodily action, his mouth being open and his jaw set: thus he lay nearly three
hours, supposed by the family and diverse of the neighbors present, to be in a
trance. Upon his recovery, he ground his teeth together, so as greatly to
affect the hearers, and twice or thrice sighed deeply. After which, appearing
like one raised from the dead, under great concern and exercise of mind, he
began to speak with a strong voice, to the astonishment of those in company;
saying, Oh! that I could tell you what I have seen and underwent. It would
pierce the hardest heart amongst you; perhaps some may think there is no hell,
but I have to tell you there is a hell, and a dreadful one too; and the
grinding of my teeth is nothing to the grinding and gnashing of teeth in hell.
And there is a heaven and a sweet one too; where angels clothed in white robes
sit at the right hand of God singing praises to his great name; I have to
declare it unto you at the peril of my soul, but some will not believe though
an apostle should rise from the dead. You may think I am not in my senses, but
I knew you all as you came into the room, am perfectly in my senses, and God
has opened my mouth on your account, and that you might declare it unto
others. Narrow is the way that leads to life, and few there be that find it;
but broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many are going in that way.
(Proceeding in a bemoaning accent.) I have lived to this age without knowing
what God really is, until this night. I have been often visited, but did kick
and rebel. Three years ago, I had a sight that I should be brought to the brink
of the grave, but it was not shown me whether I should recover or not; but if I
do, I am desirous that I might be made an instrument to convert thousands into
the right way. I wonder (continued he) that I should undertake to be the head
of a family and not capable to teach them their duty toward God: there is a
necessity for parents and heads of families to bring up their children and
others under their care, in plainness of speech and apparel, keeping humble,
endeavoring to impress their tender minds with a sense of their duty toward
God. Many let their children run about the streets, hearing (which is often
used in this land) the holy name of Jesus taken in vain. My parents when I was
young, were drawn so much into the cumbering things of this world, that they
did not teach me as they ought to have done my duty toward God. To his wife he
uttered himself thus: My dear consort, my bosom friend, mourn not for me, there
are many difficulties and trials to be met with in our passing through this
world; retire to thy father's house, live a sober, virtuous life. If it should
please God to take me out of the world this night, I would have none to take it
to heart; no, not to shed a tear. He was diverse times drawn forth in fervent
supplication, and expressed himself on this wise: Oh! Lord Jesus, be pleased to
look down with an eye of pity upon me; on my father, be with him and comfort
him in his old age, under the afflictions and trials that may be suffered to
come upon him* On my aged mother, be her strength and support all the days of
her life; who has been a kind and tender mother to me, all my days; and has
since my sickness, in my distress, pointed out the right path for me to turn
into, when I was ready to fall into despair, under a sense of my manifold
transgressions, directing me to look forward toward my dear Redeemer, whose
blood is sufficient to wash away all our sins, which I have experienced the
truth of. Be pleased, if it be thy will, look down upon mankind universally,
reconcile all men to one another and to thyself, that there may be no more
blood spilt in the land, if it be thy blessed will; not my will, but thine be
done. Also singing praises to God for his many great mercies to him.

Being desirous of seeing diverse of his acquaintance not present, he said: They
know not what God really is; some of them have in their breasts the spirit of
envy and bitterness. Under much concern that they may be redeemed from that
wrathful spirit, he earnestly besought the Almighty to turn their hearts to
love and good will. I wonder, (said he) that God has not sent his just
judgments and destroyed this place, for wickedness and hardness of heart. He
desired to be made subject to the divine will, and said, I have no will of my
own, not my will but thine be done. To his brothers he said, Remember your
Creator in the days of your youth, dress plain and walk humble before the Lord;
never mind what your comrades say* for we must all become fools for Christ's
sake, that we may be made wise. Make Him your standard, keep the world under
your feet; attend meetings with your father and mother both on first and other
days of the week; when met, turn your minds inward and solidly think what you
came about, and endeavor to know God for yourselves; do not as I have done; I
often went to meetings and sometimes did think on those things, but soon let
them slip, letting my mind out at fine clothes and gay dress, contriving how to
exceed in grandeur. To his apprentice boy he said, I have heard thee use many
idle words and passed it by without proper notice, I beg thee may break thyself
of them, or God will pronounce his judgments against thee. desiring the company
to withdraw out of the room and to be left alone in stillness, he said, I think
I have done with flesh, I have said all that I have to say unto you; then
lifting too his hands he said, Oh! holy Jesus how sweet do I feel thee! All
being gone out of the room, he devoutly and loudly desired (in the hearing of
some friends in the adjoining room) that God might be pleased to stop the
effusion of blood.

After which he appeared like one whose mind is redeemed from the earth and
much swallowed up in a sense of that sweetness he had been so marvellously
favored with; continuing in this frame of spirit to the close of his time; and
we doubt not but he now rests in peace and quiet with the Lord.

The following POSTSCRIPT relating to the Doctrine of the resurrection and
eternal Judgment, in WM. SEWELL's History, may be a seasonable addition to the
foregoing Narrative.
'AT the last trump of God, and voice of the Archangel, the dead shall be
raised incorruptible, the dead in Christ shall raise first. 1 Cor. xv. 52. 1
These. iv. 16 compared with Matt. xxiv. 31.'

'Many are often alarmed in conscience hereby the word and voice of God, who
stop the ears and slight those warnings; but the great and final alarm of the
last trumpet they cannot stop their ears against, nor escape it. It will
unavoidably seize upon and further waken them finally to judgment: They that
will not be alarmed in their consciences unto repentances, nor out of their
sins here, must certainly be alarmed to judgment hereafter.'

'Whosoever do now wilfully shut their eyes, hate contemn or shun the light of
Christ, or his appearance within, shall at last be made to see, and not be able
to shun or hide themselves from his glorious and dreadful appearance from
heaven with his mighty angels, as with lightning and in flaming fire, to render
vengeance on all them that know not God, and obey not this Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ. 1 These. iv. 17. Matt. xxiv. 17. Luke xvii. 24. Dan. xix 6. Job.
xxxvii, 3.'

'And though many now evade and reject the inward convictions and judgments of
the light, and shut up the records or books thereof in their own consciences,
they shall all be at last opened, and every one judged of these things recorded
therein and according to their works. Rev. xx. 12, 13.14.15.'


