A DISCOURSE, ON THE GENUINENESS AND AUTHENTICITY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT:
DELIVERED AT NEW HAVEN, SEPTEMBER 10th, 1793, AT THE ANNUAL LECTURE, APPOINTED
BY THE GENERAL ASSOCIATION OF CONNECTICUT; ON THE TUESDAY BEFORE THE PUBLIC
COMMENCEMENT.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY GEORGE BUNCE, and Co M,DCC,XCIV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE testimony, adduced in the following discourse, was taken principally from
Dr. Lardner's Credibility of the Gospel History. Several other valuable
articles of testimony, collected with an intention to insert them, were
omitted, on account of the length of the discourse; as were also some
additional arguments.

A little more than half of what is now published was delivered from the desk.
If the writer is not deceived, the remainder will be found to be pertinent to
the principal design. He believes the testimony to be justly represented; but,
if in the hurry and anxiety, occasioned by a long continued sickness of his
family, and of his parishioners, any mistakes have been committed, he presumes
they will be pardoned.

T. DWIGHT.
Greenfield, July 19th, 1794.
ERRATA.
PAGE. LINE. FOR. READ. 8 20 principle principles. 12 15 complete complex. 17
30 authenticity authority. 22 10 Mariron Marcion. 25 24 of to. 52 last four
few. 53 16 of taxing of the taxing. 54 note (at the end) add Laraner. 59 19 new
entirely new and entirely. 62 2 ignomy ignominy. 64 20 preferred preserved. 65
and 67 note Jevell's Boil. Lect. read Twells's; Boil. Lect. 67 18 thaken
shaken. ibid 29 after Jerome dele, and write 72 12 suceessors suceessors. 73 1
dostrines doctrines. ibid. 14 Romans Roman. 74 22 after publicly dele 76 18
dole old. ibid 23 after observe write

A DISCOURSE ON THE GENUINENESS AND AUTHENTICITY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.
JOHN XXI. 24. This is the Disciple, who testifies these things, and wrote
these things; and we know, that his testimony is true.
THIS passage asserts the book, in which it is found to have been truly written
by St. John. Should the assertion be fairly proved by the highest evidence,
applicable to subjects of this nature, the Genuineness and Authenticity of the
whole NewTestament would, probably, be, by most persons, acknowledged to be
also proved. As the gospel of St. John contains Narrations, and Doctrines, as
surprising and improbable, as any which are contained in the other books of the
New Testament; as the admission of these will be generally allowed to be an
admission of those also, and will involve difficulties, in the eye of human
faith, of the same nature, and the same magnitude; and as the same evidence
will support both alike, few persons, who are wholly persuaded, that the
gospel, attributed to St. John, was written, and truly written, by him, will
hesitate to receive the whole New Testament as an authentic account of the
life, death, and resurrection, the instructions, institutions, and precepts of
JESUS CHRIST.

SHOULD these observations be allowed to be just, it will follow, as the
unavoidable consequence, that, if the Gospel in question can be proved to be a
genuine and faithful record of St. John, the New Testament is the Word, and
Christianity the Religion, of the SON of GOD. For the authors of the
New Testament have declared themselves to be inspired by the Spirit of GOD,
with the unerring knowledge of his holy pleasure, in all things pertaining to
life and godliness.

To the scheme of discourse, hinted above, the text most naturally leads. It
may however be advantageous to extend my observations beyond these limits, and
to examine the authenticity of the whole volume of the New Testament. All the
books in this volume stand on the same ground, and are supported by the same
arguments. The text may, therefore, be fairly viewed as a proper theme of a
discourse, designed to authenticate the whole. This purpose I shall attempt to
accomplish, in the following manner.

1. I SHALL endeavor to show, that the several books in the New Testament,
particularly the Historical books, were written by the persons, whose names
they bear.

2. THAT the writers were neither deceived, nor deceivers.

3. THAT their writings have descended, without any material alterations, to
the present time.

THE first of these propositions includes the first declaration of the text,
extended to the several writers of the New Testament. The other two
propositions, if true, will evince, that the present state of the testimony,
ascribed in the text to St. John, perfectly accords with its original state;
and thus enlarges the last declaration of the text into a solid ground of
faith, for mankind, at the present time.

IN support of the first of these propositions -- That the several books of the
New Testament, particularly the Historical books, were written by the persons,.
whose names they bear; it may be observed in the first place -- That the state
of the Jews, and of the Romans, as also of other nations, so far as it is
either directly declared, or alluded to, in these books, is abundantly attested
by other writers of undoubted authority, and is, therefore, truly represented.

PARTICULARLY there were, at the times specified, such persons in Judea, as
Herod the great, his four sons, Herodias, Pontius Pilate, Cyrenius or Quirinus,
Felix, Portius Festus, Annas, Caiaphas, Lysias, John the Baptist, and Drusilla;
who had the characters, and situations in life, testified by the Evangelists.

SUCH writers have also attested, that, at the times, and in the places
mentioned, there were such persons, as Augustus, Tiberius, Claudius, Nero,
Gallio, Sergius Paulus, Cornelius, and Aretas; living in the stations, and
characters, here assigned to them: And,

THAT there were such classes of men, as Pharisees and Sadducees, Scribes and
Lawyers, Herodians and Samaritans, of the same characters, for principle and
conduct, as are here ascribed to them.

THESE customs of the Jews are also abundantly evinced to have existed, at this
time; viz. That they came from the different countries, where they lived, to
the feasts at Jerusalem; daily frequented the temple; prayed, at the third and
at the ninth hour; Hence the force of St Peter's reply, Acts 2 15.
fasted until the morning prayer was ended; were greatly zealous for the law,
and for the temple; worshipped in synagogues; read statedly portions of the Old
Testament; practiced the vow of the Nazarite, shaving their heads; inflicted
forty stripes save one; Such as that, recorded Act. 23, 12.
allowed and exercised furious acts of private zeal for Religion; paid tribute
to the Romans, and esteemed it a grievance; had publicans of their own nation,
and abhorred them, for being in this office; hated, and vehemently persecuted
the Christians; were zealous for the Sabbath, circumcision, etc. even to
bigotry; and considered the rest of mankind, as odious and contemptible, with
an unexampled detestation.

IT is also clearly proved, that their high priests rent their clothes, on
extraordinary occasions; that the Pharisees and the Sadducees were steady and
bitter enemies to each other; that the Jews and Samaritans hated each other, to
a degree wholly singular; that, out of Judea, the Jews prayed customarily by
the sides of rivers, and seas; that they laboriously made proselytes; that they
were astonishingly corrupted in doctrine, and in manners; and that they and the
Samaritans, at this time, universally and strongly expected the coming of the
Messiah.

WITH equal clearness are we certified, that the Roman Governor had, in Judea,
the power of life and death; that public notifications were in Jerusalem,
customarily written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin; that criminals, under the
Roman government, always carried their own crosses; were customarily scourged,
mocked and abused, as CHRIST is said to have been; that, among the Jews,
persons were put to death without the city; that burial was not always allowed
to malefactors; but that Roman governors might, and usually did, allow it; and
that the Jews usually embalmed their dead, in the manner recorded by the
Evangelists.

WITH the like certainty are we also taught, that the Romans examined prisoners
by questioning and scourging, excepting Roman citizens, who could lawfully be
neither bound, nor scourged, especially when uncondemned; that the Roman
Government gave the power of life and death to such officers as Lysias; heard
no accusers, in the absence of the accused; kept accused persons in custody, as
Paul was kept; sent prisoners from the provinces to Rome, and delivered them to
the Captain of the guard; and, at that time, generally treated all nations,
particularly the Jews, and the Christians as being Jews, with mildness and
equity.

IT is also entirely established, that the temple was forty-six years in
building; that Judas of Gallilee and the Egyptian mentioned by Lysias, Acts 21,
38, existed, and did the things ascribed to them; that Herodias was first
married to Philip, and then to Herod, his brother; that John, the Baptist was
put to death by the same Herod; that the Emperor Claudius banished the Jews
from Rome; and that, in his time, there was a famine throughout the land of
Judea.

OF the facts and persons connected immediately with the purpose of the Gospel
I shall have occasion to speak hereafter.

THE writers who have singly testified to some, and collectively to all, the
things above mentioned, are Josephus, Philo, Cicero, Tacitus, Ulpian,
Hermogenian, Marcian, Tertullian, Celsus, Petronius, Dio, Suetonius, and
several others.

THE two first of these writers were Jews; the rest, except Tertullian, were
Heathens; and there is not one instance, in these testimonies of Jews, or
Heathens, in which either of them at all intended to witness any fact, in favor
of the gospel, or of christians. All of them, who knew any thing of
christianity, were decided enemies to the christians, and their testimony,
therefore, especially when we take into view their personal reputation, and
their advantages for knowing the things, which they assert, is completely
satisfactory.

IN few methods, could the genuineness of the New Testament be more certainly
proved, than in this. It is utterly impossible for a writer, dealing large'y in
allusion to the customs, and in assertions concerning the facts, and persons,
of a preceding age, not to be betrayed into many mistakes concerning them. It
is not a little difficult for any writer to possess the knowledge, necessary to
avoid such mistakes; and far more difficult for him to form his mind into a
train of thinking, exactly suited to the circumstances of a preceding age, and
to keep his attention invariably fixed on so complete an object, as not
frequently to wander from truth and propriety.

VIRGIL, a man of primary abilities, and vast industry, has, in his Eneis,
attempted to present the world with the manners, proper to the several
personages, mentioned in that work; and undoubtedly designed, that they should,
as much as might be, suit the age, in which those personages lived. But it is
obvious to every attentive reader, that the manners of that poem much better
suit the age, in which the writer lived. Yet a careful and just representation
of manners was probably one principal object, in the eye of that ingenious poet
throughout his work.

JOSIPPON, or Joseph Bengorion, a writer of the tenth, or eleventh century, has
undertaken to write a History of the Jews; in which he professes to have lived,
at the time of the destruction of Jerusalem. This writer, notwithstanding the
very great pains he has visibly taken, to pass for the character which he
professes himself to be, has, in many instances, betrayed himself; and that so
far, as to speak of several things, which existed, some centuries after the
time, in which he pretends to have lived.

WRITERS of the first talents, art, and information, have ever found this
difficulty insurmountable, when they have made attempts of this nature; but it
must have been peculiarly insurmountable by the writers of the New Testament,
had they been impostors. Their character, education, and information, could, in
no degree, qualify them for a successful imposition of this kind. The truth and
accuracy with which they have evidently written, on the subjects above
specified, even in a vast number of very minute articles will, to every person,
qualified to judge, appear to be an unanswerable argument of the genuineness of
these writings.

2. THE books of the New Testament have been quoted by both Catholic and
Heretical Christians, and also by Heathens, at such periods, and in such a
manner, as to put their genuineness beyond every reasonable doubt.

The four Evangelists, and the Acts of the Apostles, are quoted, in the two
first centuries, by Justin Martyr, Clemens of Alexandria, and Tertullian:

Matthew, Mark, and Luke, by Clemens of Rome:

Matthew, Mark, and John, by Polycarp, and Athenagoras:

Luke, and John, by Theophilus of Antioch, and the Epistle of the Churches of
Vienne and Lions, and Matthew by St. Barnabas, and the Acts by the above
mentioned Epistle.

BESIDE the above Christian writers, all the Evangelists are quoted by the
Emperor Julian, a man every way qualified, and inclined, to expose the
falsehood of these writings, if it existed; and are quoted with the fullest
proofs, that he had not a doubt of their authenticity.

ALL these books are referred to by Hermas, and the Recognitions of Clement,
and by the Heathen Philosophers Celsus, and Porphyry:

Matthew and Mark by Papias, and the Epistle to Diognetus; as John also is by
the last mentioned work:

Matthew, Luke, John, and the Acts, by Ignatius, the Acts of Paul and Thecla,
and the Testaments of the twelve patriarchs:

Matthew, Luke, and the Acts, by Hegesippus, and Polycrates:

Matthew, Mark, John, and the Acts by Athenagoras:

Luke, and John, by Tatian.

Luke by Theophilus of Antioch:

John by the Heathen Philosopher Amelius:

And the Acts by Justin Martyr, and Polycarp.

THE several quotations, here referred to, are made in the very words of the
Scriptural writers, as they have descended to us. The references frequently
contain several of their words, and always the facts, or sentiments, recorded
by them; and are made, in a manner so plain, that the reference is usually of
equal evidence and authority with the quotation; and always, at least in my
opinion, too evident to allow of a reasonable doubt.

To the genuineness of the Gospels of Matthew and Mark, Papias, within
fifty-three years from the date of the first Gospel, bears express testimony;
asserting them to be the production of the writers supposed. To the Gospel, at
large, Justin Martyr, within 77 years from its first date, gives the like full
testimony; declaring it to consist of authentic narrations, of CHRIST and his
Apostles. Tatian composed a Harmony of the four gospels, 109 years only, after
the first in order was written; as did Basilides declared, that he was
instructed by Claucies, who was taught by the Apostles themselves.
Basilides, the Heretic, a commentary, about 60 years after the date of the
earliest Gospel. Irenoeus, within 115 years, Clement of Alexandria, within 132,
and Tertullian, within 137 years from the same date, yield a full and ample
testimony to the genuineness of all the books under consideration; as full, I
conceive, as can be desired or expressed.

UPWARDS of seventy other persons, many of them of great and deserved
reputation for wisdom and integrity, are to be numbered, as additional
witnesses to those, whom I have now mentioned: all flourishing within 140 years
after the writing of St. Luke's Gospel. Most of these witnesses yield their
testimony by quotations and references, too express to be denied, or doubted;
while others, in numerous instances of high character, spent much of life in
furthering the progress of Christianity, and sealed their testimony with their
blood.

IGNATIUS, also, within 44, and the Epistle to Diognetus, ascribed to Justin
Martyr, within 77, Melito Bishop of Sardis, within 115, and Clement of
Alexandria, within 132 years from the above date, inform us of a Volume, in
which these books were collected.

By these writers, the books in question are spoken of in terms of the highest
respect; as the word, the preaching of CHRIST; as the scriptures; as the Word
of GOD; and as divinely inspired. Thus, for instance, Irenoeus declares, that
they were written by the will of GOD; that they are to mankind the foundation
of faith; and that those who wrote them, were inspired, with infallible
knowledge of truth, by the HOLY GHOST. Hence he concludes, that to despise them
is to despise GOD himself. Athanasius also, at a later period, after recounting
the same books of the Bible which we now possess, says; "These are the
fountains of salvation; in these alone the doctrine of religion is taught: let
no man add to them or take any thing from them." In general, the sentiments of
the ancient Christians, in the ardour of respect for the Scriptures, appear on
almost every page; and visibly exceed even the high reverence, in which they
are now held by those, who expect from them everlasting life.

IN the mean time, it is to be carefully remarked, that the books of the New
Testament, are the only books, of which they ever speak in this manner. All
others, they uniformly consider, as the mere essorts of men, and of no
authenticity in Religion. This subject they often discuss; and their decision
is but one, and delivered in terms of undoubting confidence. As a full
justification of this confidence, they inform us, that they received these
books, by most authentic tradition from the Apostles themselves; the whole of
which tradition they were able to trace, and to prove. Tertullian particularly
asserts, in the fullest manner, that, in the several Apostolical Churches, the
clearest evidence of this authenticity might be obtained; as it had been, by
himself, in the church at Rome.

ALL these writers flourished, and wrote, within one hundred and fifty years
after the date of the first written book of the New Testament; and were born
20, 30, 40, 50, and in some instances 60 years, before the date here ascribed
to them. Barnabas, Clement of Rome, Hermas, Ignatius, and Polycarp, it is
generally agreed, were hearers, and companions, of the Apostles themselves; and
most, if not all, of those named, as of the second century, conversed with
those, who had lived and conversed with the Apostles. These writers were also
of very different educations, views, interests, and prejudices; and were
inhabitants of Asia Minor, Palestine, Syria, Egypt, Crete, Greece, Africa
proper, Italy, and Gaul. At a time, when the formation of books was so
laborious, and the acquisition of them so difficult, and expensive, it is only
to be accounted for, from the peculiar zeal and reverence of the early
Christians for the Scriptures, that the New Testament should have been so
widely spread, at this early period. Nor could the first Preachers of
Christianity have left a fairer proof of their candor, piety, and benevolence,
than the singular pains, with which they multiplied, and diffused, the copies
of these venerable Oracles.

IN the third century, beginning at less than 150 years, from the date above
mentioned, these testimonies, both by quotation and reference, are so
multiplied, that they cannot be particularly alluded to, in this Discourse. It
ought, however, to be observed, that Caius, Julius Africanus, Origin, Dionisius
Bishop of Alexandria, Cyprian, Victorinus Bishop of Pettaw, on the river Drove,
and Methodius Bishop of Olympus, in Syria, beside many others, all men of
talents and integrity, have, together with Firmilian Bishop of Coesarea, borne
a very full and decisive testimony to the existence, authenticity, facts, and
doctrines, of the New Testament. Several of these men were born, in the second
century; and some of them, particularly Origin and Dionisius, were possessed of
the greatest advantages, for knowing the whole traditionary, as well as
written, History of the Gospel, and of its authors, of the facts, which they
have recorded, and of the doctrines, which they have left, for the benefit of
succeeding generations. The testimony, which all these writers have given to
the books in question is as decisive, as words can express; and the quotations,
which have come down to us, although made for other purposes, and never at all
designed for this, and although a part only of the works of these writers is,
in any instance, extant, and although in very many instances there is nothing
remaining, but a few small fragments, are yet so numerous, that a large part of
the whole New Testament might be collected from them. In the remaining writings
of Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria, and Irenoeus alone, as Doctor Lardner has
observed there are more quotations of the little volume of the NewTestament,
than those of the whole works of Cicero, greatly, and justly, as he has been
celebrated for his superior talents, which are now to be found in all the
writers of several ages.

IT is scarcely necessary to observe, that, in the succeeding century, the
testimonies, both by quotation and reference, multiply to such a surprising
degree, that we find numerous catalogues of the books of the New Testament left
on record; generally the same which we have now; and that not only great
numbers of men of high reputation have singly borne this testimony, and in
every conceivable method; but several Councils have also given us their united
voice, in support of their authenticity, and inspiration.

I SHALL now beg leave to call your attention to testimony, in some measure, of
a different kind: the testimony of those, who have been generally esteemed
Heretics. These men, who more, or less, departed from the opinions of the
Catholic Church, concerning several scriptural subjects, were under various
temptations to lessen or to deny, the authority of the New Testament, and
particularly that of the Historical books. As they embraced their peculiar
opinions, principally from preconcieved doctrines of Philosophy, the primary
source of error, among those who have professed Christianity, they were under
much the same temptations to sacrifice the whole New Testament, as to sacrifice
the particular parts, which they actually rejected. Nevertheless we have
sufficient assurance, that, even amidst the heat of vehement and ill-conducted
controversy, they all regarded the greater part of this Volume, with the
highest reverence; and have left behind them valuable attestations of its
genuineness and authenticity.

OF these men, in the first Century, or the beginning of the second, Basilides
with his followers, and the Carpocratians; in the second Century, Heracleon,
Cerdon, the Sethians, Artemon, Hermogenes, Theodotus, Montanus, Praxeas,
Cassian, and the With regard to these Heretics, I have followed Dr. Lardner, in
preference to Dr. Mosheim.
Manichees, appear to have received the whole of these sacred writings.
Basilides and Heracleon commented largely on them; and the five last, in the
list here given, quoted them; three of them largely; and all of this number
appear to have received them with a respect, probably not inferior to that of
the Catholics.

MARK with the Marcosians his followers, Cerinthus, Mariron, Leucius, Apelles,
Elxai, and the Paulicians, received, as of divine authority, the greater part
of the New Testament. The Paulicians received all, except the two Epistles of
Peter; and these they rejected, merely because he had denied CHRIST. In the
mistaking conduct of these men, we have a striking attestation to the
genuineness of the sacred books; for, even when hardly pressed in controversy,
they acknowledge the great body of them; and, for the rejection of a part,
assign, as reasons, their own preconceived opinions, and not any proofs of
corruption in the books, which they reject. Even Marcion, the general corrupter
of the Bible, and Leucius, the general forger of false scriptures, have
exhibited that there were, in their time, the former part of the second
Century, genuine and authoritative Scriptures. Otherwise the First could not
have acted the part of a corrupter; nor would the Last have acted that of a
forger; it being impossible, on any other supposition, that either means, or
temptations to this conduct should exist. It ought here to be remarked, that
Origin, who probably knew better than any other man, and who has unquestionably
declared what he knew, asserts, that, so far as his knowledge extended, the
Marcionites, and Valentinians, and perhaps Leucius, or, as he is sometimes
called, Lucanus, were the only persons, who had ever corrupted the Scriptures.
At the same time, it ought to be remembered, that this conduct of these
Heretics was highly advantageous to Christianity; as it induced the early
Christians to scrutinize with singular care, and to watch with extreme
jealousy, the writings of the Apostles.

THIS investigation may, perhaps, be considered as more closely confined to the
Historical books of the New Testament, than was originally proposed. As reasons
for this method of treating the subject, my Audience are requested to observe,

1st. THAT the subject would have been otherwise, too extensive, to be at all
fairly handled, on this occasion:

2d. THAT the very same proofs of quotation and reference, as well as almost
all the other evidence, by which the Historical books are supported, are the
support, and, as I conceive, equally, of the remaining books. No person,
therefore, who admits the validity of this evidence, for the Historical books,
will dispute it, as applied to the others.

3d. THE Historical books are the foundation, on which the others wholly rest.
In a theological view, therefore, the only view, in which any of them ever
became the subjects of controversy, he, who receives the Historical books as
genuine, will find no occasion to question the rest.

ON the evidence, here suggested, it may be useful to remark, that the state of
things which I have represented, cannot be accounted for, unless the
genuineness of these books be acknowledged. That, in so short a time, so many
persons, of so many, and so distant countries, of so different educations,
habits, prejudices, and views, of so fair a character, of so much
understanding, without a selfish end to aim at, without con cert, without a
design of giving testimony to this point, and without an apprehension that the
genuineness of these books either was, or would ever be called into question,
should yet, in so many instances, to so great an extent, and with such high and
uniform reverence, have thus quoted and referred to them, and thus professedly
distinguished them from all others; that they should have renounced religions,
to which before they were habitually attached, even to bigotry, and adopted,
from these books, a religion totally new, and singular; and finally that upon a
faithful conformity to them they should have thus placed all their hopes of
salvation, and have persisted, through life, in a steady and unexampled
adherence to them and to the religion founded on them, against every earthly
hope, and with every earthly discouragement; is not only incredible; but, in my
apprehension, impossible; on any other supposition, than that these books are
the genuine productions of the Apostles, and authentic Narratives of the Life,
Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, of JESUS CHRIST, and of the labors of those
Apostles, in propagating the Religion, which he taught to mankind.

To the observations, already made, it ought to be added, that, considering the
contempt, in which the first Christians were held by the Roman Empire, the
testimony of the genuineness of these books, which appears in the remaining
works, and monuments, of Heathens, during the above mentioned periods, is as
great, as could be reasonably expected. Many are the indubitable testimonies
which they have left, not only to facts of the utmost importance to this
question, but to the very books themselves. Celsus, particularly, is a witness
of the greatest weight, and in a degree, greater than could fairly be hoped
from the smallness of his remaining fragments. His undeniable references to the
Historical, and several other, books of the New Testament, are numerous, and
made, within one hundred and thirteen years from the date of St. Luke's Gospel.
He was a man of sense and learning, a professed enemy to the Christian
Religion, and a laborious and inquisitive champion for Heathenism. His
attestations, therefore, will not be disputed. Those of the Emperor Julian,
who, after having received a Christian education, and made a Christian
profession, publicly declared himself a Heathen, are of the same nature, and in
some respects of equal importance. It is true, he did not possess so sound an
understanding, nor live at so early a period, as Celsus; but he had, from his
education, the fullest opportunity to become acquainted with the books, and the
worship, of the Christians, and a sufficient one to learn the facts, which were
their declared foundation, and evidence. At the same time, he had all the
advantages possible at the period in which he lived, to know, and the utmost
disposition to declare, all the defects of that evidence, and all the real, or
imagined, weakness in that foundation. Yet he has not, in the least, impeached
the facts, or weakened their influence. On the contrary, by acknowledging the
books, because their authenticity could not be disputed, and confessing the
facts, because their reality could not be questioned, he has added his own name
to the list of valuable witnesses for that Redeemer, whom he wickedly denied,
and for that system of Religion, whose doctrines he has childishly labored to
overthrow. On these, and other similar testimonies, I shall hereafter make some
further observations; and shall only add, in this place, that the edict of
Dioclesian, which, in the year three hundred and three, two hundred and forty
years after the date so often mentioned, ordered, on the severest penalties,
all Christians to surrender the Scriptures, that they might be burned, proves
at once that the copies of them were exceedingly numerous, and widely
dispersed, and that this sagacious Emperor, and his Court, were fully
convinced of the total impossibility of exterminating Christianity, by
tortures, however numerous, protracted, or distressing, unless they
accomplished the destruction of the books, on which it was founded: a proof of
the first magnitude, that Christianity rested originally on the New Testament.

2d. THE testimony of the Historical Writers of the New Testament, was true:
They were neither deceived, nor deceivers. The two parts of this proposition, I
shall take the liberty to consider either separately or together; as may best
conduce to their elucidation.

THAT they were not deceived, with regard to the facts, which they have
related, is evident, in the first place; because they were, in every respect,
competent judges of them: they had sufficient faculties, and sufficient
opportunities.

THE facts, related in the Gospels, may be all comprised under the Life, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension, of JESUS CHRIST; and those, related in the
remaining Historical book, under the title of it -- The Acts of the Apostles.

THE faculties, necessary to form a competent judge of all these facts, are the
usual senses of men, and that degree of understanding, which we customarily
term Common-sense. It will doubtless be understood, that I assert these to be
the only faculties, necessary for this end. Superior genius, or great
seize of science, are not only not necessary to enable a man perfectly to
judge of these subjects, but would, in no wise render him a better judge, than
any other man, possessed of the faculties above mentioned. A plain man, thus
qualified, would, as perfectly as Aristotle, or Sir Isaac Newton, know whether
CHRIST lived, preached, wrought miracles, suffered, died, appeared alive after
his death, and ascended to Heaven. The testimony of the senses, under the
direction of Common-sense, is the deciding, and the only testimony, by which
the existence of these facts must be determined. No man could, better than the
Apostles, judge whether a man were leprous, and restored from his leprosy, by a
command; whether Lazarus were dead, and raised to life; and whether CHRIST
walked on the waves. Nor could any man with more certainty determine, whether
CHRIST, after being dead, and buried, appeared again alive, talked, moved, ate,
instructed, comforted, and directed them, rose up from the earth, in a cloud,
and disappeared; or whether; at their command, the lame were restored to
soundness, the sick to health, and the dead to life. They could, also, as well
as the greatest men living, know whether CHRIST taught them the singular
precepts, and doctrines, recorded in the Gospels; and whether he lived in that
perfectly holy manner, which they have described. It seems, sometimes, to have
been imagined, that persons of superior talents would have been better judges
of the facts, related in the New Testament; but the idea cannot be seriously
entertained by any person, who has attended to human life. On the contrary,
plain men, accustomed to active life, usually judge of facts, with less
prejudice, and more accuracy, than philosophers, whose unfortunate disposition
to theory and system commonly and greatly warps their judgment from truth.

THE opportunities, which the Apostles had of observing these facts, were also
such, that it is difficult to conceive how they could have been better. The
Apostles were, for more than three, probably for more than four years, the
constant companions of CHRIST, in his most retired, as well as in his most
public, hours. They saw, they heard, they knew, every thing concerning him, so
far as respects the present subject. Had they discovered the least failing in
him, it must have destroyed his whole character, in the eye of persons, who
thought him the Messiah; and had there been the least failing in him, they must
have discovered it.

THEY were the daily witnesses of his miracles; not of one, two, or twenty; but
of multitudes; accomplished invariably; as often as occasions presented
themselves; and with as much ease, and certainty, as accompany the most
ordinary occurrences of life.

AFTER his resurrection, they had every advantage, which could exist, for
knowing whether he appeared alive. Nine times, he appeared to some, or other of
them; and twice, to the women, who went to his sepulcre. He ate, he conversed
with them, and instructed them, and gave various other proofs of his
resurrection, which no man, in his senses, and in the like circumstances,
either would, or could dispute.

THE power, which he promised them, of working miracles, was, in that promise,
extended through life. Of the fulfillment, they had all possible opportunity, as
well as capacity, to judge. If the promise failed of fulfillment, the charm was
in a moment dissolved, and the dream at an end. This, it is to be remembered,
must have happened, whether they were disposed to it, or not. For, as they
published the promise to mankind, at an early period, they put their own
character, and that of their master, wholly at hazard; and if the promise were
not publicly and evidently fulfiled, the imposture, whether acknowledged by
them or not, must have been easily detected by their fellow men.

2d. THEY believed in CHRIST, against all those motives, which usually govern
mankind.

WHEN the Apostles first addicted themselves to CHRIST, they possessed, in a
riveted degree, the Jewish ideas of a temporal, glorious, conquering, reigning
Messiah. This prejudice they plainly held, until the day of Pentecost. It is
most wonderful, that, with this prejudice, they should have listened to him at
all; for nothing could be more contrary to his real character; nor could any
thing more unfit them for believing in a Messiah lowly, despised, and
persecuted. The only rational method of accounting for this fact, is, that he
showed himself to be a person, as extraordinary, as he is described to be in
the Gospels. This induced them to attach themselves to him, at first; and the
strong persuasion, which they cherished, that he would assume his proper
character, of secular splendor and dominion, contributed to prolong their
attachment. In his true character they believed, from necessity and
irresistible conviction only, with a slow progress, and a reluctant submission
to evidence. All their prejudices were visibly and steadily at war with his
declarations, and, from time to time led them to neglect, or to disbelieve,
many of his most important communications.

BUT, on the day of Pentecost, this mystery was unfolded to them, at once. From
that period, all their preceding hopes vanished. From that period, they
cheerfully assumed to themselves the lot of poverty and shame, coolly prepared
for uniform opposition and contempt, and advanced to meet persecution, danger,
and death, with a constancy, which no enemy could alarm, and no power destroy.
Could we so far forsake every dictate of reason, as to suppose them deceived at
first, it is wholly impossible, that they should not have awaked from the
delusion, at the rousing calls of obloquy and infamy, of the prison and the
cross.

IT is here carefully to be remembered, that all these evils were uniformly
predicted to them, by their master. From him they learned, and believed, that,
in following him, they must give up every earthly expectation; must bid adieu
to friends, and country, to peace, and competence, to the hope of a settled
home, and the pleasures of an affectionate family; must wander through the
world hated, afflicted, and tormented; and must end this gloomy career of life
with all the miseries, devised by ingenious and malignant persecution. With
this melancholy prospect, often called up to view, their ministerial life was
begun; and by the severe sufferings, which filled up this prospect, it was
accompanied to the end.

ENTHUSIASM has been often objected to the Apostles, as one method of
accounting for their adherence to CHRIST, and of lessening the force of their
testimony. This, it is presumed, has been done, merely because it was the only
method of filling a chasm in the system of infidelity; for there is not the
least appearance of enthusiasm in their character, as it is given to us, either
by themselves, or by others. Never were persons less fairly exposed to such an
objection. There is nothing in the nature of CHRIST'S life, preaching, or
miracles, which could be the object of enthusiastical belief, or which could
furnish a ground for enthusiastical attainment. On the contrary, as has been
already observed, to receive him, as the Messiah, required, on their part, a
complete sacrifice of every prejudice, and to adhere to him, of every interest.
-- Throughout their whole attendance upon his ministry, they discovered a
continual opposition to all the peculiar characteristics, which, as the
Messiah, he discovered, and were almost daily, with the greatest justice,
reproved by him, as being of little faith.

BUT Enthusiasm is weakly alleged, for the purposes of infidelity, even if we
should against plain certainty, allow the Apostles to have possessed this
character. Enthusiasm would, in no respect, account for the things, for which
it is alleged. Enthusiasm could not possibly make its votaries believe, that a
man was born blind, and lived blind for twenty years, and then, at a command,
received his sight; that men were encrusted with the leprosy, white as snow,
and, in a moment, were changed into the usual healthful appearance of the human
person; and that themselves, with eight or ten thousand others, had eaten to
the full of five, or seven loaves, and a few little fishes. Enthusiasm could,
in no wise, persuade any person, otherwise possessed of common-sense, that
CHRIST daily and always performed these, and the like, wonderful works, at his
pleasure, in the most public manner, and so as to convince and alarm the whole
country of Judea; that he taught things, different from all, which had been
before taught, and wholly superior to all preceding doctrines of men; and at
the same time, enable that person actually to remember the things themselves,
and the words, in which they had been communicated, and to record them for the
inspection of others. In a word, to say nothing of the total insufficiency of
Enthusiasm to bear men above a whole life of uniform suffering, opposition,
want and wretchedness, it could never persuade any man, that, through a long
period, he himself was able, with a word, to heal the sick, to restore the
lame, and to raise the dead, in the name of JESUS of Nazareth. For these, and
the like effects, the cause assigned is wholly inadequate; and, but for a
peculiar spirit of opposition to Christianity, would never, even in the present
case, have been suggested by any man, who had the least acquaintance with the
human character.

THUS it is, I presume, sufficiently evident, that the Apostles were not
deceived.

THAT they were not deceivers, or impostors, will, I trust, be rendered equally
evident, by the following considerations.

1st. HAD they been inclined to deceive, it was impossible, that they should
ever have accomplished such a design. The facts, which constitute the sum of
their information to mankind, and the foundation of the whole Christian system,
were, according to their own representations, of the most public notoriety.
They directly declare to the Jews, that they, in numerous and successive
instances, were witnesses of these facts, equally with themselves. To the
knowledge, which their countrymen possessed, of these facts, as having been
eye, and ear witnesses of them, they boldly and steadily appeal; and on this
knowledge ground those arguments of conviction, and persuasion, which produced
such effects, as never were before, or since, produced by arguments. This is,
indeed, very singular conduct for impostors to pursue, and may with confidence
be asserted to have existed in no other case of imposition. Nothing is more
evident, than that, if the Apostles designed to impose on their countrymen,
they could not have adopted more obvious, or more effectual means to defeat the
design, at its very commencement. In a word, if the Apostles are believed, in
such conduct as this, to have aimed at imposition, they cannot, by those who
entertain this belief, be vindicated from the character, either idiocy, or of
phrenzy; and one of these must probably, in the eyes of all persons who
deliberately attribute to them such a design, be their real character.

2d. IF the Apostles were deceivers, they were deceivers, against all those
motives, which, in cases of this nature, have hitherto influenced the human
race.

ALL men, who are not wholly deprived of reason, invariably act, with a view to
some good, which they expect by acting to obtain. This maxim is as certain, and
as acknowledged, as that all bodies gravitate. Arguments are therefore founded
on the first of these truths, as firmly, as on the last. The Apostles, then, if
deceivers, undoubtedly expected some good from the deceit. But what good could
men expect, in the present life, from opposing, without any foundation to rest
on, the religion of their country, which, at the same time, they acknowledged
to be enjoined by GOD? What, from opposing the religions of the whole human
race? What, from asserting a despised and crucified man to be the Son of GOD,
and the author of a new and most interesting Revelation of his will; when they
knew that themselves, and all who had been acquainted with him also, knew, that
he had given no probable evidence of meriting this character? What good could
they expect from asserting themselves to be possessed of the power of working
miracles in his name, and from professing their ability, and readiness, to work
miracles, of the utmost importance, and publicity, when they certainly knew,
that they possessed no such power?

ADMITTING, however, this palpable absurdity, is it possible, that they should
expect any good from this profession, after they had made the experiment, and
had in every instance failed? For, in this case, they must have failed in every
instance. What could they expect, what could they receive, but uniform
contempt, and entire infamy?

IT is in vain, here, to assert, that there have been parallel instances. Until
Infidels shall produce at least one parrallel instance, it may be confidently
asserted, that none has existed. As to those, which they have hitherto
alleged, they ought to blush whenever they recollect them; for, it is
presumed, that, with all the extravagant and singular prejudices, manifested by
them against Christianity, they cannot but see, both from the nature, and the
publicity, of the miracles of the Gospel, an entire and irreconcilable
difference between their own workers of miracles, and the Apostles.

IN the future world, the Apostles, if deceivers, could certainly expect no
good. In this case, they cannot be supposed to have believed in either the
character, or the declarations, of CHRIST. All his promises to them of future
and eternal happiness, if he be supposed to have made any, must, in their view,
have been idle tales. Hence, if they expected any good in the future world,
they must have expected it, merely as the reward of their deception. But can it
be imagined, that any man could expect future, everlasting happiness,
especially in that future world, and from the hands of that GOD, whom they have
described, as the reward of a lie, or rather of a life spent in lying? Can a
Jew have formed such expectations, with the Old Testament in his hands? Above
all, can those men have formed such expectations, who forbade to do any evil,
that any good might come, on pain of damnation; and who declared, that
whosoever loves or makes a lie shall be cut off from all future good?

IT is unnecessary to add any thing, under this head, further than to observe,
that arguments of this nature are allowed, by Mr. Hume himself, to have the
same force with those, which are founded on natural causes. In his Essay on
Liberty and Necessity, he observes -- "When we consider how aptly natural and
moral evidence link together, and form only one chain of argument, we shall
make no scruple to allow, that they are of the same nature, and are derived
from the same principles."

3. IT is incredible that wicked men, such as impostors of course are, should
have aimed at the objects, visibly aimed at, throughout the New Testament.

THE whole end singly aimed at in the New Testament, is manifestly to make
mankind virtuous. The History, Doctrines, Precepts, and Ordinances, unitedly
urge men to nothing, but piety to GOD, a reasonable government of themselves,
and justice and benevolence to each other. Can an impostor be imagined to aim
at this end? On what grounds, can he be supposed to labor for this purpose,
through a life, encircled with daily and extreme distress, and voluntarily, and
with undoubting preference, to meet a violent and ignominious death? I leave to
infidels to explain the mystery, to unfold the principles, and to reconcile the
purpose with the character.

4th. THE Apostles lived so as no deceiver ever lived.

THE Apostles not only appear to have been virtuous men, but have been
generally acknowledged fairly to claim high distinction, in the list of the
virtuous. To establish this distinction nothing more is necessary, than to
compare them with Philosophers in general, particularly with Infidel
Philosophers. Let them be compared, for instance, with Bolingbroke, Hume,
Voltaire, and Roussean, and there will be found not a near resemblance, but, in
most respects, a striking contrast. Nor are they totally superior to Infidels
alone; but to men of virtue and piety. In the most exact, sublime, refined, and
enduring virtue, they stand alone; and very remote from any rival. How is such
a character to be reconciled with a life of imposture?

5. An imposition committed to so many persons could not have escaped detection.

THE number of the Apostles, including Matthias and Paul, was thirteen, and
that of their coadjutors, though unknown, was evidently much greater. Seventy
were commissioned, as preachers, by CHRIST; and many more by the Apostles.
Perhaps there never was any plot committed to such a number of persons, without
detection; even where it respected a single action, existed for a little
period, and was not extorted by any distressing acts of violence. But here the
secret, if we suppose a secret to have existed, was a design, the most complex,
and the most extensive, which ever entered into the human mind; and the
prosecution of it was extended through life and embittered with opposition,
hatred, want, and infamy. Yet no one of the number ever discovered it, although
they had frequent and zealous contentions, and although none gained, and all
suffered by the concealment. Not a hint of this nature is given, nor a
suspicion warranted, by the whole testimony of antiquity. Would an opinion
fraught with such incredibility, as attends that, which is here combated, be
admitted, or even suggested on any other subject?

AT the same time, it is to be remembered, that their understanding, and
information, in human policy was too confined, to allow of such concealment,
even if, in other circumstances, it had been possible. -- They were all plain
men; like the farmers and mechanics of this country; only far less informed.
Such men, limited wholly and of necessity, to their own narrow circle of
business, to provide subsistence for themselves and their families, cannot be
believed, in that business, to have imbibed so profound a policy, or arts of
such complete and sagacious imposition.

FROM these arguments it appears incredible, that the Apostles were deceivers.
It may, however, not be improper to suggest the following reasons to prove,
that they were neither deceivers, nor deceived.

1st. They published the prophecy of CHRIST, concerning the destruction of
Jerusalem, several years, before that event took place.

THE three first Gospels, in which that event is predicted, were published as
early, at least as the year sixty four; and Jerusalem was taken, by Titus, on
the eighth of September, in the year seventy. This prophecy contains so minute
and explicit a description of the event, under consideration, with regard to
persons, time, and circumstances, as to exclude the possibility of any material
mistake. The Evangelists, therefore, in giving this prediction to mankind, put
their Master's character, and their own together with the whole Christian
cause, on the issue. If the prediction were not exactly fulfilled, all fell at
once. This they could not but know; and plainly, therefore, could not, unless
they fully believed the prediction, have published it to the world. But, if
they were deceivers, they could not have believed it. The consequence is
obvious, and undeniable.

THAT they were not deceived, with regard either to the prediction, or the
character of CHRIST, is, with like evidence, proved by the fulfillment of the
prediction: a fulfillment so exact, and entire, as to remove every doubt;
especially when it is remembered, that the Historian, who, from his own
knowledge and presence, has confirmed this truth, was a Pharisee.

2d. THIS proposition is evidenced by their total inability, of themselves, to
form, and to fill up such a character, as that of JESUS CHRIST.

TO form a perfect character, and to fill it up with such traits, as to make it
appear like a real, living, acting being, or like one, who has really lived,
and acted, in the world, and to give it proper and characteristical sentiments
and manners, is perhaps, as hard a task, as was ever undertaken by the human
genius. Virgil, one of the greatest geniuses, and one of the wisest men, of
Heathen antiquity, has attempted it, in his Eneas. -- With his success this
Audience are sufficiently acquainted. Eneas, in the hands of this great master
of fine writing, is not only a spiritless and unamiable person, but is
tinctured, throughout, with grossness and immorality. The Heathens, indeed,
have not, in their poetry, exhibited one amiable character, because, as is
justly observed by the Author of the Rambler, they were unacquainted with
Revelation. They had no virtuous models, from which to copy; and like other
men, were wholly unable to form such a character by mere imagination. -- Their
morals were so gross and their conceptions of virtue so imperfect, that the
proper features of such a character appear not to have entered their conception.

BUT what Virgil could not perform each of the four Evangelists has in the most
finished manner performed. The character of JESUS CHRIST is wholly that of a
real-living, acting person; as distinct as that of Hamlet, or Achilles. At the
same time, it is a character of finished perfection. All the parts of it are
suited entirely to each other, and, united, constitute, beyond comparison, the
fairest image of pure, uniform and exalted virtue, which ever entered into the
human mind. The piety, the benevolence, the wisdom, the integrity, the
loveliness, of the Redeemer have had no rival, no second, even in the highest
efforts of the noblest imagination. His Doctrines visibly excel all other
doctrines; his precepts triumph over all other moral rules; and his conduct
leaves out of comparison every human example. Notwithstanding the best and
wisest of mankind have laboriously imbibed his wisdom, and studiously formed
themselves by his precepts, he still stands alone; the meridian sun, in whose
presence every little luminary "hides its diminished head."

ON this subject, there is no dispute; as there can be no doubt. Almost all the
wise men, who have lived, since the Christian era, and all the virtuous, have
united in this sentiment; and far more of such men than the whole earth has
produced besides, have diligently studied the books, in which the History of
this glorious person is contained; and they have, with one voice, agreed, that
the wisdom manifested in them is from Heaven, and that the Author of it is the
SON of GOD. In the meantime, his instructions and character have wrought in the
world, the greatest change, which it has ever experienced, and become the
source of almost all the just, moral sentiments, and amiable moral conduct,
which have existed, since this History was first published, in the Gospel. The
excellence and preeminence of his Character is, therefore, fully established,
and has been acknowledged by many Infidels, beside Rousseau.

COULD such a character be the result either of enthusiasm, or of deceit?
Whence had the Apostles such ideas? How were mechanics and fishermen enabled to
accomplish what none of the human race, beside them, has ever accomplished? Can
we suppose the fishermen of Judea to have been so totally superior not only to
the fishermen, but to all the wise and learned men, of every other country?

3d. If we allow this absurdity to have existed, we shall still be wholly
unable to account for their forming such a Character, as that of CHRIST.

THE Apostles have given us the Character of the Messiah. This Person they,
with their whole nation, expected to appear, in circumstances of the highest
temporal grandeur and dignity. With this preconception firmly riveted, the
Apostles cannot be supposed to have departed, without some adequate cause, from
all their preceding ideas of this splendid Personage, and to have formed a
character of him so greatly reversed, as that, which they have actually formed.
Nor can any cause be conceived to be an adequate one, unless of equal magnitude
with that, which themselves have left upon record. Nothing, less than the
evidence of their own eyes and ears, will account for this fact. They must have
thoroughly known the person, to be able to describe the character, and by
irresistible conviction have been forced to renounce all their former
prejudices, to be willing.

4th. THE truth of the Apostles testimony is evinced by the attestations of
their Enemies to the principal facts, which they record.

THE testimony of Judas to the whole character of CHRIST, especially his moral
character, may be fairly esteemed decisive.

JUDAS had every advantage for knowing the whole character and conduct of
CHRIST, and every conceivable temptation to publish whatever was defective in
it. If he preached not the wisdom, if he wrought not the miracles, if he
practiced not the virtues, professed by himself, and attributed to him by
others, Judas could not have been ignorant of the failure, nor have neglected
to publish the imposition. But, while his temptations operated in the highest
degree, he has not only accused him of nothing, and directly declared him
innocent; but by accomplishing, at this trying period, his own death, has given
the clearest proof that, in his view, CHRIST was what he professed to be; a
preacher of truth, a perfect example of holiness, the author of the most
wonderful miracles, and, in a word, the SON of GOD.

THE Jews were generally most bitter enemies to CHRIST. His miracles and life
were exhibited to them daily, in such a manner, as to enable them competently
to judge, of both. If it could have been done with a shadow of pretense, they
must therefore, have denied his miracles, and aspersed his character. A few
instances of such aspersion are recorded in the Gospel; I need not mention how
groundless, or how contemptible. Similar aspersions, if possible more
groundless, and more contemptible, are handed down in the Mishna, a Collection
of Jewish traditions made by (...), about the year one hundred and eighty: --
Talmud a Commentary on the Mishna. There are two Talmud's, the Jerusalem
Talmud, and the Babylonian.
Mishna, and in the Talmud. Generally they dared not to call his character at
all in question, until long after the establishment of Christianity throughout
the Roman Empire; as I shall soon evince, by a passage from Origin, which I
conceive fairly to decide this question. His miracles they denied neither in
the Gospels, nor in the Mishna and Talmud; but acknowledged their existence
fully; attributing them, in the one, to a concert with Beelzebub, and, in the
other to magic, which they assert him to have learned in Egypt. In the mean
time, these last mentioned books, written with the most malignant opposition to
Christianity, give attestation to the existence of CHRIST, as the Author of a
new Religion, and as a Worker of miracles; to the state of the Jews, as
described in the Gospels; to his Disciples, as having followed him, and wrought
miracles in his name; to the destruction of Jerusalem; to the rise, and the
prevalence, of Christianity; and to the constancy of the Christians, in its
early periods.

AMONG the Heathens, whose hatred to Christianity needs not to be specified
(beside the testimony asserted, by Justin Martyr and Tertullian, to be
contained in the Acts of Pilate, the existence and authenticity of which
cannot, it is presumed, be fairly disputed) Tacitus, the Roman Historian whose
character, as a writer, requires no remarks, and who flourished about the year
one hundred, thirty-six years after the Gospels of Matthew and Mark, were
written, declares the time, name, country, and character, of CHRIST, as the
Author of the Christian Religion; bears witness to his trial, and death under
Pontius Pilate, procurator of Judea, and to the expectation of the Messiah by
the Jews; and records the destruction of Jerusalem, together with the principal
events which attended it; the great numbers of Christians, at this early period
existing in Rome, Judea, and other places; and the terrible persecution of
them, by Nero.

THE same things, generally, are testified by Sulpicius, Anno four hundred.

THE banishment of the Jews, from Rome, by Claudius, is asserted by Suetonius,
Anno one hundred and ten; as is also the destruction of Jerusalem.

THE Emperors Trajan, Anno one hundred and seven, and Adrian, Anno one hundred
and seventeen, testify several interesting things concerning the Christians;
particularly their great numbers, innocence, and constancy.

PLINY, Anno one hundred and seven, beside the things just mentioned, informs
us, that the Christians steadfastly opposed Idolatry; worshipped, in
Assemblies, on the Lord's day; sung hymns to CHRIST, as a GOD; held agapoe, or
feasts of charity; had church officers; and engaged, by oath to commit neither
theft, robbery, nor adultery, nor ever to falsify their word, nor to betray any
trust.

CELSUS, the famous Epicurean philosopher and bitter champion for Heathenism
against Christianity, Anno one hundred and seventy six, one hundred and
thirteen years after the first written Gospel, testifies beside the things
already mentioned, that there were books, written by the Disciples of CHRIST,
containing an account of his life and actions, his own discourses and words;
particularly several predictions of his; his Name Logos, or the Word of GOD;
his genealogy, and that of Mary, his mother. He further testifies, that he was
born of a Virgin, and was reputed to be the son of a Carpenter; that the
Chaldeans were reported to have come, and worshipped him, when he was an
infant; that Herod the Tetrarch, being informed of this, ordered all, who had
been born in that village, about that time, to be killed, intending to kill
him, lest he should afterward take the government; that he was carried into
Egypt, lest he should be killed; that Angels were sent, on his account; that he
was baptized by John; that the HOLY GHOST descended on him, in the shape of a
Dove; that a voice from Heaven, declared him to be the SON of GOD; that he was
very poor, went about from place to place; took to himself ten or eleven,
abjects, or low people; healed diseases; and raised the dead; fed multitudes
with a few loaves, of which large fragments were left; was called a Nazaraean;
represented himself as sent to call not the righteous, but sinners to
repentance; forbade the anxious pursuit of riches; exposed the difficulty of
obtaining immortal life by the rich; was called upon to show a sign in the
temple; was deserted, denied, and betrayed, by his companions; was derided,
clad in a purple robe, crowned with thorns, had a reed put into his hands,
thirsted, and had gall and vinegar given to him; that blood slowed from his
side; that he died a shameful death, and was reviled at his death; that he
foreknew, and foretold his sufferings; rose again from the dead; showed himself
to a woman, and to several others; showed the marks of the nails; breathed on
his Disciples; was the first Author of the Christian persuasion; taught the
doctrine but a few years before Celsus wrote; was at that time esteemed
superior to Angels, reckoned to be the SON of GOD, and called a GOD; and that
one Angel, and, in another place, two, were said to appear at the sepulcre of
JESUS. Celsus, also, testifies further that the Doctrine of the Resurrection of
the Body, and of a future, Immortal Life, founded on the life, death, and
preaching, of Christ, was recorded by his Disciples; that many Jews believed on
him, and forsook the worship of their own country; that his followers were, at
first, four in number, and of one mind; that they afterward became numerous,
spread abroad, and were divided in opinion; that they customarily met together,
in assemblies, and there taught things agreeable to their sentiments; that they
were forbidden to partake in idol-feasts, and refused to join in idol-worship;
and that the Jews were punished for the crucifixion of JESUS.

JULIAN, who was possessed of most of the learning of his age, who had the
education of a Christian, and the malice of an Apostate, and whose testimony,
therefore, will not be suspected, declares that CHRIST was born, in the reign
of Augustus, and at the time of taxing, or enrolment, made by Cyrenius, or
Quirinus; that the Christian Religion arose, in the time of Tiberius, and
Claudius; that the Historical books of the New Testament were genuine, and
authentic; that they were the only Historical books, acknowledged, as of sacred
authority, by the Christians, and the only authentic memoirs of CHRIST, and his
Apostles; that the Gospels were written as early, as is generally believed; and
particularly, that John's, the last, was written, soon after the death of Peter
and Paul. He also testifies, that CHRIST cured the blind, the lame, and the
possessed, rebuked the winds, and walked on the waves; that there were
multitudes of Christians in Greece, and in Italy, before John wrote his Gospel;
that, beside persons in humble life, Cornelius and Sergius Paulus were
Christians; and that Peter and Paul were the great preachers of Christianity.
Julian aimed to overthrow the Christian Religion, but has confirmed it. His
arguments against it are perfectly harmless, and insufficient to unsettle the
weakest Christian.


THE testimonies of Porphyry and Hierocles are also, in several respects, of
considerable value. It is greatly to be regreted, that so small a part of their
works, especially of those of Porphyry, is now remaining. From the scope of
them, so far as we are informed, they would have furnished a highly interesting
testimony to the Scriptures. A minute account of their remaining testimony
cannot now be given; but it ought to be observed, that they, together with
Celsus and Julian, acknowledge the genuineness and authenticity of these books;
and miserably evade the force of the argument, from the miracles of CHRIST and
his Apostles, by attributing them to magic.

THERE are, also, still remaining, many other useful Heathen testimonies, which
cannot now be particularly mentioned.

FROM those, which have been mentioned, the conclusion appears to be fairly
drawn, that the Apostles have given a true testimony to Mankind. From Celsus,
especially, do we derive decisive evidence of this truth. It is not here
designed to represent this Philosopher, as receiving these things, in the
manner, in which we recieve them. In this case, he must have been a Christian.
But he considered them, as the acknowledged representations of the Evangelists,
eye and ear witnesses of the things which they declare; representations, in his
own time, universally received by Christians, and never impeached. It ought,
however, to be here observed, that Origin declares Celsus to have, by
insinuation, aspersed, in some degree, the character of CHRIST, though with
nothing infamous; and to have been the only person, of whom himself had ever
heard, as having aspersed him at all. This declaration of Origin may be
esteemed a full proof of the perfect spotlessness of CHRIST's Character, from
his death to the time of Celsus: for Origin could not but know, and has
undoubtedly declared, the truth.

5th. THE truth of the Apostles, testimony is proved in a peculiar manner, by
several important institutions, and memorials of interesting facts, which they
have recorded. These institutions and memorials are,

1st. Baptism, introduced in the room of Circumcision:

2d. The Lord's Supper, instead of the Passover:

3d. The First Day Sabbath, instead of the Seventh day Sabbath:

4th. The Christian-worship, instead of the Temple-worship:

5. The Christian Church, instead of the Jewish:

6th. Invocation of CHRIST, as GOD; and also Invocation in his Name.

ON these it is to be observed generally, that the first Christians, among whom
these institutions and memorials were originally established, were Jews, and
were also numerous; as the New Testament, and Heathen, Jewish and Christian
Antiquity unitedly declares. By Jews, therefore, they were first received. This
being premised, I would further observe,

1st. THESE Jewish institutions were established in the Law of Moses,
acknowledged by all the Jews, by the Apostles, and by CHRIST himself, to be the
Word of GOD; and were, therefore, of unquestioned, divine authority.

2d. THEY were sanctioned by the example of their prophets, priests, and kings;
and by a National adherence of many centuries; even from the commencement of
their National existence, to the time of the Apostles Mission.

3d. THEY were sanctioned by the penal laws of Moses; so that to fail of the
commanded adherence to them was punished with excision.

4th. THEY were sanctioned by CHRIST's uniform observance of them, and by that
of his Apostles.

5th. THEY were established in the minds of the Jews, by pride and bigotry, in
the extreme.

6th. THEY, with the rest of the Mosaic system, were universally considered, by
the Jews, of that age, as designed to be perpetual.

BUT notwithstanding all these high sanctions, and the unprecedented attachment
of the Jews to these institutions, as the means of personal, and national
distinction, the Christian institutions above mentioned were introduced in
their place, and to their annihilation.

IN the year forty nine, or fifty, the whole Church at Jerusalem, consisting of
the Apostles, Elders, and Brethren, decreed, that the Gentiles, whose
membership in the Jewish Church, when proselyted, had before depended, equally
with that of the Jews themselves, on an exact conformity to these Mosaic
institutions, should not be under any obligation to observe them. This event
may be considered as the annihilation of these institutions, in the Christian
Church; for, though the Nazaraean Christians appear with some others, to have
continued Jewish observances, after this period, yet a blow was then given to
them, from which they never recovered. Many of the Jews appear to have totally
neglected them, from this period, and, in spite of their former most bigoted
adherence, to have viewed them as done away.

ON what principles can we account for this singular event? The Mosaic
Institutions were considered by all Christians, as being of divine authority;
and were publicly asserted to be so, by the Apostles, and by their Master.
Could others be introduced into their place, which were not acknowledged to be
of at least equal authority?

BAPTISM and the Lord's Supper were professed to be memorials of CHRIST's Death
and of the cleansing of sin, by the effusion of his blood, declared to have
been shed publicly, at Jerusalem, and on the feast of the Passover, by the
Roman Government, and the Jewish Sanhedrim. Is it possible, that CHRIST should
not have been known thus to have poured out his blood; or that his sufferings
should have been thus commemorated by those, who being constantly appealed to,
as eye witnesses of his death, yet did not know, that he had thus died?

THE First day Sabbath was instituted, immediately after the day of Pentecost,
as a memorial of CHRIST's Resurrection from the dead. Could Jews be supposed to
unite in observing this institution, upon such an appeal, if CHRIST had not
been on the best grounds believed to have risen; and if circumstances, less
extraordinary than those alleged, had accompanied his Death and resurrection;
or if either were less convincingly attested, than is asserted in the Gospel?

IS it possible, that the Apostles could be even listened to, when proposing a
Form of worship, new, entirely different from the splendid ritual of the
Temple; a Form of worship, of which the Aaronic Priesthood, sacrifices, and
purifications, were no part; and in which all men were placed upon a level with
the Jews, all places made equally sacred with the Temple, and all persons with
the Priests; a Form of worship, in which universal humbleness and spirituality
were substituted in the room of unequalled pomp, and of services rendered
venerable and affecting by the most forcible exhibitions to sense and
imagination; unless CHRIST had been certainly known to have appeared, with
proofs of a character, not equal only, but superior to that of Moses, and of
an authority, fairly qualifying him to change what GOD himself was confessed to
have once established?

THE same observations are, with the same force, applicable to the substitution
of the Christian Church in the place of the Jewish.

COULD the Invocation of the name of JESUS CHRIST, which, from Acts 7. 56. is
proved to have existed, and from 1 Cor. 1. 1. 2. Acts 9. 14, 20, 21. and from
various other passages, is proved to have existed so extensively, as to become
a designation of Christians in general, have been adopted even by the Apostles
themselves, and, much more, by other Jews, unless facts, as extraordinary as
those recorded in the Gospels, had evidenced his character and mission, and
proved him to be the SON of GOD, sent into this world to establish a new and
perfect Religion, and to accomplish the Salvation of mankind?

ALL these institutions were professedly built on facts, publicly appealed to,
and wholly uncontradicted, for ages; facts of the most singular nature, and of
the highest conceivable importance; facts, professed to have existed as proofs
of a most wonderful Mission of the most wonderful Person ever heard of in this
world. The adoption of these institutions, therefore, by those among whom these
facts were declared to have existed, and who were appealed to as eye and ear
witnesses of their existence, while these facts were alleged, as the
obligatory and only reasons for such adoption, appears to be an unanswerable
proof, that the facts themselves existed, and of course that the Apostles have
given a true testimony concerning them. At the same time, the adoption of them
by Jews, so circumstanced, and directly charged with being the enemies, and, in
some sense, the murderers, of the Person who was thus commemorated and
honored, a Person who appeared always in the humblest life, and in a character
so opposite to that of their expected Messiah, adds such a degree of weight to
this evidence, as, one would imagine, must, if it were possible, even silence
gainsaying.

6th. THE only remaining proof of this point, which I shall now mention, is the
apparent Integrity of the Narration itself; and this, because it is so obvious,
and so generally and easily understood, I shall consider in a summary manner.

THE Integrity of this Narration appears in the first place, in the frank
manner, in which the writers record the low condition of their Master, the
contempt and opposition, with which he met from the Jewish Government and
Nation, his sufferings and death, and the ignomy, with which it was attended.
Nothing was ever more unlike design, than this account, considered in all its
parts.

2d. IN the like frank exhibition of their own humble state and character,
their errors and faults, their prejudices and debates, and the numerous
instances in which they deservedly received reproof from the mouth of CHRIST.

3d. IN the peculiar simplicity and impartiality, with which they record facts.
-- Their Narrations are mere narrations of facts, whether favorable or
unfavorable to their cause. In neither case do they utter a comment, unless for
mere explanation. There is no opinion pronounced, a single instance excepted;
no praise given by them to CHRIST; no blame charged upon his enemies; no
expression of wonder at his miracles, nor of abhorrence, at the injustice of
his murderers; nothing aggravated; nothing diminished; and, in a word, no
appearance of those feelings, which could not but be excited by the events,
which they relate, On the contrary, they appear to have sacrified every human
feeling to the cause of Truth, and to the obligations of Duty.

4th. In the entire harmony, which reigns throughout their writings. They
wrote, at different times, and in different countries. The three first
Evangelists appear never to have seen the Gospels of each other; and John wrote
more properly a supplement to their Gospels, than a formal narrative of the
Mission of CHRIST. That they wrote without any concert is certain from what
they have written; and that their writings entirely harmonize was never denied,
unless from the love of the denial. In time, place and circumstance, in the
characters, conduct, and manners of those, whom they mention, there is an
agreement, which cannot be paralleled. Had the Gospels been fabricated by
imposition, such could not have been their character. Truth is always
consistent; Falsehood never. It is also to be observed, that all of them wrote
several years, after the facts, which they have recorded, took place. Such an
agreement is, therefore, high and convincing evidence of the truth of their
testimony.

3d. THE testimony of the Apostles has been handed down to us, uncorrupted. --
This I will endeavor summarily to evince, in the following observations.

1st. THE passages quoted by the ancient Christian writers, and by the Heathen
also, are generally quoted in the same words, and almost always have the same
sense, which we find in passages now in the New Testament.

A LARGE part of the New Testament, and particularly of the Historical books,
might be obtained from these writers, in the very words contained in our
printed New-Testaments. This, it is evident, would have been impossible, had
not all quoted from the same original writings.

IN many instances, however, their quotations are made in words differing, more
or less, from those, which are acknowledged by us. On this subject it may be
observed in the

1st. PLACE, that these writers often intentionally give only the sense of the
passage, as they severally understand it. Of course, judging differently, as we
do, they necessarily wrote their different interpretations, in terms somewhat
differing. Most of the acknowledged terms are frequently preferred; although in
the instances now referred to, they are preserved rather to express the meaning
happily, than to accord exactly with the words of the Scriptural writers.

2d. HENCE they differ, not unfrequently, from each other, in the terms which
they use, although generally and easily reconcilable in the meaning. As this
is done by those, who visibly used, and acknowledged, the same Scriptures, and
harmonized in their theological sentiments, it is evident, that their
differences sprung from the source, to which it is here attributed.

3d. As they knew, that those, to whom, and those, for whom, they wrote, had
the New Testament, as well as themselves, and as the The Authenticity of the
New Testament at large was never called in question, until the sixteenth
Century.

Jevell's Boil. Lect.
Authenticity of these books was not then called in question, they quoted
securely, from memory knowing, that, if they made any mistakes, their readers,
as well as their correspondents, could easily correct them.

THESE quotations are often made merely to illustrate a doctrine, or to enforce
an exhortation, reproof, or consolation; and hence cannot be expected to
possess verbal exactness; it being unnecessary to the purpose in hand.

4th. AMONG those who thus quoted, some were of more, and some of less accurate
characters; and hence they quoted more or less exactly.

5th. THEIR own works, having passed through the hands of many transcribers,
are now doubtless less exact, in this respect, than they originally were; so
that we may well be surprised to find their differences so few* and so small.

6th. STILL they are of trifling importance, and such as do not materially
affect a single doctrine, or fact.

PERHAPS it may be thought that most of those, which are here called
quotations, ought rather to be termed references. I have used the term
quotations, because it has appeared to me, that the writers aimed to quote, but
did it imperfectly, for the reasons which are suggested.

ON this subject, it ought further to be mentioned, that many of these writers
differed much in opinion, and disputed warmly, concerning several doctrines of
high importance. We may, therefore, well be astonished, that the writers, of
almost all sects, should so far agree in their quotations. So general was this
agreement, to the time of Origin, that, though possessed of more information,
concerning this subject, than any, perhaps than all men living, he had never
heard of any person (Marcion, his followers, the Valentinians, and perhaps
Leucius, excepted) who had corrupted the Scriptures.

NOR ought it to be here forgotten, that these very differences are a standing
proof, that there was not the least concert among Catholics, or Heretics, with
respect to this matter, nor any design formed, or even thought of, to impose
these books on the belief of mankind. On the contrary, they plainly considered
the books, as standing firmly on their own evidence; and left men to receive,
or to reject them, as they should think proper.

2d. THE singular reverence, with which the ancient Christians regarded the
Scriptures, forbids even a suspicion, that they wilfully corrupted them.

Of this reverence some notice has been already taken. A few additional
observations may however be advantageously made.

THE Scriptures are now in every hand, are used as a school-book, quoted in
ordinary conversation, and are questioned, opposed, and ridiculed by Infidels.
Hence good men, although not at all shaken in their faith by these means,
appear yet to regard these writings with less profound veneration, than is
observable in the ancient Christians. By them the Scriptures were viewed with
some such reverence, as would naturally be rendered to GOD himself, manifested
in this world, with glory becoming his Character. See Jevell's Boil. Lect.
A remarkable specimen of this reverence, in the members of an ancient Church,
is recorded in a letter, from St. Austin to St. Jerome, Jerome translated the
Old Testament. The Bishop of the Church mentioned, used this translation, in
divine service. In the prophecy of Jonah, Jerome had rendered the Hebrew word,
translated Gourd, by the Latin word Hoedera. In the former Latin translation,
originally used in this Church, the same Hebrew word was rendered by the Latin
word Cucurbita. When the Bishop read the passage, the people, perceiving the
word changed, were alarmed, and would have finally left the Bishop, if he had
not consented to restore the original word. Such was their watchfulness, and
jealousy, for the preservation of the purity of the Scriptures, even where no
fact, doctrine, or precept, was materially concerned.

SITUATED among persons of such a character, few men would dare to misquote, or
corrupt; and few would be inclined to do it, if they dared. Such corruptions
also as existed, would be immediately detected, and regarded with the utmost
detestation. Thus the corruptions of Marcion were founded throughout the
Christian church, and his name consigned, for his villainy and impudence, to
perpetual infamy.

3d. THE Christian sects were numerous; and each watched over the conduct of
the others, with a careful, jealous, and prying attention.

IF there were at any time, an especial temptation wilfully to misquote the
Scriptures, we easily see, that it would peculiarly respect those passages
which were the favorite ones of particular sects, and which were supposed must
to befriend their characteristical opinions; but we also see that these would,
by each sect, be watched with an eagle eye, and a continual apprehensiveness of
danger. Hence arose an extreme difficulty in accomplishing a design of this
nature, even if it were formed: a difficulty, greatly increased by the warmth
of strenuous controversy, and by the desire, and the pride, of victory.

THESE considerations will furnish us with an easy and sufficient explanation
of a fact, otherwise very difficult to be explained; viz. the general and
surprising agreement among so many persons thus differing and thus contending,
found in their quotations of the Scriptures.

4th. THE very great number and diffusion of the copies of the New Testament,
rendered such corruption, in any great degree, evidently impossible.

COPIES of this volume were, at an early period numerous in Spain, France,
Italy, Greece, Macedonia, Africa proper, Egypt, Syria, Palestine, Asia Minor,
Armenia and Persia. The general, apparent agreement of these copies is a
demonstration, that very little corruption has ever taken place in these books.

5th. THE New Testament was early translated into several languages.

THE Old Latin translation was made most probably in the first Michaelis
affirms that no man of learning, Dr. Mill excepted, denies this Version to have
been done in the first Century. See Travis's Letters to (...) from which this
account of the Versions here mentioned is taken.
or very early in the second Century. Tertullian expressly declares, that there
was a Latin Version of the Gospels and Epistles existing in his time.

JEROME's Version was done in the fourth Century, and with great care,
learning, and exactness:

THE First Syriac probably in the Fourth:

THE Second Syriac, and the Armenian, in the Fifth: and

THE Coptic in the Sixth Century.

ST. AUSTIN declares, that all attempts to corrupt the Scriptures were in vain,
because they were then translated into so many languages; were in the hands of
people of every age and character: and were so known, so esteemed, and so
celebrated.

Anno Dom. three hundred and ninety-five.

ST. CHRYSOSTOM also declares, Anno Dom. three hundred and ninety-eight, that
they were, in his time, already rendered in the languages of Britain, Syria,
Egypt, Persia, and India: and in the languages of all people in general,
whether barbarians, or others.

IT may, perhaps, be both agreeable and useful, in this place to recite a
passage from Theodoret, in which he refers to this subject. Anno Dom. four
hundred and twenty three.

"I WILL compare the most celebrated lawgivers of the Greeks with our
Fishermen, Publicans, and Tent-makers; and show the difference between them.
The Laws of the former were forgotten, soon after the death of those, who
enacted them, but the laws delivered by Fishermen have flourished, and
prevailed, and have been received, not only by Greeks, and Romans, but also by
Scythians, Persians and other Barbarians. The Heralds of truth were not,
indeed, masters of the Greek eloquence; but, filled with wisdom, they have
carried the divine doctrine to all nations, and have filled the whole world
with writings, containing instructions concerning religion and virtue. All men,
leaving the dreams and speculations of Philosophers, now nourish themselves
with the doctrines of Fishermen and Publicans, and study the writings of a
Tent-maker. The seven Wise men of Greece are forgotten; nor do the Greeks
themselves certainly know their names; but Matthew, Bartholomew, and James,
Moses, David, and Isaiah, with the other Prophets and Apostles, are known to
all men, as well as the names of their own children. Whom did Xenophanes,
Parmenides, Pythagoras, Anaxagoras, or Speusippus leave as their suceessors in
Philosophy? What city follows the Laws of Plato's Republic? You can show none
who now teach those doctrines; but we can show the power of the prophetical and
Apostolical doctrines; for the whole earth is filled with their words."

"THE Hebrew writings (of the Old and New Testament) are translated not only
into Greek, but into the Latin, Egyptian, Persian, Indian, Armenian, Scythian,
and Samaritan; in a word, into all the languages used by the nations. Our
Fishermen, Publicans, and Tent-makers, have persuaded not only Greeks, Romans,
and Egyptians, but all nations of the earth. Nor are our doctrines understood
by those, only, who preside in the Churches, but by smiths, wool-combers,
tailors, and artificers of all sorts, by women, and maidservants. Nor do those
only, who dwell in cities, but the country people, also, understand, and are
able to discourse concerning our dostrines; they practice virtue, and shun
vicious actions."

"GOD had before tried other methods. He taught all men by the wonderful frame
of the universe. The Jews he reclaimed by the Law and the Prophets. But a more
effectual remedy was wanting; and experience has shown the benefit of it. The
whole world has now been enlightened, and idolatry abolished. Greeks, Romans,
Barbarians, acknowledge a crucified Savior."

"COMPARE these Fishermen and Publicans with the Greek and Romans Lawgivers.
You will find, that those Lawgivers could not persuade even their own
neighbors to live according to their laws; but these Galilaeans have persuaded
not only Greeks and Romans to embrace the Law, and the Doctrine of the Gospel,
but the subjects of the Roman Empire in general, together with Scythians,
Sarmatians, Indians, Ethiopians, Persians, Britons, and Germans. Indeed they
have brought all nations, and men of all sorts, to receive the Laws of a
crucified man; and that not by arms, soldiers, or Persian violence, but by
reasonings and arguments, showing the usefulness of those Laws. People, whom
Augustus and the whole power of the Roman Empire could not induce to receive
their laws, venerate the writings of Peter, Paul, John, Matthew, Luke and Mark,
as if they had been sent down from Heaven."

6th. THESE books were also publicly read, in all the Christian Assemblies,
throughout the world.

THIS practice began, when the books were just received by the Christian
Churches. See Dr. Macknight's New Translation of the Epistles, Prel. Essays. 2.
Paul laid the Pastors of the Church at Thessalonica under an oath to cause his
first Epistle to that Church to be read to all the holy Brethren, and directed
the Colossians both to read the Epistle from Laodicea, and to cause the Epistle
to the Colossians to be read also in the Church of the Laodiceans. And, with an
immediate view to this purpose, several of the Epistles appear to have been
inscribed; one to the Churches of Galatia; another To the Church of Corinth,
and to all them, who, in every place, call upon the name of JESUS CHRIST.

THIS practice of publicly, reading the Scriptures, originated by Moses, and
sanctioned by Apostolic authority, has continued to the present day. When we
consider the character of those, before whom they were read, men who so revered
them as to be ready to lay down their lives for them, who proportionally
studied them, and who were to the last degree jealous of their purity, we
cannot but see the corruption of them, even in one instance, rendered, by this
practice, extremely difficult. Beyond all computation must the difficulty be
increased of corrupting them so generally, as to produce any important effect.
To induce so many persons, so remote in place, differing so much in character
and opinion, and agreeing so entirely in the highest reverence for the
Scriptures, to consent to any supposable set of corruptions, or to impose such
corruptions generally on a body of men so circumstanced, must have been too
evident an impossibility, to be seriously undertaken by any man, or men,
however visionary or wicked.

7th. THE number of Manuscripts of the New Testament, at present, or lately
existing, is very considerable; and these so generally agree, as to forbid all
apprehensions, that these books have been materially corrupted.

AN accurate account of the Manuscripts of the New Testament cannot be expected
from one, who is both removed from the places of their existence, and
unpossessed of such books, as contain a just exhibition of their number and
character. At the same time, the following observations cannot be unacceptable
to this audience.

1st. THE Lardner Vol. 5.
Alexandrian MS is unquestionably of very great antiquity. This MS was given by
Cyril Lucaris, Patriarch of Alexandria, when translated to the sea of
Constantinople, to Sir Thomas Roe, the British Ambassador at the Port, Anno
Dom. sixteen hundred twenty eight, and was declared by the Patriarch to have
been written early in the Fourth Century, by Thecla, a noble Egyptian Lady. By
Dr. Grabe who has published a particular account of it, it is believed to have
been written in the fourth, and by others in the fifth Century.

THIS MS. contains all the Canonical books of both Testaments, and a catalogue
of them all. It contains also several books of the Apocrapha, and a few other
writings of the like character; such as the old ancient Christians esteemed
useful, and read at times, in their public assemblies: as we sometimes read the
sermons of eminent Divines in ours. There is not, as has been already observed
in all antiquity, the least evidence, that any writings, but those now esteemed
Canonical, were ever so esteemed. On the contrary all others are placed in a
totally different list and Character. Yet many books of the fathers were, and
very justly, accounted useful and edifying.

2d. THE New-Testaments of Erasmus, Robert Stephens, Beza, and the Editors of
Complutum, were collated with a great number of MSS; and with a care and
integrity which generally does the Editors the highest honor.

See Travis's Letters to Gibbon.
3d. THAT of Wetstein was formed from a consultation of sixty five MSS. All of
them did not, however, contain the whole New Testament.

See Dr. Macknight's New translation of the Epistles Prel. Essays, 2.
4th. THERE are now remaining in public and private libraries, in Europe, more
MSS. of the New Testament, of different ages, than of any other ancient
writings whatever. Many of these are of great antiquity.

THESE MSS. may be considered, as having, by their general agreement, decided
this question; and as proving the opinion of St. Augustine to be just, that it
was impossible materially to corrupt the Scriptures.

THUS have I finished the arguments, which I proposed to produce, in support of
the Genuineness and Authenticity of the New Testament.

NO question, perhaps, can be of more importance to the divine Authority of the
sacred Volume, than this. If its Genuineness and Authenticity be established,
its Authority is also established.

IF there was such a person as JESUS CHRIST; if he was so born; if he so lived;
if he was so attested; if he so preached, wrought miracles, died, rose from the
dead, ascended to Heaven, commissioned his Apostles, and enabled them to
preach, work miracles in his name, and erect his kingdom through the world, in
the manner which they have related; then he was the SON of GOD; his Doctrines
were true; his Apostles were inspired; and his Religion is of Divine Original,
and of Divine Authority. Mankind are, of course, bound to receive, and obey it.
Those, who reject it, reject it at their peril; and those, who sincerely
embrace it, are secured, beyond a hazard, in the certain future possession of
its invaluable and immortal blessings. 1794.


