ON THE ADVANTAGES OF PUBLIC WORSHIP. A SERMON. By WILLIAM HOLLINSHEAD, D. D.
One of the Ministers of the INDEPENDENT or CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, in
Charleston, South Carolina.

Preached June 3d, 1794, at the opening of the newly rebuilt House of Worship
of the Independent or Congregational Church at Dorchester. PUBLISHED AT THEIR
REQUEST.

CHARLESTON: Printed by MARKLAND, M'IVER and Co. No. 47, Bay. MDCCXCIV.

A SERMON.
PSALM LXXXVII.2. THE LORD LOVES THE GATES OF ZION, MORE THAN ALL THE
DWELLINGS OF JACOB.


THE heaven of heavens cannot contain the Almighty: Yet he condescendeth to
dwell with man on earth, with him that is of a humble and contrite spirit: He
looks down from the habitation of his holiness, with grace and goodness, on
every humble supplicant of his mercy: He acknowledges a temple, in every heart,
that truly worships him: He hears the most secret prayer of retirement: And
accepts, as a pleasing sacrifice, even the hidden devotion of the inmost soul.

Real piety, however, is not confined to the bosom where it resides. And
though, in the view of him who desires truth in the inward part, that service
only is acceptable, that is offered with a disposition which can be discerned
by none but God; yet genuine religion will not conceal itself from the public
eye. Like the lamp that gives light to every part of the house, it will shine
in all our deportment; and be visible through every part of our character, as
men, and as creatures of the living God.

From a general conviction of this truth, probably has arisen the general
consent of mankind, to the obligations of public and social worship.

However this may be, we find it to have been the practice of all nations, from
the earliest periods, to cultivate some public institutions of religion* in
which, in a social manner, they presented the sacrifices of devotion to the
Deity.

It is our privilege, who enjoy the light of revelation. to know, that what men
have generally esteemed the first duty of society, is a duty of the first
importance, and most highly acceptable in the eye of God himself: As it is
expressed in our text, "The Lord loves the gates of Zion more than all the
dwellings of Jacob."

It is not necessary to enter on a critical examination of this Psalm, in order
to throw light upon these words. The reason of so honorable a preference given
to Zion, was that there was the seat of the temple. There, in a peculiar
manner, dwelt the divine presence. Thence it pleased God to deliver the divine
oracles, and to send forth his prophets. And there was the place, appointed for
the assembling of all Israel, to present their united offerings to the Lord.

The christian dispensation, it is true, enlarges and extends our privilege.
God is not now confined to temples made with hands: And neither the mountain of
Samaria, nor yet Jerusalem, is entitled to the peculiar honor of his sacred
presence. The promised hour is come, when the true worshippers worship the
Father in spirit and in truth. In every place where men call upon the Lord,
where two or three are gathered together in the name of Christ, he is there in
the midst of them. We immediately perceive, however, on contemplating these
circumstances, how friendly an aspect they have toward the public worship of
christian societies: And we naturally infer from them, that if it pleased God
to honor with the peculiar tokens of his favor, the costly rites and laborious
forms of the Mosaic institutions, much more will he accept the simple and
unadorned, but spiritual worship of the gospel. In this view how animating and
encouraging is such a declaration as this in the text, to every undertaking for
the promotion of public worship in the gospel church: "The Lord loves the
gates of Zion, more than all the dwellings of Jacob." The import of this is,
that God is pleased indeed with the sacrifice of an humble mind, with the
secret worship of the heart* and with the retired offerings of the individual;
but will more especially bless and honor the public assemblies of his saints.

It is my intention in considering this subject, a little more particularly to
point out to you the benefits of public worship, and then to direct to some
suitable application of the discourse. And,

1st. It is an important benefit of public worship, that it promotes the
improvement of human nature, in the most useful and valuable seize;
inspires and cultivates those dispositions and habits, which enable men to act
their part with propriety, in the present world, and fits and prepares them for
future happiness.

It is obvious that the christian worship, of which we are now speaking, is
calculated to enlarge the sphere of the human understanding, presents to its
consideration many new objects of infinite importance to the happiness of
mankind, and if duly attended to, must accelerate the advancement of the
rational powers toward their highest state of perfection. Those pure and
exalted conceptions which the gospel worship inspires of the great God, as the
creator of the universe, the kind and gracious parent of his intelligent
creatures, the righteous governor of the world, who disposes all things,
relating to men, for the promotion of the virtue, the wisdom, and the happiness
of mankind: Those glorious and sublime ideas, under which the divine
perfections are presented to us, as the objects of our adoration: That humbling
impression of our own condition, which is enforced on our hearts, as in a state
of apostasy and revolt from God; and that illustrious display of mercy toward
fallen man, in the redemption, by which alone we can draw nigh to our Maker in
hope: Must at once enkindle the devout affections, inspire with the love of
virtue, and arm the soul with fortitude in the pursuit of divine seize.

At the same time the frequent recollection of these great ideas, especially
with a view to the devout expression of our reverence and regard to God, cannot
but raise the mind to a degree of elevation, far above what it is capable of by
any other means.

Does the knowledge of human sciences improve the understanding? Is the soul
enlarged by an acquaintance with the works of nature, with history and
philosophy? How inferior are the highest seize in these, to those just
apprehensions of the divine perfections, and of the mystery of salvation which
we are taught in our holy religion! Even in this view, the christian worship
presents us with a source of knowledge, the most improving and sublime. But
while, by these means, it sets before our eyes the perfections, the government,
and the grace of God, in a light the most amiable and captivating, in a light
the most encouraging to every truly pious and devout mind: There is a grandeur
and solemnity in the principles of the gospel worship, which must at once
awaken in the heart, a respect for the divine administration and a disposition
suitable to our condition as lapsed, but redeemed creatures.

What an awful and affecting circumstance is it, for instance, when a whole
assembly prostrate their souls at the footstool of sovereign mercy: Where none
presumes to claim acceptance, but on the principles of repentance and faith in
the atonement of the redeemer! What an idea does it give us of the sanctity of
the divine laws, of the strictness of his justice, and of the wonders of his
love, when we contemplate that astonishing method of salvation which is
frequently presented to our consideration, and ought always to be kept in
recollection in our solemn approaches to the Deity. How strongly are the
obligations of piety and virtue enforced by the consideration of the respect
which these solemn transactions have to futurity. While in public worship we
stand, as it were, on the confines of both worlds, an unbounded prospect opens
upon us into eternity, and marks, with peculiar emphasis, the importance of our
station and character here on earth. We are led to consider ourselves as
probationers for a future state of existence, in which we are to be fixed in
everlasting abodes of happiness or punishment, agreeably to our improvement or
neglect of the advantages and duties of the present state.

Who that familiarises these sentiments to his soul, by a regular attendance on
the duties of social worship, will not experience some happy influence of them
on his heart! At least, as far as religious principles can, in the nature of
things, be effectual, he must be rendered by them a wiser and better man.

In proportion to the sincerity of his belief of them, they must not only
humble him in the dust, as a sinner who has forfeited the favor of heaven; and
impress upon his heart a thankful sense of his obligations to redeeming grace:
But dispose him, in all things, to maintain a conscience void of offense both
toward God and toward man.

I shall only add, under this head, that a stated attendance on the ordinances
of public worship has a tendency to fit and prepare the soul for future
happiness.

As it improves and enlarges the understanding, as it inspires with sentiments
of devotion, as under the divine blessing, it is highly instrumental in
purifying the heart, and promoting the habits of godliness and virtue; it
assimilates the mind to that blessed society, who have already arrived at a state
of perfection. But as it consists in itself, of a series of devout employments,
it may be considered, in some sense, as heaven already enjoyed on earth. The
same gratitude and love, that animate the songs and inflame the hearts of the
redeemed in glory; the same unity of spirit that binds them in everlasting
bonds of angelic affection, are already in some measure in exercise, in every
pure gospel church on earth; and by means most proper for the purpose, are in
the way of improvement toward perfection.

While, therefore, we unite in the devout employments of gospel worship, we are
in the practice of those habits which constitute the employments of the
heavenly state; of those habits which tend to imprint upon our soul a sense of
our obligations to every moral virtue; of those habits which refine and purify
the heart, and fit and prepare us for eternity.

2d. It is an interesting advantage of public ^^^^^ip, that it prepares the
mind for those trials to which human nature is unavoidably exposed; and
furnishes it with armor against the ills and distresses of life.

It would be easy to expatiate on the forlorn and helpless state of a man,
without the benefits and consolations of religion. He finds himself, by the
very constitution of his nature, in many respects, a child of sorrow. Through
all the various stages of his being, his way is marked with unexpected
vicissitudes. The blandishments of childhood and youth are succeeded by the
woes of riper years. The prosperity of the morning is eclipsed by the
afflictions which suddenly arise to darken his horizon; and the shadows of the
evening descend upon him thickened with the gloom of melancholy disappointment.
Untaught in religious truths, he perceives nothing in the ways of providence
but mysterious darkness. He is lost in a labyrinth of inexplicable events. He
knows not what to look for from present appearances; whether he may hope in the
divine protection on the tempestuous sea of life; or what is to be the final
issue of those perplexing circumstances with which he is surrounded.

In this situation, what a source of light, of comfort and support are the
ordinances of religion? In the gospel we are instructed in those ways of
providence, which philosophy and reason have attempted to investigate in vain.
We here learn, that the occasion of those calamities which happen alike to the
good and the wicked, is the universal guilt of human nature: That in the midst
of the days of our vanity, however, God is the father and the friend of them
that fear him: That he conducts the dispensations of his providence with an
eternal regard to order, truth and virtue: That, however complex our present
situation may appear, he has ordained an happy issue to every event, in which
the children of his mercy are concerned: That he has opened a way for the
deliverance of his fallen creatures, from all the inconveniences which they
are liable to on account of sin, by Jesus Christ his beloved son: And has
secured to them that return to him and accept his grace, a present benefit in
all their sorrows, and in future, a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory.

It would be a pleasure to reflect on these truths -- It would at least,
inspire the suffering mind with hope, were it only probable he might become a
partaker in such blessings. But how much more cheering is it, in a distressed
hour, to know that God himself, has appointed the means by which these
blessings flow to every creature, who seeks them according to his gospel: That
for this end he has "given some apostles, and some prophets, and some
evangelists, and some pastors and, teachers, for the perfecting the saints, for
the work of the ministry, for the edifying the body of Christ."

How supporting, how encouraging is it in the most trying seasons of adversity,
to be permitted to approach to the Almighty in those sealing ordinances, in
which he ratifies the promises of his grace; in which he admits the claim of
the children of his covenant on his favor and protection: in which he renews
and confirms the declarations of his grace and kindness toward them that hope
in his salvation, and are obedient to his word.

Do we derive support from religion in the silent hours of retirement? How much
more may we expect it in the use and enjoyment of those pledges of unchanging
goodness, to which we are invited, in the assemblies of his saints! That
furnishes a recollection of the grounds of peace and tranquillity, and of a
better hope, and more substantial enjoyments hereafter: But these are the
evidences, that enstamp with a sacred authority all the promises of God, become
a visible security, on the part of heaven for the accomplishment of his word,
and add strong consolation to the confidence of these, who have fled for
refuge, to the hope of the gospel.

In the

3d Place; it is a high advantage of public worship, that it is one of the best
means of promoting and strengthening the benevolent and social affections in
the human heart.

There is no situation in which men can possibly appear in so endearing a point
of light to one another, as when they are assembled in one society, to adore
the God and Father of the universe. No circumstance so effectually calls every
generous affection into exercise, as when they offer their united praises, join
in one common supplication before the mercy seat of heaven; and express their
earnest hope and expectation of living together forever in the enjoyment of
undivided blessings in the kingdom of God.

Here all distinctions die. All animosities and contentions cease. In the
presence of God we stand all on one common level. As sinners we are naturally
alike; in the same state of condemnation, entitled to the same hopes, liable to
the same fears, with an equal interest in the benefits of pardoning mercy, and
equally concerned in the worthy performance of the duties we are employed in.

How much is it to the interest of mankind, that those seasons, which habituate
them to consider one another in so pleasing a point of view, return as
frequently as possible! These are the most effectual means of softening and
humanizing the heart; and of promoting those noble and generous dispositions,
which are the highest ornament of human nature.

It may be thought, that moral virtue may subsist equally well independent of
religion. Articles of religious belief it may perhaps be said, are mere points
of speculation, which have little influence on the morals of mankind. But the
observances we are pleading for, have an indisputable effect on the sentiments
of the heart; and in proportion, must have a sensible influence on the life and
manners of the sincerely conscientious. In them, at least, they must promote a
generous philanthropy; and will become a strong security for their performance
of all the duties which they owe to society. Nay, even the inconsiderate and
unthinking, who have not experienced the sublime influence of religion in so
effectual a manner, may nevertheless be restrained by them in their career, and
become better members of the community. This appears to me to be a most
important consideration, in a young country, rising by a swift progress to
opulence and power. As a nation advances in these, the sources of luxury and
pleasure are multiplied, and generally produce a corruption and licentiousness
of morals: And this by a natural consequence leads the way to disorder and
destruction No sufficient guard has ever yet been devised by human wisdom
against this fatal process. In many respects it does not lie within the reach
of social regulations; but a sense of God and religion naturally restrains the
excesses which grow out of a state of prosperity, and teaches men to correct in
themselves, many of those levities, which, however pernicious their tendency in
society, cannot be suppressed by its laws. The reader is referred on this
subject, to an Essay on the influence of Religion in Civil Society, by the Rev.
Thomas R^^se.
While many it is to be expected, may be recovered from sin and folly, and
reinstated in the favor of heaven.

For the application of this subject:

What has been said on the advantages of public worship, may be considered as
an argument of our obligation to encourage and promote it.

You have well done, my brethren, who have entered on this useful, necessary
and interesting undertaking in this place. The success, which has thus far
followed your endeavors, and enabled you to repair a building for the worship
of God, which has so long lain useless and in ruins, is a pleasing intimation
of the favor of Providence on the design. What has already been effected,
ought to evince to you, with what facility you may accomplish any pious and
useful undertaking, when you act in concert and with a willing mind. With equal
ease, I doubt not, you will be able to proceed in the fulfillment of your plan,
in establishing amongst you, the ministry of the word of God. Considerable and
persevering exertions may still be requisite for that purpose.

Permit me, however, to remind you, that the object you have in view is well
worthy of all your attention. When obtained, it will bring with it a reward,
which will be of growing value to them that enjoy it, through all the changing
scenes of this mortal state, and which will shine with inextinguishable luster
in the world to come.

In this building you have opened a fountain from which, with the blessing of
God, will flow some of the most invaluable benefits to yourselves, to your
children, and to society. The word of truth, dispensed from this place, like a
river that enriches the soil, while it beautifies and adorns the country
through which it passes, will diffuse those streams of religious knowledge
which shall improve the heart and better the understanding, and add the beauty
of virtue to the life of many. No design could be better calculated to promote
individual or social happiness; for, while Christianity forms a man for the
enjoyment of himself, while it furnishes his mind with useful and interesting
sentiments, while it refines his soul, administers comfort to him in adversity,
and heightens his enjoyment in prosperity; while thus it multiplies and
enlarges his means of personal satisfaction, it renders him a more useful
member of the community. The example of a good man is a public benefit;
religion sheds a luster on his conduct which makes it venerable; his virtues
command the respect, and recommend themselves to the imitation of all around
him; his presence chases away vice and folly; and his conversation, generally,
is promotive of sound and useful knowledge.

In all the social characters men are improved by religion. The magistrate and
the private citizen, the ^^ther, the husband, the brother, the friend, the
ma^^^^, and even the servant, is enabled to act his part with more propriety,
and to fulfill the duties of his situation with integrity, in proportion as he
is under the influence and direction of the doctrines of Christianity. Religion
is the first bond of the social compact, the only tie of union among mankind,
which can preserve that harmony, good order, and decorum, which are essential
to the common good. We find that this formed the basis of those systems of
policy by which men have, from the earliest ages, been reduced to a state of
society; and if religion, darkened with ignorance and error, and burdened with
superstition, was so precious an instrument in the hands of the wisest
legislators and sovereigns, how much more may be expected from it when
illustrated and explained in the purity and under the authority of the gospel?

After all the parade that has been made of philosophy, of the light of
reason, and of natural virtue, it is to the influence of Christianity that we
are indebted for the greatest part of the refinement and purity of morals that
is to be found amongst men at this day. As Christianity has spread her light
around, learning and the liberal arts have been more cultivated and improved;
men have acquired a better knowledge of the general rights of human nature,
have framed wise and liberal systems of civil government, and are advancing
toward that state of light and purity when they shall no more hurt nor
destroy, and the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters cover the sea. But, above all, by the light of Christianity many are
conducted in the paths of truth and virtue, are instructed in the knowledge of
eternal life, and prepared for the everlasting blessings and felicities of the
kingdom of Heaven.

Such are the benefits you are obtaining, such the advantages which, by divine
goodness, you are enabled to promote in society; and you have the greater
reason to expect to succeed in it, when you recollect that it is a design on
which the divine approbation is pronounced, in such expressions as those in the
text -- The Lord loves the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
Private methods of instruction and improvement may obtain his blessing, and be
attended with advantage; but it is to public worship, and to the social use of
divine ordinances, that his favor is peculiarly promised. This auspicious day
places you, in that respect, in a situation the most eligible and promising.
Many motives arise from this consideration, to induce your stedfastness and
perseverance in promoting the cause which you have so seasonably and so
judiciously undertaken.

By these means you will contribute toward the advancement of the best
interests of society. You will provide for the dissemination of religious and
useful knowledge; you may probably have the satisfaction of reclaiming many
from the error of their ways; the benefit of your pious care will descend to
the latest posterity; and the blessing of millions, that were ready to perish,
will come upon you.

Go on, therefore, with the resolution and unanimity with which you have begun;
endeavor to strengthen amongst you the bonds of peace, and to be yourselves
living examples of that virtue, benevolence and justice, which are the
ornaments of human nature, and which it is the design of all religious
institutions to promote. Above all, endeavor to obtain those saving benefits
by the gospel, which, as they will add a luster to your character, and render
you a blessing to mankind, will also fit and prepare you for future happiness.
Use your advantages with a view to the renovation of your nature, and for your
improvement in all holy and godlike seize; that while, in the gospel, you
behold the glory of the Lord, as in a glass, you may be changed into the same
image, from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord; and may the God
of all grace shine upon you and bless you. In a peculiar manner may he own and
prosper this pious work, and cause the sun of righteousness to arise upon it
with blessings in his rays! Then shall your light go forth as the morning, and
your judgment as the noon day. AMEN.


