A TESTIMONY CONCERNING ACCEPTABLE WORSHIP TO ALMIGHTY GOD.

BY DENNIS GETCHEL, Late of Vassalborough, in New England.

PORTLAND: PRINTED BY THOMAS B. WAIT. AT HIS OFFICE IN FISHSTREET. 1794.

The following TESTIMONY concerning Acceptable Worship to Almighty God, was
given in writing by DNNIS GETCHELL, late of Vassalborough, in the eastern part
of New England, a little before his death, who was educated in the
Congregational or Presbyterian religion; was in the office of Captain and
afterward a Major, in the late war, and for some time a member of the general
court at Boston; he deceased aboat the month called April, 1791.
"I AM moved and disposed to leave this testimony for the truth, in humble
gratitude, praise and thanksgiving unto the great author and preserver of my
being, who in his mavelous loving kindness has visited my soul with a
sensible knowledge of what I now communicate; and that I have not been moved
thereunto by the advice, consultation or direction of any mortal; but purely
for the honor of the holy head of the church of God, and the good of my fellow
mortals, to bear testimony, that no man can acceptably worship the adorable
God, but in, through and by the influence of his own Eternal Spirit of Truth
and Rightcousness, in the pure silence of all flesh; not as some may imagine,
in senseless stupefaction or mere silence as to vocal declarations; but in an
entire abstraction from all earthly or fleshly cogitations; in which seasons of
holy passivity (all the effects of divine power) is there divine ability
imparted, in which the soul can acceptably worship the Almighty Maker of heaven
and earth, in a manner no form of words can reach, And I have this testimony to
leave for the truth, and for the sake of that only, that in diverse
opportanities of waiting upon the Lord in pure silence, with the people called
Quakers, in the time of my sickness; my soul (both with and without word) has
been made to rejoice in the living sense of God's salvation to my unspeakable
comfort, and to our mutual edification; and in unfeigned love to the uprigh:
hearted of this religious society of people, does my soul wish that grace,
mercy and peace may be multiplied among you.

"And I feel my soul impressed through a sense of duty to God, and as a warning
to others, who are or may have been made sensible of the truth as held by this
people, to freely own, that being blinded by the god of this world, in love
with the honor and friendship thereof, and through a fear of the shame of the
cross of Christ, I have been disobedient to the heavenly visitation of God's
love, and thereby deprived myself of many precious opportunities, that I
believe I should have been favored with, had I been faithful to the just
witness which (during the time of my confinement) I have often had deeply to
mourn for before God: I feel therefore desirous that none may slight the day of
their visitation, or shan the cross through fear of man, or the reproach of the
world, but that they may be prevailed upon to give cheerful obedience to the
dictates of truth in the mind, where is placed God's witness, a minister of the
sanctuary whom all ought to hear and obey.

"In testimony of my love to the pure worship of God, I do request and advise,
that my family meet with and attend the religious meetings of Friends.

"Given forth this sixth day of the fourth month 1791, at Vassalborough, as a
testimony for the truth, in the fear of God, under the enlivening influence of
good hope and desire that the Lord may make it useful for the promotion of
truth; and that he who is a just rewarder of all such as love, and diligently
seek him, will graciously condescend to receive this free will offering at my
hands, unto whom be all Glory, Honor, Majesty and Power, with everlasting
thanksgiving ascribed for evermore. Amen.

DENNIS GETCHELL."

Some Account of Dennis Getchell aforesaid, as certified by a person who was
well acquainted with him in Years past.
HE was a man of good natural abilities, and reputation in the parts where he
lived, having his residence at Vassalborough aforesaid, appearing strong in
argument, cogent in reasoning, deep in his researches after the origination of
matter and things, of a steady conduct; was deemed a good neighbor and an
useful member of civil society: After serving in several public stations (as
first mentioned) in the latter part of his life he had conferred on him a
commission of the peace: He had been convinced of the truth, relating to a
principle of inward light and grace being conferred on every man, as a pure
infallible teacher, consistent with the doctrine of the people called Quakers
(although it is slighted and spoken against by many professing christianity:)
And being upwards of twelve years ago remarkably reached and tendered in his
spirit under the testimony of a minister of that religious society, at a
meeting held near his dwelling, his mind was for some time apparently turned
from the sentiments received by education, with desires to take up the cross
and walk in a narrower way, which he then saw was necessary in order to obtain
inward peace; but his resolutions did not prove to be strong enough to withdraw
from, and withstand the stream he had been accustomed to, in regard to worldly
friendship with the maxims and honors thereof, so as to make a solid progress
in the true christian path of self denial; therefore, although he retained a
regard for the society called Quakers, he never joined himself among them as a
member: When his health declined, through the prevalence of a sore disorder, he
was visited with a sense of divine mercy, and it is hoped he witnessed
forgiveness of sins; often greatly bemoaning his folly and disobedience in not
being faithful to the inward principle of truth and its discoveries of
christian duty, which he had been favored to see in time path was a sore way
of obtaining salvation. The humble penitent state of his mind near the close of
his life, appears from the tenor of his expressions heareafter inserted: Out of
the many of like nature which he uttered in the time of his illness; these
following having been faithfully preserved in writing, were lately communicated
for more general benefit to a person at Provindence in the State of
Rhodeisland, by one of said Getchell's near neighbors, who was formerly a
magistrate of that place, and remains to be a person of good reputation and
undoubted veracity.

Upon his giving over any expectation of help from physicians at the place
where he lived, he concluded to embark for Boston, and being about to take
leave of his near connections and others, in an opportunity at that time
happening, he appeared to be much contrited; but being evidently under the
refining hand of divine power, which purifies from nature's dross (although
heretofore he mostly had words at will) he was now so reduced and curbed in by
an awful sense of his own unworthiness, before the Supreme Judge of the world,
that he said; "notwithstanding it looks very dark and uncertain, whether I
shall ever see my family any more; yet I am so shut up that I cannot
communicate any advice or instruction to them; I can only utter words without
life: The Almighty has shut my mouth, and whether ever it will please him to
open it again, I know not; and if I am not favored to speak in the life, I
must leave them without a word, however trying."

Taking leave, he said, "Friends, all I can say is farewell," which he uttered
in a broken manner.

Not long after his return from Boston (being also given over by the physicians
there) he seemed favored with a sense of divine mercy, in the living hope of
pardon and salvation; and many of his relations and neighbors being present,
he warned them to beware of the polutions and vanities of the world; and
strongly advised them to restrain their families from going out into company,
and not to indulge their children in frequenting places of ill example, as he
said he had too much done in his time; he warned them in a particular manner
against the pernicious principle of Deism; and also the Universalian principle,
as imbibed by many nowadays; touching a belief that none are to be
perpetually punished after death, whatever their actions may have been in life;
"this (said he) has a tendency to induce people to think light of God's
attributes, mercy and judgment; to which principle I had given too much
attention, to the scattering of my own mind from the pure principle of truth:
Oh, beware of its suggestions, whereby many I fear are captivated to the rain
of their poor immortal souls," with much more to the same purpose: At another
time he said in substance thus, "Words do not seem to me as once they did; I
often feel shut up, and cannot say a word; some people come in, and think they
must do something; and so without life (or with unsanctified lips) speak of
things they have only heard with their (outward) ears; but it is a burden to
me: At other times I feel such openness, that I fear I shall exceed my bounds,
if you see this to be my case, pray admonish me." -- He often desired to
collect his family, when friends came, saying, "I have no opportunity of
getting out to meetings," upon which occasions there appeared evident tokens of
divine goodness being near.

At one time while some persons sat with him at supper, he said in a very
sensible and feeling manner, "I have often (when sitting at meat) besought the
Lord for more substantial food than this, which must perish; for the bread of
life which comes from heaven; and oh, may we all be so preserved through life,
as to meet in heaven, there is happiness without mixture and without end." At
another time soon after one had entered the room (and they being alone) he said
nearly as follows, "I have been made sensible of the nature of acceptable
worship, through the emblem of the flowing and ebbing of the tide, which is by
a secret influence unknown to man; that as the tide flows into rivers, rivulets
and creeks, and again returns to the ocean, so it is as the love and spirit of
God flows into the mind, when reduced into pure silence, it is in that which
returns to the ocean of (love) that God is acceptably worshipped, and there is
no other way, therefore I am convinced that Friends are before any other
people; and my faith is such, that those who are thus in the fellowship of one
spirit, feel the flowings thereof into one another minds: But oh! how have I
despised and trampled on the blessed truth, through a contempt of its small
appearence, as others now do; my sense of the greatness of my pride and
rebellion is such, that I think my suffering light, and that I shall have
further chastisement yet; though so it is, in the extreme anguish I am apt to
think it is enough."

At another time he said "There was a person came to see me to day (naming him)
being a man of note: And another (being one who had been convinced of the
truth, and gone from it) and immediately it struck my mind whether I should not
be ashamed of Christ's words, if any were given me to speak, and, through fear
of the shame of the cross, I began instantly as words were given; and I have
this to say, truth will comfort the believers, and cause devils to tremble:"
And speaking of the one above hinted, that was gone from the truth, said, "he
is endeavoring to patch up something, but never will obtain peace until he
returns to the place from whence he went out: Truth is over all, and no
substitute will answer in its room: Many are making to themselves something
they think looks like it, but nothing will answer but the truth itself; it is
over all and the possession of it will enable a man to forsake all: Ten
thousand worlds, one upon the back of another, would be no inducement to me, to
live as I have lived. In the world is pollution, yea, there is poison in every
vein of it."

At another time he said, "Oh! that a search may go through the churches, and
none be contented with a name, and in the end be disappointed:" At another time
he said, "the help of man is vain, yea, even though they were princes; my trust
and dependence is only on God, who has power and can help; I am waiting in
hopes, that in his own time he will arise for my help, which will be the best
time: He is just, and if he should cast me off forever, I feel nothing in me
that can say, what do thou? If I perish, it shall be at the feet of his
power, begging mercy:" At another time "We are but as children under age, and
don't know what is best for us: We need a wise and tender parent to guide and
direct us, it is necessary that we should know on whom to depend; this keeps us
poor and begging."

About two minutes before his departure his brother asking him how it was with
him, he said, "my trust and dependence is upon a merciful God."


