THE HAUNTED PRIORY: OR, THE FORTUNES OF THE HOUSE OF RAYO. A ROMANCE. FOUNDED
PARTLY ON HISTORICAL FACTS.

-- Hic murus (...) este,
Nil conscire sibi, nulla (...).
NEW YORK: PRINTED BY J. CARRY (...) MATTHEW CAREY, PHILADELPHIA. 1794.

THE HAUNTED PRIORY.
CHAP. I.
IT was on a cold and stormy December evening in the beginning of the
fourteenth century, and not long after that fortunate period when Peter
surnamed the Cruel was cut off from a life which he had stained with bloodshed,
rapine, and oppression, that a stranger entered a village situated on the banks
of the Tagus, near the eastern extremity of the kingdom of Castile, in Spain.
He was old, and, though withered* of gigantic stature -- his large snow-white
beard (...) in the sleeting wind -- (...) black baize (...) buckled with a
(...) loins -- he had on his feet sandal (...), and on his back he carried a
large (...) while a long staff, ornamented on the top with a cross, sustained
his wearied steps. He stopped at the door of the first neat-looking cottage
that presented itself, and, asking whether he could be accommodated with
lodging for the night, was answered in the affirmative, and requested to walk
in. Being seated, at the desire of the people of the house, he told them that
he wanted not only lodging for the night, but food also; and apprised them at
the same time that he had nothing to offer them in return, but his prayers and
a tune of his harp.

Your prayers we earnestly desire, father, replied a young man -- but other
return we wish not, no^ should accept. Even your harp, whatever delight it may
afford us, shall remain untouched, if offered in way of compensation for (...)
little accommodation our poor ^ut can bestow (...) indeed, continued he, I
consider it to be a fortunate circumstance that you should have called (...)
this particular season of the year, when, (...) conformity to the established
customs of our (...), we are provided with better means of (...) you than we
should be at any other time.

(...) suffusion of red, that bespoke something more than gratitude, overspread
the aged face of the Pilgrim -- he laid his hands upon his breast -- ^ent his
head (...) acknowledgment -- (...) -- then sighed and said, (...) his words
(...) struggling for a passage, He that (...) thy heart, good youth! with the
true spirit of beneficence, will give thee the reward of it.

A table was then spread with the best provisions which the cottage afforded --
and the whole family, consisting of the young man already mentioned, his wife,
an old man his father, and two children, sat down with the stranger to a frugal
but wholesome supper: a pitcher of tolerable wine concluded the feast; the
young man earnestly pledging his aged guest to drink.

The enlivening influence of hospitality, and the unaffected cheerfulness and
good nature of the cottagers, insensibly relaxed the austerity of the old
Pilgrim, and warmed him into co^^^^^^tion -- He listened with pleasure to the
(...) detail of rustic enjoyment, and the artless acknowledgments of domestic
bliss -- At length Happy, says he, my son! most supremely happy is thy lot, if
there be happiness found on earth, and you have the wisdom to understand it --
God has given thee greater riches than are to be ^o^nd in the palaces of
princes, or in the stately domes of the affluent. I remember the time indeed,
when the castle of a ^obleman, or the arm of a knight, were the never-failing
refuge of distress, in whatsoever garb distress appeared; and when the proud
turrets of the nobility burst upon the ^ight of the oppressed or unfortunate,
(...) ^^n on the eye of the (...); cheering, enlivening, (...) -- Then reigned
over this (...) Alphonso the wise, the valiant, and the good -- But now at
every gate savage inhospitality, with stern denial, rudely opposes the entrance
of the poor, and chills the woe-worn heart of misery; but crouches and basely
bends the servile knee of respect to the pampered knave of fortune -- O
gracious God! -- from such let my steps (...) turned for ever.

Ah, father! interrupted the young man, pardon the presumption of youthful
zeal, which thus ventures to break on thy discourse: but little should I merit
your good opinion, if I suffered you uninformed to say that now, which
tomorrow's setting sun should see thee retract -- Tomorrow, God willing, thou
shall see a man --

What man? interrupted the stranger warmly.

Oh! such a man! -- the husband of the widow -- (...) of the orphan -- the
never-failing (...) of the distressed -- humble though wealthy -- though
valiant, gentle as the new-dropt lamb.

Young man, your youthful heart, impressed with some partial act of generosity,
some unimportant benefit, rendered perhaps in a moment of capricious virtue,
overflows with a gratitude which blinds you; a gratitude which speaks more for
you than for the object of it: -- generous yourself, you over-rate the favors
conferred upon you by others -- This is an error, but I confess, an amiable
one; and no uncertain pledge of a worthy heart -- But who is this man, this
very, (...) character of whom you speak*

Here every mouth involuntarily opened, and at the same instant pronounced Don
Isidor.

Don Isidor! -- who? what Don Isidor? impatiently exclaimed the Pilgrim.

Don Isidor de Haro, returned the host.

Don Isidor de Haro! -- Good Heavens! -- Young man, recollect yourself -- say
-- what Don Isidor de Haro? -- Is he of this country, or how long has he lived
in it?

As to his native country, I cannot say any thing with certainty, returned the
young man; but I believe he is a Castilian by birth -- He has been here but a
short time, yet in that short time has gained the affections of all ranks of
people.

Here the old man of the cottage took up the account with -- It is only two
years since Don Isidor came here to take possession of the castle and estate of
Duerro, which he honorably obtained from the affection of our good king, as a
reward for his services: -- where he came from I know not, but I have heard
that he was all his life before in the wars.

The stranger rose suddenly from his feat, took two or three hasty strides
across the room, (...) bitterly; then again, sitting down* (...) entranced in
meditation: while the (...) struck with awful astonishment at his (...),
remained silent -- At length, (...) ^^^^vering himself -- Pardon, good people
said (...) the emotions occasioned by the (...) recollection of some passages
of a life strangely checquered with the vicissitudes of fortune -- But this Don
Isidor de Haro, then, is a good man, you say, though rich! -- Is he married?

He was married, but his lady had been dead sometime before his coming here;
his domestics say that sorrow for her death has driven him to this retired
life. His grief seems unaltered and undiminished by time, though it said that
he was at the first quite serene and calm under it.

Has he any children? --

Yes, father! he has two: the young gentleman, Don Alphonso, his eldest, is now
about fourteen years of age.

Alphonso! has he indeed a son named Alphonso?

He has -- the noblest youth that lives -- I have the honor to be employed by
Don Isidor as one of his instructors.

Then you are a scholar?

Thanks to Providence, I am not entirely ignorant of letters, but by no means
such a scholar (...) instruct that young gentleman in letters -- Father Thomas
who lives at the castle does that, but I teach and practice him in some of the
athletic exercises; for you must know that there is not one necessary to a
soldier, or becoming a gentleman, in which he is not diligently instructed; nor
is there a youth of some years older than him in the country, that can equal
him at any of them: -- besides, he is reckoned (...) most accomplished scholar
for his age; and as to his person, you will judge of that when you see it: I
will not pretend to describe it.

Donna Isabella, the daughter, continued he, is about eight years old, they
say, but has been ever since her mother's death with a sister of Don Isidor,
who is married to a nobleman in the court of Portugal; and it is said by the
domestics that she is a child of unequalled beauty; and that as Don Alphonso
shows in every motion the spirit and vigor of Don Isidor, so Donna Isabella
every day discloses more and more the delicate luster of beauty, and excellent
temper of her deceased mother.

Don Isidor then must be happy, (...) the Pilgrim. Blessed with wealth, power,
children, such as you describe, and, above (...) with the well-merited
affections of his vassals and dependents, he must approach as near to happiness
as the state of mortality will allow.

Some say not, replied the peasant. Those who have the constant opportunity of
observing him remark, that he labors under some hidden melancholy: indeed, all
allow that he has never been the same since the death of his lady; and were it
not for the amusements he finds in the instruction of his son, the employment
of his (...) in contriving and executing acts of beneficence, and in the
conversation of the good Father Thomas, it is thought that he must have (...)
beneath the weight of his afflictions. -- Indeed, Father Thomas is a most
excellent man; for, besides his extraordinary piety, he is extremely
charitable, and as a preacher and pastor is unequalled: -- but tomorrow,
father, you will see them all -- Don Isidor will expect you. No one, whatever
his condition may be, passes without calling at the castle; and it is a part of
the young gentleman Alphonso's business to watch lest they should accidentally
pass by, and to bring them home with him, from whence they generally carry away
a good supply of clothes and food. Nay, I doubt not but that while we indulge
ourselves here with the enjoyment of your company, we may run the hazard of
(...) Don Isidor, by not having (...) you to him at first.

Little more passed that night -- The fatigues of the day called upon the old
stranger to retire to his (...), and the cottagers sought, by timely repose, to
prepare for the labors of the ensuing day.

CHAP. II.
NEXT morning the Pilgrim, after having bestowed on his hosts a hearty
benediction, and his thanks for their hospitable shelter, took his leave, and
proceeded on his way toward the castle of Duero. It was little less than a
quarter of a league from the cottage to the avenue; and as he walked very
slowly, deeply immersed in thought, the day was advanced when he got to the
gate of it. Here seeing that the mansion was at a distance little short of that
(...) he had already come, he sat himself down (...) a large stone bench, in
order to rest himself and discuss at leisure the variety of subjects which
occupied his thoughts, from the discourse of the preceding night -- He had not
been long seated, when he perceived a number of boys running toward him, with
the speed of a flock of frighted deer; one outstripped the rest, and, leaving
them far behind, reached the stranger before he had time to form a conjecture
upon the novelty of his appearance. If the (...) man was surprised at the
swiftness of his pace, he was (...) at his personal appearance, and (...) at
his address. The full, (...) of his limbs, and the large (...) bones, displayed
a stature gigantic for his age, and promised a proportionate share of strength:
his face, in which manly fire, dignity and sensibility were blended, glowed
with the colors of health and exercise; while an air at once majestic and
insinuating diffused a charm over the whole, that operated like a spell upon
the beholder. Addressing the old man with a mixture of respect, admiration, and
pity, he said, I hope, Senor, you have not been long sitting in this place, so
unworthy your reverend appearance and years; should it be so, I shall have to
accuse myself of an unpardonable neglect, for which I should certainly receive
a severe reproof from Don Isidor. How far have you traveled this morning?
(...) you breakfasted or taken any refreshments? and (...) a moisture
collecting in the old man's eyes, Do, dear Sir, get up, and I will lead you to
a place where you shall refresh yourself with food and repose, and where you
will meet with a hearty reception. Here he reached forth his hand to the
Pilgrim, who grasping it in a mixed ecstacy of transport and amazement,
snatched it hastily to his lips, and bedewed it with tears of affection. O
wondrous youth! exclaimed he, whomsoever thou art, whom God has (...) on a
model all his own, lead on -- I will follow you any where -- every where. He
could no more -- utterance was choked (...) tumult of his feelings, and he
walked (...) along, his young guide holding him by (...) his fingers, which he
had caught in the excess of his rapture, and still retained with a firm grasp,
while the other boys, who had come up one after the other, surrounded them,
gazing alternately at the beard, the dress, and the harp which hung at the back
of the Pilgrim.

As they proceeded along -- Is Don Isidor at home, my dear? interrogated the
old man -- No, Senor, he has been abroad for some days, but all the servants
have directions to obey punctually my orders in my father's absence, and you
shall be well treated though he be not at home. To be sure, he will be greatly
delighted on his return, which is now hourly expected, to (...) you here; for
nothing gives him so much pleasure as the company of strangers: at the
farthest, he will certainly be back tomorrow: mean time, whenever my talk
wearies you, Father Thomas will keep you in conversation more entertaining, as
well as more suitable to the gravity of your years.

At length they arrived at the gate of the (...). On its being opened, the
stranger was surprised to find himself saluted with as much respect as if he
had been a prince, by the keeper, who emphatically pronounced, Welcome,
stranger, whoever thou art, welcome to the castle of ^^ero! The old man felt
sensations to which (...) ha^ long been a stranger. As they (...) through the
courtyard, they were (...) by a (...), who said, Don Alphonso, the (...) are
ready. It is very well, Pierot, replied the youth; I will but introduce this
stranger to Father Thomas, and attend directly. Upon which the Pilgrim turning
to his young friend said, Let me not, I beseech you, young gentleman, detain
you from your pleasures. Though the days of youth are past with me, I well
remember the painfulness of restraint; and I already feel too great an interest
in your heart, to run the hazard of losing any share of it by taxing your
kindness too severely.

Indeed, returned the youth, the delight I feel in attending you would more
than compensate for the loss of any pleasure. The servant who just now spoke,
came to call me to my riding-master: riding is a part of my daily exercise; but
attending you is a duty much more material in itself, and much more productive
of pleasure to me.

Having brought his guest into the (...), Alphonso led him into the great hall,
placed him in the chair, and gave orders that immediate preparation should be
made for his accommodation and refreshment; which Donna Ursula, the house
keeper, received with a heart burning with rage, and a face expressive at once
of mortification and contempt.

Going from the great hall, Ursula was met in the passage by Father Thomas. --
Here is (...) work going forward, said she, in the great (...). -- I thought
what would come of Don Isidor (...) foolish orders -- I suppose we shall have
the place full of ^ermin -- Why this is worse again than the work he made about
the three ragged rascals of soldiers with the wooden legs.

Patience, patience, good madam! interrupted Father Thomas -- What means this
torrent of presumptuous expressions to which you have given utterance? why
those unseemly gesticulations and strange marks of displeasure?

Go into the parlour and see, replied the furious Ursula -- There Don Alphonso
has got a beggarly old musician in his honor's great chair, and has ordered
breakfast for the fellow in as great state as if he was a cavalier or a knight
of St. Jago, although he has not got a maravedi's worth of clothes upon his
back, and very likely, if he could get clear off, would rob the house of
whatever he could lay his hands on.

Woman, interrupted the reverend Thomas, in a tone of stern reproof, hold thy
sinful tongue, nor dare presumptuously to give utterance to such expressions in
my hearing* obey with silent respect the orders you have received; recollect
that you are a servant, and dare not to call in question the commands of him
that feeds you: your want of charity demands a penance of another kind, which
at a proper time I will not ^ail to exact; but your insolence now calls for the
(...) which disobedient, (...) the hands of their masters: (...) your duty, and
let me hear no more of your comments on my noble child's conduct, or I vow I
will speak to Don Isidor on his return, and make him turn you to the world, and
consign you for an existence to that charity which you would deny to others.

To be sure -- as your reverence says, exclaimed the terrified Ursula.

Begone! I say -- and let me hear no more of it.

Thus saying, Father Thomas proceeded to the great hall. Upon his entrance
Alphonso sprang across it, took him by the hand, and led him over to the old
man, who immediately rose, bent his aged knees, and besought his blessing;
which the holy man bestowed upon him, raising him at the same time from the
ground, and replacing him in the great chair.

Father Thomas then took a chair, seated himself, and, having surveyed the
stranger with an earnest and scrutinizing eye, sighed, and pressed the hand of
Alphonso with a warmth expressive of approbation; then addressing himself to
the old man, Have you traveled far this morning, Senor? said he.

Only from the adjoining village, returned the other, where I was treated with
cheerfulness and hospitality that would charm the stubborn heart of misanthropy
itself, by a young man, who said that he was, if I am not mistaken, one of this
young gentleman's preceptors.

It is Juanico, cried Alphonso in rapture -- (...) Juanico was able, he would
be as generous as the first nobleman in Spain.

Alphonso left the stranger and Father Thomas in discourse, while he attended
his duty in the menage -- When that was dispatched, he impatiently returned,
and found he had finished his breakfast. The whole day he employed in showing
him the gardens, woods, vineyards and castle: the armoury particularly
attracted the old man's attention -- he looked with an eye of skilful curiosity
at every part, each in its turn. Do you not wish, my dear, said he to Alphonso,
to be able to wear these? I do very much, returned the youth; ^ay, I am pretty
sure that I am able even now; for I can run with Sancho Perez, the biggest boy
you ^aw with me, on my back, against Juanico, who entertained you in the
village; and I am sure Sancho is twice as heavy as one of these. -- And why do
you not try? interrogated the other. -- I am afraid, replied Alphonso, that Don
Isidor would suspect me of vanity, and I know there is nothing he hates so much
as vanity. -- My dear, my noble child, cried the Pilgrim, modesty like (...)
should not go unrewarded; and if Don Isidor will deign to pay any attention to
a poor man like me, you shall on his return have a trial. -- Ah, Sir, returned
Alphonso, my father regards (...) poor as much as the rich, where he finds
(...) honest and brave -- but surely you are not (...) ^oor man -- I think you
a very great man. -- An undescribable sensation thrilled to the old man's
heart. He seized Alphonso in his arms, held him for some time clasped in his
embrace, and wept. Alphonso wept too -- he could ^ot tell why -- his young
heart was agitated with unaccustomed sensations of delight, and he smiled
through his tears: the luster of natural majesty broke through the sable weeds
that veiled it, and the dignified mind of the youth, in estimating the worth of
his fellow creature, laid no account on that of his clothes.

Next morning, while Alphonso and his new friend were engaged in the armoury,
the trampling of horses announced the arrival of Don Isidor. Father Thomas met
and retired with him into his closet: as soon as permission was granted him,
Alphonso flew to embrace his father: when the mutual manifestations of
affection were over, O father, said Alphonso, I have got you a visitor in the
house. -- So I have been told by Father Thomas, my dear; I entirely approve of
your behavior to him, and thank you for so very honorably representing me in
my absence: I am the more pleased with your attention to him, because he is so
very poor a man.

Poor! repeated Alphonso -- surely, father, you mistake -- he is not poor -- I
never saw a grander man in my life.

Do not depreciate your own charity, my dear, said Father Thomas -- you cannot
but (...) observed the extreme poverty of his dress.

His dress! No indeed, said Alphonso, I took no notice of his dress: if it be
poor, as you say, I am sure I am sorry for it* for I cannot help loving him.
And turning to Don Isidor, I respect him as much -- almost as much as if it was
yourself: -- then he has such a commanding air -- and he talks so grandly of
war, and honor, and courage, and armor, that I am sure he would delight you.

What Alphonso says is not entirely void of foundation, said Father Thomas.

Well, then, said Don Isidor, tell your friend that I kiss his hands, and shall
be glad to see him by and by in the great hall.

He is there now, said Alphonso; I hear the sound of his harp.

Then let us go to him, my dear.

On their entering into the hall, the old man rose, and, with a deportment
majestic beyond expression, saluted Don Isidor; who, on his part, received him,
not with that arrogant (...) of humility which mortifies more than any other
exertion of pride, but with that unfeigned condescension which made every
benefit he ^^^ferred valued less for the magnitude of the (...) than the
cheerfulness of the giver. In truth, he felt in the present case a veneration,
if not (...) imposed upon him by the figure before him.

I will not, said the old man, do so much injustice to the character of Don
Isidor (...) suppose, that the footing on which (...) a person of my humble
appearance in his castle will subject Don Alphonso to the imputation of
rashness, or me to the censure of forward intrusion. Don Isidor may be assured,
that the kindness of the youth (flattering though it was) should not have been
accepted, had not universal report persuaded me that it would have been
approved by his father.

Venerable Senor, returned Don Isidor, I hope you will find that your opinion,
and the report which gave it birth, are not entirely misplaced. My boy, whose
whole life has been one continued series of acts the most grateful to my
feelings, has never done one more productive of satisfaction to me than
procuring me the honor of your company. I am not, continued he, a man of much
ceremony. And shall therefore only tell you, that my guests are, to all intents
of hospitality, masters of this castle; and I beg that you will co^^ider
yourself so. Do me the favor to take your seat, and I will again wait upon
you, as soon as I have given some necessary orders.

When Don Isidor retired to his apartment, he could not help reflecting on the
extraordinary appearance of the stranger. Pilgrims and itinerant bards he had
often seen, but never one that at all resembled this, in whom he imagined he
could distinguish the remains of the warring and the defaced ruins of the man
of dignity. That he was of a rank far above his present seeming, he had not the
smallest doubt; but what that rank had been, or how he had fallen from it, he
could not conceive, and he feared to enquire: even conjecture was lost in the
wide field of calamitous events. While he was embarrassed in this confusion of
thoughts, Alphonso entered. There is something, my child, said Don Isidor, in
this old veteran's manners, which exacts more than common respect, and bespeaks
him of superior rank, though fallen. I confess an invincible curiosity to know
who and what he is; but, as the recollection of such things must be painful, I
will rather content myself with ignorance of the matter than indulge my
curiosity at the risk of giving a single pang to his aged heart: I will
therefore be silent on the subject, unless he chooses of his own accord to
disclose himself to me. At all events, the great hall is a place where the
difficulty he may have to be communicative must be increased by the frequent
entrance of servants. I wish, my dear, to acquit myself to you of a vice which
I have so often and so vehemently reprobated to you, and therefore declare,
that not idle curiosity, but an anxious desire to heal, if possible, the wounds
that fortune may have inflicted on him, induces me to this; I will therefore
direct one of the servants to wait upon him with my respects, and inform him
that I shall be obliged to (...) company in my closet.

Then, Sir, said Alphonso, I had better go myself: will it not appear more
respectful?

Thank you for your hint, my child, said Don Isidor: you speak my very soul.

Alphonso was not long away, when he returned leading in the old man in the
same manner as he had led him up the avenue. Don Isidor was surprised at
perceiving that he had brought his harp with him. Being seated at the desire of
Don Isidor, he proceeded, without a word, to tune his harp, while his face
exhibited marks of strong emotions, and seemed pregnant with extraordinary
events. Don Isidor would not break in upon him. After a short prelude, he began
to play, accompanying it with his voice. Melancholy had set her stamp on every
note he sung. Don Isidor, who heedfully attended, to catch (...) his verses a
clue to his sorrows, was for a time all ear. -- He sung of fortune and fame
(...), of friends and children lost, and of the miseries of an unconnected,
isolated existence here. Then he sung of war, till his harp, seeming to catch
the enthusiasm of its master, struck (...) martial sounds as roused the blood
of Don Isidor, and filled the young Alphonso with an ardour he was before a
stranger to. Hence he skilfully turned to the happy state of Don Isidor, whose
armor hung up at once a monument of (...) owner's former prowess and present
peaceful honors, and a lesson of emulation to the rising spirit of his son.
Don Isidor at this part (...) his eyes, which before had lost their functions
in attention to the song, on the old man, whose face, glowing with the awakened
enthusiasm of his spirit, beamed with the glories of the warrior and the bard.
In mute amazement he for a while gazed, tracing the lineaments of a countenance
familiar to him, yet unknown -- thrice he essayed to speak, but, lost in
surmise, astonishment, and doubt, as often faltered. At length, with difficulty
mastering the tumult within him, he said, Ah, Sire! am I mistaken, or do I
behold -- do I see the once beloved and ever revered -- the glorious --
Unfortunate Baron de Rayo! interrupted the old man.

Don Isidor had barely strength sufficient to rise and throw his arms about the
Baron's neck -- there, locked in a firm embrace, he held him for some (...),
speechless with delight, while Alphonso endeavored to encircle both in his
arms, kissed the garments of both by turns, and wept and lang^ed together. At
length Don Isidor's great heart finding vent, he exclaimed -- How, how is this?
-- Alas! Alas! do I live to see this day -- the great Baron de Rayo, the
glorious and the good -- the plume of science, the thunderbolt of war! -- Do I
live to see him thus? -- do I live to see my first friend, my (...), he whose
instruction and example first (...) my youthful spirit forth, pointed out the
path to glory, and led the way to deeds (...) and (...) -- divested of his
honors and (...) -- traveling unattended, unaccommodated, like a minstrel,
through the country! -- Why, why is this? Penance it cannot be, for thy soul
was as incapable of guilt as thy spirit of dishonor. Say, then, my friend, my
parent, how comes this to pass? and why is the transport which I feel at thus
finding thee restored as it were from the dead, counterpoised with the anguish
of seeing thee thus fallen? Say, too, what of Gonsalvo, the dear companion of
my youthful days?

All this time Alphonso stood in a gaze of wonder -- the tears coursing each
other in quick succession down his cheeks.

Don Isidor, said the Baron, whatever my griefs (...) be, I have yet room left
in my bosom for a large portion of joy to see you once more, and to see you so
happy. Here Don Isidor shook his head. -- I say again happy, continued the
Baron. The human mind, prone to discontent, will, if it lack real cause of
misery, forge for itself (...) and arrows out of the best benefits of life. You
have had your afflictions, and I have some conception of them; but by the time
you have heard my tale, you will allow, that all the sorrows you have suffered
were joys, compared with mine. But see this tender lamb, his heart (...) to
aught but happiness, shrinks (...) bare suggestion of our woes; let us spare
(...) recital which would only shock his gentle (...), and serve no purpose of
instruction or utility. Another time --

My dear, said Don Isidor, speaking to Alphonso, could you not find something
to amuse you for a short time?

Yes, Sir, certainly, said Alphonso: there is a suit of armor below, which
your noble guest observed this morning would fit me; and, asking me if I ever
had one on, and telling him not, declared he wished to be the first to arm me.
That, with Don Isidor's permission, I will go and get cleaned up, that I may
have the pleasure at once of trying it, and complying with our guest's desire.

Which ^is it? said Don Isidor: is it mine? Yours! Lord! no, Sir -- it is the
small one, the French cavalier's,

Do as you please, my dear, in this instance^ and for the future, in all cases
in which this gentleman directs you, remember that my advice or concurrence may
be dispensed with: go, then, my child, and on what has just now passed between
my friend and me, let your lips (...) sealed with silence.

Alphonso bowed in token of assent, and left the room.

As soon as he was gone, It is an old observation, said the Baron, conceived in
wisdom and (...) on experience, that wherever (...) there is a fool and a knave
in the case. I, for my part, think better of both of us than to offer flattery,
or to expect it to be received: I shall therefore frankly declare, that in that
youth, who has now left us, Don Isidor possesses a treasure more than
equivalent to all the losses of his life. Why it is, I know not, but it is
certainly a truth, that, from the instant I beheld him, I felt myself so tied
to him by the strongest cords of affection, that to separate him from me would
be to tear every ligament of my heart asunder. -- But I delay my promised
history; and much I fear that the pain some passages of it cannot fail to give
you, will be but poorly requited by the gratification of your curiosity.

CHAP. III. The Baron's Relation.
ALPHONSO Baron de Rayo, thou well rememberest, was of no mean distinction --
his castle was as strong, his wealth as great, his vassals as numerous, as any
peer's in the kingdom of Castile, and his renown in war, and favor with his
prince, not less the topic of admiration with the nation at large than the
subject of envy to his enemies: -- his fortunes seemed founded on a rock, and
his honors and domestic circumstances to bid defiance to the storms of
adversity -- such they were when last we parted.

Heaven had spared me one daughter, the only remaining child of a numerous
progeny; the rest followed their beauteous mother to the grave, ere yet they
reached the age of puberty. This and more thou already know; but as it makes
a link in the great chain of events I propose to relate, I choose to be
circumstantial, even though it should render me tedious. In the possession of
that daughter, and the resignation which, as a Christian, I owed to the will of
Heaven, I buried the remembrance of all my losses; and failing in male issue,
and being determined never to marry again, I adopted the son of my sister, the
young Henry Gonsalvo, reared him as my own, and hoped, by my influence with the
king, to get the title and honors of the old house of Rayo entailed upon him
and his issue.

At this time your father, the younger brother of a respectable branch of our
house, bespoke my patronage for you -- I took you to my castle, and, fancying
that I saw in you the dawnings of future greatness, determined to train you
early up to arms. Your progress and unfolding powers justified my hopes; nor
can I recollect many passages of my life that pleased me more than beholding,
in the brotherly contests of emulation between you and my Henry, the victory
hang now on this side now on that, till both were exhausted; for so perfect was
the equality between you at the close of ten years, in which you continued
together under my eye, that it remained doubtful which excelled in vigor,
dexterity, and martial ardour; or which in tenderness, fidelity, and mutual
attachment. I looked upon you both with pride -- with hope -- and flattered
myself that in each I saw a second self arising. But what was my exultation,
when, our glorious king Alphonso calling me to the war (...) Moors, I brought
you both with me, and (...) that your actions exceeded my most sanguine
expectation! The king, you know, on the taking of Algeziras, honored you with
knighthood, and gratified (...) fond wish by entailing the family honors and
title on Henry Gonsalvo.

When our most beloved monarch, the friend and patron of our house, and the
father of his people, died at the fatal siege of the Moorish fort Gibraltar, I
retired in despondence and grief, and brought Gonsalvo with me; while you,
arrested by a thirst for glory, and disdaining a life of inactive dependence,
remained behind. We returned -- Henry loaded with honors, and I exulting in
the reflection, that the reputation of our family, for ages celebrated in the
field, and distinguished for valor and loyalty, was likely to suffer no
diminution in the hands of its new representative.

We had not been long at home, when I had the additional satisfaction to
perceive a^ event ripening which from the first I had anxiously desired, and
which alone was wanting to give full completion to all the wishes or views I
had on this side the grave: in short, I perceived that a reciprocal affection
was growing apace in (...) bosoms of Gonsalvo and my daughter; and being
determined, neither on the one hand to injure their love by anticipated
concurrence, (...) to throw any obstacles in their way by too vigilant
observation, I gave the young (...) just as much time for uninterrupted
communication as I thought would serve to strengthen their flame, without
consuming their affection. Every thing turned out correspondent to my
intentions. Henry, fearful of the event, retired to his father's house, and
from thence gave me, by letter, a disclosure of his passion, with many
expressions of apprehension; and above all, deprecating my suspicions of
perfidy and breach of hospitality in having paid his addresses privately to my
daughter. I spoke to Maria with all the delicacy I could; though I already
knew, desired to be made the friendly confidant of her sentiments; and assured
her that my consent should not be wanting to make her happy. Overspread wi^h
blushes, and almost sinking with apprehensions and diffidence, she modestly
avowed her love. O Isidor! her appearance, her manner, her every word and look
at that instant recalled to my mind the dear deceased partner of my soul, when
blushing she gave herself to my arms. -- Here the Baron averted his face, and
covering his eyes with his hand, remained a few moments in silent agony. But
recollecting himself, he exclaimed -- This should not be -- but sad remembrance
will obtrude itself.

A tear fell from Don Isidor, and the Baron resumed his story.

At this period Peter called forth all his (...), to crush a confederacy formed
against him (...) some discontented nobles, at the head of which were his
mother and his half brother. (...) was the legitimate son of our lamented king
Alphonso; and I thought it my duty to defend him, without examining the merits
of his cause. Gonsalvo and I accordingly set out to join the royal standard. I
will not enlarge upon the disgust the tyrant's whole conduct gave us: it
however served to lessen, if not entirely remove the regret I felt at finding
you had long been a follower of the fortunes of Henry Count Transtamare, his
brother. You were right, as it has turned out; but I acted upon principles of
loyalty and allegiance, and find my consolation in the consciousness of
intentional rectitude. To be succinct, we overcame the rebellion, and Gonsalvo
and I returned to our peaceful castle, with no other reward or compensation for
our pains than the laurels we gathered in the field, which, under such banners
as we fought beneath, were withered ere they could be plucked.

Immediately on our return, the nuptials of my children were celebrated with
all the pomp and dignity becoming their illustrious house; and my happiness
soon received further augmentation by Henry's announcing to me the pregnancy of
his wife. The wished for yet dreaded moment at length arrived, and gave to our
fond arms a noble boy: here my soul seemed to recline, and rest itself as after
a long fatiguing journey. The child was scarcely a minute from (...) sight --
he was the delight of my soul -- I hung in raptures over him, anticipating the
opening of his manhood, and drawing to myself, in fancy's flattering colors,
the picture of his future form; the vigor and symmetry of those limbs, then in
a state of shapeless, helpless inaction; the fire of that spirit then reposed
in torpid apathy; and the variously expressive beauties of that face, which
then exhibited no trace of sensation, save the transitory impressions of
accidental pain, or the passing dimples of an unmeaning smile.

A short time after this Peter again called us forth. His reiterated breaches
of faith, his cruelties and exactions, raised up against him a formidable
power, headed by Henry Count Transtamare, assisted by the renowned Bertrand
Guesclin. I thought it our duty to attend him, nor could we, however willing at
such a time to remain at home, decline the summons without tarnishing, or at
least hazarding our fame. We therefore prepared to depart; and the young child,
which was named after me, Alphonso, was put out to nurse in a village near the
castle, my daughter being determined to attend her husband to Cordova. From
this resolution, however extraordinary, nothing could dissuade her; and every
thing being done that could render the journey convenient to her, we set out,
and, without any incident worthy of relation, (...) at Cordova, which to our
astonishment we (...) invested by Peter; his enormities having (...) the
inhabitants to the desperate measure of declaring openly against him. We were,
however, treated with every mark of distinction by the gentry round the place;
and the singular heroism and conjugal affection of Maria raised her so high in
every one's esteem, and gained her such universal respect, that her condition
was rendered much more tolerable than we could possibly have hoped for.

Among those who were most forward in doing honor to our family, was the
Marquis de Punalada, a man of an illustrious house, and high in favor with the
king: he had formerly been acquainted with Gonsalvo, and now renewed his
intimacy with a zeal that gave us the more pleasure, as the capricious and
violent temper of the king made the condition of all those who were not
favorites, either immediately or collaterally, extremely precarious and
disagreeable. We had little time for the cultivation of this intimacy. Henry
was ordered off on a service of considerable danger and difficulty; and I was
ordered, together with all the elder Barons, to remain with the army at the
siege, in order that the king might avail himself of our counsels -- while
Maria retired with the Countess Dalmado to the city of Eceja, to wait the
return of her husband.

I shall not interrupt the thread of my story with a detail of the operations
of the army, which perhaps you already know as well as I: but tell you, that
here I was informed that you had perished with the other adherents of Count
Transtamare, with whom the tyrant broke ^aith so wickedly at Toledo. Something,
no doubt the stings of a guilty conscience, fretted Peter, and inwardly preyed
upon him: naturally ill-disposed, he grew daily worse, and the noble loyalty of
subjects never was put to so severe a trial as in adhering to the cause of that
weak, worthless tyrant.

For a considerable time I had heard nothing from Gonsalvo or my daughter; I
began to feel an uneasiness unusual to me, at a neglect for which I was utterly
unable to account, when one day I was put under arrest, and hurried before the
king.

Unconscious of having committed any offense to merit such a gross indignity, I
was busied in forming conjectures on the strange event; when going through the
camp to the king's pavilion, I heard a herald pronouncing my son, Henrico
Gonsalvo, a traitor. More at a loss than before, I dismissed the enquiry into
the causes from my mind, and only looked to the consequences, which I
determined to endure with that unshaken fortitude and dignity that became a
noble Castilian.

Arrived at the royal pavilion, I found Peter seated on his throne, a number of
the nobility around him, and, as usual, the Marquis de Punalada at his right
hand, in conference with him, while his face appeared convulsed with a (...) of
all the horrid passions that shake human nature, struggling for the mastery of
his soul. Perceiving me, he turned abruptly from the Marquis de Punalada, and,
addressing himself to me, sternly said -- When foul rebellion stains the
branches of a family, and well-founded suspicion falls upon the chief stock,
what reparation does justice to an injured monarch demand -- what measures do
his security require? Say, Baron de Rayo! I speak to you.

When treason or disloyalty is proved against the house of Rayo, my liege lord,
returned I, myself will be the first to pronounce the sentence of the severest
rigor, and call the execution of it justice.

That base dissimulation (interrupted Peter furiously) which, under the
plau^ible pretext of rigor, and an affected zeal for justice, assumes the garb
of innocence, but marks more strongly the deep laid treachery of your views,
and bids us but the more beware of danger.

None, answered I, but the disloyal and treacherous ever found an enemy in, or
had cause to fear danger from, our house -- and who but your majesty dares
accuse us of it? Let the villain slanderer, be he who he may, come forth, and
my life shall be the pledge that I refute the (...) and sure no common
calumniator it must be, who could shake that confidence which the long and
faithful services of ages have justly entitled the family of Rayo to claim from
the crown of Castile.

Do thou then, dissembler as thou art, interrupted the king, pretend
ignorance? Why fled thy rebel son, and joined the cause of Transtamare? Know
thou naught of this? or will thou presume to say, that he who knew no thought
but thine, who moved but by thy guidance, and yielded to no impulse but the
impulse of thy spirit, should have taken such a step without thy knowledge and
concurrence? Thy nephew too preceded him in his rebellion: but he has paid the
forfeit of his crime, and so shall thou; we will show the proud Rayo that to
offend us is some danger, and that, as we raised, so we can lay his honors in
the dust.

Gracious God! what was my indignation! -- Rage for some time deprived me of
speech, almost of sense. After some pause I rallied my scattered senses -- The
honors of Rayo, said I, your majesty has neither raised nor can extinguish --
this body, it is true, is in your power, and must endure every outrage that
jealous tyranny may choose to inflict upon it; but the honors of myself and
family shall mock thy threatened rage, (...) beyond the reach of thy poor
revenge, and (...) new vigor from the strokes of persecution.

Mark, cried Peter in a rage, mark (...) my lords, the recreant defies us --
Take him from our ^ight, and hurry him straight to prison.

Yet, ere I go, said I, let me, in presence of these noble barons, exculpate
myself from a charge the bare thoughts of which raise in my soul scorn,
abhorrence, and indignation. Here my feelings, like a torrent suddenly
contracted, overbore my reason, and I added, Disclaiming all attachment and
respect to him who wrongs me, and aims a deadly blow at my well-earned honors,
I declare that merely to satisfy my peers I stoop to this vindication. Though
Peter may have his own reasons for doubting the allegiance of any of his
subjects, the virtues of Rayo might shield him from the charge of dissimulation.

I then turned to the knights and nobles. Peter, weak, wicked creature, biting
his lips with internal agitation -- My lord, said I, why my son has disappeared
I cannot conjecture, nor did I know that event (if it has happened, which I yet
doubt) till I came into this presence: that he has gone over to the army of our
adversaries I cannot believe, as I know that his allegiance to the throne was
equal to my own. Over this some strange mystery hangs; a mystery which that
God, who sees and knows the inmost (...) of the heart, bears me witness I am
utterly unable to get to the bottom of: yet (...) cannot believe that he would
go and leave (...) wi^e a hostage, for sure he loved her, and (...).

Mark the subtle traitor, exclaimed the (...) he would insinuate that he know
not of (...) daughter's flight.

My daughter! Mother of God, exclaimed I, is it possible? What new wonders are
yet for me to hear? what new mysteries to be unfolded? The barons seemed struck
with my emotion.

Yet, my lords, rejoined I, let me turn to my own conduct, and show that I am
abused.

At the time that this war broke out, and the king called upon his people to
rise in arms, my years might have exempted me, without imputation, from the
services of war. Grown gray in the service of successive kings, dignified with
honors, and covered with the rewards of a monarch who knew how to estimate my
services, I might have stayed at home and enjoyed the repose necessary to my
years. Did I then come forth at these years to tarnish all the glories of a
well-spent life, act the base dissembler's part, and play the hoary fool? I ask
you, my lords, is it possible? Yet am I without proof, enquiry, or even a full
knowledge of the charge against me, treated as a criminal, a criminal against
myself, my fortunes, and my family. Observe, my lords, how this story hangs
together: if we had determined on the project of which we stand accused, what
hindered us from executing it in a manner, and at a time more suitable to our
views? Why delay the desertion to that time and place which alone could render
it hazardous? Why should I be left behind? The cloud of mystery which hangs
over it disqualifies me from speaking as I would do. -- But my part must appear
plain and manifestly innocent; and a^ to my son, I pledge my life for his
fidelity.

Here the king broke off my discourse; and, rising furiously, ordered me into
confinement. I was hurried out of the pavilion, and the next day was conducted
under a strong guard, and lodged a close and solitary prisoner in a cell in the
tower of Siguenca.

For a long time I was utterly incapable of reflection, or of entering into an
investigation of this unaccountable turn in our affairs: all within was wild
chaos, confusion, and uproar. Time at length began to calm the perturbations of
my mind, and the tumults within gradually subsided into deliberation I found
myself, however, as much at a loss as before -- In vain did I turn over every
incident of my life, that could, by ^orced possibility, have given rise to the
error; all seemed more strange, unaccountable and inexplicable, the more it was
examined; and I had at length nothing left to think, but that my children, by
some means which I could not develop, had been sacrificed to fraud and the
subtle designs of some hidden enemies, envious perhaps of the honors of our
house.

O my Maria! O my Henry! would I exclaim, where are you, my comforts? Do you
still live, or has the ruffian hand of barbarous power assailed your precious
lives? O gracious Lord of all, if it be so, give the guilty to the vengeance of
th^se arms, old and withered though they be, and thy servant will depart in
peace!

Thus, day after day and month after month elapsed: having no diversity of
incidents to chequer existence, I had no objects by which to measure time, and
was uncertain what number of years I passed in that dreary mansion. Losing all
hope of revisiting the world, I almost lost all desire too, and had laid my
account with ending my days in that dismal prison; when one night I was visited
by a dream or vision, and to this hour I cannot determine which. Methought, as
I lay in my bed, Gonsalvo called to me. I looked up, and beheld him pale,
emaciated, with every appearance of wildness and distraction in his face and
air; I looked at him and wept; then stretched forth my hands to embrace him: he
^^uded my endeavor. Alas! my son, said I, after so long an absence, is it
denied to me to -- Sire, said he, interrupting me, it avails not -- depart
you hence, and se^k my lost child. I essayed to speak, but could not -- I
endeavored to call to him -- he baffled all my efforts, and (...), leaving me
in an agony of consternation and grief.

Next morning the impression of this phantasm was so strong upon my senses,
that I was almost at a loss to determine whether it was a reality or a dream:
while I was in a train of contemplation on it, the keeper of the prison entered
my chamber -- I asked him whether any (...) been admitted to me in the night --
He said (...); but at the same time informed me, that he (...) that morning
received orders to discharge from confinement all persons imprisoned there;
Peter the cruel being dead, and Henry Count Transtamare, who killed the tyrant,
having succeeded to the throne.

The coincidence of the dream with this my deliverance made an impression on me
difficult to conceive, impossible to be described, I thought I saw the finger
of Providence pointing out the way to some strange and momentous revelation.
The tumult of my feelings, surprise, joy, astonishment, and suspense, was more
than my enfeebled state could support. I was scarcely able to move, and for
some days was unable to leave Siguenca: when at length I was able, I was at a
loss what way to go; but at last determined to seek the Marquis de Punalada, of
whose friendship for Gonsalvo I entertained no doubt, and who would therefore
be most likely to give me information of his ^ate. With weary steps I reached
the city of Burgos: there I had the mortification to hear that my estates were
confiscated, and my blood attainted; and was (...) over told, that the Marquis
had quitted court, and retired to his estate in Andalusia, long before the
death of Peter. Thither, feeble and exhausted though I was, I repaired -- After
a long, wretched, and fatiguing journey, I reached (...) near his castle, and
was ^old, that he th^n mostly resided on his estate on the banks of the ^iver
Ebro. I was surprised at this intelligence, which nevertheless was sufficiently
(...) by the people of the village. I determined to find him. So recommending
myself to the Almighty, and beseeching him to endue me with strength and
patience, I again turned my back on Andalusia. Not being able to travel in the
state suitable to my rank, the little means I possessed being just exhausted,
and moreover recollecting that it might be prudent for me to pass as much as
possible unnoticed, I entered the town of Cordova, equipped myself as you see,
and then proceeded on my journey, living occasionally at convents, and on the
beneficence of the hospitable people of the country. My way was long; and as I
walked slowly, and was obliged to rest frequently, it was a considerable time
before I got to the banks of the Ebro. The night before I reached them, I was
visited by a dream nearly resembling that which I had in the prison of
Siguenca: Gonsalvo came in as before, and repeated the words, Sire, seek my
lost child! As before, I strove to embrace him, when methought he turned from
me, uttering a sigh that seemed to shake his frame to pieces. -- We can no
more, he said, and walked away from me; when methought a ghastly wound on his
head yawned and discovered his brains, and the blood ran in a torrent down his
back: -- My soul, which till that minute was a stranger to the impressions of
fear, sunk with horror at the sight -- I trembled, gave a loud and hollow
groan, and awoke in an agony. -- I ardently longed for the return of day. It
came, and brought no consolation -- My dream had banished every gleam of
comfort from my soul, and left nothing there but gloom, horror, and darkness --
yet shall I own to you, that at intervals the pride of the warrior broke in
upon my reveries, and painted to me imaginary prospects of revenge!

I traversed the banks of the Ebro for many leagues, enquiring in vain for the
Marquis de Punalada, till I came near that part which once owned me for its
lord; a place I should above all others have avoided, were it not for the hopes
of seeing my grandchild, or at least hearing of him -- an indulgence which I
deferred only for the purpose of being first satisfied about his father and
mother. As I approached, therefore, I felt all the torments of suspense and
apprehension. At length, however, I arrived within a short way of the castle.
It was evening when I knocked at the door of the first peasant's cottage within
the boundaries of the lordship of Montalto. A stranger appeared, who rudely
demanded my business. I told him I desired to see Juan, the man of the house.
If you (...) Juan Navarro, returned he, you must look for him somewhere else.
What, my friend, (...) I is not this his cottage? No, returned the clown; it
was once his, but thank God and my master, it is now mine. And pray who is your
master? The Marquis de Punalada. The Marquis de Punalada! Yes, the Marquis de
Punalada. The Baron de Rayo, its former owner, has been put to death for high
treason, and the king gave that castle yonder, and this estate, to my master:
it is not above three days since he left it, and went to his other estate in
Andalusia. O Heavens! what were my feelings! -- How I supported them I know
not. The circumstance that Punalada, the specious friend of Gonsalvo, rather
than any other person, should have got possession of our confiscated property,
struck like ^ightning a thought across my mind, a suspicion of an act too full
of horror, guilt, and wickedness, for man to perpetrate, and in the fullness of
my heart I exclaimed, O cursed, cursed villain! -- The ^ellow, full of
resentment at my abuse (as I suppose he thought of himself), lifted his arm to
strike me -- I smote him to the ground, and retired. Proceeding hastily to the
next cottage, which was that in which my grandson was nursed, I received an
answer there to nearly the same effect.

Apprehending that the peasant, recovering, might collect a number of his
lord's vassals to assist him, and fall upon me, in which case resistance or
expostulation would be equally vain, I turned into a wood, and, by a well known
path, arrived at a village out of the power of the lord of the castle of
Montalto; and calling at a cottage, took (...) my lodging for the night.
Determined upon getting the best information I could, and above all to find out
where my grandson was lodged, I prevailed upon the son of my host to go to the
castle and the contiguous village, and make the necessary enquiries. He
returned soon, and brought me an account that there was not one of the former
inhabitants living on the lordship; that all were put out, and replaced by
strangers; nor could it be found where any of them went.

You will allow that nothing could be now added to the measure of my
afflictions; it was already running over. Lost, then, I exclaimed -- lost
indeed, my Gonsalvo! My Maria! lost is thy child! I fear, yourselves too!
Where, ah where, blessed Father! shall my sorrows end* -- whither shall I go --
where turn me to find my children, if yet they live? -- Alas, I know not. Here,
then, lay thee down, wretched old man, and patiently await the hand of death,
which soon shall visit thee and heal thy woes; or go to thy castle, assert thy
right against the base vassals that possess it -- slay all who oppose thee --
till, thyself slain, thou shall pull down a number to the grave with thee, and
fall gloriously amidst the ruins of thy enemies! Here, stifled with rage, and
bursting with the swellings of (...), I fell on the floor in a state of
insensibility, to which a languor succeeded that in all probability tended to
save me from the more acute effects of my passion. The good people of the
cottage, much affected with my emotions, used every little art to console me,
execrating the wretches who could aim a blow at a head so white as mine. Urged
by their repeated solicitations, I at length took some food and went to bed:
here, sleep, which usually flies from the touch of the unhappy, led on by
fatigue, visited me. Still I was haunted with the former dream, with little
variation; and determined to pursue, as far as I could, the admonition. I
therefore first repaired to Toledo, to enquire of the chief officers of Henry
Transtamare's army, whether Gonsalvo had gone over; and after a most minute
investigation, found that no such event had ever taken place: I thereupon
resolved to commit myself to the direction of Providence, and search for my
children, either till I found them or lost my life. Under this determination I
first visited the court of Navarre, then that of Portugal; thence crossed Spain
over again to the kingdom of Arragon: finding no trace any where of the objects
of my pursuit, I formed the desperate resolution of going to the Moorish
territory of Grenada, on the bare possibility of Gonsalvo's having been by some
unlucky means enslaved by the Infidels. Two years weary traveling, supported
by the alms of the charitable, could not deter me from my purpose: I therefore
turned my face that way, and proceeded, supported by the hope which the
frequent visitation of my dream had insensibly inspired me with. The second
night I took up my lodging among the charitable fathers of a Franciscan
monastery. I informed them of my intention, giving them at the same time my
reasons for it, and disclosing to them the whole of my misfortunes. One of
them, a grave, wise and learned man, undertook to dissuade me from it: he
remarked, that the disappearance of my son and daughter happened in a place and
at a time that the Moors could not, by any possibility, have been instrumental
to it: he said, that he thought the much greater probability was, that they had
been, for some hidden purpose, cut off by the cruel hand of Peter; and that by
going to Grenada, I should only bring down additional misery on myself, and
lose the small probability there was of recovering or finding out my
grandchild; and he finally advised (in which all agreed with him) that I should
rather go to Toledo, apply to the Archbishop, and through him get an order of
government to search for them. I perceived that the eagerness of my desires had
confounded my judgment, and that I had, in the flame of pursuit, overlooked
several material objections to my plan. That night I went to ^ed, undecided in
my intentions; still I was (...) with the dream -- Cons^lvo again showed his
cloven skull, and again urged my departure in search of his child. Alas! my
child, said I, whither shall I go? Go, said he, fate will instruct thee and
guide thy steps. Methought I immediately went forth on the desired search -- I
walked with difficulty up a steep hill: at length I thought I got into a field
where two armies were drawn out in preparation for engagement; the trumpets
sounded a charge, the martial clangour filled my soul with a transport not to
be described; I wielded my lance, and was hesitating which side of the scales I
should throw my weight into, when methought you, Sir Isidor, stepped forward to
me and said, Noble Rayo, Isidor de Haro will give your children to your arms or
perish in the attempt: with that I thought you vanished, but soon returned, and
advancing toward me smiling, presented me a golden helmet in which was laid my
child, my Alphonso: I suddenly grasped the helmet, and snatched the child to my
bosom, when looking down, I perceived that the helmet falling had killed his
father, who lay bleeding in agony on the ground. My woe and horror were
unutterable: I turned (...) of my javelin toward my breast, (...) to rush upon
it, when methought you (...) me, and struggling with me, snatched the fatal
weapon from my hand, and said, Grieve not, be patient, all shall yet be well, I
will be myself a father to Alphonso. In endeavoring to throw my arms about you
(...).

This new dream furnished my heated imagination with new materials to work
upon; a train of new ideas took place, and a new plan arose from them. Perhaps,
thought I, Isidor may yet live -- perhaps uncorrupted too. -- I will seek him
out, thought I, and leave the rest to the great Disposer of events.

I arose early next morning and set forward on my way to the court of Henry,
with an intention to ascertain the fact, whether you were dead or not; and I
confess I was startled at the apparent past derangement of my mind, which could
so long have dwelt upon my misery without thinking of so obvious a remedy as
this probably offered. I traveled some days, when accidentally passing through
your village, I chanced to hear your name mentioned in such terms as convinced
me, that I was near the habitation of a friend: and now I am here, I must
confess that I find myself, I know not why, in a state of more internal
composure than I have for years been accustomed to; and weak though it may
appear to you, the frequent visitations of Gonsalvo, and his injunctions in the
dream, and the subsequent one, in which you appeared, coupled with the
circumstance of meeting you, the name and personal appearance of this (...)
youth, together with a confused (...) ideas rush on my mind with a force which
reason cannot resist. Here he paused, and fixing his eyes steadily on Don
Isidor, as if to catch every passage of his mind through his eyes, he continued
-- Tell me, Isidor, in pity to a father's feeling tell me, know thou, or
have thou heard, aught of Gonsalvo or of my daughter? and oh say, nor delay to
solve the torturing doubts of my wretched care-worn heart -- say -- Who is this
youth (...) Alphonso? Oh say! for much my mind (...) -- and (...) if I be
mistaken the strong resemblance warrants me: in him Gonsalvo all appears in
renovated youth, moves in every step, and speaks in every sentence that he
utters.

Don Isidor, struck with astonishment at the conclusion of this story, stared
for some time at the Baron, transfixed in silence. If the misfortunes of a
family he so entirely loved, affected him with sorrow, the whimsical transition
from it to his son, smote him to the soul: he loved the Baron with more than
filial tenderness, and as he always admired him for his extraordinary valor,
^o he revered him for his superior wisdom; but to see his soul so shaken, and
his understanding so enfeebled as to yield up his reason to the mere illusions
of fancy, and to suffer his judgment to be so tainted by the false colorings
of a dream as to call in question his property (...) his own child, shocked him
beyond measure. The resemblance his son bore to Gonsalvo he (...) himself
noticed, and with pleasure noticed, as it served to keep up the remembrance of
a much loved, long lost friend and relation: but the Baron's straining that
resemblance to a conclusion so wild and extravagant, was a falling off too
lamentable not to overwhelm him with grief and astonishment. Unable from those
impressions on his feelings to speak, he for some moments continued silent, his
face imprinted with the strongest marks of concern, while the Baron's hope,
gaining new strength from the pause, cast a visible gleam of satisfaction over
his countenance.

My dear lord, and most valued friend, said he, after some hesitation, to say
that your misfortunes affect me as though they were my own, and that there is
nothing within the compass of my power which I would not do to redress or
relieve you from them, is to speak far short of my feelings and inclinations,
and is no more than, I trust, you will readily believe: would to heaven that
the remedy were immediately to follow the effort, and sleep would not seal my
eyelids ere you found it. In the disappearance of Gonsalvo, my loss is not
less, nor did my grief fall short of yours; but, with the extinction of hope,
my grief has abated; I have long ceased to think that he lives; some account of
him else must surely long since have reached his friends; but as to the mode or
cause of his disappearance, I find myself as unable to form even a (...)
conjecture as you can be. As to the rest, hear my story and be satisfied.

CHAP. IV. Don Isidor relates his History.
YOU may remember that, previous to our going against Algeziras, we were
entertained at the court of Alphonso, then at Burgos, and treated with uncommon
marks of distinction; there was a vast concourse of nobility there, as well
those who were going to the war, as their friends and relations, who came to
spend as much time as possible with them before their departure, and bid them a
final adieu -- Don Alvarez de Guzman was at that time the king's (...)
favorite, and of course the most conside^^^le person present. The pomp and
dignity of his great man's family contributed to the splendor of the court,
but no part of it so much as his ^air niece Donna Isabella de Guzman, who (...)
to engross the eyes and admiration of (...) court, and to eclipse all the young
ladies (...) present, though there were many of the first in estimation both
for birth and beauty (...) the train of the queen Maria. As Gonsalvo and I
stood in a familiar degree of intimacy (...) Don Alvarez, I had frequent
opportunities of conversing with Donna Isabella, and found that her mind was as
highly gifted with wit, and enriched with knowledge, as her person was with
beauty. -- Not to trouble you with a detail of minute circumstances,
interesting only to the parties concerned; we conceived a reciprocal tenderness
for each other, and I obtained her consent to demand her in marriage from her
father, and to that end to ask the assistance of Don Alvarez; but as her father
was of a very high rank and proud disposition, and I at the time but a soldier
of fortune, it was determined that I should wait until my services entitled me
to rank, which in the scene we were then going to, was likely soon to happen.
We privately plighted our faith to each other, and parted (...) mutual
assurances of eternal and inviolable fidelity. Soon after we took the field:
what happened there, and afterward at Gibraltar up to the time of your
departure, I need not mention; the king, you know, honored me with knighthood,
and on your returning home I resolved to remain with the army returning back to
Castile; actuated perhaps by a thirst for glory, but certainly by my passion
for the (...) Isabella too. And here, my lord, it (...) proper to make an (...)
to you, for a (...) that favors too strongly of insincerity. My (...) you, who
was more than (...) to me, (...) the confidence which your friendship entitled
you to, demanded a communication of so very important an affair; but the truth
is, I was doubtful of success, and too proud to circulate the shame (as I then
thought it) of a disappointment if I should fail: let it satisfy you, that I
did not communicate it even to Gonsalvo. -- But to return whence I have
digressed* I thought my newly acquired honors gave me more reasonable
pretensions, and made this a fit season to introduce the subject of my passion
to Alvarez, not doubting, from the strong friendship he expressed for me, and
which I thought was sincere, that he would willingly render me all the service
he could on the occasion. Whatever his private feelings on my opening the
business to him might have been, he affected to take my proposal in good part,
but told me that to the King and Queen Dowager Maria I must make my suit, as
they had honored the young lady with their patronage, and had taken to
themselves the task of providing for her a suitable alliance.

The duplicity of Alvarez must have been obvious to any one, who was not
blinded by excess of passion on one hand, and the security of sincere
friendship on the other. I thought he was sincere; whereas if I had only taken
the pain^ to reflect, I might have seen that he should have taken the office of
opening the matter to the King upon himself. However, as I stood tolerance well
with Peter, I felt little repugnance to (...) close my inclinations to him,
which I did the succeeding day in the modestest manner I could, concluding with
an account of our reciprocal attachment, and of our engagement to each other,
which we had entered into previous to my taking the field.

I was much surprised to see the king knit his brows, and discover manifest
marks of displeasure during the latter part of my speech. -- When I had done,
Don Isidor de Haro, said he, we have been pleased with thy services to our
royal father, and have given thee proofs of our approbation -- but think no
more of this lady as you value our favor -- we have already provided her with
a suitable match -- our royal word i^ pledged, and cannot be departed from. I
ventured to remonstrate, but he was inflexible, and I left his presence in a
state, compared with which the ordinary miseries of life were comfort. I sought
Alvarez, and he told me that he was from the beginning apprehensive that I
should not succeed, for that he had reason to believe the king proposed to
marry her into the (...) family of Garcias.

With all the dissimulation of a true courtier, Don Alvarez affected to condole
with me on my misfortune; and I left him, nothing relieved by his discourse,
though full of gratitude for his friendly sympathy.

The agitation I was thrown into by this mortifying refusal affected me so
violently, that I was taken extremely ill of a fever, the cause of which my
pride urged me to keep concealed. In this extremity I had nothing to support or
relieve me but my dependence on the fidelity of my Isabella, whose soul was far
above falsehood or caprice; and the indefatigable attention of my faithful
servant Pierrot; who, in his grief and care for me, brought himself into a
(...) of health little better than my own. Thus was I nearly reduced to all the
horrors of sickness, solitude, and disappointed passion. What, thought I, avail
my newly -- acquired titles? -- I am a step of honor higher it is true, but
all my hopes of happiness are perhaps for ever blasted -- Titles, rank, and all
the pride of man, what are you but deceit? -- you mock misery, point the sting
of adversity, and hold out the horrors of ruin to our view in tenfold
amplification! -- (...) I not only forgot my honors, but (...) also, and lived
for some time almost unconscious of existence.

I (...) roused from this state of torpid despair by (...) that Peter was
preparing to arm against (...) present king* then Count Transta^are. The news
struck like a gleam of light across my mind -- love suggested hope, and pride
whispered revenge. I had known Henry during the life of Alphonso; we had often
conversed and hunted together, and he had professed a strong friendship for me,
as well as for (...) you will not wonder then, that the character of Peter, the
insult he had already offered, and those which it was probable I might yet
receive at his hands, joined to my respect and love for Henry, should of
themselves, even exclusive of my passion for the fair Isabella, suggest to me,
the idea of deserting the service of the tyrant and flying to that of his
adversary. -- The thought no sooner occurred than my resolution was taken, and
I only waited for an opportunity of once more seeing my Isabella, to carry it
into execution. This opportunity soon offered. I informed her of the king's
resolution -- of my determination to retire, and wait for a more favorable
time to complete our wishes: I conjured her to be firm in rejecting any
proposals of marriage from another quarter, and assured her that it was my
determination to take her from under the tyrant's power or perish in the
attempt. She answered, that it was probable that would be effected without my
interference, as the Queen Mother, Maria, in whose suite she was, was at the
head of the confederacy formed against Peter, and in league with Count
Transtamare: and, finally, she assured me, that nothing but death, or my own
inclination, should keep us from uniting our fates together. -- We (...) down
together, and with the holy rosary and crucifix clasped in our hands, swore to
each other mutual fidelity. That very evening I departed, attended by my
faithful Pierrot, whose joy at getting fairly out of Peter's reach, which
happened about sunrise the ensuing morning, burst forth in a train of songs,
jests, and observations, so simple, so pleasant, and so natural, that my gloomy
reflections were insensibly banished from my heart; and I felt a transport the
more exquisite as it was so long a stranger to me.

When I reached Toro, where Henry was assembling his forces, he received me
with open arms, expressed an earnest wish that Baron Rayo and Gonsalvo would
shake off their attachment to the tyrant, and join him; but assured me, that as
he well knew the refined principle upon which the Baron adhered to the reigning
monarch, and the rigid honor and integrity which governed his actions -- let
the event of this contest be what it would, he and his family should be
protected. Not to detain you with a recital of events which you know as well as
me, the fall of Toledo was the fate of our cause; I escaped out of it by
miracle; and, still attended by my faithful Pierrot, bent my course toward
Portugal. The extreme fatigue of my body, joined to the anxiety of my mind,
brought me again so (...), that I was obliged to take up my lodgings at a
peasant's cottage on the banks of the river Guadiana: here the genial
temperature of the air, the wholesome simple diet, the uninterrupted repose of
the cottage and its inhabitants, whose cheerfulness insensibly found its way to
my heart* above all, the exertions of my faithful (...) entertain and serve me,
facilitated my (...) and made a considerable alteration in my spirits. I soon
had strength to bathe and hunt in the woods; and, pleased with the daily
increase of my health and strength, remained there till I was perfectly
recovered.

It was not without great regret that I quitted this sweet humble abode of
innocence, hospitality, and pleasure; after making the cottagers the best
return I could for their hospitality, we separated, not without emotions of
sorrow on all sides. I thought that Pierrot would have broken his heart; and
nothing less tha^ his attachment to me could have torn him from them. Ah, your
honor, said he, as we traveled along, that is what may be called living --
that is a life after God's own heart -- there we were neither afraid of crafty
undermining rivals, false friends, or cunning courtiers; there we had neither
envy, jealousy, fraud, nor dissimulation; there we could lie down in our beds
without any apprehension of death but such as the Almighty might be pleased to
visit us with -- without any fear (...) being one day pushed into the field of
battle, (...) next day upon the scaffold -- there were no tyrants to cut us off
-- no Peter to rob us of our sweethearts.

This last word roused me from a state of repose, in which the unusual calmness
of our life (...) the cottage, and the exhilirating influence of returning
vigor had laid me. I relapsed into (...) -- I began to feel all the misery of
being thus tyrannically cut off from every thing that could render life
supportable to me; I was stung to the quick at the thoughts of Isabella's being
put into the hands of a rival; and as strength increased, the vigor of my mind
increasing also, I began to examine the grounds of my despondence, and found
that much of it was owing to a momentary awe, impressed upon me by the furious
and known relentless nature of the tyrant Peter, and the consequent depression
of my spirits: I began to censure my too easy acquiescence, blushed for the
meanness of my conduct, and heartily scorned myself for the abject dereliction
of the duty I owed to my own happiness, and to the faith I plighted to my
Isabella. All allegiance to Peter was cast off -- my fortunes were inseparably
connected with those of Transtamare, which, though at present clouded, were far
from extinguished; the wickedness of Peter himself being a more powerful engine
in his favor than all the hosts of France. With this prospect, such as it was,
I thought I should be content, could I only get possession of my Isabella. I
should have told you, that on the rupture between the Queen Mother and Peter,
she retired to her father's house: one difficulty only therefore lay in my way,
but that was to all appearance an almost insuperable one; the probability
being, that as Peter had crushed the confederacy, her father would not merely
refuse his consent, but use every stratagem to deliver me up to the tyrant: I
determined, however, to leave no means unessayed on my part, and to trust the
rest to the affection of my Isabella and the direction of Providence.

Having thus adjusted the matter in my mind, I recrossed the Guadiana, and,
disguised in the dress of a common Pisano, turned by the most unfrequented ways
back through Spain toward Talavera, at a small distance from which, but where
particularly I did not know, her father had his abode. After some days weary
traveling, I found myself near Talavera; and, in order to get proper
information, determined to stop at the first cottage I came to. It was not long
till one offered of a most inviting appearance (...) with the cheerful consent
of the people I dismounted from my horse and entered, and found it within clean
and well accommodated, beyond any thing I could have hoped for or had ever seen
with peasants. After eating a hearty dinner I retired to a small room to repose
me, after the fatigues of the journey, and soon fell into a profound sleep. I
had not enjoyed it long, when I was awakened by a hand shaking me by the
shoulder, rather roughly. Surprised, I looked up, and saw Pierrot hanging over
me with a face in which the most whimsical mixture of ^^rious expressions was
pourtrayed: joy, however, was the predominant trait, and I was pleased before I
had reason to think I had cause to be (...) Lord, your honor! says he, I hope
you (...) pardon my waking you; but I could not for the life of me refrain -- O
blessed Virgin! Can you think it -- the strangest, luckiest, oddest affair! --
What! -- exclaimed I -- prithee say what it is? -- Oh, your honor! I am half
dead with joy, for to be sure nobody could have expected it -- Did not I tell
your honor how I dreamed last night that the horse you rode was all on fire
under you, and yet never consumed or burned? and did not I tell you that it was
a blessed dream, and that luck would come of it? And did not I tell you -- What
-- indefatigable babbler! what is it you would tell me? Well, well, say what
you will, dreams come out as true as the gospel of St. John of God. For
Heaven's sake, Pierrot, have you a mind to rack my brain to pieces with
suspense, and make it as wild as your own? Tell me quickly what you mean, or by
Heaven! -- Well, to be sure, if I thought your worship would be angry, my
throat should have burst with the story or ever I should have disturbed you:
God knows, I thought that you would have flown through the roof of the house,
like a spark of fire up a chimney, at the very mention of it. Hear me, Pierrot,
said I hastily -- If you have aught that concerns my peace, which, by the
wildness of your looks, and the incoherence of your words, I am inclined to
believe; let (...) have it in three words, or here I abjure (...) Three words,
indeed -- three words! (...) Pierrot, Lord of Heaven help you -- it is (...)
three thousand words! But what are words? -- Three thousand pieces of gold --
three thousand rubies and emeralds would be too cheap a purchase for such good
-- such delightful -- Begone! said I, in a rage -- Fly! before I am tempted to
commit some rash action and annihilate you on the spot -- brute -- ass --
barbarian! Here I rose up in the bed, and, listing up a chair, was going to let
it fly at him, when he walked away, muttering to himself, and, getting outside
the door, and half thrusting in his head, with a look of arch reproach, he said
-- You are too angry then to hear news of my lady Isabella? Gracious God!
exclaimed I, leaping from my bed -- Lady Isabella! Say again -- Where? How? In
what way? Tell me -- tell me all. Aha! said he triumphantly, ecod I thought
your honor was not quite awake at first, or you would not have made such a
difficulty of hearing my story. You must know then, that in this very house,
this that we now are in, and in that very bed in which you just now lay, and by
that clean, orderly, neat, good-looking old body of a woman, that you saw
sitting in the wicker chair (well, happy was her lot, and she says so herself)
-- 'Sdeath! What of her? There now again -- you cannot have patience, and I
telling you in as few words as possible -- by her then was your (...), dear,
charming Lady Isabella nursed. (...) of Mercy, is it possible! -- Possible! is
my (...) Pierrot? -- As sure then as it is my name, so true is what I say: nay,
this very morning did she bless this cottage wi^h her presence; and, tomorrow
morning will come against may, if good luck befall, she may be here perhaps this
evening, for it is yet far from night, and she sometimes comes after dinner.

In a fit of rapture, I threw my arms round my faithful Pierrot, whose joy was
nearly as great as my own, and who, while I was dressing myself, told me, in
his disjointed consequential manner, at which I should on another occasion have
laughed, that the nurse mentioning her young lady's name, and he asking her, if
she ever heard of mine, declared, that I had been almost the only subject of
conversation between them for some time; and that she spoke of me as of a
person already her husband.

This account made me think that I should run (...) hazard in informing the old
woman who I was: I called her therefore into the room, and told her -- she wept
for joy, and declared it was ^he happiest event she had for a long time known,
as she was sure it would render her (...) (so she called my Isabella)
completely blessed. She had not long retired, when we heard the outer door open,
and a person enter -- a confused, indistinct buzzing of female voices
succeeded, and continued for some minutes; at length I heard a well-known voice
-- a voice more ravishing to my ears than seraphs songs. Is it possible!
gracious God, is it possible! Is my Isidor in this house? -- Unable to contain
myself, I burst from the room, and caught her in my arms -- Yes, my love, my
faithful, my adored Isabella, your Isidor is here; and this blessed, joyful
interview is more than a recompense for ages of affliction. Oh my Isabella,
did thou but know what pangs, what sufferings mine have been!

Here I was interrupted by the old woman with, I do not know, young Senor, what
your sufferings may have been, but many and many a tear has my young lady here,
in this very spot, shed over your name; and even I, who did not know you, was
fain to keep her company -- she did so take on -- But, Lord, Sir! I hope you
will go fighting no more -- fighting is a woundy mischievous, unchristian like
thing, and no luck can come of it; and then my lady trembles so at the very
thoughts of it, that I wonder how you could have the heart to set about it.

The old woman's gabble was a very seasonable relief to Isabella, who had sunk
into my arms in a soft, speechless delirium of joy and surprise -- As soon as
cool reflection resumed its seat, I told her every thing that occurred, as I
have already told it to you, and desired her advice upon the steps necessary to
be taken to secure our happiness. The division between Queen Maria and her son
Peter, she said, had not altered the intention of the latter: and she heartily
confessed, that she had received her father's positive commands to entertain
Gareias (...) her husband: that she was convinced all attempts to alter his
resolution would be vain, and that my discovering myself would certainly be
attended with utter ruin. Under those circumstances, she said she was at a loss
what to advise -- but knowing my honor, and convinced of my sincerity and
affection, was willing to adopt any measure that I should prescribe to her.

We now called the old nurse into consultation, and after some deliberation it
was agreed, that we should be married the next morning at the cottage, and that
the ensuing night she should leave her father's unobserved and join me at the
cottage, whence we should immediately depart, and take shelter in Arragon, till
I could get intelligence where Count Transtamare had disposed of himself.

Early next morning the old woman dispatched her husband to a neighboring
village for a priest, who lived there, to prevail on him to come to the cottage
and perform the ceremony; and, in the mean time, sent away a young lad, her
son, to the town of Talavera, under pretense of getting medicines for her
guest, who feigned sickness for the purpose, in order that he should be no
interruption, nor suspect what was going forward. The old man being properly
qualified to apply to the feelings o^ the priest, that is to say, having a
purse well stocked with money, readily obtained his consent, and they both were
betimes in the cottage to breakfast. Nothing was wanting now but the bride:
with eager eyes I traced the path she was to come -- I grew uneasy -- then
impatient -- at last my heart sunk into despair. -- At length she appeared --
Oh my Isabella! said I, in a tone of tender reproach, my heart was dying within
me -- the day was so far advanced, I began to fear you were detained. Thou dear
impatient, said she, do thou know that it is not yet eight o'clock? Such are
the thorny feelings, such the hopes and fears of true love. But why do I
trouble you with a foolish detail of useless in interesting trifles?

Oh, proceed with it, said the Baron -- be minute, be particular -- the most
refined intellectual sensation, the most exquisite delight, is that which
arises from a nice investigation of the virtuous passions. Always an admirer of
beauty -- always the friend of love -- age has not diminished my admiration of
the one, nor my esteem for the other; and I declare, that no part of your story
has afforded me so much pleasure as the description of your passion and
fondnesses for your amiable Isabella.

Ah, Baron! returned Don Isidor, amiable indeed! had you but known her -- had
that bliss but been reserved for me, to see you clasp her in your fond parental
arms, and bestow your blessing.

Hold, Isidor, interrupted the baron -- Have I not griefs enough already?
Would thou that this too was added to the load? Alas! I fear, nay I feel,
that I shall but too much deplore her loss upon the strength of thy
description; to lose her, when known, might have been too much: -- but go on,
my child! I interrupt you.

To proceed, we were married in presence of the old couple, their daughter, who
attended on Isabella, and my honest Pierrot; who, perhaps, in excess of joy
fell not short of ourselves: he mused, he capered, he cried and laughed
alternately; and when the knot was tied, his reason overcome by the overflowing
of his heart, he dropped on his knees as Isabella's feet, and, snatching her
hand, kissed it as if he would devour it -- wept till he wetted it -- and
called her his master's savior!

The priest gave me a proper certificate of our marriage, and departed, after
having given us the most solemn assurances of secrecy. Isabella returned to her
father's house, and I retired to my room in a state of delicious transport that
I was before a stranger to. I spent the rest of the day in framing plans of
future happiness for myself and my Isabella.

Impatiently did I wish for night -- it at length (...), and in due time
brought my treasure to my arms. We set out without loss of time; Isabella
mounted on my horse, while I ^ode on that (...) Pierrot, and he and Ines, my
wife's (...) on a mule purchased of the old man for the propose.

I thought it most advisable to take the (...) road possible out of Peter's
dominions, and therefore struck into one that led to the kingdom of Arragon: we
arrived without any material accident at the city of Saragossa, where a rumor
was in circulation, that there was immediately expected a rupture between the
kingdoms of Castile and Arragon. I directly dispatched an account of this to
the Count Transtamare, then taking refuge at the court of France, in order that
he might turn the rupture to the most advantageous account his policy might
suggest to him. It was not long after that Henry himself appeared at Saragossa,
entered into a league with the king of Arragon, and took the field (...) more
against Peter. The prudence and (...) of Henry gave victory to the Arragonian
troops wherever he led them. I was seldom from his side, and can say that no
man ever deserved (...) fortune better; for, as none showed greater power in
winning her over, so none ever made a better use of her when won. The war was
very successful: however, the king of Arragon thought proper to patch up a
peace with Peter and Henry conceiving it prudent not to (...) too far in him,
returned again to Paris, attended by his wife Joanna, who had been rescued
(...) the tyrant's hands, and by me and my Isabella.

While we were in Arragon my wife was delivered of a son -- that same boy whom
you honor with your regard -- Henry was his godfather, and with my consent
named him Alphonso in honor of the king his father's memory. His mother being
extremely ill and weak after her lying-in, it was thought expedient to put the
child out to nurse; and as we were to go to France, and it was necessary to
leave the child behind, we dispatched Pierrot to Isabella's old nurse at
Talavera, to procure one she could depend on there, in order to be under her
eye. The child accordingly was given to the woman sent by her with Pierrot, and
who went back attended again by him, furnished with a sufficient sum for three
years expenses, to be delivered to the old woman for reimbursement.

The anguish at parting with this dear first pledge of our loves was
unutterable; my wife's particularly was so extreme, that she could scarce
support it, and she proceeded to Paris with a heart foreboding an eternal
separation from her child.

Of the various fortunes of Count Transtamare, in his struggling for the throne
with Peter, as you must already know them, I need not inform you, more
particularly as it would break in upon the thread of my story; suffice it to
say, I was with him in all, and even when domestic sorrow made me unfit for the
world, I attended him.

The sun of my bridal rose with brightness, but was, alas! eclipsed in its
meridian -- My wife had two children in the three years following the birth of
Alphonso, who both died infants: in the fifth year she again proved pregnant --
fatally pregnant -- in due time she had a daughter who closed the scene, for in
nine days after its birth I lost my comfort, my peace, my all, in Isabella --
she died and left me the most miserable of all created beings. Yes, yes! all
joy vanished with my Isabella! -- Here Don Isidor stopped, hastily arose from
his seat, and retired. The good old Baron, who saw and participated in his
affliction, patiently sat with brim -- ^ull eyes in expectation of his return.
At length Don Isidor came back -- took his seat -- gave the Baron a squeeze by
the hand, with a look soliciting pity, and endeavored to proceed -- The Baron
purposely interrupted him, Did you hear nothing of your wife's father all this
time, and did Don Alvarez take no steps to mediate between you and his brother?
-- I should have told you in its proper place, that my wife opened to me the
whole artifice and duplicity of Alvarez: it was at his instigation that the
king resolved to marry (...) Garcias, and she incurred his resentment by (...)
resistance.

When Isabella was brought to bed of her (...) child, I wrote her father to
inform him of the event, beseeching his blessing for his daughter and her
child; he sent me a reply gross and rude to the last degree, disclaiming all
connection with his daughter, and threatening me with the (...) vengeance of
the King. I despised the (...) at as much as I contemned the man, and (...)
myself with having done my duty to him:

Mean time I failed not in my enquiries about you and Gonsalvo, the
recollection of whom constantly overcast even my happiest moments, as the
frequent passing clouds preparatory to a sto^m darken the fair face of day.
From the strange variety of contradictory accounts I received of you both, I
had nothing left to conclude, but that you had both fallen victims to the rage
or jealousy of the tyrant; and I never (...) get rid of a goading reflection,
that by possibility I might by my desertion have excited the monster's
jealousy, and contributed to your ruin.

As I had proved myself the zealous adherent and faithful servant of Henry, so
he proved the most noble and generous of masters to me. -- When by killing the
tyrant he got possession of the throne, one of his first acts was to bestow
this estate upon me. He solicited me earnestly to remain about his person; but
on my declaring to him the state of my mind, and that nothing (...) the duty I
felt to attend him in his dangers could have so long kept me from my so much
desired retirement, he gave up the point, and honored me by saying, how few,
Don Isidor, are found like you, ready to share in a monarch's dangers, and
unwilling to participate of the splendours of his court! Go, then, you know my
power, be not distrustful of my inclination -- your services exceed the one,
but not the other -- tax both to the utmost, and you shall not be disappointed:
one promise only I exact from you, namely, that I see you once a year at least.

He has ever since continued to load me with favors, and designs to provide
amply for his son, for so he calls Alphonso. I was performing my promise of an
annual visit when you first arrived here; and I still find him the same
generous friend, the same gracious and beneficent prince. One of his chief
favorites is married to an aunt of my wife, the sister of her father; she
affects friendship, but I can see that he and she abhor me, as they conceive me
to stand between them and the inheritance of Don Pedro Guzman, my
father-in-law's estate; but it is no matter -- I know the king, and have no
other feeling for them and their hatred than contempt.

Since I came here my chief prop has been my son Alphonso; his instruction has
engrossed, my whole care; my daughter being with the Marchioness del Ora in
Lisbon, who insisted on taking her to herself. I must confess, that the growing
perfections of my son, every day disclosing some new beauty, beguile me of a
portion of my sorrows. The clouds of misery that so entirely obscured my
happiness begin to disperse, and the presence and conversation of you, my dear
revered patron and father (seizing the Baron by the hand), will help to clear
the whole hemisphere before me, and give the setting of my life that brightness
which your counsel and protection afforded to its rising.

One thing now on the expressions which have fallen from you about my son. When
I consider the strong resemblance he bears to Gonsalvo, which I have often with
pleasure noted, and which, considering their close consanguinity, is not so
very surprising, coupled with the circumstance of his bearing the name of
Alphonso, which you say was that of Gonsalvo's son -- I cannot so much wonder
at your emotions: Nevertheless one thing has struck me with astonishment, that
a soul so vigorous as yours, a mind (...) with all knowledge, and endued with
so much wisdom, could yield to the suggestions of a dream -- a creature of the
fancy -- a mere being of the imagination: -- to act by the monitions of such
illusive shadows, is to act against reason and against nature.

Nature, my dear Isidor, returned the Baron, cannot give us a reason for all
things, as most skeptics expect it should: that phenomenon, the marking of the
foetus by external objects, and even by the workings of the imagination, is as
much beyond the reach of human reason, as the monitions of a dream or the
appearance of departed spirits: the difference is, that the experience of
almost all is in favor (...) the one, that of few in favor of the (...). If,
then, we be so ignorant of things immediately subject to our senses, what (...)
we be in those of the soul abstracted from them?

Don Isidor shook his head, but said nothing -- Dinner was served in -- the
happy Alphonso could hardly eat with the delight the Baron's company afforded
him; such charms has cheerful accommodating old age for the tender heart of
youth.

It was that day determined, that Don Isidor should proceed to court, to get
the attainder taken off the Baron; and that, till that was (...), he should
remain undiscovered.

CHAP. V.
WHEN Alphonso withdrew after dinner, he was accosted by Pierrot with, Don
Alphonso -- accompanied by a significant wink and beck of his hand, as who
should say, Follow me -- I have something to communicate to you. Alphonso
followed -- Pierrot led him through the yard -- then looking about to see if
the place was sufficiently secure from observation, he led him into the garden;
thence again, with the same precaution, into the vineyard, and thence into the
field of exercise; then leading him into the very middle, as remote as possible
from any place of concealment where listeners might stand, lest possibly some
person might be there to hear what he was about to say -- taking Alphonso by a
button, and staring full in his face, with a look of infinite sagacity and
importance, he said in a whispering voice, Don Alphonso, do you know this oh!
harper in the great hall? How should I know, Pierrot! said Alphonso. Does my
master, Don Isidor, known him? -- Alphonso, unwilling (...) break the secrecy
imposed upon him by his father, yet averse to telling a direct falsehood,
^^plied, How should my father know him, since he has not seen him many hours? I
will tell you what it is, master -- but to be sure it may by a silly thing I am
going to say -- No matter, returned the youth, say it, whatever it may be. --
Well, then, to be sure, I may be wrong -- but my mind misgives me strangely. --
What would you say? Don't fear -- I shall never mention it, speak out. As I
hope for mercy, the sight of the old harper made my hair stand on end; nay, the
thought of him now makes my blood run in my body, and I wish he was well away
from the house. Why, what do thou mean? said Alphonso. I mean that -- but --
well I don't know how to say it. Say it, be what it may, returned Alphonso.
Well, your honor has often heard Don Isidor talk of the Baron de Rayo -- he
was a good man to be sure, but that is no matter -- I don't like to have any
thing to do with the dead! Well, you must know that this Baron within -- I -- I
mean he that is like him -- he, I say, was in the tower of Siguenca for high
treason -- put there by that villain Peter; and there he died, or, as some say,
was put to death, by the orders of that devil in grain, whom Christ pardon! --
Don Isidor took on so about him, and used to sigh and groan for him; and no
wonder, for he was a father to him. Well, what do you think? -- but -- but --
but -- I know you will laugh at (...) Pierrot, I will not, let it be what it
will I (...) not laugh at you. Look you, Don Alphonso, said he, clapping one
hand on the top of his head, and the other under his chin, is this head I hold
in my hands, mine or not? Certainly it is, Pierrot. Then, as sure as it is, the
old harper in the hall is the ghost of the Baron Rayo, who died in the tower of
Siguenca -- it is at least his fetch! Body of me! I knew him all the time he
was at dinner, in spite of all his care to hide himself; and I trembled and
shook like an aspen leaf, for (...) spoke in the same grand way he was wont to
(...) Montalto castle. Lord! your honor's father, who does not fear the devil
himself (St. John be our guard!) was as much afraid of the Baron as a mouse of
a cat -- he was so grand; and it surprises me that Don Isidor does not know
him, for all his coarse great coat, leathern belt, and long beard; but to be
sure he is blinded by some charm. For my part, I know not what to do -- I am
afraid to tell Don Isidor, and I am afraid to let him remain unknown in the
house, for God and his Holiness the Pope alone can tell what his designs may be
-- and though he was dearly fond of master, when alive, who knows how the other
world may turn his heart!

Pierrot, said Alphonso, keep this secret entirely to yourself; on no account,
let it go further: I will go in and take proper means to find all out, and let
you know -- mean time, be secret, I charge you.

Never fear, your honor: the world should not prevail on me to speak a word
about (...) ^^^trary to your orders; but, for the blessed Virgin's sake, let
Don Isidor know soon, for I fear there is some ruination in the old Baron's
coming about the house.

Alphonso immediately flew into Don Isidor's closet, to disclose to him and the
Baron the conversation between him and Pierrot; and in order to make them more
cheerful, he told them the whole as it passed, but in a manner so pleasant and
humorous, that they both, for the first (...) relaxed into mirth, and gave way
to a (...) of laughter.

The Baron recollected the name of Pierrot, when Don Isidor mentioned him in
his story, but as he was since advanced into years, he did not notice him when
attending at dinner. It was agreed however to undeceive him with regard to the
Baron's death -- to let him know the truth, and bind him down to secrecy. For
this purpose he was called into the closet: as soon as he entered, the Baron
advanced toward him, and with a deep and tremendous tone said to him, Friend,
this youth informs me -- Here Pierrot stood transfixed with horror -- his face
pale, his nost^^s dilated, his eyebrows raised, and every other mark of a
violent agony of fear upon him. -- With much difficulty the Baron preserved
gravity enough to proceed -- Do thou know ought of me? -- Speak. Ye -- ye --
yes. -- That is, N -- (...) -- no -- Speak, and fear not. Ah, (...) said
Pierrot, with a tremulous voice, I did (...) think you would -- Speak! said the
Baron again, with a voice that shook the room. Yes, yes, your honor, said
Pierrot, hastily -- I did say to Don Alphonso, as how I thought that your
worship was -- was -- something -- that is a little like the deceased worthy
Baron de Rayo. Here the Baron took his hand, which he, his mouth yawning wide
with excess of horror, endeavored to withdraw, and pressing it gently, said,
And why not the Baron himself, Pierrot? Has age and this coat so (...)
disguised me that you thought me only (...) like Baron de Rayo? Your honor,
then, said Pierrot, brightening, is not dead? Certainly not, said the Baron.
Don Alphonso! said Pierrot, did not I tell you a month ago, there was to be
luck in the way; and that I dreamed of a coffin flying, with black wings, over
a gallows -- a sure sign, as your worship knows, of good. But you are not dead?
No, indeed, said the Baron laughing. Then, said Pierrot, dropping on his knees,
may God keep you so! It is true, I (...) Don Alphonso, that your fetch was
here, but then I thought your honor was dead -- and so -- and so your worship
knows that if you were dead, you could not be here alive -- and so I was not so
much to blame: but troth, your honor, I was hugely ^rightened; although I am
sure* though I say it, I would not turn my back upon ever a ^^e in the kindom,
excepting your honor in fair living sight -- but for the dead, I (...)
abhorred to have any thing to do with (...) Well, then, said Don Isidor, you
now know the Baron to be living, and have no further cause for fear; so make it
your business to see that he is properly attended, and served with the respect
suitable to his dignity. But, mark me; let not, on thy peril, a single tittle
of this discovery transpire.

I shall carefully obey your honor, said Pierrot.

It is very true, said Don Isidor as Pierrot (...) tired, a braver fellow, when
opposed to (...) never existed; but he is superstitious to (...) ^^^cess: often
has he pestered, indeed oftener (...) me with his dreams; but the very
mentioning of the dead seems to scare him. This is an unaccountable phenomenon
in the human heart.

Not at all, returned the Baron; he fears not men, because his senses are
competent to judge of the danger, and apportion the power of resistance to it;
in which case a boldness of nature gives him confidence, and make him estimate
his own prowess at the highest: but, in the case of spirits, his soul
instinctively confesses the existence of such beings, from false conception, or
early habit; attributes to them mischievous dispositions; while, being out of
the compass of his sense, he cannot estimate their power, and therefore fears
them. Thus, however contradictory it may appear to you, it appears perfectly
intelligible and natural to me.

Next morning Alphonso, passing at an early hour though the armoury, perceived
Pierrot hard at work: he had taken down the ^rmour, and was cleaning them with
all imaginable industry.

What is all this for, Pierrot? said Alphonso -- by whose directions is it that
you take so much trouble? Pierrot looking up in his face, with a countenance
full of sagacity and self-importance, (...), We shall have rare doings, now
that the (...) de Rayo is here -- he will be for tilting (...) you, as he was
wont with Don Isidor and young Henrico Gonsalvo: but tell me, Senor, does the
Baron give any account of that sweet young gentleman? Oh, he was the flower of
the country! the cleverest, the handsomest -- why, (...) was almost as big as
the Baron. -- Often, often, when I look at you, I think of him, for you are the
picture of him; and so Don Isidor says. Ah! Lord help us -- where is he now --
have you heard, Senor?

No, Pierrot, I have not; not a word. But why this armor? --

Why there would be Don Henrico, and your father, just when about your age, nay
before that, tilting, and lancing, and mock fighting, perpetually at it, and
the Baron looking on and instructing them: and now you shall see -- I will
wager my head against a truss of hay, that before tomorrow night you will see
this armor employed; nay the old Baron himself will be at (...) but here is no
armor to fit him. Alack, Pierrot, he is old. Lord bless your honor, you
little know what tough stuff the old codger is made of; I Will suffer our cook to
cut off my middle finger and make a pasty of it, if I would not rather face any
three men in our parish than him, old as he is; only make him angry -- why it
was he that made Don Isidor what he was, and sure enough it was like master
like scholar between them, for your father would fight the ^^vil himself:
there, at Algeziras, he cut his (...) through a hundred Moors, and brought
int^^^^gence to the king that saved our whole army from being cut off by the
Infidels -- the king made a knight of him for it. I cannot tell you the
particulars of it; for if ever I talked of it as we rode together, he would
stop me, and blush as if he was ashamed of it.

Well, Pierrot, interrupted Alphonso, I should not like to hurt any one, but
methinks war must be glorious sport -- so grand -- trumpets sounding -- horses
neighing -- arms clashing -- the king applauding. -- Oh God! Oh God it must be
delightful* -- Where did you collect all those ideas, my dear, dear boy, said
the Baron, appearing suddenly, for surely you speak as feelingly, and as
pertinently too, as if you had been already engaged. I have read of them, Sir,
returned Alphoso, and I think I should like to try them. -- And try them thou
shall, my love, said the Baron, embracing him.

I wish the Baron may not have overheard me, thought Pierrot to himself,
recollecting his expression of, Old Codger.

Should you like me for a master, my dear? said the Baron.

Indeed I should, Sir; but I wish you a better office. It would ill suit you to
bestow your time on a boy like me.

My dear, rejoined the Baron, your father has consigned you entirely to my
care, and in doing (...) conferred on me the greatest possible (...)* All my
life used to arms, they will, in (...) age, be my best pastime; and perhaps it
my not be unpleasant to you to hear, that he who was your father's instructor
in arms will be yours. This day then we begin; and, with so promising a pupil,
I have no doubt of doing every thing.

That I will warrant you, old fellow, said Pierrot, as the Baron and Alphonso
retired; if fighting will do, you will given him enough of it. -- By St. John
of God! I believe the Baron thinks that the Almighty made man for no other
purpose but fighting. -- God have mercy on his old ^oul! I am sure it is time
for him to think of something else -- but I verily believe those fighting
people think they are never to die, or that they have no soul to be saved --
With which words Pierrot retired from the armoury, marking his forehead with a
thousand crosses, and muttering as many pious ejaculations to the Virgin Mary.

In a few weeks after, Don Isidor, according to a plan laid by him, the Baron
and Father Thomas, set off to court, got the attainder of the Baron reversed,
and had special messengers sent all over the kingdom, with letters from the
gentry at court, and orders from the king to the magistrates of the different
towns, to search for Gonsalvo, his wife, and his child: by the king's desire
too, the Archbishop of Toledo sent dispatches to all the heads of the church
throughout (...) country to the same effect. Thus the Baron (...) able again to
reassume his proper appearance* and had the consolation to think that if his
children were living there was a great probability of their being found, and to
conceive a lively hope that he should yet press his grandson to his bosom.

CHAP. VI.
THE Baron was surprised to find that his pupil had already acquired a
considerable share of skill in the science of defense, and that he was an
excellent horseman. His bulk and strength too were prodigious considering his
age, and the Baron had reason to believe that he would one day ride foremost in
the ring of heroes. In a few months Don Isidor was prevailed upon to case
himself in armor, and (...) the lists in mock ^ight with his son: Alphonso
rapidly gained ground, and, before the end of the second year, Don Isidor
pronounced him to the Baron to be more than his equal in the encounter. His
statu^e (...) ^^larged to a size far above his father's; the (...) softness of
his face began to harden into (...) features of manhood -- the rude bulk of his
limbs to form into the most perfect symmetry, and the tender treble of his
voice to increase into a strong manly tenor. The heart of* Don Isidor expanded
with joy, and raised him almost above mortality; while the pride (...)
exultation of the Baron sparkled in his (...) and gave new vigor and vivacity
to his (...) If, said he pleasantly one day to Don Isidor, if I continue to
grow young apace, as I have done since I came to your castle, I shall be just
of a proper age to go forth as Alphonso's squire at the time that he will be
fit to enter upon the world.

The sharpest afflictions find a period at last, either in death or habit --
Thus it was with those of the Baron, who, though the messengers returned
without being able to get the slightest trace of intelligence of his children,
began to grow less wretched (...) he was: he found in Alphonso something on
which to bestow his affection and employ his time, and the (...) of his woes
began to be insensibly effaced (...) his heart.

The time when Alphonso should make his appearance on the theater of life was
approaching fast; and as the first step was of the utmost importance, the
Baron, Don Isidor, and Father Thomas held frequent conferences on the subject;
but all their first plans were rendered (...), and Don Isidor's happiness
interrupted (...) as lamentable as it was unexpected. King Henry was suddenly
cut off by poison, administered by the in^^^gues and jealousy of the Moorish
king of (...)

On the accession of John the son of Henry to (...) throne, Don Isidor went to
pay him homage, was received as the friend of his father with (...), and found
the loss he sustained in the (...) death in some measure supplied by the young
king's choice of a minister and favorite, who was Don Juan de Padilla, a most
particular and hearty friend of his. He therefore returned home more assured
than he expected, and determined to send Alphonso to court, recommended to Don
Juan, as soon as possible, in order that he might be among the first who
offered themselves as candidates for the favor of the young monarch. He
accordingly set out with all the appointments suitable to his views, attended
by the trusty Pierrot. On his arrival at Burgos, he delivered a letter from his
(...) to Don Juan, who received him with marks of affection, assured him (...)
his patronage and protection, and told him (...) would take a proper
opportunity to present him to the king.

Don Juan was as good as his word. Sending one morning for Alphonso to come to
him, he said "The king has at my request permitted me to present you to him,
and has appointed this day for the purpose: he is young, of a charming temper*
(...) excellent disposition; he is already prep^^^^ (...) in your favor by
gratitude for your father services to the late king, you will find little
difficulty therefore in making yourself agreeable to him." -- They went
accordingly (...) the royal chamber, and were admitted to (...) young monarch;
who, after a long conversation with Alphonso, and after having attentively
examin^^ his external deportment as well as his understanding, turned to Don
Juan and said, "Don Juan de Padilla, of all the young cavaliers (...) you have
hitherto introduced to me, this is he who fills up in my mind the most perfect
idea of the true gallant cavalier; his person is superior to any I have seen,
and his conversation is a happy mixture of vivacity and good sense. Let him be
near our person as much as is consistent with his honor and convenience.

The early part of John's reign afforded the young Alphonso, ample occasion to
display his military talents: -- in various encounters with the forces of
Portugal, he carried victory along with him in almost every engagement. And on
the desertion of one of John's chief confidential officers, whose intelligence
and knowledge of the Castilian army's situation might have given a decided
advantage to the enemy, he pursued him to the hostile army, broke through a
large body of them who surrounded the fugitive, seized him, and bore him
through them triumphantly on his saddle, back to the Castilian camp: when this
prodigy of valor and prowess was announced to the king, ^e expressed his
satisfaction in the most lively terms, and seemed to triumph not a little in
his foresight and penetration, in having at once discovered in Alphonso that
superior heroism of which he had just given so striking a specimen.

Peace being again restored, Alphonso became (...) constant companion of the
king, from whom (...) received many flattering marks of favor, and (...)
others, knighthood.

(...) those youths of rank who kept about his person, and laid claim to his
favor, was Don Rodrigo de Calvados, the son of a deceased nobleman, a
favorite of the late king and of Donna Maria de Guzman, sister to Don Pedro
Guzman, Don Isidor's father-in-law. By the address and intriguing disposition
of his mother, he had been kept about the court since his father's death -- He
was in his nature subtle, pliant, fawning, and plausible; with those qualities
he had contrived to engross much of the king's friendship to himself, till
Alphonso stepped in, and almost without an effort engaged a share of it. Stung
to the quick at the progress Alphonso made in the king's affections, and
burning with envy of his superior accomplishments, he conceived the most
implacable hatred against him, and wished for nothing so much as the
destruction of his new rival his chagrin became visible; his mother questioned
him upon it, and he hesitated not to tell her the cause. The ambitious spirit
of (...) lady could ill brook even a partial suspension of he views in favor
of her son; her soul was up in arms, and her jealousy was as great of
Alphonso's rising favor at court, as at the prospect he had of inheriting the
estate of his grandfather and her brother Don Pedro Guzman -- The prowess of
the youth made an open quarrel too dangerous an experiment; and surrounded
(...) they were with crowds of spies, a plan of treachery was likely to be
attended with equal danger* while his irreproachable conduct left nothing on
which malice: If could ground an accusation -- Thus puzzled, they knew not what
to do, though they agreed that something must be done.

It was a custom with the king to make parties of hunting, in which the ladies
and gentlemen of the court attended him; on such occasions they generally
entered a great way into the depths of the forests, where game was most plenty,
and there pitched tents for their accommodation. As it was now the season, the
king ordered preparations to be made, invited a number of the gentry to attend
him, among the rest Alphonso, Don Rodrigo and his mother. On the first day of
hunting a large boar was started, which the king pursued, and overtaking, was
^^riously assaulted by the animal; by some mismanagement of his horse the
king's spear missed the boar, who turning short, with a rip of his tusk gored
the horse, which fell; and the boar was just repeating the blow at the king
when Alphonso stepped in between them, but in such a hurry that, instead of
piercing him through the breast, he only opened a slanting wound in his neck,
which rendered him more furious. The king mean-time had disengaged himself:
Alphonso, by a sudden and extraordinary spring, got from the boar before he
could make another effort, and meeting him with his spear killed him on the
spot. All this time Don (...) go stood at a cautious distance, compliment^^ the
king on his fortunate escape. As soon as (...) company came up every mouth was
open at once, congratulating his majesty on the fortunate issue of the affair,
who on his part took Alphonso by the hand; and addressing the company said, If
my escape be an event from which you have derived any satisfaction, join me in
gratitude to him whose gallantry has, under God, effected it. -- Alphonso was
so overwhelmed with the compliments which were lavished upon him by all the
company, that he could scarcely bear it: the goodness of his monarch was a
weight too great. With difficulty he answered, If hazarding so worthless a
thing as the life of Alphonso, to save that on which the glory and happiness of
a nation depend, lays any claim to merit, I am overpaid by the success of the
attempt: do not then heap on me a weight I cannot support, by thanking me for
doing that which was my duty. God forbid, said the king, that we should set so
little value on the services you have rendered us, as your modesty would have
us do! No, Alphonso, the gratitude of a king would be but poorly shown by mere
professions -- your services shall neither be unrewarded nor forgotten.

Although Rodrigo and his mother were among the loudest in complimenting the
youth, the new progress he had made by his heroism, in the heart of the king,
was like poison to their entrails -- but when the ladies all expressed (...)
admiration of his courage, beauty, vigor* and person, and above all the modest
dignity (...) which he received their praises, the malignant (...) could
scarcely restrain themselves; nor could Alphonso, had he known of their evil
intentions, have wished them a greater curse than the company of their own
feelings.

What is there which a wicked woman will not do? The aversion of Donna Maria de
Calvados, which, but for this late triumph, might have remained smothered, now
blazed with-(...)-fold fury: she riveted her eyes on him, and ^^^eretly wished
that they had the power of those of the basilisk, that she might look him dead.
As she looked at him, she thought she beheld fea^^^es that she had once been
acquainted with.

This worthy lady had, previous to her marriage with Don Rodrigo's father, seen
and conceived a tenderness for Gonsolvo, when he was first brought to court:
my, she had made overtures to him, of which his attachment to the daughter of
the Baron de Rayo would not permit him to take advantage. It is no wonder then
if the resemblance which Alphonso de Haro born to that Gonsalvo should be soon
recognized. She was astonished at it; she thought it beyond the usual course of
nature; and measuring her belief by her wishes rather than by the facts, she
(...) it down that he was really his son, and upon that suggestion, idle though
it was, formed a plan, (...) she determined to put in immediate exe^^tion. She
informed her son of her suspicions, (...) which she said that she was resolved
to act as (...) certainty, and charged him to cooperate with her in informing
the king. To this Rodrigo objected, that his doing so might raise suspicious in
the mind of John, for that he was so attached to Alphonso, nothing less than
positive evidence could shake him in his favor.

The mother aware of this circumstance, as well as her son, how thought that an
anonymous letter would be the best and safest way to try the temper of the king
on the business. They sat down together therefore and produced the following
letter, which Rodrigo contrived to have dropped in the king's private closet.

Most gracious sovereign,

When treason lurks in any shape about your majesty's throne, it is the duty of
every subject to apprize you of the danger.

A son of that traitor to the crown of Castile, the fugitive Henrico Gonsalvo,
is now, under the false name of De Haro, near your sacred person: the old viper
has eluded justice -- crush the young one ere it sting you.

As soon as the king received this letter, his esteem for Alphonso directly
suggested to him the truth, that it was the work of some envious enemy; he
therefore sent for Don Juan de Padilla, and, first showing him the letter, told
him his sentiments of it.

Were not this artifice, said Don Juan, too (...) low for the genius of Donna
Maria de Galvades I should suspect her of being at the head of it; her whole
life has been one continued scene of court intrigue, and she is most likely to
be jealous of the favors you lavish on this young man in preference to her
son, without considering the great difference in their talents and
qualifications. As it is only justice to the youth, however, that the mask
should be torn from the face of his enemies. I shall take the liberty of
suggesting to your majesty a mode that cannot fail of discovering them.

The young king, highly pleased, said he would join in it most willingly, and
desired him to propose it.

Order Alphonso to withdraw from court, said Don Juan.

Order Alphonso to depart from court! interrupted the king.

May it please your majesty to hear me -- The intrigues of your majesty's
enemies in the court of Portugal require observation, and we have already
agreed to retain some noble and faithful Castilians privately in your service
there: let Alphonso, under a feigned name, proceed thither among the rest,
while I make it known that he is dismissed in consequence of this private
admonition.

And what end will this answer? demanded the king, who did not relish the
parting with Alphonso.

Your majesty shall know, returned Don Juan. When he is gone, your majesty may
express a desire to know to whose fidelity and good offices you are indebted
for the admonitory letter, and doubt not but that, eager for personal
approbation, they will disclose themselves.

The king immediately fell in with the plan of Don Juan, who sent for Alphonso,
told him the affair exactly as it was, opened to him the plan, and concluded
with telling him that it offered an opportunity of seeing Lisbon, which would
not only amuse him, but contribute to his information and improvement.

Alphonso appearing much concerned, Don Juan earnestly enquired if the plan was
disagreeable to him.

Oh, no, no, Senor! replied Alphonso; but I am stu^g to the soul to think that
I should have deported myself so as to make an enemy: but, alas! this is but a
small concern; the thoughts of giving trouble to my sovereign (...) me most:
what am I, that so good, so great, so august a monarch should throw away a
thought upon me? (...) what but injury can it be to me to discover who my
enemies are, since I must necessarily revenge myself or despise them?

Noble youth, said Don Juan, you are irresistible -- yours are the sentiments
of true nobility: I almost wish I could indulge you: but the king has made the
affair his own, and will not be contradicted.

Little preparation was necessary for Alphonso: the king sent for him, took him
into (...) set, showed him the letter, assured him (...) eternal friendship,
and told him that he expected his return as soon as he should signify his
desire for it; which would happen when a proper discovery took place, or when
it was despaired of. -- Alphonso threw himself at the king's feet, kissed his
hand, and bathed it with tears of gratitude: May no disloyalty or disaffection,
but such as mine, said he, ever approach your sacred throne! The king then
presenting him a paper to be delivered to Don Juan, and putting a costly ring
upon his finger, bid him adieu.

He waited on Don Juan immediately; who reading the paper, told him that it was
an order to pay him two thousand plastres for the expenses of his journey.

That night Alphonso, attended by Pierrot and two guides, set out for Portugal;
and the next day it was whispered that the king had dismissed him in disgrace.
From the first town he went he wrote a l^tter to his father, and another to the
Baron, informing them of the recent event, and desiring a letter to his aunt,
the countess of Leiria, in Lisbon.

At the end of three days the guides left them, and he and Pierrot were left to
themselves: the latter, who was by nature sociable and (...), thinking the
departure of the guides gave him a license to converse with his master, (...)
whither and for what end he was going*

I am going, Pierrot, said the youth, to (...) that grand and universally
admired city Lisbon, and to search for adventures, as a valiant Christian
knight should do.

I do not understand what your honor means by adventures.

I am going then, said he, to redress grievances, to right wrongs, to protect,
when it f^lls in my way, poverty and weakness, against the violence and
encroachments of the wealthy, the proud, and the strong.

God and the blessed Virgin prosper such intentions! To help the weak and the
poor is good; but I doubt me your honor is too ready to fight for the strong
and the great too. Now, although fighting be a very good thing upon occasions,
when one is obliged to do it (and I can myself take and give a few hard knocks,
as the saying is, when need requires, as well as another), yet methinks it is a
strange sort of a trade to follow, and very unfit for a gentleman above all
others.

Why for a gentleman, Pierrot? said Alphonso, who liked his discourse.

I Will tell your honor -- When a poor fellow is reduced to get his bread by
knocking others in the head, it is hard enough upon him, but still perhaps he
can do no better; and if he endures hardship, or is knocked in the head
himself, (...) may comfort himself with the thoughts the (...) might have
endured worse; -- but here (...) honor, who might be comfortable and (...)
home, set out on a wild-goose chase to (...) fighting, and after getting enough
to satisfy a reasonable appetite on the part of the king, are now going, for
lack of better, to look for more of it on the part of the beggars.

But, Pierrot, honor is as great a reward, and as necessary to the existence
of a gentleman, as bread is to that of the peasant.

I should be glad to know, returned Pierrot, what honor there can be in
breaking bones, cracking of crowns, or poking spears into men's guts. I think
it would be more honor to be sitting at home with your father, or playing
innocently with the old armor, and the fierce old Baron at home at the castle
of D^ero.

But Pierrot, said the youth, if (...) of us (...) not fight, we should become
a prey to our enemies, and to all bad men who chose to wrong us.

Time enough, I say, still, when it comes to one's hand; but why run our heads
against stone-walls, as the saying is? Your honor's father was as brave a
warrior as any in Spain: but he was wise enough at last to go and stay at home
in peace; and he has done more good, and got more honor in one week since,
than he could have got in fifty years mad prize-fighting about the world. There
is the old Baron de Rayo -- why I suppose he has fought more than (...) tigers,
and what is he the better for (...) What was his honor at last? Why, an old
(...), and a tune on the harp for his dinner. There was the noble Henrico
Gonsalvo -- he took a slight after (...) as you all it, and never came back
(...) master, I am old, and can inst^^e from experience, more than others from
books -- honor is a very dangerous slippery thing -- it is like a ghost -- you
think you see it -- you may catch a^ it, but you never can hold it fast; and
for my part, I have seen so much ruination brought about you all by it, that I
tremble at the name almost as much as I do at that of a ghost!

Upon my word, Pierrot, I had no conception that you were so ingenious a
casuist -- Proceed, (...) notwithstanding your erroneous imagination your
argument pleases me.

Well, then, your honor, there is Don -- Don (...) Diabolo! oh, Don Rodrigo;
he, too, is one of your men of honor. It seems then, honor is got different
ways; for the day you took a fancy to try how a wild boar's tusk felt, and ran
(...) honorably between death and the king, Don (...) shook from head to foot
-- I was near (...) -- his face was the picture of death -- and I plainly
perceived other marks of fear, which I (...) mention. -- Well, this Don Rodrigo
is a man of honor too -- Now the question is this, If honor be got by
cowardice, is it worth the (...) and danger of fighting for?

Pierrot, said Alphonso, with all your (...) ^ity you have put a question now
that would puzzle a learned clerk to expound; but (...) from mistaking the
subject. If, as you say, Don Rodrigo be a coward (which I believe is only the
effect of your imagination), it must be considered as a misfortune, not a
dishonor: it is true, he is in that case, not a man of military honor -- but
he may be a man of moral honor; and being a favorite of the king, the
presumption is, that he must be in some respects honorable. For, know,
Pierrot, that the road to the temple of honor are many; and it is of little
consequence which a man takes, so he pursues that for which he is qualified by
nature, and makes true religion his guide, and a clear conscience his companion.

Now, your honor, quoth Pierrot, has tied a knot with your tongue which you
cannot untie with your teeth, though they were each as strong as that said
boar's tusks. -- You say honor is your aim -- Very well -- There are many
roads, you say, to honor, no matter which you take -- Then why not take the
plain, easy, comfortable path, home? There with your father and your friends,
by and by with a pretty wise and a parcel of children, blessing all the poor
with your bounty, they blessing you with their prayers -- ah, Senor, there
(...) be honor, there would be glory -- (...) pate-breaking, bloody, cut and
thrust (...) a plague upon it! I say -- it is inhuman, unchristian, and
abominable; and I cannot abide the thoughts of it, unless, as I said before, it
(...) one's way, and then I will make the best use of the arms God gave me, and
defend myself.

It was evening when the conversation passed between Alphonso and his faithful
servant. Pierrot. Just as the latter had concluded his last sentence, they were
suddenly alarmed with the screaming of female voices at some distance before
them in the forest -- Alphonso, who, by the interruption of the trees, could
not see the objects from whom the noise proceeded, spurred on his courser, and
was followed close by Pierrot, whose aversion to fighting was more the result
of his reason than the dictates of his heart, and who, in an instant, forgot
all his prudent apothegms, and drove on his horse with (...) great eagerness as
ever did knight of chival^^. After riding at full speed a few hundred ^^rds.
They found that the object of their pursuit had changed its position, and that
the (...) were more to the right hand, and ob^^rved that they were growing
fainter, while (...) of horse plainly bespoke a flight, (...) convinced him
that no time was to be lost. (...) therefore turned to the right, and pressed
(...) with all their speed: for a considerable (...) they followed the noise,
sometimes coming ^earer, sometimes losing the sound, till at length they
observed before them a chaise driving full speed, and guarded by a number of
men well mounted and armed. At this sight they pushed their horses harder; and
that which Pierrot rode being swifter than his master's, which was of the
larger and heavier kind, he got up first, and concluding how things were,
rushed eagerly by the horsemen, and with a stroke levelled the driver of the
chaise, and then with a dextrous blow gave one of the mules which drew it a cut
on the back of the neck, which laid him dead, and effectually stopped the
progress of the whole; then turning about upon the horsemen, who had been
already charged by Alphonso, they both laid about them with such fury, that
after laying one dead, and wounding three others so that they could not escape,
they put the remainder to flight. Alphonso then came up to the (...) and found
in it two ladies, one of whom had fainted, and was supported by the other, who
demonstrated every mark of dismay and distraction. The veil of the lady who
fainted was kept carefully (...) by the other; which Alphonso perceiving* (...)
It is my earnest wish, lady, to render you and your companion who has fainted,
every assistance in my power; but I fear my presence (...) for some reasons, be
at this time (...) shall, if that be the case, withdraw (...) within hearing,
till it may by your pleasure (...) call upon me^ meantime, madam, (...) for be
assured, that he who has (...) felicity to step between you, and the (...)
intended you, will protect your person to whatever place you may think it
expedient to go for security.

Pardon me, sir, returned the lady, after a pause, in which she viewed the
youth with an earnest eye, if, in the consternation I was in at the scene which
has just passed, I should have confounded innocence with guilt, and conceived
that we had been saved from one ruffian only to be subjected to the violence of
another; but as the courtesy of your expressions, the delicacy of your manner,
and, let me add, the nobleness of your air, proclaim you incapable of
dishonor, I shall not scruple to put myself under your protection, and entreat
your assistance to convey us to a town not two leagues hence, where I shall be
tolerably secure till I can prosecute my journey: mean time I shall be obliged
to you to order your servant to bring a drop of water to the relief of this
young lady. Alphonso immediately ran off, and in a few minutes returned with
some water in his helmet, which he with many apologies presented to the ^ady;
who removing the veil from the face of her who had fainted, discovered to the
astonish^^ youth the most exquisitely beautiful set of features he had ever
beheld.

But if he thought them beautiful while bespread with the pale hue of death,
what were his sensations when, as life returned, expression and color were
restored to her cheeks, and when opening her eyelids she stared (...) around
her, and discovered a pair of eyes (...) beyond any he had ever beheld! He was
(...) astonishment -- while she cried (...) save me! -- save me! -- in pity
save me from the tyrant -- Alas, where are we? -- who is this cavalier? But why
do I ask? He is one of the Duke's creatures! Yet surely he looks noble, and
wears not the face of a ruffian. -- Tell me, dear madam, where are we? -- are
we safe! -- what means this pause of quiet, so different from that which passed
but now? Compose yourself, my child, said the elder, all is well: the
perturbation of your spirits calls for rest; therefore refrain for the present
from interrogating me, and content yourself with the assurance that we are safe
as yet.

Rely, ladies, said Alphonso, upon such protection as I and my servant can
afford you; and rest assured that we will still defend you while we have life
to move an arm.

It is not a few Portuguese that shall hurt you, said Pierrot, with a bow to
the chaise, by way of hint to the ladies to be of good che^k.

I already perceive that, my good friend said the lady.

Every thing being arranged in the best manner circumstances would allow of,
and the prisoners secured, the ladies and their gallant champions set forward
toward the town, where they arrived at a late hour. The ladies retired to a
chamber, while Alphonso and Pierrot went (...) magistrate, who dispatched a
guard to bring (...) wounded men, attended by Pierrot to she (...) place.

The ladies and Alphonso supped together -- during supper, he sucked in the
poison of love in such large draughts that he found little room for food; while
the elder lady cursorily hinted, that she was flying with her young ward into
Spain, to release her from the addresses of an importunate amorous old nobleman
of Portugal, whose influence at court made it dangerous to offend him. She
added, that finding her going, he had taken that violent method of procuring by
force that which was denied to his rank, wealth, and solicitations.

Alphonso paid (...) a handsome compliment on the generosity and
disinterestedness of her principles; said, that to give such youth, innocence,
and beauty to the (...) of old age, would be a crime worse tha^ (...);
expressed his joy at having been instrumental to her safety, although he
fore^^^^ that his peace of mind for ever was the price at which he had
purchased it* and concluded with a ^enement declaration of love.

The elder lady said, that she hoped he would confine his discourse to such
subjects as she could listen to -- that indebted though they were to his valor
and generosity, their acquaintance was too short, their knowledge of each other
too slight, the passion he had avowed too suddenly formed, to countenance
either him in making suc^ a declaration, or her in listening to it. She
therefore entreated that he would be silent on tha^ subject else she should be
obliged, however unwillingly, to retire. Alphonso bowed, and for the rest of
the short time they sat together confined himself to the language of the eyes.

Alphonso slept not the whole night; he tossed, he tumbled, he sighed; he
formed a thousand strange, vague plans, every one of which he again rejected:
at last he determined to discover to the ladies who he was, in order to secure
a favorable reception. At day break he arose, and calling Pierrot, was by him
informed, that the ladies, after parting from him, had given orders for the
chaise and fresh mules, and departed.

Alphonso was in an agony of despair -- he immediately took horse and pursued
them in the route toward the confines of Spain, till their horses were unable
to proceed, and he found pursuit vain. Alas! said he, what a wretch am I, to
have seen such beauty, and to have it snatched from me in an instant! --
Ungrateful (...) mark, no proof of gratitude or regard! -- Oh God! Oh God!
would that I were dead!

As to mark, if you mean a token, said Pierrot, perhaps we have got one without
their consent or desire: look at this, said he, producing a small picture of
the young and beauteous object of his affection.

Gracious God! Exclaimed Alphonso -- how -- where -- by what means did you get
this! -- did the dear lovely -- cruel -- did she give it!

No, Said Pierrot.

How then? demanded Alphonso.

Why, when the alguazils and I went to the spot where we rescued the ladies, to
look for the wounded ruffians, we could not find them; and searching about
closely with the lanterns, I found that picture lying on the ground, which I
brought back with a determination to give it to the lady; but now they are
gone, I am glad you have it.

Blessed be your heart, my honest Pierrot! returned Alphonso; never shall this
be forgotten to thee: for this, even this, will be some comfort, some (...),
under my miseries.

They then turned back toward Portugal by another road, and without further
accident (...) the city of Lisbon; where, to his great (...), he found that his
aunt had, in consequence of the death of her husband, retired from Lisbon, and
gone again into Spain.

CHAP. VII.
IT was now that season of the year when the people of all Christian countries
devote themselves of joy, festivity, and thanksgiving, in anniversary
commemoration of the birth of the Savior of mankind, when Alphonso set out
from Lisbon on his return to (...), in consequence of a message from the king,
who desired him to leave Portugal and return into Spain. He had formed the
resolution of seeing as much as he could of the country, before his return; and
therefore visited the city of Seville, purposing thence to proceed to Cordova,
and so to Burgos. He left Seville on Christmas ever, and had already come near
the ancient to tower of Carmona, when hearing a more than usual noise of bells
ringing, he demanded of a shepherd* whom he accidentally overtook in the road,
what was the occasion of it? You must be a stranger to Spain, although you
speak the Castilian tongue, said the shepherd, not to know (...) tomorrow will
be the nativity of ou^ blessed Redeemer, and that on this account the (...) are
ringing. I am, returned Alphonso, a Castilian, and a true Christian, thank God;
but a long journey, and a variety of incidents, prevented me from attending to
the time: I knew it was the season, but was perfectly heedless of the day
itself being so near. Shall I be able, to reach Cordova tonight? You may,
returned the shepherd, if your horse be able to keep the pace he is at, and you
happen to hit the right road, which I assure you is very difficult and very
dangerous too; for there be so many roads before you, running like your fingers
from your hand, that you will be very apt to miss the true one, and the
concerns and old Moorish towers on the ridges of the Sierra Morena are filled
with hands of robbers: however, keep to the right yonder brow that is topped
with a broken rock resembling a tower; as you proceed by that, you will keep
still to the right till you come near the town of Palma; keep to the left of
it, and (...) will probably meet some goatherd who can (...) you; if not, God
and our blessed Virgin (...) our guide!

As soon as they parted from the shepherd, Alphonso quickened his pace. If I
were allowed to advise, said Pierrot, we should proceed to the (...) of Palma,
of which the shepherd spoke, and there go to midnight mass, and on the (...)
proceed with a proper guide to (...) it is not alone the robbers of (...) you
that we have to dread; but this being (...) season when the fairies and all
sorts of (...) are wandering about and playing their frolics, who knows what
mischief may befall us? -- And if we should chance to be misled by any of those
malicious demons, and beguiled into those mountains, which look a thousand
times blacker than night itself, we might possibly fall into the bowels of some
monstrous cavern, or tumble down some of those frightful precipices with which
I am sure those mountains abound.

Pierrot, interrupted Alphonso, why should you, being a Christian, suppose that
we have more to fear from demons, as you call them, at this season than at
another? I should suppose that we have rather less. However, I am positively
determined to proceed; meantime you may remain behind, and follow me at your
leisure: your fears might probably produce those very mischiefs of which you
express such apprehension; therefore turn you into Pal^^* while I push on to
Cordono. Pierrot said not a word, but followed his master, who pushed (...)
w^rd briskly. Night drew on apace, and the (...) sensibly became shrouded in
the bosom of a (...) forest, bounded on either side by stupendous mountains,
which rising almost (...) ^id their heads in the skies, and whose (...)
rememberances seemed to frown with (...) on the narrow path that wound through?
(...) ^ood below. The awful solemnity of the (...) was increased by a rapid
rill of water, which growled adown the bosom of a glen, and, bursting into a
sudden cataract, thundered on the rock below. Senor, said Pierrot earnestly,
hear me, for the blessed Virgin's sake hear me; remember that a fool's advice
has saved many a wise man from ruination. I warn you that we are going astray
-- return, for the love of Christ, and do not run headlong upon your fate.
Peace, peace, returned Alphonso -- did thou ever see a spot so calculated to
call up ideas of sublimity and magnificence? Did thou ever see so charming a
night? The moon herself seems to assume increased splendor, to chase away the
obtruding clouds, and shine with unobstructed luster on the business of the
sight (...) Blessed Virgin! what is that? (...) Pierrot. What do you talk of?
said (...). If I live, said Pierrot, I saw the strang^st (...) -- It is not
your eyes that saw it, returned Alphonso. Just as he (...) he descried a (...)
of more than (...) before him, who seemed walking hastily ^^rough the path of
the forest, in the same (...) that he was going: he spurred his (...) a round
pace in order to come up (...); but, though he at last pushed him to (...) the
object still kept before him, till (...) to an angle formed by a narrow road,
at the foot of a perpendicular corner of the (...) of immense height, he turned
round it, (...) get out of sight. Alphonso still quick (...) his pace, turned
it also, and found a vast (...) plain, extensive beyond sight. Nothing was to
be seen -- he drew in his bridle, and stood bewildered in contemplation, while
all was wrapped in a silence truly awful: he was lost in astonishment, and
remained for some time in a state of doubt and contemplation. At length turning
to Pierrot, whose fears were wound up to a pitch of superstitious horror not to
be described, It is not possible, said he, that this delicious plain should be
uninhabited, yet can I see no trace of human residence, and the moon is so
bright that I think I should if there were any* I will holla (...) -- perhaps
there may be some one within hearing. He then called out with all his might,
and was answered by an echo which reverberated his voice a number of times,
increasing each time in loudness till at last it died away in the same number
of reverberation^ again. Utter dismay, seized Pierrot -- Alphonso was not
perfectly at ease. -- not a soul appeared -- he waited many minutes with
impatience -- I will holla again, said ^e. -- ^or the mercy of God, Senor, said
Pierrot, take care what (...) do -- let us call upon Heaven, and turn (...)
back again into the path we came* -- (...) preceiving no track in the plain he
(...) agreed to do as Pierrot advised him, and (...) toward the road from
which he had wandered (...) pursuit of the figure. -- He ^ad scarcely (...)
steps when the air was filled with (...) screeches -- he stopped -- they ceased
(...) Virgin I said Pierrot, where are we (...) or what can those screeches
mean? Sot, cried Alphonso rather peevishly, do you not perceive that they are
owls which fly in clouds about us? (...) this time he again bethought him or
the road, and being at the corner looked out for it, and perceived many paths
leading through the forest in that direction. While he was considering which of
them to take, a sigh of deep anguish, heaved as from the bosom of a giant
behind him, caught his ear: he turned his head, and again saw the figure^
walking at an easy pace; (...) round his horse and again pursued* deserving it
attentively: it had a long ^pear in (...) hand* and glided with amazing
swiftness before him. Stop, said he in a loud voice, stop, and I swear by the
God of Christians you shall receive no (...) immediately the vast (...) of the
^ills was filled all round (...) which in the (...) manner (...), You shall
receive no harm. The (...) him, and again disappeared. (...) paused -- then
turning to Pierrot said, (...) must be something in this -- come of i^ (...) I
am determined to proceed in this (...) his horse forward (...) far, when the
moon all at (...) ^he most dismal darkness, interrupted ever and (...) with
flashes of lightning which se^^ed but to make it the more (...) succeeded: rain
fell in torren^^, while (...) wind blew as if it would root up the (...)
mountains from their bases, and filled the air with groans and hollow sounds.
He spurred his horse into a gallop, throwing the reins on his neck, and leaving
him to his own direction -- or to that of a superior guide.

He had not rode long before he found his horse stop suddenly; and looking
attentively before him, thought that through the dark void he could perceive a
high wall with battlements: he again called out aloud; a tumultuous noise was
heard, and all at once he perceived several large windows, resembling those of
a church illuminated by a strong light from within. Concluding it to be a
chapel lighted up for the purpose of celebrating midnight mas^ ^e blessed God
for the miraculous event which (...) him to it, and dismounting from his horse
(...) out an entrance. -- There was none on th^^ (...) and the place on either
side was so closely inveloped in thick underwood and bushes, that (...) found
some difficulty in getting through (...) He pierced through, however, and ^ound
(...) side a door open; he entered it, and, (...) through an aisle perfectly
illuminated, (...) himself in the body of a magnificent church and very near
the altar. He wondered much to (...) that there was no one in it; but
concluding that (...) priests were in the sacristy and (...) not come, he knelt
down to pray (...) ^ad he been in this posture two (...) ^hen music the most
heavenly struck up, (...) he heard (...) De Profundis chanted by voices more
than human, and the whole fabric shook with the notes of an organ whose deep
tones equalled those of thunder. He heard, but saw no one, and was riveted to
the ground with astonishment -- the music stopped -- a bell that seemed to
shake the church to its foundation tolled, and he reckoned twelve -- the light
vanished -- his ears were assailed with the most piercing sighs -- a hideous
noise like the crashing of a vast pile of falling rocks was heard -- he drew
his sword, and offered up a prayer to Heaven for his safety -- A noise, as of
the flight of an immense pair of wings passing through the air, was heard
wafting its heavy way round the vaulted cieling of the aisle -- The resolution
even of Alphonso could scarcely support it. Whatever thou art, said he in a low
and solemn tone, that have led me into this perilous and awful place, I conjure
thee by him whom the Almighty this blessed night gave as a (...) for our sins,
to speak thy intent -- He paused for a reply, while his bristled hair stood
erect upon his head, the marrow in his bo^es ^^oze as into stone, and his head
even to the deep recesses of his brain felt as if congealed into solid ice. He
heard the clashing of a (...) against armor -- his mind was wrought (...) the
madness of horrid expectation -- and (...) a figure, such as he had seen, but
rendered visible by a lambent flame which played (...) stood before him. It
seemed far above the common size, but its aspect was rendered still more
formidable by an enormous warlike plume that nodded on its helmet, and seemed
reflected as in a mirror, in the brightness of the armor in which it was
cased. Excess of horror wound up the sinking spirits of Alphonso, and he put
himself in a firm posture of defense -- Whatever thou art, said he, approach no
nearer -- my trust is in the Almighty, and if thou be wicked thou can not
hurt me If there be aught that I can do -- The figure sighed. Alphonso's fear
was lost in compassion and curiosity -- Fear no^, dear youth, said the figure,
reserve your sword for vengeance. -- With those words, the helmet (...) from
his head, and disclosed a countenance* (...) majestic sadness, pale, bloody;
while (...) ^^dundant hair entangled with clotted gore (...) in loose disorder
over his shoulders: against sighed, then glided backwards till it reached the
wall, which yawned and shut him in. Alphonso, his senses suspended between
amazement and pity, by a convulsive impulse of which be was unconscious, darted
forward, and plunged his sword after the figure into the wall, which closing
held it fast. -- He exerted all his strength to draw it out, in vain. While he
was thus engaged, a strain of music more soothing than (...) skill could
produce, struck up, and lulled (...) by degrees into a sweet and gentle sleep,
and he ^unk upon the ground. The figure still was present to his imagination --
he dreamed that it took him by the hand, and, leading him through a number of
dark and intricate windings, presented him to Baron de Ray^, saying, To your
conduct I consign him -- and then presenting him a large key said, Take this,
consult the Baron, and be resolute -- nor bolts, nor bars, nor walls of
adamant, nor human fraud nor human force can resist those whom God has designed
to be the instruments of Heaven's vengeance. On which the armor of the figure
gaped, a skeleton fell from it in fragments at his feet; while the coat closed
upon him, the helmet and plumes lodged upon his head, and ^e found himself
armed cap-a-pee: encumbered (...) the unusual weight he struggled and a^^oke,
and perceived that day had dawned.

His first sensations on awaking were little (...) than a dream: he was
bewildered in a (...) of awe and wonder at what he had seen, and (...) strange
conjectures on that which he had dreamed; he could hardly determine at first,
whether the whole had not been a dream, till (...) at the wall he perceived his
sword sticking in it: he caught it by the hilt, intending to use all his
strength to draw it out, but it yielded to a twitch. In doing this he missed
his ring; he sought for it up and (...) the floor for some time in vain: at
last recollecting the violence of his efforts in the night to draw forth his
sword, he turned to search there. There was a small heap of rubbish lying
under: he scraped it up in search of the ring, which he found: just as he took
the ring up, he perceived a key lying in the rubbish, and snatching it up also
saw that it exactly resembled that which he had dreamed of. -- Gracious God! he
exclaimed, to what mysterious agency God! he exclaimed, to what mysterious
agency am I thus conducted? then kneeling, and devoutly lifting up his hands
and eyes to Heaven, fervently prayed for fortitude and wisdom proportioned to
the great work of which he saw himself likely to be made the instrument.

Having thus prayed, he found himself unusually invigorated and cheerful: -- he
looked around him, and was surprised to find the face of every thing entirely
different from that which he had the preceding night conceived it to be. He
found that the church had been suffered to fall to ruin -- branches of the
trees without were striking through the half-dem^lished window-cases -- weeds
were growing near that which had been the altar -- the cieling (...) pierced
with holes and breaches which serve^ as nests for various birds -- there were
no (...) but one small one which were not stopped (...) He got up into one of
the windows, and (...) a large space resembling a garden, but filled with
trees, whose spreading branches interwoven with each other almost excluded
light or air, while the bottom was choked with noisome (...), briers and
bushes: this space was bounded on the other side by a large building, which
though very high had no windows in that direction. He again descended, and went
into the aisle, which he found in the same way inveloped in bushes; he sought
for the door by which he had entered, and with difficulty found it; it was a
winding passage through a wall -- a great gate (once the entrance) he observed
to be carefully closed up, but it was in a different direction from the passage
at which he had come in. He then returned to the chapel, and with a
scrutinizing eye observed the place where his sword was stuck, in order to mark
it: (...) took out his book and accurately noted all the particulars, the altar
serving him as the great guiding mark; then, going out through the aisle and
narrow passage, with difficulty made his way through the bushes, marking it
carefully however by breaking down some large branches. After winding round the
wall he found Pierrot waiting in such a state of horror and suspense as human
nature was scarcely able to support -- Had you stayed much longer, Senor, said
he, I should have expired -- How you have the heart to endure such things I
cannot tell -- I am sure I am afraid of no living man that ever wore a head,
and yet if my hair be not turned white with fear I much wonder at it. -- Why,
what now? what has been the matte^^ -- Matter, your honor! -- God knows,
matter enough -- why, your honor had not gone as long as I could reckon ten,
when all the lights in the windows went out -- and then I heard a clashing of
swords -- and then groaning -- and then shrieks, like those of unfortunate
departed souls in trouble. I thought that the life would leave me: however,
fearing you might have been attacked, I resolved not to act like a cowardly
rascal, and got off my horse, drew my sword, and went round this wall: then the
noise ceased; I attempted to break through the bushes, but, oh Lord! if I am
here alive, a thousand snakes began to hiss at me like red hot horse-shoes
(...), so that I was fain in spite of me to draw back. When I returned to the
place where I left the horses, I found that they had run off about the plain; a
plague upon them! -- I ran after them, for the moon shone bright again, and, a
curse confound the brutes! they would not let me catch them till about ten
minutes ago. I at last began to think of going in to look for you, and if I
could not find you to set off to Don Isidor as fast as I could, to tell him the
disinal news; but, thanks to the blessed Virgin! you are here, and, as I think,
safe. So mount your horse, clap spurs to (...), and without once looking behind
you (...) away from this mansion of demons, (...) ghosts and devils -- Lord,
Senor! are not (...) with fear? Make haste, make haste; (...) when you get out
of the way of the demons (...) mean the good people that inhabit this place --
let me know what befell you: but do not say a word here; for they would set us
all wrong in an instant, and keep us another night, perhaps for ever, in this
abominable place, which looks somehow more black and gloomy than hell itself.
Nay, I dare say, that every step we move we tread on the bodies of murdered
people -- haste you therefore, dear master of mine, haste you -- mount your
horse, and let us be away as fast as our best legs can carry us.

Pierrot, said Alphonso, I do firmly believe you to be, in an encounter with
mere flesh and blood like yourself, as brave a fellow as ever (...) bred: but
superstition makes you in other cases a coward to excess -- I say to excess,
for it deprives you of your senses. What stronger proof can there be of this,
than your distaste to this place? which I solemnly declare I think to be the
most charming spot by far that I have ever beheld: here there is nothing
wanting which can render the face of a country ^^chanting.

Aye, aye, interrupted Pierrot, God knows, there are charms and enchantments
enough in it: but for mercy's sake, Senor* make haste, and let us begone before
it grows dark -- I da^e say that the evening is approaching fast.

There again, returned the youth, you (...) the madness occasioned by your
fears. (...) sot, do you not perceive that it is yet (...) morning? Even now
the sun barely (...) from the top of yonder hill, and with feeble rays shines
upon us so obliquely, that our shadows reach almost beyond our sight. I cannot
leave this cheering spot till I indulge my sight with more of its beauties.
Methinks I could live here for ever! Behold how yonder mountain, steep, almost
perpendicular, rears on the south its huge stupendous head to the clouds, and
shields the plain below from the scorching power of the sun's meridian heat --
while the earth, as if grateful for its protection, spreads at its feet a rich
carpet of never-fading green! Look again to the west -- see where myriads of
oaks and cork trees, ranged by the hand of nature in gay and beautiful parade,
one above the other up the slope of that hill, spread in kindly majesty their
arms afar, and join to form a canopy unequalled in the palaces of princes, to
shade the shepherd and his flock from the sultry evening's heat; and see above
them, on the grassy top, the shepherd now draws forth his flock to (...) This
is not all: behold where on th^^ ^^st the copious Guadalquiver rolls its
majestic (...) fertilizing the adjacent lands, while woods of ^^ives,
cornfieldsd, and vineyards, cover (...) bosom with the wealth of Spain, and
lovely orange* groves fringe its banks with (...) of lively green and gold; o^,
it (...) transporting! here could I rest -- here could (...) rest for ever!

Here a bell tolled for some time -- Do you not perceive, continued Alphonso,
that in the bosom of this thick wood, and beyond those stately, ruins rising
out of it, there must be a place inhabited? for that is the bell either of some
nobleman's castle or of some neighboring convent tolling to matins. We will
see, said he, proceeding to mount his horse.

Then, said Pierrot, if it must be so, it must be so; come on, then -- do as
you like; it shall never be said that Pierrot lagged behind; or that, when hell
was broke loose, he could not stand fire as well as another. -- No, no, if
Pierrot be not as well able as ever an Alphonso in the land (begging your
honor's pardon) to endure a flaking of fire, sword, enchantment, or demons,
let him never receive mercy.

By this time Alphonso was mounted, and turning his horse toward the west
proceeded slowly through the valley, looking ^ver and ^^on around him, stopping
his horse and musing -- at one time admiring the beauty of the place, at
another making such observations as he thought necessary to a future
recognition of it. He soon perceived on his left hand a rising ground,
resembling a moat, which started (...) the root of the mountain, and turning
his (...) ascended it: from thence he had a more enlarged view of the plain
below, and could distinctly observe, at the back of the old buildings in which
he had spent his night, and close to them, a building which, from having a
belfry, he concluded to be a convent: beyond this, he thought he saw, though
indistinctly, marks of unusual cultivation; he therefore dismounted, and with
much pains clambered up the rocks behind, from whence he could perceive a
magnificent castle, with turrets, moa^s, drawbridge, etc. and an extensive
demesne in high improvement behind it. He wished to see some one to whom he
could apply for information; but all near him was a blank and silent desert.
Come hither, Pierrot, said he, and be comforted -- See you yonder convent! -- I
do, Senor. -- Well, alight and come hither, and I will show you something more.
-- Do you see yonder castle? That I do, your honor. -- Do you observe the
turret and drawbridge? I do, Senor. -- Well, what think you now? Why, I think
as before* and the more so, on account of that castle -- for it is there your
devil^s deeds are done. -- Ah, Lord! your great men with castles think no more
of taking the lives of men, than old no men do of killing chinches, or cracking
(...) -- Lord help us! Still, I say to your honor, ^et us be gone, for there
is no more mercy in those castles, than there is pity in the heart of a (...)
-- Pierrot, said Alphonso, how shall we (...) to whom that castle belongs?
Suppose you were to go thither and enquire. Why, as to that, returned Pierrot,
if your honor commands, I will go though it were to the mouth of hell -- But I
would almost as soon lose my life at once -- nay, I am sure I should never live
to return to you again. Well, then, generous Pierrot, returned Alphonso, I will
not command, nor even permit you to go; but we will ride up through the wood to
those goatherds who sit on the hill beyond it, and they perhaps will inform us.
Overjoyed to be released from the visit to the castle, Pierrot approved of the
proposal with alacrity, and they arrived at the verge of the wood, which was so
thick, that a person on horseback could not make way through it; they therefore
rode along it, and at last came to a path or rather narrow road, which from its
direction seemed to lead up the hill: by this path, after many windings and
turnings, he got to the open space on the top, where he saw, not far from him
the goatherds sitting at their breakfast. He rode up to and accosted them with
his usual courtesy, which they returned by inviting him to take a share of
their fare. He felt himself not disinclined to eat, and alighting sat down
cheerfully to a meal of bread and oranges, with some poor wine: while he was
making a hearty repast upon those, he enquired what the name of that beautiful
valley was, and whose was the castle? when the eldest of the goatherds obliged
him with the following ^^cital.

CHAP. VIII. The Goatherd's Story.
I AM now old, and have all my life followed the business of a goatherd, and of
course must have seen vast numbers of beautiful places; but never have I seen
any place to equal in beauty this very spot of Vallesanto; and this, Senor, all
men will tell you, was its reputation time out of mind; and the richness of its
pastures, the coolness of its air, the plenty of its provisions, the content of
its inhabitants, the sanctity of its convent, and the virtues of the family who
were lords of it, made it the topic of conversation in all neighboring parts.
The present lord of all the country you see round is the Marquis de Punalada,
almost as old as myself: he came to the possession of the estate and castle at
an early age, and, was beloved by all who knew him* his fame was not confined
to this valley, for there were few in Spain who did not hear of and acknowledge
his greatness. He married a lady his equal in rank, reputation, and fortune;
but in charity, piety, and all the virtues that distinguish Christians,
superior to all the men and women of her day. They lived long together in the
greatest happiness, and had two children, a son and a daughter; and all the
poor rejoiced in the prospect of finding one day, in the virtues of the
children, a continuation of the advantages they had already derived from the
charity of their forefathers. Soon after the birth of those children, the
Marquis was called on by the king to attend him to the wars -- so he went,
leaving his lady and family behind him, and from that time Vallesanto began to
decay. Captivated by the king's favor, he grew proud, and forgot his good lady
and children at home. However, at last he did come -- but so different a man in
his conduct from what he had been, that no one would have believed him to be
the same person. -- The dear Marchioness took it sorely to heart, and died
suddenly -- and he again was so affected at her death that he hid from company,
betook himself entirely to the convent, and many said that he was going to take
the cow^ However, after some time he quitted it, and took his children to a
distant part where the king had given him a large estate; and then there were
reports that my lady's spirit appeared at night, and made the castle uneasy to
him: be that as it may, he came here but seldom, and for years the children
remained at his other estate. However, at last he removed them here; and the
cause that was assigned for it was so extraordinary, that it I had not had it
from one of his own domestics I should not (...) believed it. In short, the
young lady had fallen in love desperately, and what was worse, ho^^lessly -- it
was with a picture! It was said to be the picture of some man dead God knows
how long. However, this did not satisfy the young lady, but she must go to a
Hadador, A fortune tellers.
who told her, that whenever she should see a man who resembled that picture,
the house of Punalada would tumble to the ground. Some of her attendants
informed the Marquis of this prediction; in consequence of which he hurried her
off here, and shut her up in a chamber of the castle, where she was watched
with the utmost vigilance: no one had access to her but the Marquis, the Father
Prior of the convent, her brother, and some old domestics; for, having in his
fury ordered the picture to be burnt, he had nothing to give the servants as a
guide; whereas, had he kept the picture, he might have compared all comers with
it, and so perhaps kept off danger. As misfortunes seldom come alone, the
Marquis perceived a new turn in the castle, which threatened not only sorrow
but shame: in short, he found that my young lord, his son, had fallen violently
in love with his sister, and was abandoned enough to make odious proposals to
her. The unhappy young lady, to shelter herself, told the Marquis, who directly
put her into the convent; while he himself, racked with some inward affliction,
shut himself from (...) intercourse but with the Padre Prior. Meantime people
gave their tongues a loose, and talked strangely; the place, even the convent,
was said to be haunted; a chapel, in which mass was sometimes celebrated, was
shut up and let to run to ruin: in short, Senor, nothing but misfortune,
affliction, and bad luck, has for many years attended the family and the place;
and the neighboring goatherds have forsaken the valley upon account of
frightful appearances that haunt it.

Do you mind that, Senor? interrupted Pierrot -- Why, good man, as his worship
and I were last night -- Alphonso darted an angry look at him, and he was
silent.

As for matter of that, continued the goatherd, who observed Alphonso, the man
can tell nothing new, so your honor need not have any scruples -- there is
more talk than you think of -- and in truth the Marquis is now for his tyranny,
wickedness, and moroseness, more disliked and suspected than he ever was
beloved; for though we of this place be poor, we have clear consciences, and
worship God and our Redeemer, and have wickedness so much, that we would not
like a king that was bad. Castilians, thank God, are good Christians, and would
not barter with the devil, though they were to gain worlds and their wealth by
the bargain. But to conclude this strange story, the young man, instigated by
the devil -- abandoning all sense of religion and virtue, and running counter
to the course of nature, finding himself unable to prevail on his sister to
indulge an incestuous passion for him, determined to enjoy her by force or
stratagem; and to this end, with large gifts and great promises, bribed a
servant who attended her to aid his designs, and, as she since confessed, to
put a sleepy dose in her drink, and let him in at night. -- As God, who directs
things for the protection of the innocent and the punishment of the guilty,
would have it, all his plans turned to his own ruin. Her chamber was in the
uppermost story of the convent, and looked into a courtyard: by means of
immense bribes he found his way into the yard, while his accomplice, the lady's
servant maid, let down a ladder made of silk, which he had supplied her with,
and which she fastened above to one of the iron bars of the window. He
asscended -- but just as he got near the window, the ladder gave way, he
tumbled headlong down, and was caught on the pikes of the railing below --
meantime the jade above threw (...) the ladder, and went to bed. In the morning
his lordship was found dead -- the Marquis was with difficulty prevented from
slaying himself: an enquiry was set on foot, and the holy brotherhood extorted
from the wretch a confession. Soon after the Marquis brought (...) court a
nephew of his, who is to inherit the estate and hoped to marry him to the young
lady, but she absolutely refused. Thus things remain at present -- his lordship
drags on a horrible life in his castle, and the young lady a wretched one in
the convent.

By the time that the goatherd had finished his story Don Alphonso had eaten
his breakfast; when rising, and in the most courteous terms thanking them for
their hospitality, and the old man in particular for his story, he mounted his
horse, and being directed in his road, took his departure, having ordered
Pierrot to give each of them a piece of money, and the old man five.

They had not gone far, when Pierrot taking advantage of his master's
indulgence began -- And now, Senor, what think you of this same Marquis de
Punalada? Is it not better a thousand times to be dead than lead such a life as
he does? And I warrant he is more careful of it too than you or I of ours, and
so it seems by his watching -- and does not that show (...) wickedness? God
help him! God help him! Bad as life is, he fears death may be worse. -- O Lord!
oh Lord! preserve me from the guilt of murder! -- If the (...) so far got the
better of me as to make me commit murder -- I -- I -- I don't know what I
should do -- I would cut a hole in the ground and bu^y myself in it. -- Murder!
-- Oh, I freeze at the very thoughts of it. The greatest king in Christendom
could not give life to a frog or a blade of grass -- what must he be then who
takes away the life of a Christian? Yet, God help us! such is the madness of
the world, that nothing gets a man so great a name as killing another -- and
the more he kills, and greater is his honor, as you call it! Ah, Don Alphonso!
quit this life of war, and lead one of blessed peace, as a true Christian
should do.

Upon my word, Pierrot, I must allow that you apophthegmatize most ingeniously,
but I cannot see how that which you have said could arise from the subject we
were talking of.

What! Does not your honor think that the Marquis has been guilty of murder?
The way he lives -- the haunting of the place -- besides, while the old man was
telling you his story, another of the goatherds told me as much as made my
blood run cold -- I may be wrong to be sure, but I would not for all the
estates and castles in Andalusia have the conscience of the Marquis.

At last they got into the high road, and early that evening arrived at
Cordova. Here Alphonso found himself divided between two duties, and debated
with himself whether he should directly proceed to court to the king, or go to
his father's, to throw himself at his feet, and, in conformity to the monition
in the dream, to consult the Baron. After some deliberation, he determined to
trust rather to the tenderness of a father than the caprice of a court, and
accordingly went straight to Burgos, from whence he dispatched the two
following letters by Pierrot:

TO DON ISIDOR.
As I approached toward home, I found myself divided between two conflicting
duties, one to my father, the other to my sovereign; and though my inclinations
fought on the side of the former, prudence carried the victory in favor of the
latter. The king honored me beyond my merits, and this raised up enemies
against me at court. It is to obviate their machinations that I delay the
happiness of throwing myself at the feet of the best and most beloved of
parents; a happiness, however, which I shall not deny myself many days --
hoping soon to embrace you.

ALPHONSO.

TO BARON DE RAYO.
A great and portentous incident, of which I hope soon to inform you, calls me
to hasten to the castle of Duero; it is such as I dare not commit to paper, nor
know I whether it should be unfolded to any one else, even to my father. -- I
am obliged first, however, to wait on the king; and will, as soon as I can,
receive your benediction in person. It is a supernatural monition I have to
communicate -- I cannot therefore express my anxiety on that account, and am
apprehensive of delays on the part of his majesty. If you could prevail on Don
Isidor to accompany you to Burgos, you might, perhaps, find the fatigue of ^he
journey compensated by the strange eventful history I have to relate, (...)
clue of which seems reserved for you alone to unravel -- I can say no more in
this way. -- Turn this in your mind, and bestow your prayers on

ALPHONSO.

Alphonso was received with every mark of tenderness by the king, who informed
him, that the author of the anonymous letter was too wary to fall into the trap
projected for him -- but that he was fully convinced Don Rodrigo and his mother
were at the bottom of it. In little more than a week after he had dispatched
the letters to his father and the Baron, he had the happiness of seeing them at
Burgos. The latter was impatient to hear the promised story, and closeted
himself for above an hour with Alphonso, who* gave him an accurate account of
every particular, not forgetting the goatherd's account of the Marquis de
Punalada.

The Baron, after examining and questioning him over and over on the same
particulars, at length was silent; and, after ruminating for some time, desired
Don Isidor to be called in. To him he made Alphonso again relate the wonders of
Vallesanto. Don Isidor was astonished. It is, said the Baron vehemently, it is
the blood of Gonsalvo crying from the ground! -- I own it is extraordinary,
said Don Isidor, who turning to Alphonso, sifted him with all his art; and
confessed he scarcely knew what to say to it, (...) to it! exclaimed the Baron,
we will act to (...) nor shall my soul find one moment's rest, till the horrid
secret is revealed. Don Isidor, your whole aid is requisite, and I demand it.
Don Isidor bowed assent. I request, continued the Baron, that Father Thomas may
forthwith be sent for, together with one more attendant such as you can depend
on. -- Juanico, interposed Alphonso. He is the very man I wish, returned the
Baron. Alphonso was astonished -- He saw in the Baron a new man: youthful
vigor re-animated every feature; enlivened every motion, and gave to his limbs
a force, and to his whole air a formidable energy, that age never exhibits. Don
Isidor was delighted -- he once again saw that Baron Rayo that used at once to
impress him with love and awe; and his soul again confessed the pleasing
necessity of obedience. All shall be done, Baron, said he: need I say that my
hand, heart, and life, are devoted to the accomplishment of your desire? Yes,
yes, said the Baron, striding across the room; the stains, the sorrows, the
disgraces, the murders, that have brought the house of Rayo to the ground,
though they cannot be repaired, shall be revenged -- most horribly revenged --
and this arm shall be the instrument!

But, dear Baron, interrupted Don Isidor, repress this rising choler --
overcome those emotions, which indulged may perhaps be the means of frustrating
your views.

Here, said the Baron quickly, take that hand -- does it tremble? Feel this
heart -- beats it (...) higher or quicker pulse than usual! No: thi^ that you
call emotion is the fixed temper of my soul -- the unalterable condition of my
mind. By Heaven I will mince that viper, and grind him and his house, even to
the last clod of his generation, into dust!

Don Isidor was silent -- Alphonso felt an unusual trepidation. -- The Baron
seemed to tread in air.

Pierrot was again sent back to Duero, with a letter to Father Thomas, who in
eight days more returned, together with Juanico, to Burgos. Every necessary
preparation was made; and they, that is to say -- the Baron, Don Isidor, Father
Thomas, and Alphonso, attended by Juanico and Pierrot, set out for Vallesanto.

CHAP. IX.
ON the fifth day they arrived at the entrance of the valley, just as the sun
was halfway dipped behind the western hill on which Alphonso and his servant
had before breakfasted with the goatherds. Don Isidor looked about him as he
advanced, wrapped in delight with the beauty of the scene -- Never, said he, have
I seen any thing to equal it! They came to a little rill of water clear as the
purest crystal, which ran toward the river -- in some places forming the most
enchanting pools, deep, pellucid, and sheltered by ^anging willows -- and in
others babbling over ^^bbles with a sweet and lulling murmur. Alphonso had not
seen it before, having entered the valley on the southward. This, said he, only
this was wanting to make Vallesanto more than terrestrial; let us cross it at
this shallow ford, and shelter us from observation in yonder clump of trees,
while I point out to you the situation of the place -- They accordingly crossed
the brook, rode up to the clump, in the hea^^ of which they sound a beautiful
recess of an (...) circular form, concealed by a thickly (...) underwood from
view; while an immense (...) tree which grew in the center of it, extending its
large branches thick set with leaves, afforded a roof almost impervious to the
sight, and which promised a shelter from the severest storms. Into this, after
having dismounted, they entered, and led their horses. Alphonso then brought
the Baron, Don Isidor, and Father Thomas forth, and pointed out to them the
perpendicular angular rock -- the moat -- and the wood in which was buried the
scene of their intended operations -- The bell tolled -- 'twas for vespers --
They returned to the thicket, where Father Thomas said mass, and all joined in
prayer. When the bell tolls again, said Father Thomas, it will be time for us
to proceed; the Fathers will then retire to rest, and by the time we get there
all will be quiet. At length the bell tolle^ -- the moon was quite obscured,
and but a few scattered stars lent barely light enough to direct them in their
way. Leaving their attendants to take care of the horses, they set out, and
crossed the plain directly toward the convent: as they approached it, they
heard a foot before them treading with slow and heavy steps -- they stood and
listened -- it stopped -- they again proceeded -- again it was heard -- again
they stopped -- and again it ceased -- It is the (...) of our feet, said Don
Isidor -- Why not then (...) our feet? said the Baron -- It is but of one
(...). A violent stamp of a foot at (...) the rattle of armor was heard -- We
come* exclaimed the Baron in a tone of terrific intrepidity -- then turning to
them -- Haste you, let us forward -- we are called. At length they came near
the wall. Beyond this, said Alphonso, is the pathway -- it is difficult to find
it -- nevertheless, I think I cannot fail of knowing it. They walked slowly on:
I see a light, said Don Isidor in a low voice -- let us stop -- we may be
discovered. -- I see it too, said the Baron, but fear it not -- it is friendly,
let us get on. He then advanced, and broke through the bushes, his vigor and
alacrity surprising the rest who followed: Father Thomas brought up the rear.
Let me, said Alphonso, go first and find out the passage. He groped along the
wall and sound out the narrow entrance. -- Here it is, said he, follow me. They
all followed, When got into that part which he supposed to be the aisle -- Now
am I at a loss, said he, to find the door into the (...) -- I have brought a
small lamp, said the (...) we will strike a light, but perhaps it may discover
us. A bell tolled, and straight the chapel within was illuminated -- Blessed be
God and our Redeemer! said Father Thomas -- They all said Amen, and entered the
chapel. Father Thomas advanced to the altar -- knelt and prayed -- They all did
the same -- He said a (...) mass, and they arose.

Here, said Alphonso, here is the spot, (...) mark of the sword. (...) ^ight
was suddenly extinguished (...) in utter darkness. The Baron then lighted his
lamp, and with Father Thomas looked around -- This, said the priest, is the
west: here must have been the great entrance, and lo! it is stopped up -- This
then, said he, moving on, is the north; and what should bring this pile of
rubbish here, I cannot guess, for over it there is no mark of ruins. -- That we
will see, said the Baron, let us remove it. He then drew a massy Moorish sabre
from his side, and fell to work loosening the rubbish, while Alphonso and Don
Isidor drew it away -- At length the sabre met resistance -- What can this be?
said the Baron. He worked with his hand, and felt till he found a large chink
-- he put in the sabre and raised it up -- It was a large stone -- Here have
been much pains taken, said he, to jam those stones together. By this time he
had got to the level of the floor* the Baron picked away a layer of stones, and
found another: he groped again to find a chink but all was solid -- Alphonso
knelt down and inspected it closely: it was an immense stone of four feet in
surface. We must raise it, said the Baron: see if there be any the smallest
opening in which to insinuate the point of the sabre. -- I cannot perceive one,
said Alphonso, but here I see the upper part of a regular arch. -- Where? said
the Baron. -- Here, just where you removed (...) stones. -- We must (...) that
too, said (...) it (...) which shuns (...) if it so please (...) disclose the
adamantine entrails of the earth, and shall he not give us strength to
accomplish this? -- As he spoke those last words, he fell vigorously to work,
till he found the under edge of the slab of stone that opposed his passage.
Having made a way for their hands, they all exerted their strength, lifted it
up on one end, and thence turned it over. Underneath was a flight of stone
stairs going downward, filled with rubbish. As one only could work in so narrow
a place, an affectionate scuffle ensued who that one should be -- Alphonso and
Don Isidor both insisting on the Baron's yielding it to them. They were
interrupted by a noise -- they listened -- a sigh which seemed to burst the
bosom that it ca^^e from filled the chapel. The Baron worked with redoubled
ardour, throwing up the rubbish that obstructed the stairs -- Alphonso beheld
him with astonishment; the alacrity of youth and the strength of Hercules
seemed united in him. -- Here is a door, said he. A hollow sound within stopped
him: he hearkened, and distinctly heard the rattling of armor, and ^he sounds
of hasty footsteps running to and fro -- Endue me with strength, said he, great
Father of might! and tore up the rubbish, as the enraged lion tears up the
earth with his claws* at length he get to the door which opened outward, and
was (...) within. Here, said he, is a door (...) means of opening it -- If,
said Don Isidor, we could with a knife cut an entrance for our hands, perhaps
our united strength might get it open, Perhaps so, said the Baron, but where is
the knife? Here, said Father Thomas. -- Don Isidor took the knife and
descended: he cut for some time: the impatient Baron snatched it from him; the
wood slew in showers of splinters from his hands. At length they made room for
their hands, and the Baron, Don Isidor, and Alphonso tore it open: it was
fastened by a chain hooked to a ponderous stone within. Just as they opened the
door a most transporting peal of music struck up, and voices more than human
sung the N^n^ Dimittis. They entered, drew the door after them, and got into a
passage arched, low, and narrow. They went forward, the Baron with his sword
drawn leading the way, then Alphonso, then Don Isidor; and last, with a
crucifix in his hand, Father Thomas: at the end of the passage they found a
door bolted on the (...) next them. There must be some other way that we have
not yet seen, into this passage, said the Baron; for the door by which we
entered, as well as this, are bolted on the inside. They looked attentively on
either side, and saw none. Let us open this then, said the Baron. He opened it,
and they found a large extensive cavern filled with dead bodies in various
stages of dissolution, some mouldered to dust, some half consumed, and some
again in a more offensive state, of putrefaction, lying on their backs with
crucifixes tied erect in their hands -- This, said Father Thomas, is the
cemetery of the convent: what shall we do here? Hardly were those words
pronounced when their ears were assailed with a violent rattling of armor
behind them: they started, and looked round them into the passage they had come
through. Gracious God! exclaimed Alphonso, there is the figure. I see it, said
the Baron, looking at it with a fixed and undismayed attention -- I see it --
Oh Isidor, do thou not? -- The tears rolled in torrents down his cheeks: he
could no more, but uttered a groan that seemed to have rent his soul from its
tenement. The figure stood -- All gazed in a transport of horror except the
Baron, who seemed moved only by grief. It lifted up its vi^or -- Oh all ye
saints of Heaven! exclaimed Don Isidor, is not that Gonsalvo? -- The Baron put
the (...) into the hands of Father Thomas, and advanced to it up the dark
passage: presently they (...) the Baren cry out, Speak, oh speak, Gonsalvo! --
and instantly the crash of a heavy suit of armor falling to the ground -- Come
hither, said the Baron. They came up -- Oh Isidor! said he, prepare yourself
for such a miraculous event as will (...) serve to remind you of the immediate
age^^^ of the Almighty, and (...) skepticism and the reasonings of pigmy (...)
dumb; bring hither the lamp, here we must (...) -- Why this is a wall! said the
Priest. We must enter (...) nevertheless said the Baron. The active mind and
piercing eye of Alphonso ended the difficulty: he found a low door, which like
the first shut on the inside, but was opened with less pains: the foul and
condensed air rushing forth blew out the lamp, and they were again in darkness:
the young marrow of Alphonso froze with horror, and even Don Isidor was
dismayed. -- The Baron again struck a light, by which they found that they were
in a small vault, arched over head, and low. -- Alphonso struck his foot
against something hard: he took it up: 'twas a short sabre, the blade of which
was rusty all over, but a large spot near the end of the edge embossed with a
large raised incrustation of rust -- Take that, said the Baron to Father
Thomas, and keep it by you. The light of the lamp was too feeble to extend
through the vault, small though it was: they therefore searched slowly along
step by step, and by the (...) light it afforded, took the best view they could
of the place. As they went ^long thus round the walls, Father Thomas, who stood
in the ^iddle of the vault, imagined that he found the ^round beneath him move:
he struck it with his foot, and a hollow sound issued from it* he called the
rest. Here is something, (...) he* probably worth notice. They came over, and
standing in turn upon it, each found it spring beneath his feet, and heard the
hollow sound. -- The Baron without a word began to ^ig away the earth: he had
not removed half a foot in depth when he found a board. They all immediately
assisted him, and the earth was removed from a bed of plank of several feet in
surface: they tore it up, and beneath found a chest in which was deposited a
skeleton, the flesh of which was quite mouldered away. It was obviously that of
a man of extraordinary stature. The Baron touched it, and it sunk beneath his
hand: he hung over it for some time -- Is there not another, said he, along
with it? They moved the earth about it, but there was none. They then turned to
the chest again: the priest took the skull, which was not quite dissevered from
the trunk till he stirred it, and attentively viewing it he perceived that it
was cloven across behind. The Baron looking wistfully at it, and showing it to
Don Isidor, asked him rather sternly, if he recollected any thing about a dream
-- Don Isidor bowed in humble acknowledgment -- The Priest, whose curiosity on
this occasion s^emed greatest and most observant, felt round the chest,
inspected the bones, the clothes, and every part of it -- at length, Here, said
he, is somewhat more th^n flesh and bones. -- It was a (...) ring. He presented
it to the Baron, who (...) it attentively for some time exclaimed, O God! then
handing it over to Don Isidor, said do thou know this device? What say reason
and skepticism now? -- Don Isidor looked, started, breathed short. -- Do I know
it? -- Yes, on my soul this is the ring of Gonsalvo: here is his device too, a
hand and dagger, with Instar Fulminis, his motto -- Well, Don Isidor, said the
Baron, are you now convinced?

Although this be sufficient to convince me, returned Don Isidor, I think we
should leave no means untried to obtain every testimony this place can afford;
let us search further. -- I intend it, said the Baron. -- He accordingly led
them again, beginning at the door, round by the wall, viewing with closest
inspection the ground, and stamping upon it to find whether it was hollow. --
At length they came to a heap, as they thought, of earth; the Baron struck it
with his foot, a helmet and coat of mail rolled about the floor -- The Baron
took up one part, Don Isidor another. It is the armor of a giant rather than a
common man, said the Priest -- It was my son's, said the Baron. Father, lend me
your knife. -- He took the knife and scraped away the rust: Behold, said he,
our family device, and here read. They read aloud, Instar Fulminis -- Yes, yes,
my child! said the Baron vehemently; a thunderbolt thou were to thy enemies,
but treachery beguiled and deprived thee of thy precious life; and now that
arm, which ^arried terror to the enemies of Castile and victory to its banners,
is fallen to a clod of the valley. -- Here the Baron's anguish, like a stream
long stopped in its course, burst in a torrent of tears and groans, which
seemed to shake the arches of the vault: for some time he was silent: at length
turning to Don Isidor and Father Thomas, he said, Lay them as they were till
all is ripe, and then shall the arms of Rayo burst like a thunderbolt upon the
devoted heads of the guilty. Let us proceed. They then went further, and found
a leathern portmanteau, much decayed, and full of insects: the Baron strove to
open it; it broke in pieces, and a silver-hafted dagger with the aforesaid
crest, a crucifix studded with rubies, and some papers fell out of it upon the
ground. The Baron searched it further, and in a private flap of it found a
number of papers. Those papers, said he, reverend Father, together with this
cross and dagger, and the ring, we confide to you, requesting that you will
seal them up -- And you, Don Isidor, will witness the transaction, ^ill justice
calls them forth. They reckoned the papers, Don Isidor and Alphonso writing
^^eir names on each, and the priest took possession of them.

Although no more be necessary now, and it draws fast toward morning, said the
Baron, let us leave nothing unexamined. They searched round with the most
scrupulous exactness -- not a spot, not a flaw in the floor or the (...) not
examine. While they (...) engaged, the young Alphonso, who was (...) to and
fro, busied in contemplating the (...) before him, and felicitating himself
with (...) thoughts that he had contributed to the (...) sure of such a horrid
affair, struck the hilt of his sword against a part of the wall, which sounded
very hollow, and apprised them of it. They brought the lamp. -- Assuredly, said
the Baron, my daughter was not spared -- perhaps there may be another
depository of the dead here. -- They knocked at the wall -- ^elt it, examined
it, and the more they advanced in a particular direction, the more hollow it
founded. -- At last they touched a door so neatly fitted that it seemed to be a
part of the wall, but crevice or joint they could discover none: determined,
however, not to leave it unaccomplished, they persisted; the priest scraping
and probing with his knife, and the Baron with his sword, while Alphonso
looking lower discovered a keyhole. -- Let us (...) here, said the priest. --
Hold, said the Baron -- for this perhaps our Alphonso has already found (...)
key. Then taking forth that which Alphonso had ^ound in pursuance of the
monition in the dream, he tried it, and the lock flew open. Here, said the
Baron, let us look with humble adoration at the Great Disposer of events -- and
henceforth let wonder cease -- "His ways are in the great deep, and not to be
searched out:" yet man, puny creature, and arrogant as puny, will estimate
heavenly things by earthly calculations, (...) of the extent of the power of
the Almighty, only because his feeble reason cannot ^^^prehend it.

(...) as he was opening the door, Father Thomas stopped him. -- Hold! said he,
we go on without considering how many hours have elapsed since we entered into
those buildings. Morning approaches -- I fear that day has already dawned --
discovery might ruin all -- therefore let us begone. You say well, said Don
Isidor, it must be daybreak. Alas! said the Baron, much remains behind -- and
shall we go? -- then pausing -- Yet it must be.

(...) permitted to advise, said Don Isidor, we should immediately depart,
car^fully laying every thing in such a manner as, if searched, to ba^^le
suspicion. They accordingly covered up the chest with the earth; Father Thomas
devoutly pronouncing the Las Animas over it. They then closed the door of the
vault, proceeded next to the steps up to the chapel; ^here closing the door,
and laying down the large stone, they put the whole, as nearly as they could,
in its former state, and departed.

CHAP. X.
THEY arrived at the bower just as distant objects were rendered visible by the
increasing light of the morning; there they found their attendants anxiously
expecting their arrival, having suffered much from apprehension as well as
cold. Every thing now, however, tended to cheer and repay them for the
hardships of the night. The rising sun by degrees chased away the cold, and
rendered the air most exquisitely refreshing. Ten thousand birds filled the
(...) with the harmony of nature; from the distant hills was heard incessantly
the bleating of (...) innumerable, while the goatherds' pipe, and now and then
the barking of their dogs, broke in occasionally, and finished the picture of
(...) new Arcadia.

After having refreshed themselves with some bread and wine which they had
brought with them, they mounted, and set forward toward Burgos, repassing the
river. The Baron (...) for some time; at last breaking silence, and turning to
the others behind him, Behold, (...) how magnificently the hand of the Creat^^
(...) furnished the abodes of all his creatures* (...) all the embellishments
of art, strained to the last nerve of human skill, not all the proud domes,
raised story over story by the aspiring hand of architecture, not gilded
cielings, burnished arches, columns of polished marble, gold or silver molded
by the hand of taste and inscribed with the proud emblems of nobility, can be
put in comparison with this one small speck in the works of Omnipotence: nay,
let but the hand of art touch it, and its beauties vanish! -- Hark! every
throat of the pretty feathered tribe swelled instinctively with notes of
grateful adoration! The flocks bleat forth their praise -- the noble ox, his
appetite and mere corporeal functions all suspended in mute devotion,
contemplates the beauties that surround him, heaves his huge sides with
rapture, and in enjoyment ^ays his tribute to the hand that feeds him! Man,
only man, swollen with the pride of reason (that dubious instrument, by Heaven
given, his blessing or his curse), becomes the bubble of creation -- sinfully
spurns from him gifts like those, and to his own gaudy perishable works resorts
for satisfaction -- worse! strains his pr^lific mind for means to desolate the
face of fair creation -- for spurious pleasures, which baffle in pursuit or
poison in enjoyment, wages inexorable war against the will of Heaven, spreads
his own brother's couch with serpent's teeth -- (...) -- murders! --

Just as he had pronounced those (...) they came to a beautiful recess, (...)
stage formed by the hand of nature, at the foot of the mountain; round it the
hills rose in a gentle slope like the seats of an amphitheatre, and in the
center of it stood a large stone cross; the whole was surrounded by a prattling
rivulet, which fell from the hills be^ing in a beautiful cataract: at the
bottom, separating into two branches, glided round this natural stage, and
meeting again below it in one stream fell into river Guadalquiver at the
distance of about a league: the whole was surrounded by stately cork trees,
which lent a cool shade from the intense ^eat of the meredian sun. In this
romantic spot was collected a crowd of men and women, dressed in all the
fantastic finery of the country, and bedecked with boughs and flowers: one man,
who seemed the chief, carried a garland in his hand, and, mated with a
beautiful female, led them all in mazes through a dance* Don Isidor stopped and
looked on -- Nothing, (...) he, delights me so much as an assemblage (...)
happy faces. The dance stopped, and the people saluted our travelers with
rustic civility. Pr'ythee, said Don Isidor, what is the occasion^ this mirth
and dancing today? Is it your tu^^lar saint's day?

Why, you must know, Senor, that the village (...) see yonder is called
Villaverde: it has been (...) possession of the present family ever since (...)
expulsion of the Moors (...) this part of Spain: and if (...) blessed Virgin
condescend* to hear the prayers of its inhabitants, it will continue so for
ever -- for never were people so blessed as they are in a lord, and never was a
family so blessed in return as they -- if good works, the prayers of mankind,
the smiles of heaven, and being true Christians and real hidalgos can make them
so. Search out the best man in Spain, and we will set the worst of this family
against him, and not be afraid of the comparison; and of all of them that ever
possessed the estate, the present Marquis seems the best; for, to the natural
greatness of his blood, and the hereditary goodness of his heart, he unites the
gifts of his good uncle Jerome, prior of our convent, under whose care he was
bred: you need not doubt then his being a good Christian, which you know is
saying every thing. As soon as he came of age, instead of lavishing the great
wealth he got into possession of, in feasts and revels and riot, in horses,
dice, cards, or women, (...) laid it all out in charity, reserving to himself
no more for his expenses than the poorest (...) in the country: he provides for
the old and infirm, gives instruments of husbandry to young farmers, and tools
to young tradesmen: h^ gives portions to young maids to procure them good
husbands, and on their marriage supplies them with a capital to ^et them going*
not a person in the country but can bear ^^timony to his charity: even the
little children flock about him as he walks the streets, skipping for joy like
young lambkins after their dams, and get their quarto or ochavo to regale: in
short, Sir, nothing, not even the brute creation fails to find tender
protection and shelter from him This is exactly the character of the present
Marquis of Villaverde, at least of him who lived in 1781.
: -- he is splendid in gifts to the church to pray for the dead, but he is
chiefly applauded for his munificence to poor hidalgos whose families have
fallen by mischance or error into poverty -- All men adore him -- and the
Almighty has marked him for him own. Well, Sir, this day he is to be married --
the whole neighborhood is in one tumult of joy -- grandees come from all parts
of the country; even the Marquis de Punalada, who has lived like a hermit since
the death of his wife, comes forth to add to the meeting: all strangers passing
by are invited* and the Marquis and his uncle will both be much pleased, and
think it a great favor, if you, cavaliers, would delay your journey, and go to
the castle of Villaverde.

That is impossible, said Don Isidor; business of consequence obliges us to
return with haste* we wish the worthy Marquis all the felicity such virtues
merit, and will offer up our prayers to the Virgin to bless his nuptials.
However, I thank you for the pains you have taken to inform me, (...) request
that you will accept this -- giving (...) a piece of money -- and make mercy
with (...) another occasion. Then turning their (...) they proceeded on their
journey.

They had not gone far when they observed an inn which stood just at the point
of two roads: here they resolved to refresh themselves after the fatigues and
fasting of the night: they accordingly stopped, and having retired into a
private room held a conference on the subject of the night's adventures. From
what we have seen, said the Baron, no doubt remains of the truth of my
suspicions: that Gonsalvo has been murdered most foully, is certain -- than the
skeleton in the chest is his, the ring is sufficient proof; not to mention
(looking at Don Isidor) the cloven skull, the portmanteau, and the armor; and
that the Marquis de (...) has been the murderer, is little less a (...) of
certainty. They all assented to (...) propositions: the questions then to be
resolved are -- First, how it has happened that (...) Priory should be made the
scene of slaughter (...) as one would think too holy for (...) of darkness;
next, what provocation (...) inducement brought on the murder; and (...) what
has been the fate of my daughter? (...) things remaining still in obscurity,
(...) wish to return tonight to the vault (...) we may discover further.

In my opinion, said Don Isidor, the development of all you mention hangs (...)
the discoveries we have already made (...) therefore of making an unavailing
(...) the vault, we should, in pursuance of (...) plan, proceed to court, and
give the king a full and circumstantial relation of the facts from the
beginning.

And desire him, said the Baron, to open the lists, and permit me to call the
villain to a public vindication of himself in single combat, I think that you
mistake me yet, interrupted Don Isidor -- Single combat indeed! -- No, far be
it from me to think of staining, the noble warrior's sword with the blood of a
murderer! -- No, let justice --

Hear me, Don Isidor, interrupted the Baron -- hear my fixed resolves -- He
must fall by this arm -- I cannot become an assassin or an executioner --
therefore I must fight him -- fear not thou the event -- in such a cause, a
pigmy's arm would wrest victory from a giant: besides -- but thou think that
I am old -- too old to -- It may be so -- but know, Isidor, that even at this
age, that man bears not arms in Spain from whose crest Rayo would not now, even
(...) old though he be, hope to pluck the laurel.

My dear Baron returned Don Isidor, I must say you still mistake me. Of the
event of a combat I have no doubt; and if, as you seem (...) surmise, I had any
that arose from an apprehension of your age, I should, and I hope^ (...)
believe it, myself step forward as the (...) of our cause. The process you
(...) would smother future discovery, and many (...) of greatest moment,
perhaps even your daughter's life (for who knows but she yet may live?) might
all be lost in this one rash act. -- Consider, Baron, it is not a mere point of
honor you have to discharge -- it is not a doubtful claim on justice you have
to enforce -- you are not so destitute of proof as to resort to the sword --
no, your proofs are already in your reach, and justice to your whole family
demands that your oppressor should be brought, not to the honorable issue of
the sword, but to the ignominious sentence of the law. As to your age, Baron,
it has nothing to do with it; for, in a case where the demands of honor called
forth the sword, I know not the hand more ^it to draw it than yours -- If it
failed, and mine should sink after it, remember that I have a son. -- Ay,
Isidor, you have a son -- such a son as I once had -- one to whose arm the fate
of empires might be trusted; but believe me, you have shaken my intentions for
the present. My daughter may live, said you not so? Look you, Isidor,
accustomed as thou have been to read my heart, which ever has been written in
my actions, thou can not but have observed how much more precious than life,
nay than ten thousand lives, has honor ever been in my opinion; yet would I,
to (...) good that one transporting hope -- to (...) daughter -- to hug her
once more in (...) -- give life, fame, fortune, every thing (...) winds; forego
all honors, all worldly (...) and take the fate of the most forlorn wretch
that draws existence from the pity of mankind -- But it may not be -- she must
be gone -- she was not spared!

However, said Don Isidor, though unlikely, it is not impossible: is it not
better to proceed by such temperate means as may insure our work at least from
further mischief? I say then, we must desire the interference of the king, and
even this must be done with caution, for Don Rodrigo is nephew and presumptive
heir to the Marquis; and his mother, who is above all women crafty, may by
circumspection discover, and by address defeat us. My advice therefore is, that
we repair to Burgos, and that Alphonso gain a private audience of the king, and
prevail upon him to grant you a hearing, in which case there does not remain a
doubt of justice being done.

Father Thomas and Alphonso added the weight of their opinion to this advice,
and the Baron agreed. Meantime, said Don Isidor, let us take some refreshment,
remain here this night to rest, and early tomorrow set forward on our journey.

Just at the moment, they observed from their windows a cloud of dust arising
at a distance, and moving toward them; they soon heard the (...) of horses,
and presently saw a (...) drawn by six mules, and surrounded by (...) it drove
by the inn, and turned (...) town of Villaverde. They called then (...) asked
him whose it was: he answered, (...) the Marquis de Punalada, who for a wonder,
said he, appears abroad, going I suppose to the wedding: ay, ay, he has armed
men enough to keep off the ghosts. -- Oh Lord save us, and keep us a clear
conscience!

The Marquis then, said Don Isidor, is much afraid of ghosts, is he? Afraid
Senor! Why, he is the talk of the whole country, replied the host; we have
sometimes such work with him -- it was but a few nights ago he called up all
the servants in the middle of the night -- said that some one was going to kill
him -- made them arm themselves, and search all around the castle -- and at
last could not be persuaded but that some person had come to him as he lay in
bed, and shook a bloody poniard over him, threatening him with speedy death: he
keeps almost continually locked up in private places, and never walks even in
the great gardens, though walled with battlements, without two chosen
domestics. Sometimes he disappears for days together, and is not seen by any
one, and the people of the castle think he is then with Father Gregorio the
prior -- though how he gets there they cannot tell, as the walls of the castle
are between them. Be this as it will, one of the lay brothers saw him once in
the prior's cell, at a time that he had not passed the gate. Some say that he
deals (...) devil -- some say one thing, some say (...) some talk of my lady's
death -- but (...) Senors, remember, I say nothing: (...) I think on it, you
are strangers to (...) do me a mischief; but thank God I (...) secret. We,
returned Don Isidor, we are above doing you a mischief, and hope you will not
think so ill of us; so, if you have a secret -- Lord! (...) your honor, no
secret -- what every one knows is no secret -- Why he screeches, and talks to
himself, and says the wickedest things when he thinks that no one is in hearing
-- such as that God cannot pardon him, and the like -- Despair you know is one
of the seven deadly sins -- as for my part I would not take the wealth of Spain
to be in his skin this night; for though I do keep an inn, I am an honest man,
and never committed murder. Murder! exclaimed Don Isidor -- why, did the
Marquis? No, no, your honor -- oh no -- not as one would say -- God forbid I
should say so -- but then when a man is afraid of his own shadow, and shrieks
-- I understand you, said Don Isidor, touching his lips with his fingers, by
way of denoting silence you are a wise fellow, and I commend you.

But, Senores, continued the host quite flattered, only think of his immuring
his daughter, a sweet young lady, in a cell of a convent, only out of fear of a
prophecy of a cursed witch -- But that cost his son his life, who was -- but,
God forgive him! he is dead. Then there is a poor (...) he has bred up for
charity: some say he is (...) bastard -- but I cannot believe it, he is too
(...) that: be that as it may, he treats him (...). Sometimes when he meets him
he (...) and orders him to be turned out, then (...) and has him brought back,
for the lad would be glad to go; and would you believe it? one day about four
days ago he was missed; messengers were sent to search for him; 'they found him
in a broken building behind the convent, where he was looking for birds' nests:
and only think, the Marquis was going to poniard him, and at last laid him in
irons, calling him villain, cutthroat, traitor! -- Lord help us! the boy would
not cut the throat of a chicken, though he wanted his dinner by it: not but the
fellow is brave enough, and now that he is grown is as strong as a mule. It is
not six months ago since a great gang of robbers descended from the Sierra.
Morena, and plundered the whole country, carrying away every thing, cattle,
corn, and all. The Marquis was then abroad, that is to say, buried in his
castle: what does the young Ferdinando, but claps on a suit of armor, and at
the head of a few peasants sallied forth, attacked the banditti, took their
chief, and kept him hostage at a small village till all they had remaining of
the stolen property was restored! The Marquis being informed of it, sent to
have the fellow detained just as all was returned: but Fernando said that he
had already passed his word, and would send his spear through any one that
should presume to detain him; adding, that it was (...) to have the things
restored to the poor (...), than to hang such a worthless wretch; (...) then
dismissed him with an earnest exhortation (...) reformation and repentance. All
people (...) astonished at the grandeur of his sentiments particularly as he
was a foundling, and, as the saying is, begot in sin: -- but as soon as he went
home the Marquis became outrageous, threatened him with death, laid him in
irons, and kept him on bread and water for a month. When let at liberty, he
walked about sad and silent, and spoke to no one. One day sauntering down a
long lobby in the castle, the Marquis suddenly opened a room door just facing
him, screeched, and almost fell into fits at the sight of him. The castle was
alarmed: his lordship declared that he was watching there to assassinate him:
the youth called Heaven to witness his innocence, and begged that he might be
permitted to withdraw from the castle, and ease his lordship's mind, who seemed
to abhor the sight of him: assuring him that, though grateful for past favors,
he was weary of such continual ill usage; upon which the Marquis swore he
should never go outside the walls of the castle, and gave orders for his being
strictly watched. Ever since he remains there as it were a prisoner -- he is
seen sometimes walking on the battlements attended by two men as guards -- no
one can tell the cause of this, but every one knows it can be nothing good.

You interest me much in the fate of this youth, said Don Isidor; and your
account astonishes (...) measure. There is something in (...) conduct to him so
far surpassing the (...) common malignity, that, coupled with his terrors and
screechings, denotes some guilty mystery.

Why, ^^nor, said the innkeeper, he seems almost, as much afraid of every body
-- nay, for the matter of that, of himself; for he cannot abide to be alone at
night. Indeed most of the domestics are terrified at night, and declare that
the whole castle and its gardens, nay, the whole priory and valley, are
haunted. Well, thank God, the Marquis of Villaverde is my lord! I would not be
under the other for -- for -- for -- no, no, no^ for -- Here he was called, and
obliged to leave his company, and his story unfinished.

A strange account this! said Don Isidor.

A very natural one, said the Baron. Though guilt bury itself in the
unfathomable abysses of the deep, it cannot fly from that awful tribunal
erected for its punishment in the heart of the offender -- I mean the
conscience, all powerful conscience, which can smooth the rude front of
adversity, and turn the hard couch of poverty into a bed of down, or goad the
guilty wretch of state with stings and tortures; convert to gall the sweets
which nature pours into his cup; midst hosts of slaves that bend at his nod,
app^l (...) with menaces of vengeance, paint to his pause stricken soul a
dagger pointed to his (...) by every hand, and give him even here a foretaste
of perdition. Gracious Heaven what infatuation! that man, so often, so awfully
admonished, will not reflect -- but, for the (...) of some transitory pleasure,
the (...) of which flies but the farther from his (...) once render this life
too hideous to be born^ and preclude his wretched soul from shelter in another!

I cannot account for it, said Don Isidor, but I feel a propensity which I
cannot overcome, to go toward the castle and take a view of it. The unmerited
fate of that youth, who from our host's account seems to have something noble
in his soul, fills me with, I cannot say how, an ardent wish to see him. Were I
superstitious, I should deem those desires predictive -- Perhaps! nay it cannot
be -- What? said the Baron hastily.

In truth, replied Don Isidor, my thoughts were so absurd that I almost blush
to own them. If this should be your orphan grandson! A flush of red crimsoned
the cheek of the Baron -- What! if it should -- but oh it cannot be -- why keep
him there? And yet his jealous apprehensions, his shrieks of horror -- but it
cannot be -- No, Isidor! no, when he had gone so deep in guilt as to murder the
father and mother, he would not stop at the child: much less would he keep him
as a continual memento of his guilt -- No, no, it cannot be, it cannot be! The
will of Heaven be done! To it I will (I trust, with fortitude) submit; and,
when the debt of vengeance to my murdered children is paid, bury if I can all
remembrance of them in their grave, and look upon Alphonso as my child, the
kindly (...) of the Supreme to smooth the down-hill (...) of my declining years.

(...), said Don Isidor, suppose we go? It can in no injury, and will at least
give us a more perfect idea of the situation of the castle, to serve us on a
future occasion.

I agree, replied the Baron: let us go.

As soon as they had dined, they departed for the castle: as they approached it
they saw, or thought they saw, the country become more gloomy; and their
imagination, influenced by their opinion of the Marquis, viewed it as a place
out off from the goods of Providence, where grass grew not, and where the
affrighted earth drew back into her womb her natural produce, as fearful to
trust it to the hands of such a monster. They rode along the walls, and
perceived that they were strongly entrenched behind a deep ditch, over which as
they advanced they found a draw bridge drawn up: passing further on, they
observed that the wall turned to the southward, and continuing their route
along it saw that it joined that of the priory. They turned back again, and as
they approached the drawbridge observed three men walking on the wall: on
their nearer approach, Don Isidor courteously saluting them inquired to whom
that noble castle belonged. One of them returned the salute, and informed him
that it belonged to the Marquis de Punalada; that the Marquis was from home:
and said, that he was sorry the arrangements of the castle forbad him from
inviting them (...) the Marquis's absence. Our travelers had (...) the
smallest doubt, from the youthful voice (...) manner of the speaker, but that
he was (...) young person of whom such honorable mention had been made by the
innkeeper: Don Isidor therefore accosted him. Young gentleman, said he, though
I should be sorry to break in upon the arrangements or trespass on the
privileges of the castle, I cannot help entreating that you would have the
goodness to direct us in the road to Cordova, from which, I know not how, we
have insensibly diverged; and as the roads about here are rather intricately
crossed and mixed with each other, you would considerably augment the favor by
descending, and instructing us particularly how we may avoid going again
astray. We are travelers, and, like all travelers who hope to profit by their
toil, wish to get the best account possible of the country which we pass
through; and here have been unable to find any but uncouth and ignorant
peasants, incapable of instructing us. You honor me much, returned the youth,
by your invitation, but there are reasons why I cannot avail myself of it. Just
as he said this, one of the men who was along with him spoke to him in a
whisper -- the (...) consulted together, and then making a sign to Don Isidor
to wait, they descended, and letting down the drawbridge passed over. The
young man stepped forward and joined the Baron and (...) Isidor. As he
approached, the whole (...) riveted their eyes upon him, and were (...) pleased
and indeed surprised at the (...) of his mien, the firmness of his deportment,
(...) vigor of his limbs, and the noble manly expression of his countenance,
in which strong character was deeply marked. The Baron felt a lively emotion of
tenderness toward him -- Don Isidor not less -- while Father Thomas had all
those sensations that a good heart meliorated by Christianity may be supposed
to feel for virtue groaning under oppression. They dismounted from their
horses, and leaving them to the care of the servants walked aside with him. He
began to speak -- but an unaccountable sensation broke his utterance, and
alternately overspread his face with a shifting red and white: however, he
informed them that this was the castle of Punalada, as he had said before, and
that it was surrounded with walls a considerable length backwards, even to the
ground of the convent of Vallesanto: that the Marquis was a man of immense
estates and great wealth, highly favored by the court, but yet so fond of
retirement that he chose rather to live here for many years past, than go into
the world and assume that figure in it which his rank and fortune entitled him
to. You are his son then, I presume? said Don Isidor. No, Sir; I am indeed the
creature of his adoption, preserved by his charity, and now supported by his
bounty; but whose son I am, alas! I know not, nor perhaps shall ever know: at
present the Marquis by his adoption is entitled to all those duties which (...)
pay to my natural parents, perhaps to (...) Then you are happy? said the Baron*
(...) youth hesitated -- at length, If, said (...) in the negative, let me be
acquitted of any intentional ingratitude to my protector. I have never gone so
far before, and I confess I am astonished to think by what irresistible power
your notice of me exacts a confession which I have never made to any one. The
Marquis has been kind to me -- I owe him every thing, yet am not happy. Why, my
child? said the Baron earnestly. I wish, replied the youth, to serve my king,
and be a soldier; but I am not permitted: the Marquis (for what reason I cannot
tell) is averse to it -- it is his will I should not go, and I must submit. --
Apprehending, as I suppose, that I have formed a design to depart for that
purpose, without his permission, he has ordered me to keep within the walls of
the castle, and assigned me a guard: but he need not; I think obedience to his
will a duty, and no earthly consideration shall make me guilty of a breach of
it. Nothing could equal their astonishment at the noble sentiments and
ingenuous spirit of so young a man. The Baron gazed upon him as if his eyes had
lost their wonted motion -- Don Isidor took him by the hand, pressed it, and
said -- Unhappy parents, whoever they are, to have lost such a son; and happy
he who has acquired such a one, even by adoption!

The Marquis, interrupted the Baron, must be (...) of the treasure he possesses
-- He is fond (...) child, is he not? Alas, venerable (...) the youth, he on
the contrary (...) me, and (why, I know not) to consider me as a person
unworthy of trust or confidence -- as a villain -- as a traitor. Here his
color shifted to a deadly pale, and a tear gushed in spite of him from his
eyes, while every muscle of his face seemed agitated. In short, Sirs, continued
he, to be plain, the Marquis has of late so treated me, that every tie of
affection is broken, and the only ligament which now remains to bind me to him
is gratitude; a bond which no true Christian can break. I trust that God will
grant me the grace never to violate it. Thus have I, Senors, seduced by an
unaccountable feeling which draws me to you with resistless force, deviated
from my accumstomed maxims of silence. To have at once reposed in you the
secret of my heart appears now strange to myself -- yet does it not give me one
painful sensation; on the contrary, I feel more tranquil a^ heart than I have
for a long, long time been.

Fear not, excellent young man! said Don Isidor: you speak to men of honor;
nay more, you speak to those who feel their hearts entwined with yours in the
reciprocal folds of affection, equally strong as yours -- equally unaccountable
to themselves.

Let us, said the Baron, call you child: if affection entitles to that
appellation, we claim a stronger right than the Marquis.

And at all events, said Don Isidor, (...) that if the caprice of the Marquis,
his (...) any other circumstance, should leave (...) liberty to make a choice,
Don Isidor do (...) will be ready to take upon him the office of the father and
the friend; and will discharge both to you as though you were the issue of his
own loins.

Don Isidor, you would engross all to yourself, said the Baron; you must allow
the claim of the childless to be paramount to yours, and such is mine. My
child, for I will call you so, said he, I am old, and can instruct you;
therefore hear me attentively: hope not that time, reason, or moral or
religious sentiment can work any change in the Marquis's heart in thy favor.
To use the helpless orphan of his protection with inhumanity, and put bonds
upon his mind and person, shows him to possess a soul either naturally
depraved, or laboring under some malignant suspicion or hidden animosity which
broods in his heart, but dares not appear: and trust me, youth, man in
intercourse with man seldom rests at the first stage of good or evil; but where
he confers an unmerited benefit, or offers an unprovoked injury, carries the
folly of the one act, or the wickedness of the other, to extremes -- Never did
I know a man that did not delight in fostering the worst briar that he had
planted; never do I remember a man who could forgive the innocent he had
injured. Let this be your caution, this the guide of your conscience: that
gratitude, which has outlived affection, is a mere religious (...), and, like
that of forgiveness of our (...), extends not to self-injury, involves no (...)
esteem, enjoins no positive attachment, but (...) bids that we pray for or wish
rather good than evil to its object. In this am I right, Father? said he,
turning to the Priest. Perfectly, returned Father Thomas. One word more, said
the Baron, taking him by the hand: Fly this castle, as you value life, or wish
for the protection of Heaven -- guilt ^aps its walls, vengeance holds its sword
over it, and the thunder of Heaven ere many days be past will shake it to its
foundation. -- Fly, therefore -- quickly fly -- and when once thy resolution
shall be taken, let this (giving him a scrip of paper) be thy guide.

The youth looked with astonishment at the Baron as he spoke -- he was overawed
by the dignity of his looks, while the words he spoke sunk to the inmost
recesses of his soul. Don Isidor, continued the Baron, we must have this youth
between us; for as of Alphonso, so of him, neither of us will give up his
share. And you, said he, my children, taking both their hands and putting them
into each other, remember, that after this day, if ever you should happen to
meet, you meet as brothers. With joy, said Alphonso, I accept from your hands
that which before was denied to me -- a brother. And I, said Fernando, with
gratitude for the acquisition, earnestly hope that I may be worthy of it.

At this instant, one of the servants called our, Don Fernando, it is time to
return; you (...) what would be the consequence if we were (...) here. I shall
return directly, said Fernando. Then turning to the Baron and Don Isidor* Your
advice, Senors, is engraven on my (...) and if I should fail in persuading the
Marquis to let me forth, depend upon it I shall take a proper opportunity to
claim your protection: meantime may Heaven protect you, and grant you all the
happiness you deserve! Reverend Father, said he, turning then to the Priest,
your blessing -- God bless you, my son! said the Priest. And now, my brother,
since you allow me to call you so, said he to Alphonso, let us embrace and
part. He then turned from them, called his attendants, and tripping over the
drawbridge hauled it up, waved his hand as a last adieu, and disappeared.

Our travelers had not gone far from the castle, the Baron ever and anon
tossing up his eyes to heaven and groaning, and Don Isidor in mute
contemplation -- when Pierrot, touching Alphonso on the arm, and making him one
of his significant becks to drop behind, says, in a low tone of voice, his eyes
staring, his mouth round as a circle, and his brows listed un in astonishment,
Answer me, Senor, only two questions which I shall put to you -- Is this
country all enchanted, or is it not? that is one. And who, tell me, who do you
think that young cavalier is like^ that is another. Let me see whether we be
all bewitched, or whether it is me alone that the devil (...) his pranks with.
And is this, said Alphonso, the cause of your important beckon to me to fall
behind with you? To (...) tend these two ridiculous (...)?

I tell you what, Senor, if you were (...) me, I cannot but think that (...) --
for, when that youth appeared, and I first saw him, I wiped my eyes again and
again -- and I doubted whether I was awake -- But to the very last I was
bewitched; for, if I was not, how could he appear to me to be my master Don
Isidor? Why, Pierrot, said Alphonso, looking earnestly in his face, are you out
of your senses? What strange notion is now running in your precious noddle?

May I never live, replied Pierrot, if that young cavalier did not appear to me
to be the very same man that carried away my lady, your mother, from her
father's, near Talavera -- that married her -- that afterward begat you -- and
that is now there riding before us! Nay, your honor need not stare, for to be
sure it is all bewitchment and sorcery; for there is nothing about us here but
conjurors, magicians, spirits, and witches, and I wish we were well out of it:
nay, for matter of that, I did not like your embracing that young fellow, who,
for ought we know, may be something bad, and has taken upon him that handsome
shape only to hurt and deceive us: indeed, indeed, we ought to turn back, and
not go the road he directed us.

Alphonso, seriously alarmed, spurred his horse and rode up to the others, and
in terms of affection and tenderness deplored the insanity of Pierrot, told
them the whole of what had passed, and besought them to examine him. Did I
(...) tell you, said the Baron to Don Isidor, never (...) I see so strong a
resemblance -- that of (...) to Gonsalvo is not greater than that of (...) to
you. It is a strange mysterious (...) would that we could get to the (...)

CHAP. XI.
AS soon as they arrived at the city of Burgos, the Baron, Don Isidor, Father
Thomas, and their attendants, remained at an inn, while Alphonso went to court.
He first made it his business to see his patron, Don Juan de Padilla, and
besought him to obtain for him a private audience of the king, to whom, he
said, he should, in his presence, unfold a business no less surprising than
horrible. The king, not less inclined to oblige his minister than to serve his
favorite, instantly granted him the audience, in presence of Don Juan.
Alphonso began by entreating his majesty to believe, that nothing less than a
business of the most serious moment could induce him to call upon his majesty's
attention in so very serious and urgent a manner. -- He plighted himself to
prove, to the conviction of the world, one of the most execrable conspiracies
that ever was conceived by man in his most abandoned wickedness -- a conspiracy
formed against the honor, (...) fortunes, and the lives of a house
distinguished (...) the service of the crown of Castile -- carried (...) effect
-- concealed for many years, and at (...) discovered by means more than
ordinary -- by the intervention of the avenging hand of Heaven. He said, that
the affair was so intricate, so dependent on a variety of proofs, and so very
difficult of explanation, that it would be necessary, as well for his majesty's
ease as for the more perfect elucidation of it, to have the principal
personages of it before his majesty: and he earnestly entreated to have the
liberty of bringing them on the morrow in attendance before him: one of them
was Don Isidor, his father; another, the Reverend Father Thomas Augustino; the
third, Baron de Rayo. -- How! said Don Juan, Baron de Rayo! Has he not been
dead, his estates confiscated, and his titles extinct? That the Baron's estates
were confiscated, and his blood attainted by Peter, said Alphonso, is too true;
but it is equally true that he lives, and that the attainder was taken off by
our late king Henry. The conspiracy and consequent frauds and murder that led
to that -- How -- murder! exclaimed the king. Even so, my liege -- most foul
murder, perhaps worse, returned Alphonso: I say, and I undertake at the hazard
of my life, and, what I value more, your majesty's favor, to prove that the
house of Rayo has sunk beneath the hands of a villain and a murderer!

This is strong language! said the king.

It is, my liege, said Don Juan, and such as (...) presume Alphonso, ere he
uttered it, was prepared to make good.

Then what is the scope of your present command? said the king.

That the persons I have named be permitted, on the morrow, to come before your
majesty, in presence of Don Juan, and such other persons as your majesty may
think fit, there to lay before you the whole of this transaction.

I grant it, said the king.

May your faithful servant, said Alphonso, presume to suggest the necessity of
secresy for the present; Don Rodrigo is nearly concerned in the event, though
not in the guilt.

Enough, said the king -- Tomorrow morning at ten o'clock, I will, for greater
caution, be at Don Juan's house; there we will hear of this extraordinary
affair.

On the morning, Alphonso, attended by Don Isidor, the Baron, and Father
Thomas, repaired to Don Juan's, who received them all with every mark of
esteem, and particularly treated the Baron with distinguished respect: they
(...) upon the business in hand, and Don Juan assured them of the king's
resolution to render justice to the Baron.

At the appointed time the king came, and with him the corregidor of Burgos.
The king desired Alphonso to proceed. Alphonso entreated that the Baron de Rayo
might be permitted to explain the nature of the case. The Baron began from the
very commencement, and after deprecating the imputation of egotism, if he spoke
of himself, which the nature of the case demanded, gave a detail of the
services of himself and his family to the state; relating various victories
which had been acknowledged by the reigning kings to have been gained over the
enemies of the faith and state, by his valor and wisdom: for a proof of all
which he referred to existing records, and living evidence. He then described
the heroism and achievements of his son; and drew a picture of the sufferings
of him and his daughter, which affected the king extremely: he then adverted to
his own miseries -- his imprisonment -- wanderings -- wants -- and finally his
reception by Don Isidor.

Here Alphonso took up the affair, with an account of the incidents at
Vallesanto.

Don Isidor then began with the story of the search -- and lastly, Father
Thomas produced the ring, sabre, crucifix, and dagger, and the papers found in
the portmanteau, sealed up; all of which they jointly and severally swore to.

Don Juan was astonished. -- He said, that the leading circumstances of the
tale tallied exactly with facts in his recollection. He was intimate with
Gonsalvo -- knew his device -- believed it was his ring -- would certainly know
his armor, as they had often fought together -- and he particularly
recollected, that the Marquis de Punalada suddenly retired from court soon
after the disappearance of Gonsalvo.

From the letters, which were almost fallen (...) pieces, were collected the
following sentences.

LETTER I.
"You have not an hour to lose, Gonsalvo (...) Padre Pablo will tell you all --
Haste you away -- a moment's delay may put your wife beyond your power -- in
the embraces of the K --."

LETTER II.
[Opened the second, but probably the first in point of date.]

"There is a convent, with the prior of which I have some power -- two of my
domestics will attend you there -- no other place affords you a sanctuary
against the disappointed lust of P -- (meaning Peter)."

LETTER III.
"Leave it to me to develop the affair to the Baron. -- All your property,
papers, etc. I will secure for you. Depend on the continuation of my good
offices."

Here the corregidor demanded whether there was any mark or signature by which
to ascertain who had been the writer of those letters.

My lord, said the Baron, his majesty and you will observe, that in this
strange discovery, evidently made under the directing hand of Heaven,
presumptive evidence is the utmost we can yet reach; the identity of the person
murdered will be admitted sufficiently proved, when the ring, the armor, and
the letters directed to Gonsalvo, (...) with the skeleton, the skull of which
is split (...), and the instrument lying in the (...) are taken into
consideration. The question (...) is, whether this proof be or be not
sufficient to induce your majesty to set on foot an inquiry; to call the Father
Prior of the convent to account for that crowd of suspicious circumstances, and
thence to draw more ample proof of the guilt of the accused?

This, said the king, is certainly reasonable.

The corregidor agreed with his majesty.

Your majesty then sees, continued the Baron, that the next consideration will
be, how to do this in such a manner as to prevent the cunning of those
concerned from rendering the enquiry abortive: and as I have turned the whole
through my mind, and have considered it with so much the more attention, as I
am most concerned in the issue, I will, with your majesty's permission, suggest
a plan which I trust will meet with approbation.

The corregidor desired him to explain himself.

My scheme, said the Baron, is this: -- In the first place, let some of your
lordship's most intelligent officers, duly authorized, proceed with us to the
vaults, and there take full cognizance, and testify to your lordship in writing
what shall appear to them: let this, along with the testimony of the reverend
Father here, of Don Isidor, and of Don Alphonso, be made up into a record, and
deposited, together with the ring, armor, sabre, and letters, in the archieves
of your court; on this your majesty will ground an order for the arrest of all
parties suspected; and in the exertion of this, care must be taken to prevent
(...) impediments, by collusion or otherwise, (...) thrown in the way of
justice. To this end, while one armed force surrounds the castle of Punalada on
one side, and another the priory on the other, we, with a chosen few of your
majesty's appointment, will enter the vault by the private passage and be ready
to receive any one that might enter it through the castle. I have many reasons
for expecting, from the execution of this plan, much success, seeing that the
sudden concussion of unexpected fear, has often shaken from the soul of a
hardened sinner, a guilty secret, which the deliberate operations of justice,
nay, torture itself, could not wring from him.

The corregidor then declared, that notwithstanding the miraculous tenor of the
whole transaction, every thing which had fallen from the Baron carried so much
the sterling weight of truth, as, joined with the evidence, and his and the
other witnesses known integrity, served to bear down all doubt of his
sincerity; and he entirely approved of his plan for facilitating a full
discovery, and ensuring justice: and in conclusion added, that he would appoint
a proper person to go and hold the inquest desired.

The king, on his part, assured the Baron, that on the proof of what he had
advanced being established (of which by the by he had little doubt), every
practicable reparation should be made to him and his family: for, said he,
exclusive of (...) demand justice makes on me as a sovereign, (...) think
something especially due to the (...) of Alphonso.

Alphonso, penetrated with gratitude, knelt and kissed the king's hand. -- Long
may John live the pride and glory of Castile! exclaimed the Baron: the rest
pronounced a heartfelt amen: and the king and corregidor retired.

Don Juan kept them all that day at his house, and in the evening an officer
arrived with a letter from the corregidor to the Baron; he had orders to
proceed directly on the inquest: they resolved to set out that night; but it
was agreed that the servants should remain behind, to prevent unnecessary
speculations.

CHAP. XII.
IT was just twilight when they arrived in the valley: they proceeded to the
bower, where, according to a prior determination, the Baron and Don Isidor
remained with the horses, while Father Thomas, the officer, and Alphonso, went
to the chapel. Arrived at the month of the subterraneous passage, they struck a
light, and found the place just as it had been left by them. The obstructions
being now few, they got down without much loss of time: Alphonso soon found the
little door that opened into the vault. -- The officer entered crossing
himself, and was smote with horror at the spectacle presented to his view. He
examined the skull -- the armor -- every thing -- and took down an accurate
account of the whole in writing. In order to establish the point of the
relative situation with the convent, Father Thomas opened the cemetery, and
showed him the bodies of the deceased fathers of the convent, which he likewise
exactly noted, and then again returned into the vault. Alphonso then took out
the key and opened the door at which the Baron had before stopped at the
suggestion of the priest.

(...) entered now into a long vaulted gallery, which (...) off transversely on
either side the door: (...) they stopped to deliberate which way they should
turn, whether to the right branch or the left. While they were in this state of
suspense, their ears were struck with the notes of soft music, which seemed to
come from the extreme end of the right branch of the vaulted gallery. They
paused -- the music died away -- Never, said Alphonso, did I hear such
ravishing sounds! -- They then, with as little noise as possible, went forward:
-- again the music struck up, and they could distinctly hear a female voice, as
sweet as that of seraphs, accompanied by a guitar -- it sung by snatches the
most tender, melancholy notes. -- They stood and listened attentively, but
could hear no distinct words. At the conclusion of a stanza it ceased, and a
sigh that would have rent the knotty heart of apathy itself, and extorted pity
from the remorseless savage of the woods, followed it. -- Alphonso sighed
responsive.

They again as cautiously as possible stepped forward, and at the end of the
gallery sound that it again branched off to the left. -- At this instant they
heard another sigh, and presently a voice, tuned by the hand of harmony itself,
exclaimed: Oh blessed and most merciful redeemer! when shall my soul take its
flight, and shelter itself in thy bosom from the miseries of this life? -- They
took advantage of the speaking to step ^^^ward without giving alarm, and
perceived before them a glimmering light faintly break across the gallery.
Alphonso, who carried the (...) it down at the turning; and they came (...),
across which, near the top, was cut (...) of about a foot long, and four or
five inches broad, grated with small bars of iron. Father Thomas stepped forward,
cautiously peeped in, and beckoned to the others to do the same. They beheld in
a low gloomy chamber, which wanted nothing but height and windows to render it
magnificent, a lady on her knees before a couch praying with eyes and hands
devoutly uplifted to Heaven: her face, which they could distinctly see, bore
every mark of dignity and beauty, but faded, and strongly impressed with the
vestiges of care, thought, and affliction -- Her lips ceased to move -- the
tears gushed in torrents from her eyes -- she dropped her arms upon the couch,
then (...) down with her face between her hands, uttered a heart-rending sigh,
and remained motionless. Alphonso's soul seemed forcing a passage through his
eyes, while his heart beat so strongly as to agitate his whole frame, and he
breathed short and hard. Father Thomas feared he might be heard, and drew him
away -- the officer continued to observe what passed within. Presently a door
opened in the extreme end of the room, and he observed a large man seemingly of
above the middle time of life enter; he had a lamp in (...) hand, and a sword
in the other -- The lady started, (...), seeing him, arose and sat down on the
couch; Be joined her, and seating himself with an air of familiarity by her
side, addressed her with always in tears! -- what, shall I be ever (...) to
excite fresh insult? -- shall I find you (...) incorrigible? -- and does not
the apprehensions of my power yet subdue your stubborn soul?

Alas, my lord! returned the lady, is a lapse of so many, many years spent in
this dreary cell under all the miseries of anxiety and incertitude -- is the
resolute endurance of violence, insult, and opprobrious abuse -- is the
firmness with which I resisted the active endeavors of your hireling priest,
who betrayed his God, and used the sacred privilege of confessor to pour
pernicious poison in my ear, and act the pandar's part -- is the fortitude with
which I resigned my infant to that death with which you menaced him, rather
than wrong my most beloved lord -- are my vows solemnly made and registered in
Heaven -- are the mortifying scorn with which I have always treated your
protestations, and my contempt and hatred of your hideous person -- are those
fervent petitions which now for many, many years I have every hour of the
undistinguished day and night wafted to Heaven with the sighs of an afflicted
heart, to smite your guilty head and level it with the dust -- are all those, I
say, openly expressed and every day avowed, yet insufficient to correct the
presumption of your heart, or convince you of the folly as well as wickedness
of your hopes? -- Unhappy wretch! Pity for whose weakness would countervail my
indignation for any crimes less than yours -- begone! -- or if nothing* will
convince your senseless vanity, nor (...) the fiend that works within you, but
(...) with blood, take my life -- But oh! that would be mercy, an act above the
reach of your gloomy soul -- Nay, strain all your cruelty to the utmost, let
all the petty vengeance of a base soul be let loose upon me, but cease to
torture me with repetitions of your foul polluted vows, nor insult the ashes of
my murdered husband, whose arm, when living, could have crushed you into dust.

Once for all then, hear me, madam, said the man. -- Here I solemnly swear --

How shall thou swear? By that? -- unhappy man, who have already broken every
tie that binds man to man, every bond that connects the creature with its
creator; who have so far outstripped all precedent of sin, as to leave your
crimes without a name, and run beyond the pale even of Heaven's mercy.

If then, interrupted he, if there be yet left in Heaven's mercy one ray of
hope to glance upon my soul, may it be cut off, and consign me to utter
darkness if I do not now once for all speak the irrevocable purpose of my mind
-- my firm, unalterable resolve -- Your son, as I have already told you,
convicted of treacherous designs against my castle and my life, now awaits his
doom in chains.

Unhappy wretch! returned the lady -- think, think! nor heap new perdition on
your soul -- think that all is not treachery which the coward suspicion of a
guilty heart proclaims so -- What! was his talking with a few armed men
treachery?

(...) interrupted the man, but he mentioned a name which shows --

What name? exclaimed the lady exultingly -- Oh, mother of mercy! perhaps it
may -- Oh if there were a name, the very sound of which would blast open the
gates of your concealment -- dart vengeance quick as the piercing lightning
through your castle -- and hurl you from your blind security! -- Even now,
spite of yourself, you betray your base fears -- and (rare union of cowardice
and rashness!) while you tremble at the lion's roar, indulge in cruel sport,
and goad its young one in the cage.

Hear me, proud woman! interrupted the man hastily -- hear me, nor interrupt me
with your raving -- by that oath which I Have just sworn, he dies! -- One only
thing, and that you know, can save him.

Then let him die -- a son of the house of Rayo knows how to die, but cannot
know dishonor -- nor can Heaven receive a more delightful sacrifice than that
of a virtuous son immolated at the shrine of his parent's honor.

By Heavens, he shall die before you!

And think thou, monster, foolish as depraved* that my soul, elevated by the
dignity of virtue above the common feelings of our nature, and cheered by the
all-sustaining voice of religion, can, after yielding up the life of my child,
stoop to tremble at the manner of his death (...) -- No, let it be! and draw
from it, and from (...) own feelings, this instruction, that as there is no
circumstance too trivial to strike (...) the heart of guilt; so there is no
(...) however horrible to man's nature, that the firm soul of virtue and
religion cannot look fearless in the face* and suffer with a smile.

One week, said he rising, I allow you for deliberation: at the end of that
time should thou remain stubborn, though my own death should go hand in hand
with it, and eternal perdition wait on death, it shall be done! -- Then moving
to the door, and casting at her a look full of horror and fury, he said
sternly, Think upon it! and withdrew.

For one week then, said the lady, I shall not be afflicted with the sight of
you -- Oh happy truce, worthy a rich sacrifice!

Remember, said he returning, a week! -- By Heavens but a week! -- and again
retired.

The lady then threw herself down upon the couch, wept bitterly, and remained
immovable -- The priest then withdrew and brought away the others, saying, it
was probable that nature exhausted was sinking into sleep.

And who may these people be? said the officer. -- Hush, said the priest, let
us begone! -- They returned into the ^^ult, and shut the (...) them -- Be
particular, said the priest to the officer, in noting the conversation you have
just heard.

I shall, said the officer: -- this armor we must bear away -- it is the
corregidor's orders -- the rest I can report.

Every thing passed with the secrecy they (...) they found the Baron and Don
Isidor (...) the horses, and mounting, were out of the valley by daybreak.

As they went along, Father Thomas, in whose mind the expiration of the week
appeared with all its horrors, pressed them to hasten forward, telling them in
general terms, that if they were not back in a week, dreadful consequences
might ensue -- and as it was full four days journey to Burgos, at the common
rate of traveling, it was found expedient to put their horses to the push.

The Baron could not comprehend what Father Thomas meant, nor would the latter
tell him, but amused him with a story of his own fiction. The truth was, Father
Thomas knowing the warm, impetuous temper of the Baron, was afraid to tell him
what passed in the vault, lest it should rouse him to some act of rashness that
might defeat all their projects, and had enjoined Alphonso and the officer to
be silent on that head.

They arrived at Burgos on the evening of the third day; and the urgency of the
case being a sufficient excuse, the officer that night made a faithful report
to the corregidor, and Don Juan ^earing the whole went (...) the king. -- They
viewed the armor, and Don Juan having it (...) in the proper places, said, he
would bear witness to its being Gonsalvo's. The priest then gave an exact
account of the scene in the (...) chamber -- The king was horror struck --
Never* said he, have I heard of such accumulated (...). The Baron was like a
person bereft of his (...) -- he meditated -- attempted to speak -- paused
(...) started -- smote his breast -- cast up his eyes to Heaven -- groaned
aloud -- The king perceived his agitation, and was much affected. It must be,
said the Baron at last, with difficulty getting forth his words -- it must be
she -- it is, it is my daughter! and that youth to whom we spoke at the castle
is her son, Fernando is her son; then turning to the king, and bending his aged
knee -- Oh Sire! can thy heart, which never has known sorrow but by the name,
conceive the pangs of an old man, on whose gray head it has pleased Heaven to
shower down sorrows, thick as it sends the hail upon the earth -- can thou in
this moment of suspense, when the cloud of his misfortunes breaking emits one
ray of light. -- when all his hopes hang on the slight tenure of a tyrant and a
murderer's will -- can thou sympathize with him in his feelings, and with a
virtuous sketch of the imagination beguile yourself into his condition? Here
the king, much affected, endeavored to raise him. -- Yes, thou can,
continued the Baron; -- I see it -- heaven-born pity beams in your eyes, and
through them speaks consolation to my heart. Oh Baron, interrupted the king,
rise! Ah no, my liege! let old Rayo, who has often made the infidels and
enemies of Castile bow the knee before your grandsire's throne, here cling to
the ground till his ^oon be granted. I grant it, said the king, giving him his
hand -- Rise, Baron, I beseech you.

My boon, then, said the Baron rising, is, that this very night measures may be
taken to secure the prior and heads of the convent of Vallesanto, and the
Marquis of Punalada with his domestics.

I will not only do so, said the king, but will even take it as a favor if Don
Juan will go along with you. Don Juan cheerfully assented, and received orders
to instruct three troops of horse to hold themselves instantly in readiness to
march. Meantime, said the king, I shall send for the archbishop of Toledo to
attend me, in order to get his warrant, without which I should not wish to
touch the convent.

The next morning all marched properly instructed and authorized; the Baron and
his party going out of the city by a different route from Don Juan and the
troops. On the evening of the fourth day they reached the valley, and according
to the plan settled between them, the Baron and Don Isidor and two troops went
round by the Villaverde road to the castle, while one led by Don Juan, and
attended by Father Thomas and Alphonso, went toward the convent, where, after
giving proper instructions to the commanding officer, they left them, and
proceeded to the chapel, removed the usual impediments, and sound their way
into the vault. Here having viewed every thing, Alphonso drew forth the key,
opened the door, entered the transverse passage, and proceeded gently toward
the (...) that looked into the lady's chamber. (...) perceived her lying asleep
upon a couch, and a lamp burning on the table by her. Here they impatiently
waited the sound of the (...) from the castle-gate, each straining his eyes to
get a view of the lady's face, yet daring not to make a noise. At length the
wished for signal was given -- the trumpet sounded -- an universal clamor and
noise was heard at a distance -- The lady still slept -- A clanking of chains
was distinguished approaching the chamber on the far side; and the door flying
open, the man seen be* fore appeared dragging along the ground by the hair,
with one hand, the unfortunate Fernando, who being shackled could not stand,
and in the other brandishing a sabre, while fury, wildness and terror rendered
his countenance beyond expression horrible -- Here, Madam! said he, dragging
the youth to the foot of the couch -- the hour is come, and your son is brought
to die at your feet! -- The lady suddenly started from her sleep, screeched,
threw herself upon her son, and swooned.

You have now, said he to Fernando, brought treason to my doors, and it is fit
that you should die: to make vengeance more complete; I will wait till your
mother revives to behold it. Alphonso could no longer restrain himself, but
rushing against the door splintered it to pieces -- Villain! cried he, hold
your murderous hand, (...) this instant thou die!

The Marquis started at the word -- and looked up. At the sight of Alphonso the
sword fell from (...) hand -- has hair stood erect -- his knees knocked against
each other -- his face assumed the very image of death -- he was bereft of
speech with the agony of his fear, and his eyes glared without any appearance
of motion -- At length he threw himself prostrate on his face, and fell into a
swoon.

Meantime the lady, assisted by Don Juan, came to herself -- and stared wildly
round her. -- Is he dead? said she -- Oh no! Is not this he? Alas! I have not
seen my child these many years! -- She then looked down eagerly on her son,
who, on his part, seeing his friend Alphonso, exclaimed in ecstacy -- Good God!
is this my Alphonso? -- Surely it is -- Ah! where, Alphonso where is the Baron
de Rayo? -- Hah! where -- what said thou, my child? did you say the Baron de
Rayo? it cannot be -- Ah, no! -- my father -- my beloved father is long since
numbered with the dead -- else I should not be here, nor you my child. -- No --
my father is now in company with those christian heroes, whose valor and
virtues adorned human nature, singing hymns of glory to the Most High!

While this was passing in the subterranean part of the castle, the officer had
summoned, in the king's name, the lord of the castle to open the gates. -- The
Marquis, who had, in his consternation at the first account of their arrival,
proceeded to the act of desperation already mentioned, was sought for in vain
over the castle -- Attendants ran up and down -- and the Prior, perceiving the
convent gate besieged by a troop, immediately betook himself to his wonted
passage to seek the Marquis: -- his route lay through (...) left branch of the
vaulted gallery already mentioned, and thence along by the door of the lady's
chamber. Hearing a noise of words, he thought the Marquis was there, and in his
precipitation burst into the chamber, just as the lady had ended her last
sentence. Nothing could exceed his astonishment -- he started back -- but she
saw him, and breaking off suddenly -- Hah! officious pandar, said she, art thou
come to help thy lord and master and fill up the measure of thy iniquities by
new butcheries? Father, said Don Juan, stepping up to him, I arrest you in the
name of the king. Then turning to Alphonso, and pointing to the Marquis, who
still lay prostrate -- Lift up that recreant lord, and let us bring them both
from this place toward the castle, which it should seem lies this way. They
then lifted up the Marquis, who opening his eyes, stared at Alphonso, and
bellowed out aloud -- It is, it is the murdered Gonsalvo! -- They hurried him
and the prior suddenly through the door by which his lordship had entered,
while the lady, who had all along kept her eyes fixed on her son Fernando, at
the name of Gonsalvo, cast up her eyes and caught a side glimpse of Alphonso,
just as he pushed the Marquis through the door. She instantly screamed aloud --
started (...) the body of her son, and calling out, My husband! my husband!
flew toward Alphonso -- while he and Don Juan were beyond measure shocked and
astonished. Don Juan apprehending her to be delirious laid hold of her, and
with some resistance on her part brought her back to the couch. She screamed
and struggled violently. Oh villain! villain! are you too a murderer? and will
you keep me from my long lost lord whom I thought dead? -- She then paused, and
turning to him said, Is he indeed alive, or has my fight been blessed with the
shade of my beloved? For Heaven's sake, dear lady, said Don Juan, compose
yourself, and prepare your mind for news that will delight you; for though your
husband be not alive, your deliverance from the tyrant is at hand, and all will
yet be well. Just at these words they heard a great noise -- I must go, said
Don Juan, my presence may be necessary. -- Good heavens! said the lady, looking
earnestly at him, is not this -- Alas! my recollection is gone, and time and
grief have effaced names from my memory -- Were you not a friend of Gonsalvo's?
I was -- Your name? Don Juan de Padilla. The fame, said she. -- Does my father
live? said she eagerly. -- He does, replied Don Juan -- I must away and will
bring him to you soon.

Then said she, I have yet a father and a child -- but I have lost my husband!
yet, blessed be he that has in the general wreck of our house spared me what
he has.

Don Juan at length found his way, directed (...) the noise, through a long,
dark-vaulted gallery* which led him into a small closet, whence, (...) the
sound, he passed through (...) chambers, till at last he came to a large (...)
where he found the marquis and the Prior surrounded by a crowd of soldiers and
domestics, to whom the Baron was explaining the nature of the affair, and the
manner of the discovery of the Marquis's villainy -- while he sat crestfallen,
with his head dropped upon his breast -- and the Prior endeavored to
expostulate with the Baron, and throw the whole odium of the business upon the
Marquis.

The entrance of Don Juan put an end to the whole cabal -- he ordering the
Marquis and Prior to be confined in separate places, to prevent any collusive
arrangement with regard to their confession.

Fear not, said the Prior, I will confess all -- Here I shake off all that
false lenity which has hitherto restrained me from discovering this bad man's
guilt: every thing that I know, from the beginning to this minute -- even the
little share of sin that I have had by winking so long at it, shall be heartily
and without reserve laid before you.

Here the Marquis started, like one suddenly roused from sleep -- To the king's
mandate, said he, addressing Don Juan, I how with due submission, and shall
attend you, Sir, whithersoever you shall be ordered to lead me: but let not the
calm artifice, the monkish subtilty of that wretch, heap more guilt upon me
than (...) my own. What share he has had in my misfortunes you shall all soon
know* Then will you see what mischiefs may lurk (...) the monkish cowl. Heaven
incensed, demands expiation of a soul offense, and shall have it -- if the most
unequivocal avowal and ample confession, rendering to the last letter of truth
justice to him and to myself can lead to it. To this end I will draw up, and
afterward sign in presence of you all, a full confession of this dark affair.
Let me have but two hours to myself for that purpose, in my closet.

After consulting together, it was agreed that he should be allowed the time
required, but not in his closet. Pen, ink, and paper, were therefore allowed
him in a room in a distinct wing of the castle, where he could get at no papers
or evidences to destroy them -- while guards were stationed beneath the windows
and at the door. Mean-time they entered his closet, where they locked up and
sealed all his papers -- They then proceeded to the vault, where the young
Fernando was released, and the Baron once more pressed to his bosom his
long-lost daughter.

When the indescribable emotions of paternal affection and filial reverence had
a little subsided into calmness, they led her forth into the upper part of the
castle, where, the unaccustomed air and light overcoming her, she swooned, and
was put to bed by a female attendant of the castle: while the Baron, Don Juan
and the rest continued their search, and were astonished at the number of
vaults and subterraneous passag^^ which lay in all directions round the
foundations of the castle and convent. They concluded by closing up the vault
where the bones of Gonsalvo lay, till arrangements should be made for a proper
interment.

Three hours had been thus spent, when they returned to the (...), and finding
that the Marquis had not (...) come forth, proceeded to the room where he was:
they knocked at the door, and receiving no answer, opened it, and found the
unhappy man covered with blood, and in the agonies of death -- They raised him
up, and he expired. He had cut the great arte^y of the neck entirely across,
and so had rendered assistance, had it been at hand on the minute, ineffectual.
A paper fresh written, and signed by him, lay on the table. Don Juan took it
up, and delivered it to Father Thomas, who read it aloud in the following words:

CHAP. XIII.
THIS castle was once a nunnery, and is coeval with the convent of Vallesanto;
this will account for the number of subterraneous passages which unite them: in
an invasion of the Moors they took possession of it, and dispersed the nuns,
after having violated their chastity. One of my ancestors drove them hence, and
got the estate from (...) ^he reward of his valor: hence the (...) some sort
under the dominion of the lord of this castle, who, by various entrenchments on
the rights of the church, got at last the fool appointment of prior to the
convent. The monster who is now prior was bred by my father's charity about
this castle, a mendicant child; he was the companion of my youth, the
depository of my secrets -- the confidant and agent of my amors; and when by
my father's desire he took the habit, he became my confessor.

On my coming to the estate I kept him in my family, intending to give him the
priory on the death of the then incumbent. Meantime I married, and found in the
Marchioness a most tender and affectionate companion, and a gentle corrector of
my vices. I was happy: -- but the enemy of mankind envied me my bliss, and in
the (...) of that friar plunged me into eternal -- endless -- endless perdition!

Gonsalvo brought his wife to Toledo -- I saw her, and was smitten with her
beauty -- yet for a time I had virtue enough to resist the flame. I confessed
it to Father Pedro. Again I told -- again bewailed my misery, and lamented the
flame that consumed me. -- He used his endeavors to mitigate it, by letting in
at first a ray of sinful hope. -- Here I first stumbled -- and never recovered
myself till I fell into the abyss of guilt in which you see me: wi^h the subtle
casuistry of a church logician, he refined away the criminality of adulterous
indulgence, by opposing it to the sin of suicide, for so he denominated my
forbearing, at the risk of my life and health, which were obviously declining.
He laid a plan: -- even now, after an interval of twenty years spent in
buffeting the assaults of conscience, my blood runs cold to think of it! He not
only devised the diabolical plan, but he aided in the execution of it. -- The
Marchioness was in the way -- she fell sick -- the reverend father found her a
physician, and she died. -- The prior of this convent fell sick, and died also.

Hitherto all fell out, or rather was conducted to the accomplishment of the
chief plot -- Gonsalvo was made to believe that the king looked with an eye of
lust upon his wife, and intended to ravish her from him: I was his close
counselor and friend, and persuaded him to (...) her away with the utmost
secrecy, and deposit her in a nunnery, which I told him was here. The Father
was their guide -- I hastened to the castle, while he conducted them to the
convent, and by a private door let them through the convent into the cemetery,
from which, he said, the lady should pass into the nunnery. She was accordingly
led into a remote room of this castle near the passage to the cemetery, while I
went forward with two assassins, hired for the purpose by the priest. -- We led
Gonsalvo into that vault where his body was found, and as he stooped to enter,
(his great height making him stoop more than us, and he consequently being more
exposed), one of the assassins smote him with a sabre, and split his skull --
With the priest's help we took a shell and some boards from the cemetery, and
putting him in buried him on the spot. When this was done, the priest whispered
me privately, that our safety demanded the death of the assassins. He did not
allow me time to deliberate, but turning suddenly round plunged a dagger into
the breast of him that was nearest, and then assaulting the other, who
resisted, I dispatched him with my sword on the instant.

The virtue of the lady set her above all my efforts. The officious churchman
proposed force. -- I attempted it, but in vain -- the feeble efforts of a weak
woman were sufficient to beat me from that object, for the attainment of which
I had waded through a sea of blood.

By bribing the nurse I got her child into my (...) -- Fernando is he -- I
daily threatened him with death if she did not comply. In vain -- she resisted
-- and remains as pure in person as in soul.

By a feigned tale to the King I got all the family estates confiscated, and
put in my possession. If my crimes admit of any mitigation, let it not be
forgot that I saved Baron de Rayo from Peter's fury; who, incensed with the
Baron's haughtiness, would, but for me, have put him to death. -- Let this
speak in favor of my innocent daughter. -- Fernando's nurse lives -- she is in
--

PUNALADA.


Here the knocking at the door cut off the rest, and left them in doubt about
the nurse.

Don Juan ordered the domestics, who were at hand, to take the body of the
Marquis -- then sealed the papers in presence of all, and gave strict orders to
keep the Prior in custody. He then took Fernando, who was so bewildered with
the wonders of the day that he scarcely knew whether what passed was reality or
a dream, by the hand, and saluted him by the name of Gonsalvo, congratulating
him at the same time on the fortunate discovery of his parents, and his certain
accession to rank and fortune. The Baron, little less bewildered, looked at
Fernando, and ever and anon grasped his hand with a tenderness mixed sometimes
with astonishment, and sometimes with doubt.

While they were making the proper arrangements for securing every thing to
abide the king's pleasure, a woman came in and informed them that the lady had
recovered from the sit, but was delirious. The Baron and Fernando immediately
proceeded to her chamber -- Come hither, my father, said she, and give your
daughter a last blessing -- and you, my son, to Fernando, come and take mine.

Why, my child? said the Baron, kneeling down by her -- why a last blessing!
This sickness, produced by the shocks and surprises of the day, and the change
of air, will soon wear off, and days of happiness will yet attend you. Never,
my father -- oh never! I have seen that which assures me -- What have you seen,
my Maria? Oh my most beloved and most respected sire! thing not that from any
delirium of the mind, any temporary weakness of intellect, proceeds what I am
to tell you -- it is, it is true -- As I do live, I saw my Henry, my husband!
In that hideous vault I this day saw him -- so lovely -- so graceful -- so
majestic, as when first you blessed me with ^he words, "Gonsalvo should be
mine." Calm, my dear, said the Baron tenderly -- calm those violent agitations,
which proceed from error, an error which I can explain, and will effectually.
^e whose figure has so deceived you, is the sou^ of Don Isidor de Ha^o, your
cousin and Gonsalvo's, but (...) the counterpart of my son, that I (...)
without astonishment! His likeness struck the guilty Marquis into a paroxysm of
horror (...) shook reason from its seat, and made him his (...) accuser. Isidor
lives, then? said she. He does, replied the Baron; the friend, the support, and
the protection of your father's age; and to this son of his we owe, under God,
the discovery of this horrid affair. As soon as rest has fitted you for a new
surprise, you shall see them both, and hear every thing: meantime, my child,
let this assurance appease the perturbation of your mind, and try and take some
rest. You are now safe, continued he, rescued from the ravisher and murderer's
hands; restored to light, to life, to family and friends -- bend in gratitude
to that God, who, by a signal and miraculous interposition, has brought about
your deliverance.

These words drew tears from her eyes -- she sunk in grateful humility into her
bed -- took her father's hand and kissed -- it -- then her son's -- and,
turning without saying a word, left them to depart.

Meantime an account of the Marquis's death and the arrest of the Prior reached
the convent -- all there was uproar -- the guard would let no one pass. -- At
length a requisition was sent from the young lady there, to be permitted to
pass to the castle and see her father, though dead -- This ease readily
granted. She flew round -- passed (...) the court yard, and entered the great
(...) state of distraction calling aloud on her (...) She passed by Don Isidor,
Don Juan; and (...) who met her, without seeming conscious their presence -- At
length she met Alphonso (...) sight of him she stopped short, and stared with
(...) fixed attention; -- her bosom heaved -- her color shifted from red to
white, and back again; -- her limbs trembled, and she was falling when he
caught her in his arms. -- She remained insensible for some time -- at length
recovering, she again regarded him with a steady gaze, and in a deep piercing
tone said, Then thou art he, and the prediction is accomplished -- the house of
Punalada is in ruins! -- Then breaking from him, Show me, show me, said she,
where my father is? and darted from their sight.

That day Don Juan and Alphonso, with one troop of horse, and the Prior their
prisoner, set out for Burgos, as well to lay the whole before the King, as
procure a proper conveyance to remove the lady from the castle. The King was
horror struck and astonished -- he forthwith called a council, of which the
Archbishop of Toledo made part, in which it was determined that the Prior
should be handed over to the grand inquisitor -- that the attainder of Gonsalvo
should be entirely erased from the records of the court -- that the title of
Punalada should be extinguished, and the Marquis's whole fortunes (...) -- and
that so much of them as had before (...) to the Baron and Gonsalvo, together
(...) one half of his own original estate, reserve (...) small annuity for his
daughter, should (...) to the Baron and his issue -- the King (...) other half
to himself, to bestow (...). That day proclamation was (...) Marquis's death,
attainder and so (...) and forfeiture, and of the reinvestiture of the Baron,
with his estate, rank, and title.

They returned to the castle of Punalada, with a carriage of the King's to
convey the lady to court, the King being desirous of offering her every mark of
distinction, and a vehicle for the remains of Consalvo. When they arrived they
found that Don Rodrigo had been there, and, on being refused admission to his
uncle's closet, and possession of the castle, had set off in a rage,
threatening them all with the indignation of the King -- that the Marquis's
body had been consigned to the earth with the ignominy attached to suicide --
and that the lady was recruited, and not only willing, but desirous to quit the
castle.

When Alphonso was, after proper precaution, introduced to her, her
astonishment was greater than ever it was before -- She knew not what to think
-- what to say -- or how to conduct herself -- She looked at every one round
her in turn, to read in their faces some solution of a mystery that she could
not help thinking was involved in it -- Her husband, her beloved Gonsalvo stood
before her -- Astonishment drank up her tears -- she could not cry -- yet she
would if she could, to ^ase her heart. With much difficulty at length she
faltered out. Is this then, really, the son of Don Isidor de Haro? and is
Fernando mine, or is it done to ^nock me? -- The Baron looked grave -- Don
Isidor more so -- It is so, said she -- yet it is strange. It is the will of
God, said the Baron, and (...) we sinfully presume to scan it? No, said she,
no, however irreconcilable it may be to our weak senses, it must be right --
Here she paused. This confusion of resemblance, said she, Don Isidor, points
out that union which should always subsist between our children; therefore
suffer me to treat Alphonso, and this our son, as equally our children. You
speak my very soul, madam, said Don Isidor, for my attachment to your son is
not less than yours to mine; and there seems already to subsist between them
the affection of brothers. The youths were delighted -- all parties were as
happy as their different circumstances may be supposed to admit of.
Preparations were made for their departure -- The Baron got the remains of
Gonsalvo, even to the dust in the chest, carefully put into a coffin, and laid
in the vehicle. Then after seeing the King's officers take possession and seal
down every thing, the Baron, Father Thomas and Don Isidor got with the lady
into the carriage and proceeded toward Burges, while Alphonso and his friend
Fernando rode by their side.

CHAP. XIV.
IT was pretty far advanced in the night of the fourth day before they came
near the city: Alphonso and Fernando, taken up with reflection and mutual
congratulations on their happiness, dropped behind, and had fallen into
conversation on the beauty of the night and the brightness of the moon, when,
just as the carriage turned the corner at the extreme end of an olivary, and
got out of hearing, a band of armed ruffians rushed from the covert of the
trees upon the two youths, who had no person to aid them in resistance but
Pierrot. Before they were prepared to defend themselves, one of the ruffians
from behind buried a dagger in the shoulder of Alphonso, and felled him to the
earth. Fernando on the instant saw the stroke given, and (...) the ruffian to
the ground; he then vigorously attacked the rest, and Pierrot coming up to his
aid beat them off all but three who lay weltering under the wounds given them
by Fernando Pierrot then pursued and stopped the couch, relating at the same
time what had passed -- Don Alphonso, said he, is killed, and (...) all at once
put an end to ourselves. The lady (...) -- Don Isidor burst from the carriage,
and, followed by the Baron, ran up the field of action, and found Fernando
weeping over the body of Alphonso: -- Alas, my brother, my brother, my friend!
but one instant sooner and I should have saved you -- Oh! would to Heaven the
dagger had met my heart instead of yours: but, unhappy that I am, I saw the
blow but time enough to revenge, and I save my own worthless life, while thine
is lost. Where, said Don Isidor, where is my boy? -- where is my Alphonso? --
Let us lift him up, said the Baron; perhaps life may yet be in him. Gallop
forward, said Father Thomas to Pierrot, and see if there be a house at hand, to
which we can carry him; and go you and bring a surgeon directly -- perhaps
something may yet be done. Just at this instant, a patrole of the Ronda A
patrole or watch in Spain.
came up mounted. The Baron hailed them -- Here has been murder committed,
said he; have you got a light? -- Yes, said the officer, and displaying a dark
lantern dismounted and examined those on the ground. Alphonso was bleeding
profusely; they lifted him up, tore off his coat, and perceived that the wound
had entered his shoulderblade very deep: they did their utmost to stop the
effusion of blood, and the captain of the troop being informed by one of his
people, that the carriage in waiting belonged to the King, drew forth a
leathern bottle with wine, and poured some of it down Alphonso's throat -- He
soon exhibited some slight tokens of life, his pulse moved. They brought him to
the carriage, where they found Donna Maria inconsolable; and by the direction
of the officer moved forward to an inn not far distant, while he and his men
took charge of the wounded ruffians, and brought them after.

Alphonso was laid on a bed at the inn with little symptom of life -- a surgeon
soon attended, and declared that it was impossible he could recover. Donna
Maria was distracted, and, impelled by an unaccountable feeling which overcame
form, hung upon him and kissed his claycold lips. She was at last drawn away to
give room to the surgeon, who, examining narrowly, began to be of opinion that
the wound had not reached any vital part, and observed that he must have been
hurt elsewhere: he therefore examined him carefully, particularly about the
head, and found a considerable swelling just above the ear -- Here, said he, is
the chief injury; can you tell how he received it, or from what sort of weapon?
He got but one stroke, replied Fernando, and that was in the shoulder. Then the
hurt in the head has proceeded from his weight in falling, and the loss of
blood from the shoulder is in that case rather useful than injurious. While
they were thus speaking, Alphonso began to breathe hard, then groaned: the
surgeon ordered a glass of water, with which he wetted his lips, letting a
little down -- Still the word was death.

Meantime the officers of the Rondo had got the wounded assassins to the inn.
One appeared, from his equipments, to be a gentleman of considerable rank, but
he was in as hopeless a state as Alphonso: another was in the livery of a
servant; and a third had the appearance of a bravo. The two last were coming to
themselves, but the first seemed quite senseless though he breathed; they were
all desperately wounded, particularly the gentleman, whose arm was cloven at
the joint of the shoulder almost from his body.

As the accident happened at the distance of less than a league from the city
of Burgos, Don Isidor, on his arrival at the inn, wrote off to Don Juan,
informing him of the affair, and entreating proper assistance to be sent out.
Don Juan himself arrived in two hours after the messenger was dispatched, and
the king's surgeon along with him, who, on examining Alphonso, enquired whether
he had indicated any disposition to vomit? and on being answered in the
negative, declared it to be his opinion, that he had only been extremely
stunned with the fall, and added, that in all probability he would soon come to
himself. He ordered his head to be chafed with warm spirits, his extremities to
be rubbed, and same warm wine poured down his throat: in (...) he took his
measures so well, that before (...) the youth was restored to his senses, (...)
extremely weak. Don Juan did every thing he could to cheer the Baron and Don
Isidor, assuring them that the king intended (...) make ample amends to the
family for the (...) it had sustained; and that he intended the first honors
of the state for Alphonso, whom ^e loved more than any of his favorites,
though much had been done to injure him in his opinion: -- nay such, he said,
was the attachment of the king, that he would not inform him of the present
accident before he came away, to avoid giving him unnecessary pain.

When the two inferior assassins came to themselves, Don Juan, the Baron, and
Don Isidor, were informed of it, and coming to the room where they were, Don
Juan was immediately descried by him who wore the livery. Whose servant are
you? said Don Juan severely. I am the servant of Don Rodrigo de Calvados, said
the fellow. Oho! said Don Juan -- and where is your master? There, your honor,
said the fellow, pointing significantly to a (...) where the gentleman's body
lay. -- Then it was he who set you on this enterprise? said Don Juan. God bless
your honor, returned the fellow, I knew not what I was going about till I was
in the very heart of it: this honest man here, who, God bless us! looks liker
the devil than a man, will tell you more -- I was only a servant. Don Juan
looking at the fellow perceived that he was a bravo, and ordered the two to be
immediately carried under a strong guard to jail.

The next day Alphonso was much recovered, but complained of a violent pain
from the wound in his shoulder: he was however declared by the surgeon to be
able to proceed slowly in the carriage to Burgos. The gentleman assassin, Don
Rodrigo too, was able to proceed on a litter; a strong guard was ordered for
him, and he was deposited in the jail, and a surgeon ordered to attend him: his
mother was almost mad with vexation and disappointment -- but all her interest,
all her tears, all her falsehoods, and all her address were of no avail; she
could get no one hardy enough to apply to the king in his favor.

During Alphonso's illness Donna Maria never quitted him, but when delicacy
required.

But, a considerable time having elapsed, and the wound continuing in the same
state, the surgeon expressed his surprise at the slowness of the, process, and
frequently animadverted on symptoms of a feverish kind, for which he could not
account. One day making those remarks in the hearing of Peirrot, that honest
soul said, that he fancied he could tell the cause of it.

Why, what is the cause of it, wiseman? said Don Isidor. -- Love, your honor,
replied Pierrot, bluntly. Love! -- in the name of God, with whom? I am sure,
your honor, I don't know -- and I believe it is more than he knows himself:
the picture that hangs about his neck, perhaps, may tell -- though I doubt that
too, for they were strangers.

Are you mad, fellow? said the Baron hastily. No, your worship, replied
Pierrot, I am not, I hope; I do the best at least that I can to avoid it^ for I
neither go out to seek fighting adventures, nor do I fall in love with every
pretty girl in distress, which seems to me to be the ways of going mad
nowadays -- I will tell you (...) I know. He then told him of the adventure
with the two ladies in Portugal -- concluding with as assurance, that since his
young master had seen them, he never had had one hour's peace, nor, he believed
been right in his head.

Don Isidor seemed extremely uneasy -- retired to a room -- wrote letters, and
dispatched a messenger with them instantly down to the castle of Duero. The
rest of the day he seemed extremely unhappy, nor could the Baron or any of his
friends account for the strange alteration in his manner.

Next day he put the question of his love with some delicacy to Alphonso; who
heartily acknowledged, that a lady he had met with on his travels in Portugal
had gained entire possession of his affections -- and though he scarcely hoped
ever to see her again, he could not help cherishing the love with which, she
inspired him, and indulging some small hopes. -- He then told his father the
whole story, and concluded with showing him the picture. At sight of the
picture Don Isidor turned pale, his lips quivered, his whole frame trembled
with the agitation of his mind -- He was for some minutes speechless At length
breaking silence: It is as I feared, said he! -- Oh unhappy youth! -- Good God,
my father! exclaimed Alphonso, to what strange story is this dreadful agitation
a prelude? -- Alas! my unhappy child, said Don Isidor, prepare to hear that
which must pierce your soul with horror! -- Yet you must know it; though
instant death attended the information, you must know it -- Better to die than
live one hour in the conception of a deadly sin! -- That young lady -- Good
God! do I live to tell it to my son! -- that young lady, with whom you were so
deeply enamoured, is -- your sister! -- My sister? -- Yes, your sister! and
she, that lady whom you rescued along with her, is mine -- the Marchioness
Deloro. -- Then I am undone! exclaimed Alphonso; -- undone here -- and lost to
all eternity!

Say not so, my child, said Don Isidor -- we are to believe that the Almighty,
who is merciful, will judge by the intention, and not assign the punishment of
a deliberate crime to a passion involuntary and unintentional. This horror that
you feel is in itself an expiation, if it be followed up with a firm
determination to expel the poison from your soul.

(...), there, there, my father, there lies the horror! -- I fear I must cease
to live ere I cease to sin -- if loving --

Hah! interrupted Don Isidor -- hold your impious tongue, nor utter in my
presence language so detestable -- If so lost in guilt as to dare the thunder
of the Almighty, which slow to execute emboldens sinners -- do thou not fear
that a ther^s indignation should rise and crush you (...) ruin.

Alas, my father! how do you mistake me, said Alphonso. Perhaps I do, hastily
interrupted Don Isidor: yet it is to me a subject of that nature, the bare
imagination of which harrows up my soul: -- I am not fit to speak upon it -- I
shall therefore retire and content myself with offering up my prayers to Heaven
in your behalf; nor will I again behold you till I have firm assurance that you
have banished the hellish passion^ even to the last shadow, from your breast,
or that death has snatched you from its power. So saying, Don Isidor withdrew,
leaving the unhappy Alphonso in a state of distraction, horror, and grief. It
was the first time* in his life that a word engendered in anger had fallen from
his father -- and his last expressions smote him the more poignantly to the
heart.

On Don Isidor's meeting the Baron and (...) Thomas they were astonished at the
(...) discomposure of his air and countenance -- they were both alarmed, and
almost in a breath asked him for Alphonso. Would to God! said Don Isidor, that
the assassin's poignard had cut him off ere he should have lived to tell the
horrid tale -- he is in love with his sister! They stared aghast -- Yes, said
he, after telling them the story, it is not guilt alone that meets the scourge
in this life, for I am cursed as Punalada was, and incestuous love blights my
family! --

Hold, hold, Don Isidor! interrupted the priest judgment belongs to God --
resignation is the duty of man; beware, therefore, that while you denounce
vengeance against your son, and call him sinner, you are not yourself dipping
deeper in sin than he. It appears from your own account, that at the time he
first conceived this unhappy passion, he knew not the object of it was his
sister; in the outset, therefore, no sin is imputable, since we must believe
that God judges us by our means of knowledge: to expect him then on the instant
to dislodge a deep-rooted passion, is to expect more than human nature is
capable of performing. It must be the work of time, and strong virtuous
resolution, -- and believe me, that every effort of his to overcome it will be
more acceptable in the eyes of the Almighty, than ten thousand acts of mere
passive, negative virtue. I know and will answer for his principles, and have
no fear of the event but (...) arises from the state of his health. I shall
therefore go and converse with him; and, I entreat, that in the mean time you
will on your part recollect, that gusts of rage and boisterous invective are
above all things incompatible with the mild spirit of that glorious religion
which we all adore; though some of us, to be judged from our actions, would
seem to be ignorant of it.

CHAP. XV.
IN a short time Father Thomas returned with a face unusually imprinted with
sorrow: he desired (...) physician should be immediately sent for, for that
Alphonso was raving mad -- that he sometimes talked of his sister, sometimes of
his aunt, and sometimes called upon his cruel, cruel father.

A messenger was directly sent for a physician he came, and declared Alphonso
to be in such (...) state as left little room for hope -- exhausted as (...)
had been already, he was afraid to bleed (...), and expressed a fear that the
feverish (...) would sink upon the spirits and carry him off. He ordered him a
medicine, and, desiring to be called upon the appearance of any new symptom,
went away.

As night advanced, Alphonso grew more outrageous, and they were broke in upon
at (...) by the faithful Pierrot, who told them, (...) he was tearing off the
dressings from his wounds, and that four of them were unable to hold him. They
all directly rose and went to his chamber; Donna Maria herself would not stay
behind -- there they found him in the most dreadful ^^ate of furious insanity,
tearing himself to pieces, while the blood gushed afresh from his half healed
wounds; and the attendants were lying about the room, bruised by the flings he
(...) given them against the walls. The Baron (...) to him, pinioned his arms
behind (...) back, and with the wrists of a giant held him down. Don Isidor
came in to his assistance, and they brought him to some order: when in a few
minutes growing insensibly weak, he languished away, wept, and sunk into a
swoon. By this time the surgeon who was sent for came, and prepared to re-dress
the wound; all the patient's back was covered with blood, and he ordered it to
be washed while he prepared his dressings -- (...) Maria herself undertook the
task -- she (...) away the blood, while the Baron held the (...). At length, to
the astonishment of all, she screamed out -- Mother of God, my son! and sunk
(...) upon the bed.

Does it please Heaven, said Don Isidor, to mock our miseries, and send
insanity throughout us all' -- Do I dream, or has this lady dreamed? -- Can
thou tell me, Baron, whither tends all this strange extravagant incident that
marks our fortune of late, and makes the adventures of our house more like
romance than reality?

In our affairs, replied the Baron, the real is so interwoven with the
mavelous, that the whole seems tinged with the colors of romance, and seeks
the aid of proof: such proof is now before us. This youth is her son, and my
grandson -- There lie^ proof indelibly written by the (...) of nature on his
body. By Heavens! Exclaimed Don Isidor, the madness grows round, and I myself I
fear shall shortly catch it. If madness (...); returned the Baron warmly, it is
with yourself Don Isidor! who hold up your own rash opinion, founded upon
circumstances subject to error and imposition, against the testimony of nature
itself, and boldly confront the written characters of providence -- Look, see
those grapes painted by the hand of nature in his mother's womb. Just at this
time the lady, who had been supported by Father Thomas, came to herself -- Give
me, give me my child, said she -- Oh spare him, Heaven! -- Then looking -- Yes!
there, there they are -- Oh my Gonsalvo! surely something prophetic wrought
within thy mind on that day, when in sportive innocence you dropped a bunch of
grapes down my back -- I started, softly complained being then pregnant -- You
then, my love, said, in playful fondness said, that if we lost our child, that
would be a mark by which to know him -- Alas, my love! little did thou think
by what sad calamities we should lose him, or in what horrible way he should be
found -- (...) be lost again for ever!

If I live, said the Baron, some stran^^ (...) has been practiced on us both --
a fraud most ^^kely never to be developed. That Gonsalvo's son has exactly this
mark I can give (...) now let us see whether Fernando has it. Fernando declared
that he had not. Then it (...) Baron, that it is the son of Gonsalvo. (...)
strange, said Don Isidor, it is beyond all comprehension strange, that a child
nursed under the inspection of -- But what do I say? Tomorrow I will send off
to Talavera, and have the old woman at whose place he was (...) brought, with
her whole family, here.

Reserve your arguments, said Father Thomas to a fitter occasion; at present
let us look to the lady, who seems to stand in need of care little less than
the young gentleman.

The next morning Pierrot was dispatched to the village near Talavera, to bring
the old woman who had been nurse to Don Isidor's lady, her whole family, and
the nurse who was employed to suckle their child, directly to Burgos, but with
strict injunctions not to apprize them of a sentence that had passed. During
this juncture Alphonso's fever had a fortunate crisis; he recovered the use of
his senses, and, though extremely weak, gave some hopes of recovery. It was
thought advisable, however, to keep the discovery a secret from him, till such
proof should be had as would put it past a doubt one way or other.

At length Pierrot returned, and with him the nurse who had suckled Don
Isidor's child, and her husband; the old woman having been some time dead. Don
Isidor ordered them to be conducted into the room where Donna Maria was, and
where the Baron, Father Thomas, and Fernando attended -- it was agreed that
Father Thomas should speak to her. Nurse, said he, I presume you are well
enough acquainted with the principles of our holy religion, and the extent
(...) which they reach, to know the dreadful punishment attending any kind of
faud. If you (...) not, I will tell you that however it may be (...) from
mortal eyes, it cannot be concealed from the Almighty, who will not fail to
punish it with everlasting torments: when detected here, it meets the heaviest
punishment of the law. Of both these, nurse, you and your husband stand in
imminent danger; nor can any thing but a fair confession save you from being
handed over instantly to the cognizance of criminal law. Answer me, then, as
you hope for mercy here, or salvation hereafter -- Where is the child of Don
Isidor de Haro, which you, for purposes best known to yourselves, have changed,
imposing for so many years upon him the charge of a child not his own -- while
on the other hand you may have devoted his to misery, want, or even death? --
Speak, speak the truth, and believe me nothing else can save you, for of one
part of the charge against you we have unquestionable evidence.

I will, Father! I will! exclaimed the (...) herself on her knees -- I will
tell the (...), and though to save myself from ruin I was guilty of concealing
the story from Don Isidor, I am as innocent as the child unborn of the changing
as you shall know.

One day after I had brought Don Isidor's child home to nurse, a woman with a
child on her breast called in toward the close of the day; said she was a
traveller and begged a lodging -- She (...), that she was traveling from
Andalusia to ^aragossa, and must be away by break of day (...) morning -- As we
never refused a christian shelter, we desired her to stay, and gave her (...)
of what he had. The weather was extremely hot, and we all lay out on mats in
the piazza of our cottage. Just at daybreak we heard the stranger move -- she
got up, and bid us adieu and went away. We wished her to stay for breakfast;
but she refused, alleging that she had a long journey before her, and must not
delay.

When we arose, the child was asleep in the cradle; so that altogether the
woman had been gone three hours before I went to take it up. Guess my sorrow
and surprise, when I sound that the vile wretch had changed the child. I knew
it directly by a bunch of purple grapes on the back, though in other respects
the children were very like each other.

Why did you not tell Don Isidor then? said said the Priest.

Had I been inclined to (...), replied the woman, it would have been
impossible, for he and his lady, we were told, had gone into France; but you
shall hear. I ran, continued she, directly to my husband, who was at work, and
told him. He was going to kill me with his sickle: he immediately broke off
from work, and went in pursuit of her, charging me to say nothing till his
return, as he was pretty sure of overtaking her. But, God help us, he was all
the time going farther from her; for we afterward sound that she had told us
wrong, and was going toward Andalusia, instead of turning from it. At night he
returned weary and broken hearted -- we knew not what to do -- we feared to
discover the matter -- and thought it best to leave it to chance. The thing
past over -- the old woman my lady's nurse was deceived -- and finding that we
had no reason to fear a discovery, we thought it best, as it could not be
remedied, to say nothing. This I call God and our Redeemer to witness is the
whole truth, and I hope you will think that I am not so much to be blamed.

Just as they had done examining the (...) a letter came directed to the Baron;
it was (...) the King's officer at Punalada castle, and was in these words:

Most excellent Lord,
In our searches through the many subterranean vaults under this castle we
found, starved almost to death, a woman who says she has been confined many
years by the Marquis, she imagined at least fifty; but that, from her story
otherwise, is impossible. She adds, that she has a secret of the utmost
consequence to unfold -- briefly to this effect: -- She was the nurse of Don
Henrico Gonsalvo's son -- was seduced by a priest (whom I suppose to be the
Prior) to give up the child to the Marquis; that at last being prevailed upon,
she traveled with it toward Andalusia, and falling by accident into a cottage
where a child of Don Isidor de Haro (whom she knew to be the cousin of
Gonsalvo) was at nurse, she determined to save the child, whom she loved, from
the (...) of the Marquis, which she thought might possibly be wicked; and
accordingly left Don Gonsalvo's in the bed, and carried away Don Isidor's. So
that by this account, the youth Fernando, it is probable, is Don Isidor's, and
the other your grand -- child. The woman is in custody, so take your measures
accordingly.

P. S. The woman is dying, and has made oath to this effect.




Here, said the Baron, giving the letter to Don Isidor, all is cleared up --
Fernando is yours, Alphonso is mine.

Alphonso shall still be mine, replied Don Isidor, for he shall be married to
my daughter -- I wrote to my sister, who arrived at Duero castle ^he day after
we left it, from Portugal, whence she was obliged to fly to escape the
importunities and power of an old nobleman who had fallen in love with my
daughter. She wrote me an account of he^ rescue by a young Spaniard, long
since, from Seville. I have now received her answer to my letter; and am happy
to find that the impression Alphonso made upon her niece keeps pace with his
love for her. When Pierrot first hinted the affair, I suspected the fact just
as it turned out. Come, Baron, said Don Isidor, (...) us give a loose to joy --
each of us has gained without without the other being a loser -- and these
events, which at first appeared so adverse, will serve to unite our families by
additional bonds of affection.

The body of Gonsalvo was buried in great pomp at Montalto; and, soon after,
Alphonso received Don Isidor's daughter to his arms -- was invested with half
the estates of the Marquis by the King; the other half, with Punalada castle,
being by his desire settled on Fernando, who inherited also his grandfather
Guzman's estate. Don Rodrigo was sent to the mines -- his mother was condemned
to banishment -- while the (...) of the convent of Vallesanto was doomed to
^^^petual imprisonment in the Inquisition. Father Thomas received the priory as
a gift from the hands of the Archbishop of Seville. Lastly, the Baron lived not
only to see Alphonso and Fernando the first warriors in Spain, and created
barons, but even to instruct a great -- grandson in the rudiments of the
science of warfare; and at last died, at an amazing age, surrounded by a
numerous race of heroes, the descend (...) of the old and illustrious HOUSE OF
RAYO.

FINIS.

