AN ADDRESS TO THE PEOPLE OF SOUTH CAROLINA, BY THE GENERAL COMMITTEE OF THE
REPRESENTATIVE REFORM ASSOCIATION, AT COLUMBIA.

BY ORDER OF THE ASSOCIATION.

CHARLESTON: PRINTED BY W. P. YOUNG, NO. 43, BROAD STREET. JUNE, 1794.

AN ADDRESS, etc.
IF it be true, fellow citizens, that liberty is worth preserving: that
posterity deserves our care; and that abuses in government, are more easily
subdued in their infancy, than when time has matured their strength and
consecrated their existence; then the subjects to which we now call your
attention, will speak their own propriety, and sufficiently display their own
importance.

We address you in the name, and by the order of a society, whose members have
been selected from your bosoms, and in the various walks of private and public
life, have hitherto possessed, and, it is hoped, still continue to deserve your
confidence: to whom you have committed the important duties of watching over
your interests, and representing your persons, in the legislature of your
country; and who would, therefore, be equally ungrateful for your favors, and
faithless to their trust, were they to remain in silence, when they conceive
your rights to be enfringed, and your liberties in danger.

Actuated by considerations like these, and suspecting, from some facts within
their knowledge, the representation in this state to be unequal and unjust, the
individuals who compose this society, applied themselves with attention and
care, to examine the subject. They were strongly impressed with its importance.
They viewed representation as the key stone of liberty. They sought with
diligence, every source of information; took pains to ascertain facts and
investigate principles; and found, to their astonishment, that in this state,
which calls itself free; in this state, which even glories in the name of
liberty, four fifths of the people are governed by one fifth. They found that
the three lower districts, which contain only 28,694 white inhabitants, have a
much greater number of representatives, in both branches of the legislature,
than the six upper ones, whose numbers amount to 120 902. That Charleston
district alone, whose number of white inhabitants is only 15,452, less than one
ninth of the free people in the state, elects more than one third of the whole
legislature. That Beaufort district, the free inhabitants of which are but
4,364, sends as many members as Ninety-six, which contains 33 674 white
persons. That Saint Stephen's parish, with 226 white inhabitants, of all ages
and sexes, has as many representatives as Edgefield county, which can send
2,000 freemen into the field for the defense of their country. That the three
upper districts of Ninety-six, Washington, and Pinckney, whose whole number of
free people is 74,163, nearly two thirds of the state, elect only thirty five
members for both houses; but one fourth of the legislature, which consists of
161 persons, and not as many, by one half, as Charleston district sends, whose
members amount to 61 though its number of white inhabitants is only 15 452.
That, consequently, the district of Charleston has twice as much power in all
legislative acts, as the three back country districts put together, though they
contain more than four times its number of free inhabitants. In fine, that the
six upper districts, which, by their numbers, are entitled to four fifths of
the whole representation, possess, in fact, considerably less than one half,
and are completely under the dominion of the people below.

Having ascertained these interesting facts, they next turned their attention
to the principles of free government, and enquired whether property ought to
influence representation. They were speedily led to the following conclusions,
which they regard as fundamental and self-evident truths, fit to be engraven on
the heart, and implicitly obeyed in the conduct, of every freeman. That
equality is the natural condition of man; the basis of his moral excellence,
and political happiness. That although "equality of conditions" cannot be
preserved in society, "equality of rights" is not only consistent with good
government, but forms its only firm and lasting foundation. That to suffer
property to be directly represented, would destroy this equality, by giving
rich men different and more numerous political rights than their neighbors,
whose masters they would thus become. That in the origin of society, when that
mutual contract, on which all lawful government rests, was formed, all the
contracting parties, that is all the people, were equal, and stipulated to
continue so: each individual having, in order to obtain the protection of the
rest, agreed to subject himself, not to any other individual or set of
individuals, but to the whole community. That all superiority of rights, which
some individuals in society have since obtained over others, are therefore to
be considered as unjust usurpations, subversive of liberty and fit to be
abolished. And, finally, that wealth need not be represented for its own
protection, since it will always have power enough, by the influence which it
bestows, to protect itself; and since the representatives, however chosen, will
always be possessed of more or less property, and therefore sufficiently
attentive to its preservation.

But having often heard attempts made to justify the inequality of our
representation by the superior riches of the lower country, they set themselves
next to enquire, whether, even admitting that wealth ought to be considered in
representation, the superiority is so great as to justify the existing
inequality. They found that it is not: that the lower country possesses only
three times the most wealth; while the upper country has five times the most
inhabitants; consequently, that on a joint proportion of wealth and numbers,
the principle contended for below, the upper country ought to have the most
representatives, in proportion of five to three; instead of which it has much
the fewest: only 54 representatives and 17 senators; while the lower country
has 70 representatives and 20 senators.

They saw this inequality, already so enormous, becoming daily greater and more
formidable, by the rapid increase of population and wealth in the upper
districts; and foreseeing the period, not a very remote one, when this state,
should the present system remain, must be governed by one twentieth of its
inhabitants, they could no longer remain in silence.

Their first step was to explain, prove, and illustrate all these important
points, in a series of letters, addressed to the citizens of this state, a copy
of which is subjoined to this paper, and the careful and attentive perusal
whereof they earnestly recommend. In these letters it was their aim to comprise
all necessary information on the subject, in the smallest possible compass; and
to treat it in a manner the most clear and concise. They address themselves to
your understandings, not your passions; and wish to inform and convince, not to
inflame. When made acquainted with your rights and your present situation, it
will be with you to decide, whether you will remain as you are, or take steps
for a reform: whether you will suffer this evil to strike deeper and deeper
into your government, and destroy the liberties of your posterity, perhaps your
own, or root it out immediately, before it shall become, by age, too strong for
your efforts. Should the latter be your determination, this society offers you
its assistance. There were two objects in its institution; first, to give you
the requisite information on these subjects so interesting to your welfare;
secondly, to council and aid you in any measures which you may think proper to
adopt for promoting a reform. To these ends, it has appointed a general
committee of correspondence, the same that now addresses you, and a special
committee in each county, composed of persons whom you know and confide in.
These special committees are furnished with the rules, regulations, and
proceedings of the society, which are to be held open for your inspection, and
will fully explain the objects and nature of the association, and the
principles of its members. We invite you to join it; for which nothing more is
necessary than to sign the rules and resolves. We would also submit to you the
propriety of forming simular associations in your respective counties, which
may form branches of the general association at Columbia. Should you think this
a proper measure, our committees will give their assistance. Thus a
communication of sentiment will be established throughout the state; and
whatever measures you may think proper to adopt, will have all the weight of
public opinion unanimously expressed.

What these measures ought to be, fellow (...) a matter of serious and
important consideration. Weigh them well; and however decidedly you may adopt
them, with whatever firmness they may be supported; they ought to be moderate
and regular; such as the laws will fully justify, and good citizens need never
blush to have pursued. The power of redressing the wrongs of which you
complain, has been placed by the constitution in the hands of the legislature.
To the legislature therefore you ought to apply for redress. Approach that
respectable body with a defference due to its station and an unanimity becoming
your cause, and you will be heard. Rely on the justice of your fellow citizens
below; numbers of whom are probably ignorant of your claims, and want only to
hear them stated, in order to accede to them. Petition; and let your petitions
speak a manly, frank, and firm, but a moderate and respectful language.
Represent your grievances; but represent them with clearness and candor: urge
your wishes with dutiful modesty; and rest assured that you will not urge them
in vain. Our committees have it in charge to assist you in drawing up and
circulating petitions; and we, on our part, promise our exertions in bringing
them before the legislature, and supporting them in such a manner is, we trust,
will not be unworthy of the cause. Attempts we know have been unsuccessfully
made to obtain from the legislature a partial redress of these abuses; but this
ill-success, we are persuaded, was occasioned by an opinion in that body that
the people in general did not wish for a change. Refute this opinion by the
unanimity of your measures. Convince the representatives of the people, that
the people desire a reform; and a reform will take place. For we have too much
reliance on the justice, the patriotism, and the prudence of those who compose
the legislature of this country, to believe that they will, on any occasion,
much less on one of such importance as this, shut their care to the well
founded and general complaints of their constituents and fellow citizens, when
properly expressed and made known to them.

By order of the association, General Committee.
Wade Hampton, E. Hamsay, John Tailor, Robert G Harper, Robert Stark, Daniel
Brown, Wm. Montgomery, John Kershaw, and Wm. Falconer,

Columbia, May 18, 1794.
APPIUS. TO THE CITIZENS OF SOUTH CAROLINA.
No. I.
IT is a truth my fellow citizens, not so obvious as important, that a
government may sometimes possess the form of freedom, without the substance.
The people often suppose themselves free, because they have aimed at the
establishment of liberty. They forget, that its principles, unless skilfully
applied, can never produce their proper effect.

Examples of these truths most frequently occur in representative governments,
which being of a very complicated structure, require the most exact proportion
of parts, and are thrown into disorder by the smallest derangement. We are
struck by the beauty of the machine; we admire the variety and apparent aptness
of its parts; but we overlook, or disregard some seemingly minute defects,
which frequently, but sometimes too late, command our attention, by their
destructive consequences.

Representation is a substitute for popular government. It is now universally
admitted, that the supreme power resides in the whole people. In the exercise
of this power, all are equal. For when men enter into society, they enter with
equal rights; and the portion of independence which each gives up, is
relinquished to the whole community, not to any of its separate members. No
individual can be bound, except by the will of all. This will must be declared
by a majority; in forming which; every individual has a right to give his vote;
otherwise he would be a subject of the government, not one of its members. When
his vote is given, it has as much weight as that of any other member of the
society. Hence, in the ancient republics, when the spirit of liberty was
strong, but the science of government not far advanced beyond its first
principles, all the citizens had a right to assemble, and deliberate in common,
on public measures. This was called popular government.

But in large societies, it is impossible to convene all the members: even in
small ones, it cannot be done without great inconvenience: and such assemblies
have ever been found an unfailing source of public calamities. A method was
therefore contrived, of assembling the people by representation. The territory
which belong to a state, was divided into districts, or the inhabitants into
classes; and a number of representatives were chosen, proportionate to one or
the other, and sometimes, to both of these divisions. The supreme power, or
certain portions of it, was delegated to those representatives, who, in the
name of their constituents, carried on the government. Thus representative
governments were founded.

Hence it is evident that a representative government cannot be free, unless it
be so constituted, that each member of the community may possess, by his
representative, the same portion of power, in public affairs, that he would
have been entitled to himself, had the government been administered by all the
people in person. In the latter case, all would be equal; because each member
would have a right to vote; and one man's vote would count as much as
another's. All, therefore, should be equal by representation. Liberty is
destroyed, if each individual has not as much power, by the laws, over any
other, as that other has over him. If the state be divided into districts,
equal in population, and some send more representatives than others, the
government is not free; for the individuals of those districts, which send the
fewest representatives, have less power than their fellow citizens, and are in
a greater or less degree governed by them. Still farther will liberty be
banished, if some districts have fewer inhabitants than others, and yet choose
a greater number of representatives. But if a case should occur, in which a few
small districts, thinly populated, send more representatives than all the
others of which the state is composed, though much more extensive, and fuller
of inhabitants, then the government, whatever may be its appearance and
external form, is a perfect aristocracy. The very definition of aristocracy, is
a community, where a small part of the people have the power of making laws to
bind the rest. This small part may exercise its power in person or by
representatives; but the government is still the same. A state in which one
fifth of the people can make laws to bind the other four fifths, cannot be
free. It may be a mild aristocracy; from particular circumstances it may long
continue so: but it is an aristocracy still; and sooner or later, will produce
all the bitter fruits of that hateful and pernicious weed.

Since then my fellow citizens, a representative government requires such
nicety in its construction, and may be so easily perverted; since liberty may
be destroyed by such small deviations from principle; surely it is an object
deserving the attention of enlightened patriotism, to enquire, whether some
abuse has not crept into our system. -- Such an enquiry I propose to undertake;
it will be carried on through a series of letters, in which the following
points will be discussed: 1. Whether on the principle of numbers, the citizens
of South Carolina are equally represented in the state government? 2. Whether
property ought to influence representation? 3. Whether our representation is
equal on the principle of property rightly understood? 4. If an inequality
should be found to exist, how it was introduced? 5. What is the peculiar nature
of this inequality? And lastly, what are its effects on liberty?

Let not this enquiry be considered as useless. I know, that under our present
form of government whatever may be its effects, we enjoy a great portion of
liberty and equality. But present health is perfectly consistent with the seeds
of disease. Preventive medicines are best. And the surest method of
perpetuating the blessings of a system, is to find out and remove its
imperfection.

APPIUS.

No. II.
THE first object proposed for enquiry, is, whether the citizens of this state
enjoy, in the state government, an equal representation, on the principle of
numbers? Here our surest guide will be the census, and the list of
representatives, as settled by the constitution. By comparing them, the
question may be decided with ease and certainty.

The state may be considered under a threefold division: first, into upper and
lower country; secondly into districts; and thirdly into counties and parishes.
The lower country extends along the coast, from Georgia to North Carolina, and
about fifty or sixty miles back from the sea. It includes the districts of
Georgetown, Beaufort and Charleston, and is divided into parishes. The upper
country takes in the rest of the state, to the borders of North Carolina, and
the Indian boundary. It contains the districts of Orangeburgh, Camden, Cheraw,
Ninety-six, Pinckney, and Washington, which are subdivided into counties.

Charleston district consists of the following parishes: Saint Michael's and
Saint Phillip's, including Charleston, and containing 8,089 white inhabitants;
Saint Bartholomew 2,133; Saint John's, Berkley 692; Saint George's, Dorchester
1,252; Saint Stephen's 226, Saint James' Santee 437; Saint Thomas' 397; Christ
Church 566; Saint James's, Goose creek 439; Saint John's, Colleton 585; Saint
Andrew's 370; and Saint Paul's 276. This gives Charleston district 15,452 white
inhabitants. That district sends 48 representatives, 15 from Saint Michael's
and Saint Phillip's, and three from each of its other parishes: it has also 13
senators.

Beaufort district includes 4 parishes; Saint Helena, Saint Lukes, Prince
William, and Saint Peter's. Its number of white inhabitants is 4,364; and it
sends 12 representatives; 3 from each parish: it has four senators.

Georgetown district consists of 3 parishes; Prince Georges, All Saints, and
Prince Frederics; containing together, 8,878 white inhabitants; It sends ten
representatives and three senators.

The white inhabitants of the lower country, therefore, amount to 28,694; its
number of representatives is seventy; and it has twenty senators.

The district of Ninety-six has four counties; Edgefield, containing 9,785
white inhabitants, Abbeville 7,495, Laurens 8,210, and Newberry 8,186;
Ninety-six district then has 33,674 white inhabitants; and its number of
representatives is twelve, three for each county; it has four senators. The
same number of both, with Beaufort district, which contains only 4,364 white
inhabitants; less than one seventh of the number in Ninety-six. Hence it is
plain that one free man in Beaufort district, has as much power in our
government, as seven free men in Ninety-six.

Charleston district contains 15,452 white inhabitants; Ninety-six, 33,674;
more than double; yet Ninety-six district sends twelve members to the house of
representatives, and Charleston forty-eight, exactly four times as many. A free
man, in Charleston district, therefore, has eight times as much influence in
the house of representatives, as a free man in Ninety-six. In the senate, the
disproportion is not quite so great. Ninety-six has four members, and
Charleston district thirteen; something more than three times the number; so
that, in the senate, a free man of Charleston has only six times as much power
as one of Ninety-six.

Washington district is composed of two counties, Pendleton and Greenville; the
former contains 8,731 white inhabitants; the latter 5,888; in all 14 619;
within less than a thousand of the numbers in Charleston district, which are
15,452; yet Washington sends five members to the house of representatives, and
two senators. Charleston sends forty eight to the former, and thirteen to the
latter; more than eight times the number sent by Washington.

Pinckney district contains four counties: Union, which has 6,430 white
inhabitants; Spartanburgh 7,907; York 5,652; and Chester 5881; amounting, in
the whole, to 25,870. Each of those counties sends two members to the house of
representatives, except York, which has three; this makes 9 in all. 25,870
inhabitants in Pinckney, send 9 members to the house of representatives. Four
thousand three hundred and sixty four in Beaufort, send twelve; and in
Charleston fifteen thousand four hundred and fifty-two, send forty-eight; so
that a free man in Charleston or Beaufort districts, has at the least seven
times as much power in the government, as a free man in Pinckney. This district
sends three senators, Charleston thirteen, and Beaufort four.

In Camden district there were five counties, at the time of the census:
Fairfield, Richland, Clarendon, Claremont, and Lancaster. A new one, Kershaw,
has lately been erected. Fairfield has five thousand one hundred and
thirty-eight white inhabitants; Richland two thousand four hundred and
seventy-nine; Clarendon one thousand seven hundred and ninety; Claremont two
thousand four hundred and thirty-eight; and Lancaster four thousand eight
hundred and sixty-four. This is the enumeration by the census; but it is
thought to be much too low. It gives Camden, however, sixteen thousand seven
hundred and nine white inhabitants; above one thousand more than Charleston
district contains; yet Camden district sends but twelve members to the house of
representatives; two for each of the abovementioned five counties, and two for
Kershaw; whereas, Charleston sends forty-eight; just four times the number. The
disproportion in senators is still greater; Camden sends but three, and
Charleston thirteen.

Orangeburgh district, contains 12,412 white inhabitants; and it sends ten
members to the house of representatives, and three senators. Beaufort has 4,364
inhabitants, something more than one third of the numbers of Orangeburgh, and
it elects twelve representatives and four senators. Charleston has 15,452 white
inhabitants; about 3000 more than Orangeburgh, and yet it elects very nearly
five times as many representatives, and more than four times the number of
senators.

In the district of Cheraw there are 7,618 white inhabitants; it sends six
members to the house of representatives, and two senators.

Throwing the districts of Ninety-six, Washington, Pinckney, Camden,
Orangeburgh, and Cheraw, into the upper country division, it is found to
contain 120,902 white inhabitants; it sends 54 members to the house of
representatives, and 17 senators. The lower country, including the three
districts of Charleston, Beaufort and Georgetown, contains 28,694 white
inhabitants, and it elects 70 representatives and twenty senators. Divide
149,596, the whole number in the state by 28,694, those of the lower country,
and the result will be more that five, from whence it appears, that a large
majority of both branches of the legislature, is elected by less than one fifth
of the people. This one fifth therefore governs the other four fifths, and the
state is an aristocracy. 28,000 citizens by their representatives, can make
laws to bind 120,000, without their consent.

If you take away Georgetown district from the lower country, still the two
remaining ones, Charleston and Beaufort will have sixty representatives and 17
senators, a greater number of representatives and as many senators as the whole
upper country together, which has only fifty-four of the first and seventeen of
the latter: and if you add Georgetown district to the upper country division,
the latter will even then have but a very small majority; sixty-four
representatives to sixty, and twenty senators to seventeen.

Thus the two districts of Charleston and Beaufort, which contain but 19,866
white inhabitants, not more than one sixth of our whole numbers, can
nevertheless, with the addition of three representatives and two senators from
the other districts, govern the whole state -- can make laws, raise taxes,
appoint officers of government, and exercise all other functions of supreme
power over the other five sixths, how much soever they may be oppressed by the
measures adopted, or how firmly soever opposed to them. Such a government may
be amused with the form of freedom, but it would be difficult to prove that it
possesses the substance.

The whole state contains 149,596 white inhabitants. Of this number 15,452 not
quite one ninth, reside in Charleston district, the house of representatives
consists of 124 members, and the senate of thirty-seven; of these Charleston
district elects forty-eight representatives and thirteen senators. Consequently
Charleston district, with less than one ninth of the inhabitants in the state,
elects more than a third of the legislature. It sends very nearly as many
members to both houses, as all the upper country together, though it has not
one sixth of the numbers. Charleston district has 15,452 white inhabitants,
forty-eight representatives, and thirteen senators. The six upper country
districts have 120,902 white inhabitants, fifty-four representatives, and
seventeen senators. So that in all legislative questions 15,452 citizens, who
happen to reside in Charleston district, have, within a very little, as much
power in the government as 120,902 who inhabit other parts of the state.

Here the greater number is evidently subjected to the power of the smaller,
and a much smaller too; which is the most exact definition that can be given of
an aristocracy.

If we compare particular parishes in the lower with particular counties in the
upper country, the inequality of representation will strike us still more
forcibly. Thus, for instance, Saint Paul's parish, in Charleston district,
contains two hundred and seventy-six white inhabitants, and this parish sends
three representatives and one senator. Edgefield county, in Ninety-six
district, has 9,785 white inhabitants. It also sends three representatives and
one senator. The county has above thirty-nine times as many white inhabitants
as the parish. Yet they send an equal number of members to the legislature.
Consequently, one freeman in Saint Paul's parish, has more influence in the
government than thirty-nine freemen in Edgefield county.

Pendleton county, in Washington district, contains 8,731 white inhabitants.
The parish of St. Stephen's, in Charleston district, 226; Saint Stephen's
parish sends three representatives and one senator. Pendleton county the same
number of each. It follows that one freeman in this parish, has as much power
in the government, as thirty-eight freemen in Pendleton county.

These are the most populous counties in the upper country. And Saint Stephen's
and Saint Paul's are the least populous parishes below; they were chosen to
make the contrast more striking. But in many other instances, the disproportion
between numbers and representation, is nearly as great; in all it is very
considerable.

From all this, it appears, that the citizens of South Carolina, are very far
from being equally represented in the state government on the principle of
numbers. On the contrary, it is evident, that a considerable majority of the
legislature is elected by less than one fifth of the people; which one fifth
consequently governs the other four fifths. In the next number I shall proceed
to enquire, whether any other principle, than that of numbers, ought to be
admitted in the apportionment of representation.

APPIUS.

No. III.
THE order of my subject leads me next to enquire, whether representation ought
to be affected by wealth?

It is admitted by all, that the lower country contains far more wealth, in
proportion to the number of its inhabitants, than the upper country. Should it
appear that property ought to be regarded in apportioning the representation, a
great part of the inequality, which exists in our government, might be
justified on that principle. But I apprehend that a very little consideration
of the subject will be sufficient to convince us, that no principle can be more
void of foundation, or lead to more destructive consequences.

Society is prior to property. In a state of nature each individual possesses
what he can enjoy at the time, and no more. When he goes out of his cave
another comes into it with as good a right as his predecessor, and in his turn
is succeeded by a third occupant, who holds by the same title as the former. If
he should find a fruit tree, he claims a right to as much fruit as he can pluck
and carry away. The rest remains so the next comer. In a state like this no
property can be accumulated. The single efforts of one individual can do
nothing more than supply his own immediate wants: and when a number of such
individuals assemble for mutual defense, or from any other motives, no one
brings into the community more than his personal strength and labor. All are
equal in possessions and rights; and for a considerable time whatever they
acquire continues to be in common. At length, however, as society advances, and
the understandings of men are improved by longer experience, it is discovered,
that in order to encourage industry and enterprise, each individual must be
secured, in the separate enjoyment of what he can procure, by his labor or
ingenuity. Hence rules are made for the security of property. Wealth increases
by the united efforts of a society, whose members mutually aid each other,
while each is pursuing his own advantage; and some being more industrious, more
skilful, or more fortunate than others, accumulate to themselves a greater
portion, of what the labor of all is employed in producing.

Property then being a more creature of government and laws, can have no
influence in their original formation. To deny this would be to contend that an
effect might be instrumental in producing its cause, or that a plant had
produced the very seed from which it sprung.

Accordingly, we find, that in all these early governments, which were formed
on the principles of freedom, all the members, however different in property,
talents or influence, were equal in political rights. In an assembly of the
people at Athens, the lowest mechanic, or labourer, had a vote. Themistocles,
Cimon, or Pericles, had no more. And in the democratic assemblies at Rome, the
poorest citizen was equal to Scipio, or Julius Caesar in the right of suffrage.

But representative governments are substitutes for these popular assemblies,
where all the citizens are convened, and each has a right to vote. As wealth
gives no preference in one, it ought not to give it in the other.

It is a never failing property of wealth to accumulate in particular hands. In
all well regulated societies, some few will be very rich, a considerable number
in moderate circumstances, and far the greater part comparatively poor. Suppose
that the government remains in the hands of all the people, who assemble, in
person, to deliberate and decide upon public measures. If you say that a
citizen, who possesses twice as much as another, shall have twice as many
votes, the government cannot be free, because a much smaller number, possessing
two votes each, can govern a much greater, each of whom has but one. If you
pursue the principle, a citizen who possesses ten times as much as another,
must have ten times as many votes. Suppose the community to consist of 10,000
members; it may well happen that 1,000 of these will collectively possess as
much wealth as the other 9,000, perhaps more. In that case this 1,000 will
govern the community; and the state will be an aristocracy.

If the government be representative, this principle will still produce the
same effect. In the instance mentioned above, suppose that the people, instead
of assembling to vote in person, should choose representatives. If the 1,000
rich citizens choose ten times as many representatives, in proportion to their
numbers, as the 9000 poor ones, the former will have the greatest number of
representatives, and will continue to govern the whole state. The only
difference is, that instead of ruling in person, they do it by their
representatives. Consequently, if wealth has any influence on representation,
the government cannot be free. It is further removed from liberty, in
proportion as this influence becomes greater. Whenever it becomes so great,
that a small number of citizens, on account of their wealth, have more votes,
either in person or by representatives, than all the others, the government is
an aristocracy.

But it is sometimes said, that property ought to have the power of protecting
itself -- That the poor being the most numerous in all societies, would, if
they had equal power in the government with the rich, sacrifice these latter to
their envy or their avarice. -- And that to guard against this evil, property
ought to be represented.

This amounts to saying, in the first place, that every government ought to be
aristocratic; for no community can be free, when a small number of its members
possesses, no matter for what reason, more power in the government than all the
rest together. This is evident from the principles already established. If
wealth must be represented, a free government cannot exist.

Secondly, wealth will always acquire influence enough in every government to
protect itself. The possessors of it commonly have a better education, more
extensive means of acquiring knowledge, and improving their talents, more
leisure for attending to public affairs, better opportunities of making
friends, establishing connections and forming parties. A rich citizen, without
having more votes, or choosing more representatives than his poor neighbors,
will very speedily obtain ten times as much influence in the government.
Instead of giving him more votes, you should give him fewer, in order to
balance and check that tendency to inequality, which exists in every society,
and is its most dangerous ingredient. You cannot prevent one man from acquiring
more wealth than others. You cannot prevent this wealth from uniting itself
with talents, and obtaining influence. But you ought to counteract this
disposition as much as possible. Strip wealth of as many advantages as you can,
still it will have enough, and more than enough. But if in addition to its
natural and inevitable influence, you give it constitutional power in the
government; then instead of checking, you favor and promote the tendency of
society to its most dangerous disease.

Thirdly, no society is, or can be divided into very rich and very poor
members. There will be a great variety of intermediate classes, rising in
regular gradation, from the lowest to the most opulent. These middle classes
indeed form the bulk of every community. As they are all possessed of more or
less property, they are all interested in its preservation; and while they
enact just laws, for the security of their own possessions, they equally
protect those of the richest members.

In the fourth place, the representatives, whatever may be the situation of
their constituents, will always be men of more or less property: on such the
people naturally fix their choice; they will carry with them into the
government, not only the feelings and views of their constituents, but their
own also -- this will ensure a sufficient regard to the rights of property.
Representatives who possess wealth themselves, whatever their constituents
might do were they assembled in person, will never make laws for subjecting
property to unjust burdens. There is more danger of their consulting their own
interests at the expense of their constituents. Thus it appears, that
representation, however equal on the principle of numbers, is, in its very
nature, necessarily conducive to the preservation of property.

Lastly, if the rights of property could not be protected, without giving it a
share in representation, there could be no occasion for its having that share
in more than one branch of the legislature. The use of two houses, or separate
branches, is that one may operate as a check upon the other; so as to prevent
improper measures from being adopted through haste or rashness. If property be
represented in the senate, it will be secure: for no legislative act can be
done without the senates concurrence. Besides, if property be represented in
one branch, the personal rights of the people should be represented in the
other. Of consequence, one man's personal rights being as great as another's,
the representation, in one branch at least, ought to be equal on the principle
of numbers. The truth is, that it ought to be so in both branches; for property
will always be secure and formidable, though you give it no constitutional
advantages; and to allow it any is contrary to every just principle of free
government.

It is further alleged, that as wealthy men contribute most to the support of
government, they ought to possess the greatest number of its advantages.

And they do possess the greatest number. Why does a rich man pay more to
government than a poor one? Because he has more to pay with. Is it not from
government and laws that he derives his wealth? Do they not protect him in the
exclusive possession of it? What but their influence and authority prevents his
riches from being seized by men stronger than he is, and who want perhaps for
the supply of their necessities, what he dissipates in gratifying the most
idle, perhaps the most vicious appetites? Will any one affirm, that a wealthy
man enjoys no greater portion of the advantages of society than a poor one?
What is the respect and influence which riches bestow? What are the pleasures
of affluence and ease? What is the power of conferring obligations, rendering
services, and relieving distress? Are not these advantages? Do not rich men
enjoy them in a much higher degree than those in more narrow circumstances? and
is it not perfectly reasonable, that as they have more to pay with, and more to
be protected, they should pay a greater portion of the price of protection?

Besides it is not true, that the rich contribute more than the poor. All
contribute equally, because all pay in proportion to their possessions, that is
to their means of payment. If I possess 1000 l. and another person ten
thousand, he pays 100 l. and I pay ten. The sum which he pays is the largest,
but my ten pounds is as much for me, and as difficult for me to pay as his
hundred, and as I pay less, so I have fewer advantages, and less property to be
protected than he has.

To say, that because one citizen is richer than another, and in a general and
equal assessment of property, pays a larger sum toward the expense of
government, he ought to possess greater political privileges, and more power in
the enacting of laws, which are to bind both equally; amounts to saying, that
because a man is poor he ought to be a slave; that there ought to be no such
thing as a free constitution; in fine, that every government ought to be an
aristocracy, in which the rich might domineer at pleasure over their fellow
citizens. Present the idea in this form, which is its true one, and it becomes
too horrid to be dwelt upon; yet when disguised by a little sophistry, it is
made one of the chief arguments to support an unequal representation. From all
this it is evident, that property ought to have no influence on the number of
representatives.

We are next to enquire, whether, even on the scale of property, the citizens
of this state are equally represented. -- This will be the subject of the
following number.

APPIUS.

No. IV.
IN the last number, my fellow citizens, we contended, that property ought to
have no influence on representation. We will now admit, for a moment, the
contrary position, and enquire whether on the principle of property, rightly
understood, the citizens of this state are equally represented.

Here, instead of the census, we will take the tax returns. By comparing them
with the list of representatives and senators, we may quickly solve the
question.

It is to be lamented, that from various causes, these returns are very
inaccurate. It frequently happens, that people residing in one county or
parish, possess property in others; and yet make all their returns where they
live. Hence one parish or county often appears to be much more rich, and
another much poorer, than it is in reality. Property in the upper country, to a
large amount, is held by people in Charleston, and returned there; so that the
advantage of the lower country, in point of wealth, is less in truth than in
appearance. The tax collectors who receive the returns, are sometimes
negligent; the people who make them are often inaccurate. But we have no better
guides, and must follow these with all their imperfections.

The parishes of St. Phillip's and St. Michael's, which include Charleston, pay
taxes to the amount of 10,671 l. 13 s 4 d. It is however to be remembered, that
many wealthy planters, whose possessions are in the other parishes, make their
returns in Charleston. These two parishes send 15 representatives and two
senators. Saint Bartholomew's pays 1,566 l 10 s 1 d. Saint Andrew's 1,020 l 0 s
6 d. Saint Paul's, to include its two divisions and Edisto island, 2,220 l 2 s
3 d. Christ church, 631 l 16 s 8 d. Saint Stephens, 958 l 6 s 9 d Saint
James's, Santee, 886 l 3 s 11 d. Saint James's, Goose creek, 295 l 8 s 10 d.
Saint John's, Berkley, 1,115 l 11 s 6 d. Saint Thomas, 895 l 19 s 5 d. Saint
John's, Wadmalaw, 732 l 8 s 6 d. and St. George's, Dorchester, 504 l 13 s 4 d.
These are the parishes which compose Charleston district. The whole amount of
their taxes is 21,473 l 14 s 6 d. They send to the legislature forty-eight
representatives and thirteen senators.

In Beaufort district there are four parishes -- Saint Helena, which pays 1,114
l 13 s 2 d in taxes. Prince William's, 468 l 7 s 5 d. Saint Peter's, 642 l, and
Saint Luke's 767 l 2 s 4 d; in all 3,022 l 2 s 11 d. This district elects
twelve representatives and four senators.

Georgetown district contains three parishes -- Prince George, All Saints, and
Prince Frederick. The first pays 1,765 l 13 s 4 d. The second 525 l 9 s 9 d.
and the last 1,294 l 9 s 5 d. This district therefore pays taxes to the amount
of 3,585 l. 12 s 6 d and it sends ten representatives and three senators. The
whole lower country, including Beaufort, Charleston, and Georgetown districts,
pays 28,081 l 5 s 11 d. and chooses seventy representatives and twenty senators.

Ninety-six district pays 1,898 l 17 s 6 d. Washington, 428 l 5 s 8 d.
Pinckney, 1,360 l 3 s 1 d. Camden, 2,079 l 3 s 10 d. Orangeburgh, 1,677 l. and
Cheraw, 966 l 12 s 1 d. The taxes paid by the upper country, which consists of
these districts, amounts to 8,390 l. 2 s 3 d; it elects fifty-four
representatives and seventeen senators.

No body contends, that wealth alone ought to be considered in apportioning the
representation. Such a principle is too monstrous to be endured for a moment.
The most violent stickler for aristocracy and the present system, have never
ventured upon that ground. To contend for it would be to attempt the
establishment of a pure aristocracy of the rich; a desire of which, nobody has
hitherto been found so shameless as to avow. The supporters of our present
system, contend, that representation ought to be in a joint ratio of wealth and
numbers -- each district, say they, should have a number of representatives, in
proportion, not to numbers alone, or to wealth alone, but to a joint proportion
of wealth and numbers. That is, if one district or county has three times as
many inhabitants as the other, and that other is three times the richest, they
ought to have an equal number of representatives; because, the advantage of
superior numbers on one side, is counter-ballanced by the advantages of
superior wealth on the other. Let us for a moment admit, though the contrary
has been clearly proved, that this is a just principle. Let us apply it to our
present situation, and see what will be the result.

The lower country, as we have already seen, contains 28,694 white inhabitants,
and pays L. 28,081 5 s. 10 d. tax. The upper country contains 120,902 white
inhabitants, and pays L.8,390 13 s. 3 d. tax. The former pays three times as
much tax; the latter has five times as many freemen. If the lower country
exceeded the upper as much in amount of taxes, as the upper country exceeds it
in number of inhabitants, the proportion would be equal, and they should have
an equal number of representatives. The superiority of numbers on one side,
being compensated, in that case, by the advantage of wealth on the other. But
the superiority of numbers in the upper country, five to one, greatly
out-weighs the superiority of tax below; which is only three to one.
Consequently, on the principle contended for, a joint proportion of wealth and
numbers, the upper country ought to exceed the lower in number of
representatives, in the proportion of five to three; and should have at least
one fourth the most members in both houses: Instead of which it has nearly one
third the fewest.

On the principle of property therefore, in the only sense in which it is or
can be contended for, as well as on that of numbers, the only true one, our
representation, is exceedingly unequal. We are next to enquire into the origin
of this inequality.

APPIUS.

No. V.
IN the preceding numbers, my fellow citizens, it has been proved, that you
are not equally represented in the state government. The six upper districts
are entitled, by their superior population, to four fifths of the whole
representation, instead of which they have less than one half. Even the
principle of property, combined with numbers, gives them a right to one third
more representatives than they now elect. We are next to consider the origin of
this inequality.

The sea coast of South Carolina was settled many years before the interior
country had been explored. The first settlers were Europeans, who would
naturally form their establishments near the sea. The tide flows but a very
short distance up the rivers. There are few, if any, instances in which it
exceeds 30 miles. Consequently navigaon and commerce would at first be confined
entirely to the sea coast. The country, for a considerable distance above the
tides-way, is low, wet, and barren; affording no inducements to early settlers,
and even now very thinly inhabited. For many years after the first
establishments were formed, some hostile tribes of Indians maintained their
ground in the neighbuorhood of the coast, and prevented the new settlements
from extending far into the interior country. All that is now called the back
country, and even the middle districts, were for a long time held by the
savages; early in the settlements, the culture of rice was introduced, and soon
became the great object of enterprise and industry. The only lands proper for
the production of this grain, are situated near the sea -- wealth and
population rapidly increased; and all these circumstances united to confine
them to a few leagues along the coast.

It was in this state of the colony that its first government was formed. The
lower country flourishing and wealthy; the middle either wholly unsettled, or
containing a few indigent and scattered inhabitants; and the more remote
interior parts, now called the back country, entirely unknown, or occupied by
savages. This government consisted, in part, of an assembly elected by the
people. The elections was made by parishes, into a number of which the colony
was divided. In this division the middle country was little regarded; the back
country being almost or quite unknown, was wholly over looked: insomuch that
some of the parishes extended from the sea to the mountains, while the place of
election was at the parish church, within a few miles from the coast.

The few scattered back settlers, as the inhabitants at a distance from the sea
were then called might come down and vote if they thought proper: but it never
was expected, and seldom done.

In process of time, the back country began to be peopled by emigrations from
the interior parts of North Carolina, Virginia, and Pensylvania. Some numerous
settlements were gradually formed; but the rich and refined inhabitants below,
either knew nothing of them, or considered them as hordes of rude hunters,
little superior to savages. They were of no importance in the government; no
change was on their account made in the representation. The members of the
legislature were elected by the parishes, and assembled in Charleston. At the
same place the courts of justice were held; and if a man of Long Canes, or
Pacolet, was sued, brought an action, or was indicted for an offense, he and
his witnesses were forced to attend in Charleston.

The people of the back country becoming daily more and more numerous, began to
be sensible of their strength, and loudly complained of this unequal
distribution of the advantages of government. At length in the year 1769, more
than 100 years after the colony was planted, they, with much difficulty,
obtained an act for establishing courts in various parts of the country. Still
they were little regarded in elections. A few of the most popular men among
them sometimes obtained seats, but the number was small and precarious. Almost
the whole house of representatives was chosen by the people below. The
elections were still made by parishes; and a leading man from the back country,
had no method of getting himself elected, but to bring down a sufficient number
of his neighbors, to give him a majority of votes. The first instance of this
happened about 30 years ago. The people of Long Canes, who were included in the
parish of Saint Bartholomews, came down in a body to an election, and put in
one of their neighbors. This gentleman, the first inhabitant of the upper
country, that ever obtained a seat in the legislature of this state, is still
alive. So long was it before the rights of the upper country began to be
regarded.

This inequality of representation continued to exist at the revolution. The
popular assemblies, which made the first regular opposition to the British
government, were elected by the parishes in the usual manner. A few of the
principal men in the upper country obtained seats; but their number was small,
and their influence inconsiderable. When the province at length completely
threw off its dependence, and began to form a government of its own, no
convention of the people was called for that purpose; but the assembly, which,
till then had exercised the legislative powers, passed an act containing a form
of government. This instrument apportioned the number of representatives in
such a manner, as to give the back country a share greater than it had before;
but still very inadequate to its population. As it had however but a very small
number of representatives, and of course, very little power in the assembly
which formed the system. It was forced to submit to the conditions imposed on
it, and glad to accept such advantages, however small, as it could obtain.
Besides it was, probably unacquainted with its own strength; nor was the
inequality of numbers as great then as it has since become. Thus was a system
formed and acquiesced in, which gave the three districts of Charleston,
Beaufort and Georgetown, more representatives than were allotted to all the
rest of the state. In the year 1789, the legislature resolved to call a
convention of the people. To revise and amend the constitution was the object
of this assembly. When the motion for calling it was discussed in the
legislature, some contended, that a convention brings back the people to the
first principles of society; according to which all are equal. That
consequently all ought to be equally represented in this convention, for which
purpose every parish and county should be invited to choose a number of
delegates, in exact proportion to its number of free inhabitants. These
principles are undeniable; but the lower country members perceived that should
they be adopted, the upper country, by its superior population, would rule the
convention. They, therefore, opposed this system with all their might, and
their superiority of numbers in the legislature, ensured their success. It was
resolved, that each parish and county should send the same number of delegates
to the convention, that it sent of members to the legislature: and thus the
lower country preserved the same superiority of numbers, the same power over
the votes, in one assembly, which it possessed in the other.

The effects of this plan became visible as soon as the convention commenced
its deliberations. In every vote the lower country was found to possess a
decisive majority. Consequently no reform, however desirable to four fifths of
the people, could be made without the lower country's consent. Some of its
members joined the upper country in its attempt to remove the seat of
government; which was effected by their assistance. But on the subject of
representation they were inflexible. An attempt was made to apportion it
according to numbers, or to a joint ratio of numbers and wealth. The lower
country firmly opposed both propositions. A violent contest ensued, in which,
as usual, the upper country was defeated. The will of four-fifths of the
people, expressed by their representatives, was prevented from taking effect,
by the opposition of one fifth. The number of representatives was reduced by
one-half, but the proportion remained the same. To a county, or parish, which
before elected six representatives, three were allowed. The lower country
maintained its former superiority, and one-fifth of the citizens imposed a
government on the other four-fifths.

This view of the origin of our inequality in representation, leads us to
consider, next, its peculiar nature. This enquiry will make the subject of the
following number.

APPIUS.

No. VI.
HAVING in the preceding number, explained the origin of our inequality in
representation, we come now, my fellow-citizens, to consider its nature and
properties. I fear we shall find them of a very alarming kind.

In North Carolina and Virginia, some counties are much larger than others, and
yet all choose an equal number of representatives; but there, large and small
counties are equally distributed through every part of the state: and if you
throw it into two grand divisions, you cannot say that one has a greater
portion of representatives than the other, Thus the representation is equal
with respect to the whole state; though unequal if estimated by single counties
or districts. The same observations will apply to England, where about one
twentieth of the people elects the house of commons. But that twentieth is
equally distributed through every part of the kingdom. The mischief there, is,
not that some parts of the country are unequally represented; but that all are
insufficiently and improperly represented.

But in this state the inequality is confined to particular parts of the
country, lying contiguous to each other. Not only a parish containing 300
inhabitants, elects as many representatives as a country with 8,000, but a
district consisting of such parishes, and whose aggregate numbers amount to
only 15,452, elects four times as many representatives, as another district,
whose numbers are 33,674; and three districts on the sea coast, containing
28,694 white inhabitants, send more representatives, than six other districts
in the interior country, whose numbers amount to 120,902. Hence it is evident,
that one part of the state, much inferior in extent, and far more so in
population, can govern all the other districts; which consequently, instead of
being parts of a free government, are reduced to the condition of provinces,
subject to a foreign power.

In the next place, these different parts of the country differ widely from
each other, in situation and character. In the upper country a great equality
of property prevails. Below, some are very rich, others extremely poor; and
from the situation of the country, and mode of cultivation, carried on by
slaves, and confined, as it is, to some small spots of land, this inequality is
likely to increase with the increase of wealth. Inequality of fortune leads to
inequality of condition; and inequality of condition is the parent and nurse of
aristocracy. Superior wealth, not only, is apt to beget and cherish a love of
power and privileges, but has a strong tendency to bestow them Hence there is
danger that an aristocratical spirit may arise in the low country, if it do not
already exist there: and this is a powerful reason against suffering that part
of the state to possess an undue influence in the government. For where
aristocracy once gains admittance, it never ceases to make new encroachments,
'till it has totally rooted out the principles of liberty, of which it is the
natural and implacable enemy.

Thirdly, the upper and lower counties have opposite habits and views in almost
every particular. One is accustomed to expense, the other to frugality. One
will be inclined to numerous offices, large salaries, and an expensive
government. The other, from the moderate fortunes of the inhabitants, and their
simple way of life, will prefer low taxes, small salaries, and a very frugal,
civil establishment. One imports almost every article of consumption, and pays
for it in produce: The other is far removed from navigation, has very little to
export, and must therefore supply its own wants. Consequently one will favor
commerce; the other manufactures. One wishes for slaves; the other will be
better without them. Where two classes of people, in the same community, have
such opposite inclinations and customs, it is fit that the most numerous should
govern. For the interests and feelings of the greatest number ought to be
consulted.

Fourthly, this inequality is much greater in reality than appearance From the
census it appears that 28,000 citizens out of 149,000, govern the whole state.
But we must recollect, that in the lower country, where these 28,000 reside,
the greatest inequality of property prevails -- This has a tendency to throw
all political power and privileges into the hands of the rich; whose numbers
are comparatively small. The power therefore which the lower country possesses
by its superiority in representation, is not possessed by all the people of the
lower country, but by a small part of them. A certain great man in Athens, used
to assert that his little son governed all Greece: for, said he, Athens governs
Greece, I govern Athens, my wife governs me, and my young son governs my wife.
In like manner, a few hundred persons below, govern South Carolina; for they
govern the lower country, and the lower country governs the rest of the state.
Of all the properties of our inequality in representation, this is the most
alarming.

In the last place, this inequality, already so enormous, is every moment
becoming greater. The state is now governed, we will say, by one-fifth of its
inhabitants, residing in a particular part of the country. In twenty years,
should the present system remain, it will be governed by one-tenth; in forty
years by one-twentieth; and so on as the excess of numbers becomes greater and
greater. The increase of population below is very slow and inconsiderable. The
swamps are engrossed by a few families. Besides, they require immense labor,
and perhaps the labor of Africans to reduce them to cultivation. The high
lands are exceedingly barren. These circumstances will continually drive
laboring people, of a disposition, in any degree enterprizing, into the upper
country. They will never stay and exhaust their strength in a barren soil, and
sickly climate, when they know that lands can easily be procured in a fertile
and healthy country. From the expensive manner of living below, a family might
be independent, and even opulent in the upper country, with what would hardly
enable them to subsist decently near Charleston. This, with the changes of
property, which must frequently take place, will probably occasion many
families to retire from the lower country with the remains of their fortune,
and settle above. The sickliness of the climate below, which destroys life,
perhaps faster than it is produced, will prevent those from multiplying who do
not emigrate. It is questionable, whether Charleston district contains, out of
Charleston, more inhabitants now, than it did fifty years ago. The increase, if
any, has certainly been very inconsiderable. A great number of families which
were among the first settlers, have become wholly extinct; and many, formerly
numerous, are now reduced to one or two individuals in each. In the upper
country, on the contrary, population advances with an astonishing rapidity. A
mild and healthy climate, a fertile soil, almost every where capable of
advantageous cultivation -- the simple and active life of the inhabitants, the
abundant means of subsistence which moderate labor procures -- the extent of
the country, which give the species full room to expand itself; all contribute
to multiply it in a manner almost incredible, and this natural increase is
aided by constant migrations, from less fortunate climes. Thirty years ago,
Abbeville and Edgefield counties were so inconsiderable as to remain a part of
Saint Bartholemews parish. They now contain 17,280 white inhabitants. The
numbers of Pendleton county, which about eight years ago was entirely a desert,
now amount to 8731, with this rapid progress in population, wealth must greatly
increase. A fertile country increasing in number of inhabitants, and improving
in agriculture and arts; where the fruits of his industry are secured to every
individual, must soon become rich. There is no doubt that wealth increases much
faster in the upper country than below. Exports by no means afford a certain
criterion of riches. The most wealthy countries often export the least, because
the people have enough within themselves, without purchasing from abroad, and
consume their own productions, instead of exchanging them for those of their
neighbors. This is very much the case with the upper country. On the contrary,
almost the whole labor of the lower country, is employed in cultivating
staples for exportation. The people import a great part even of their
provisions: and almost the whole product of their labor is exported. Yet the
exports of the upper country have doubled within the last seven or eight years;
while those from below have increased very little during that period. Hence it
is plain, that the superiority which the lower country country enjoys in point
of wealth, will perpetually diminish; while its inferiority in numbers, must
every day become more considerable. Should the present apportionment of
representation continue, the time must soon arrive, when the upper country,
equal to the lower in wealth, and containing ten times as many free
inhabitants, will have one third less power in the government. The least
opulent, the smallest, and the worst peopled part of the state, will rule all
the rest.

Thus it appears that the inequality of our representation, is of the most
dangerous kind, already enormous, constantly increasing, and throwing the whole
power of government into the hands of a small part of the citizens, whose
habits of life, situation, and political sentiments, must be for ever different
from those of the great body of the community. We must next consider the
effects of this inequality.

APPIUS.

No. VII.
IT now remains for us my fellow citizens, in this seventh and last number, to
consider what effects the inequality of which we have been speaking, may now,
or hereafter, produce on our liberties

It is extremely evident, that the six upper districts are absolutely under the
dominion of the three lower ones, which possess a decisive majority in both
branches of the legislature. If any one should be disposed to deny this, let us
ask him, whether the whole upper country, should it unite to a man, can carry
any measure in the legislature, however important to its interests, without the
assistance of the lower members? Surely it cannot. There hardly can be a
question which will more deeply interest the upper country, than the removal of
the seat of government. But how was it carried; by their own strength? No, all
their struggles for that purpose were ineffectual till they were joined by some
members from below. Though the upper country, to a man, was desirous of county
courts, though four fifths of the people considered that establishment as of
the utmost importance to their welfare, it was not obtained without the
greatest difficulty; and never could have taken place, had not some lower
members lent their assistance. Yet this was a measure which the lower country
had no interest to prevent. They, therefore, after a long struggle, granted it
as a matter of favor. But is it consistant with the character of freemen to
hold their rights by courtesy, at the will of an handful of their fellow
citizens? No, this is the condition of servants, whose masters may sometimes be
mild, just, and even generous; but are masters still.

Provinces will be well governed, whenever their interests happen to coincide
with the views and interests of the power to which they are subject. This power
may sometimes even make a small sacrifice of its own interests to their wishes.
But will it always be in that disposition? Let our own history witness. In some
points where the lower country was not very materially interested, it has
yielded to the wishes and interests of its subjects in the upper country. This
was the case with the county court act. Even the removal of the seat of
government, though highly interesting to those lower members, who reside in
Charleston, and therefore opposed by them with all their might, was a matter of
indifference to the lower country gentlemen in general, who, when they were
forced to leave home, cared very little, whether they went to Columbia or
Charleston. Some of them, therefore, gratified the upper country by voting for
the removal, and some, no doubt, voted for it because they thought it right and
conducive to the general good of the state. After all, this removal was more
properly a division of the government, for all the principal officers continue
to reside in Charleston. The governor is never obliged to be at Columbia, but
while the legislature is sitting. The supreme courts are held there but a few
days in the year; the secretary's, treasurer's, and surveyor general's offices,
at a great expense, and with much inconvenience to the state, are divided
between Charleston and Columbia. The lower country was by no means generally
interested, to prevent this partial removal; and yet through the opposition of
a few powerful individuals, it did not take place without considerable
difficulty. A complete removal, though much desired by the whole upper country,
by four-fifths of the people, could not possibly be obtained. And when a
question arose, in which the lower country was universally opposed in interest
to the upper, the question of representation, we all know the event. The upper
country, with four fifths of the people, and every principle of justice and
good government clearly on its side, was out voted and over ruled. It was not
then the interest of the ruling power to gratify the wishes, or consult the
interests of its provinces; and accordingly they were treated with the utmost
neglect, and a system of government imposed upon them, replete with inequality,
injustice and servitude.

This is sufficient to show, that the lower country, which is the governing
power, will seldom be disposed to favor its dependant provinces, the other
districts, where its own interests or convenience, or those of some powerful
individuals in it, can be in any considerable degree affected. On how many, and
what important points, these interests may differ, will soon appear.

In the election of officers they must frequently differ. The lower country
will wish to have governors, senators for congress, and electors of the
president, chosen from among men of their own party and way of thinking. The
upper country, on the contrary, will be desirous to fill those high and
important stations with men whom they know, and on whose love of true
republicanism they can rely. But have they the power of doing it? No. Should
the lower country combine in support of a candidate, the most odious to the six
upper districts, that is to four fifths of the citizens, it can give him 90
votes. The upper country has only 73 to oppose him with. Consequently every
public office of this state, from the governor and senators of the United
States, down to the sheriffs of the various districts, may be filled, by the
lower country in (...) with characters the most obnoxious to four-fifths of the
people.

Suppose the upper country should fix its choice on a candidate universally
beloved by them, for the office of governor, for instance, or senator; can they
elect him? Not if the lower country thinks proper to support another. They can
give him 73 votes These 73 votes will represent the will of four-fifths of the
people. Consequently this candidate will be the choice of four out of five of
his fellow citizens. But if the other one-fifth think proper to oppose him,
they can give his antagonist 90 votes, and prevent his election.

It is not only in elections, but in passing laws, laying taxes, and indeed in
every legislative act, that this tyranny may be exercised. The cultivated lands
in the lower country are of ten or twenty times the productive value of those
above. At present they are taxed according to their respective value, which is
just: but suppose the lower country should think fit to alter the mode, and to
tax all lands equally: could the upper country prevent it? No. Suppose the
people below should choose to take off the tax on negroes, and lay it upon
cattle, tobacco, hemp, and wheat; so as to remove the whole burden of public
contribution from their own shoulders, and lay it on those of the upper
country: could the latter prevent this unjust imposition? No. The lower country
has a decided majority in the legislature, and can make what laws, and lay what
taxes, it may think proper. Suppose it should think proper to lay a poll tax;
by which a man in the lower country possessed of 10,000 pounds would pay no
more for the support of government, than one in Ninety-six or Pinckney, who has
only ten pounds: it has the power of doing it. It may also take off the tax on
coaches and lay it on wagons: if it should be disposed to do so, the upper
country has no power to hinder it.

It would be endless to enumerate all the instances, in which the lower
country, by its superiority in representation, may sacrifice the interests of
four-fifths of the people who are governed, to the interests or convenience of
one-fifth which governs.

But it may be said, will all these oppressions be exercised? I do not say that
all of them will; perhaps it may be a considerable time before we shall feel
any of them. I contend that they may be exercised, that the lower country has
the power of exercising them: a power which it has in many instances exerted:
and I say that it is inconsistant with every just idea of freedom for the great
body of the people to be in the power of a small part, and to hold its rights
dependant on their justice or favor. Why did we quarrel with Great Britain? Not
for the evils which she inflicted upon us, but to guard against those which she
might inflict. Not because she taxed us in all cases whatsoever, without our
consent; but because she claimed a right of doing so. This right the lower
country possesses over the upper, and may exercise whenever prompted to do so
by its interests or inclination.

And now my fellow citizens, I conclude with a warning which requires your most
serious attention. Beware of supposing, that because the evil which I have
pointed out, does not at present press with its whole weight upon you, it is
therefore unworthy of immediate attention. Great abuses in government, like
great rivers, arise from small beginings. They are easily checked at first, but
increasing imperceptibly in their progress, they at length become too powerful
for opposition. Thus corruption crept into the British government; and thus
your liberties will be gradually undermined, unless you speedily apply a remedy
to the dangerous malady under which our constitution labors.

APPIUS.

SCHEDULE of numbers, representation, and taxes, in the different districts,
counties, and parishes of the state; agreeable to the constitution, the census
taken by order of Congress, and to the tax returns for the years 1789, 1790,
and 1791, as deposited in the treasury.
CHARLESTON DISTRICT.
Parishes White Inhabitants Representatives Senators Taxes St. Philip and St
Michael 8,089 15 2 10,671 13 4 Saint Bartholomew's 2,138 3 1 1,566 10 4 Saint
John's, Berkley 693 3 1 1,115 11 6 St. George, Dorchester 1,252 3 1 504 13 4
Saint Stephen's 226 3 1 958 6 9 Saint James', Santee 437 3 1 846 3 11 Saint
Thomas 397 3 1 895 19 5 Christ Church 566 3 1 63 16 8 St. James, Goose creek
439 3 1 295 8 10 St. John's, Colleton 585 3 1 732 8 6 Saint Andrews 370 3 1
1,020 0 6 Saint Paul's 276 3 1 2,220 2 3 Total 15,452 48 13 21,473 14 6 BEAUFORT
DISTRICT.
Parishes White Inhabitants Representatives Senators Taxes Saint Helena 3 1 L.
1,144 13 2 Saint Luke's 4,346 3 1 767 2 4 Prince William's 3 1 468 7 5 Saint
Peter's, 3 1 642 0 0 Total 4,346 12 4 3,022 2 11 GEORGETOWN DISTRICT. All
Saints 429 1 1 525 9 9 Prince George 5,031 5 1 1,765 13 4 Prince Frederick
3,418 4 1 1,294 9 5 Total 8,878 10 3 3,585 12 6 LOWER COUNTRY. Charleston,
15,452 48 13 21,473 14 6 Beaufort 4,364 12 4 3,022 2 11 Georgetown 8,878 10 3
3,585 12 6 Total 28,694 70 20 28,081 5 11 NINETY-SIX DISTRICT. Edgefield County
9,785 3 1 655 8 11 Abbeville do. 7,493 3 1 438 1 9 Laurens do. 8,210 3 1 343 8
2 Newberry do. 8,186 3 1 461 1 9 Total 33,674 12 4 1,897 5 11 WASHINGTON
DISTRICT. Pendleton 8,731 3 1 235 19 Greenville 5,888 2 1 192 6 8 Total 14,619
5 2 428 5 8 PINCKNEY DISTRICT.
Counties White Inhabitants Representatives Senators Taxes Union 6,430 2 1 L.
409 7 0 Spartan 7,907 2 1 343 12 10 York 5,652 ^ 1 290 11 11 Chester 5,881 ^ 0
316 1 4 Total 25,870 9 3 1,360 3 1 CAMDEN DISTRICT. Fairfield 5 138 2 1 345 0 2
Richland 2,479 2 556 19 6 Clarendon 1,790 2 1 528 5 7 Claremont 2,438 2 435 8 0
Kershaw 2 Lancaster 4,864 2 1 213 16 7 Total 16,709 12 3 2,079 5 10 ORANGEBURGH
DISTRICT. Total 12,412 10 3 16,77 0 1 CHERAW DISTRICT. Total 7,618 6 2 966 18 1
UPPER COUNTRY. Ninety-six 33,674 12 4 1,897 17 6 Washington 14,619 5 2 428 5 8
Pinckney 25,870 8 3 1,360 3 1 Camden 16,709 12 3 2 079 3 10 Orangeburg 12,412
10 3 1,677 0 1 Cheraws 7,616 6 2 966 12 1 Total 120,90^ 54 17 8,390 2 3 WHOLE
STATE. Upper country 120,902 54 17 8,390 2 ^ Lower country 28,694 7 20 28,081 5
10 Total 149,596 124 37 36,451 8 1


