A Short Account OF THE EXEMPLARY LIFE AND TRIUMPHANT DEATH OF Theodosia Maxey,
A YOUNG WOMAN OF VIRGINIA, Whose Death happened on the 3d day of March, 1793.

-- Here is the PATIENCE and the FAITH of the Saints.

Rev. xiii. 10. PHILADELPHIA: Printed for WILLIAM GLENDINNING, PREACHER OF THE
GOSPEL -- BY WILLIAM W. WOODWARD, AT FRANKLIN'S HEAD, NO. 41, CHESNUT-STREET.
1794.

* As the Copy-right of the ACCOUNT of the LIFE and DEATH of THEODOSIA MAXEY,
is become mine, by purchasing the Manuscript from the Publisher, Mr. James
Smith, of Powhatan County, Virginia, one of the Ministers of the Methodist
Republican Church, I do hereby forbid all persons reprinting the same.

William Glendinning.

PREFACE.
READER, you have now before you, some account of the Life and Death of one,
whose eminent piety entitled her to, and obtained her the esteem of all the
real lovers of virtue in the circle of her acquaintance.

Had her character as a Christian in life, and the circumstances attending her
death, been as universally known as they were worthy of admiration, it would
have precluded the necessity of this publication; but as this was not the case,
it was thought by some of her religious acquaintance, that a short account
thereof, sent into the world, might be of real service to the enlightened, but
too thoughtless and secure inhabitants of America.

But in the execution of this a considerable difficulty has arisen: no minute
being made of her expressions and behavior 'till immediately after her death,
many passages, (though highly interesting) are obliged to be omitted, on
account of their being so imperfectly remembered by those who were present when
such occurrences happened, that they could not again repeat them with such
perspicuity and accuracy as the nature of the case required.

Of the reality of the following account, there are a number of living
witnesses; who moreover feel a pleasure in declaring, that such an instance of
triumphant faith and patient resignation, they never before saw in all their
lives.

One remarkable instance of her entire resignation is contained in the
following circumstance; which being omitted in the following account, will be
the more acceptable here. -- One of her brothers (Bennett Maxey) being an
itenerant minister in the Methodist Episcopal Church, was traveling and
preaching the Gospel at a considerable distance from home.

It is extremely natural for those who are leaving the world to wish to see
their friends, and especially those whom they peculiarly esteem. But when she
was asked, whether she would have him sent for, she said she wished to see him;
but as he was engaged in his Master's work, she did not wish to hinder him; but
requested them to tell him to redeem time, and try to meet her in Heaven. And
no doubt but the hope she had that they should meet again at the resurrection
of the just, enabled her to give up all hope of seeing him again in time. Her
brother, on receiving an account of her death, writes in the following words;
which being strongly expressive of their love and union, and of the impression
made on his mind by her pious exhortations to redeem time, etc. are here
transcribed. When I left my dear sister I was in great hopes I should have seen
her again in time, but am disappointed; and therefore think I will take her
good advice, and redeem all the time I can. -- Time is precious, and my poor
heart is too backward to redeem time; but God being my helper, I feel more than
ever resolved to do his blessed will. -- When I think of the love and union
there were between us, I hardly know how to give her up. The pain of parting is
great; but I expect the joy will be greater if ever we meet again. So I find a
resignation to the will of God.


The reader will observe, in the course of the following pages, a very
remarkable circumstance She had labored for some time under a most powerful
temptation; but was at length wonderfully and strangely delivered by a
remarkable dream; in which a small ticket appeared to be providentially
conveyed to her, containing these words of the apostle John -- "Beloved, now
are we the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we
know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as
he is." These words proved such a source of comfort to her both at the time and
afterward, that she desired and requested that they might be made the subject
of her funeral discourse. She had at the same time, such just conceptions of
the value of time, that she also requested a sermon on that subject might be
preached to those that should attend her funeral. Accordingly at the time
appointed, two eminent ministers of God's word, (whom she herself had nominated
Mr. James O'Kelly, and Mr. Philip Gatch) solemnized her funeral, in the
presence of a vast concourse of people. The one of them preached from the words
she had chosen; and the other from Rev. x. 5, 6. And the angel which I saw
stand upon the sea, and upon the earth, lifted up his hand to Heaven, and swear
by him that lives for ever and ever, that there should be time no longer.

The attentive multitude behaved with great seriousness and solemnity. But when
her silent remains were consigned to its mother dust, there to rest till the
trumpet awakes the dead; -- then in an especial manner, the peculiar solemnity
of the scene exceeded description.

That the following account may be rendered a blessing to thy soul, O Reader,
let me entreat thee to implore the blessing of God upon it. If you will read it
with prayer, I think there is little doubt, but that virtue will appear
amiable, and of course command thy esteem. That you may follow her in the path
of duty, to the haven of felicity, is the earnest prayer of

THE PUBLISHER.

A Short Account OF THE LIFE AND DEATH OF THEODOSIA MAXEY.
THEODOSIA MAXEY, the daughter of John and Mary-Anne Maxey, was born in
Powhatan County, in the State of Virginia, on the thirteenth day of June, in
the year one thousand seven hundred and sixty-six. She was remarkable from her
very infancy, for her uncommon obedience to her parents, and becoming
deportment to the rest of the family; and on all occasions, manifested a mild,
gentle, and peaceable disposition. But as she grew up to maturity, (as it
commonly happens) the corruptions of nature grew also. And although she was
ever preserved from those wicked practices that are common to youth, yet the
customs and vanities of the world, so far led her heart astray from God, as to
make her careless and indifferent about the salvation of her soul. It is,
however, but justice to observe, that very few, while in an unregenerate state,
preserve a character so amiable, and a life so free from vice.

For some time she did not appear to have had any other awakenings, than those
of an enlightened conscience; nor any other convictions, than those which
necessarily arise from the enlightening beams of "That true light which
lighteneth every man that comes into the world" -- so that there appeared
nothing remarkable in her religious exercises, till about the 18th year of her
age.

About the year 1775, she began to hear the Methodists preach. Edward
Dromgoole, Joseph Hartley, Philip Gatch, and others who succeeded them,
preached the Gospel through those parts, with considerable success. Her parents
were some of the first that were converted to God in that neighborhood. Their
house was opened for the reception of Methodist preaching, where it has been
regularly continued ever since. This circumstance tended greatly to increase
her opportunities of instruction; for beside hearing frequently the word of God
in public, she had also the advantage of being much in the company of those
worthy characters who preached it, and of hearing their private instructions: a
privilege for which many will have cause eternally to bless God.

Nothing however, of a religious nature, seems to have made any lasting
impression on her mind, till about the beginning of the year 1785. It was then
that Mr. J. Major, after preaching at her father's, earnestly entreated her to
"try and save her soul;" and after some other plain and pointed conversation
took his leave of her with saying, "If you perish your blood will be upon your
own head." These words (which carried convictions with them) appeared to be
spoken with great simplicity and godly sincerity: and a consciousness of their
truth with a fear of their being dreadfully verified, deeply affected her, and
created such an alarm in her conscience, that thence forward she could not rest
till the Lord spoke peace to her soul.

In consequence of the convictions she now received, her mind became very
resiless and uneasy. A firm persuasion that she was a sinner against God; -- An
awful apprehension of his just displeasure; and a hope that there was yet mercy
for her, fixed in her a determination to take the preacher's advice, and try to
save her soul.

We do not intend to give a particular account of the whole progress of her
convictions from this time. There were some circumstances, however, which had a
powerful tendency to deepen and increase those convictions; a brief account of
which, will, we trust, be pleasing, instructive, and entertaining to the reader.

Religion, about this time, was at a very low ebb. Many of those who embraced
it, some years before, were now called from this to a better world. -- The
preaching of the Gospel had apparently very little effect: -- The then rising
generation were thoughtless and profane; -- and though many attended the
preaching of the word, yet the seed sown fell mostly by the way side, and but
few brought forth fruit to perfection, and adorned the profession of
Christianity. Such was the State of things, when God, jealous for his own
Glory, was pleased to revive his work in the following manner.

Elisha Maxey (a brother of Theodosia) in the month of June 1785, was
powerfully awakened and converted to God. He was one evening importuned by his
father to pray in the family: for a few moments he hesitated; but casting his
care on God, he began the first public prayer he ever offered to a throne of
grace. He had uttered but few words, when the Spirit and power of God, was
displayed in a very extraordinary manner. Deep convictions seized several of
the family, who till then had remained careless and unconcerned; but were now
constrained to cry out aloud for mercy. Theodosia was then present, and sunk to
the floor under the powerful operations of the spirit of God. Her strong cries
and tears, plainly discovered the agonies of her wounded soul; and her
convictions from that time appeared to be greatly deepened.

That a gracious work was now begun, and happily going on, in Mr. Maxey's
family, was now very evident. Seriousness and solemnity marked their
countenances, while sighs and groans frequently burst from their disconsolate
hearts; and the very breathing of their souls appeared to be after God; and,
"What shall I do to be saved?" was the important question. As they were thus
earnestly inquiring the way to Zion, Elisha (the young man above mentioned) did
all in his power to point them to Christ, as being both able and willing to
save; and his labors are not in vain. Prayer-meetings were instituted, and the
work began to spread far and wide like fire among dry stubble. Numbers attended
the prayer meetings: preaching also was wonderfully blessed: convictions were
frequent, deep, and lasting; and it was not uncommon to see several souls
converted at a common prayer-meeting. The work soon spread into other
neighbourhoods and counties, yea into distant parts; till at length great part
of the state seemed to catch the sacred flame, so that hundreds in a short time
were brought to enjoy the favor and love of God. From this beginning the work
soon after spread through Virginia and the southern states, like a mighty
torrent bearing down all before it. -- When we reflect bow this work began --
the instruments employed in carrying it on, -- and its progress in spite of all
opposition -- we are constrained to say "This was the Lords doing and it is
mavelous in our eyes.


But the great and good effect, which these things had on Mr. Maxey's family,
(and Theodosia in particular) is what principally demands our observations at
present. She continued for some time truly and heartily engaged with God. Her
sighs, tears and secret groans, were an incontestible proof that she was
hungering and thirsting after righteousness: but unbelief kept her from laying
hold on the promise. In this distressed state, she went mourning from day to
day, without comfort, without peace, and sometimes almost without hope!

But God who wounds with an intent to heal, dropped a cordial into her bitter
cup. Her mind was deeply impressed with those encouraging, and soul refreshing
words of our Lord, (Matt. xi. 28.) "Come unto me all ye that labor and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest." These words gave her some ease of mind,
and were the ground of a hope, that God would in his own good time, give her
the rest she so greatly desired.

During this her great distress, she spent much of her time in private
retirement, searching the scriptures and wrestling with God in prayer. Having
on a certain time retired into a private room for those purposes, she chanced
to read the passage above mentioned. After pondering for some time on the
words, she withdrew, leaving the book open at the place. Just about that time
Mr. D -- had an appointment to preach at her father's; and having occasion to
go into the same room, found the book in the posture she had left it. On
looking therein he was at once struck with a view of the words, and a sense of
their importance; and after a few minutes' meditation therein, made them the
subject of his discourse that day in public. The word was applied to her heart,
her hopes were strengthened, her desires increased, and she appeared more
resolutely determined to persevere in seeking the fulfillment of the promise to
her soul.

But finding at length, that notwithstanding all her endeavors, her prayers,
tears etc. she (like one of old) was nothing mended, but rather grew worse, she
determined to add fasting to the other means of grace. This she found
recommended both by precept and example in Scripture; and by those now whom she
had reason to believe were the real children and lovers of God. Hoping
therefore to find some relief from this, she entered upon it without delay: But
she soon found this was not the help she needed. At length after making every
shift, and using every means in her power, she became fully convinced, "The
blood of Christ must still remain,
"Sufficient and alone."


Instead therefore of getting relieved of her burden, it se^^^d daily to
increase. Being thus beaten out of all dependence on means, she was at last
experimentally taught the important lesson she had been so long striving to
learn; and giving up every plea, came to Christ, as "a weary, heavy laden
sinner." She had long labored as in midnight darkness, and drank the wormwood
and the gall: her sins for some time had pressed heavily upon her; but now
unbelief, like a mountain seemed to crush her down: In this distress and
bitterness of soul she attended the prayer meeting, "Burdened with a world of
grief,
"Burdened with a sinful load,
"Burdened with this unbelief,
"Burdened with the wrath of GOD."
But her extremity was God's opportunity. At this prayer meeting she was
enabled to act faith; the chains and fetters of unbelief dropped off, and her
soul burst into the liberty of the chidren of God: Her sorrow and distress
vanished in a moment, and joy and peace took possession of her heart. Her mouth
was filled with praises, and her tongue loosed to tell what God had done for
her soul. Old things were done away, and all things became new, and a new song
put into her mouth, even praise to God.

Indeed the praises of God were now her daily employ, and she never appeared
happier than when engaged in this heavenly exercise. She frequently sang with
transport the following words, "Now I Will sing of Jesu's merit,
"Tell the world of his dear name;
"That if any want his Spirit,
"Jesus is the very same;
"He that asks soon receives;
"He that seeks is sure to find;
"Come -- for whosoe'er believes,
"He will never cast behind."


In this happy frame she continued for sometime, a living witness that "God has
power on earth to forgive sin." And the happiness she found in religion during
this period, appeared too great for words to describe: she seems to have
consoled herself with the pleasing (though delusive hope, that her enemies were
all destroyed, and she should learn war no more. But experience soon taught her
otherwise, and the corruptions of nature with the temptations of the Devil,
convinced her of her mistake. Evil tempers and dispositions, the remains of the
carnal mind, began to struggle for the ascendency, and she found herself
surrounded with enemies before she was aware! By consulting her experience, she
found this was not a state of rest, but of war and conflict; and that she
consequently needed the whole armor of God; otherwise her enemies would
prevail, and her latter end be worse than the beginning. While these
considerations taught her the necessity of a deeper work of grace, a conviction
that it was her privilege, set her to seeking it. She found great encouragement
from these, and the like portions of Scripture -- "His name shall be called
Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins:" -- "that he was
manifested to destroy the works of the Devil:" that he has promised to
"sanctify his people wholly, body and soul and spirit; and to preserve them
blameess unto life eternal: -- and above all -- "that he also is faithful who
has promised, who also will do it." And as she sought the Lord for the pardon
of her sins, so she did for a destruction of the carnal mind with all her heart.

From August, 1785, till the 5th day of April, 1786, she earnestly and
perseveringly sought the Lord for this blessing. Then it was that her prayers
were heard and answered in a very extraordinary manner, before a number of
witnesses; some of whom to the present day, retain a lively remembrance of that
solemn scene. The servent agonizing manner in which she wrestled with God, is
not easily expressed. Her mortal part, at length, unequal to the task, sunk
under the conflict, and remained for some time almost motionless; but the
aspiring soul would take no denial; till at length, like Jacob, she became a
prevailer. In a word, such an instance of active, persevering and prevailing
faith, we may venture to say is rarely to be met with.

From this time forward, she appeared to dwell as in the suburbs of Heaven, and
lived a witness that even here, "the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin."
Her conduct and deportment was truly becoming the Christian character, and the
service of God was her delight. She cheerfully submitted to difficulties,
crosses and disappointments, in order to attend the worship of God, and the
ministry of his word: and she used to express her wonder and astonishment that
so many who had an opportunity of hearing the word of God, would nevertheless
continue careless at home, and spend that precious time in vanity that they
might have spent in the service of God. This was far from being the case with
her, for she would neglect no opportunity, but at all times appeared desirous
to wait on God in the use of all his appointed means; and so she continued, a
worthy member of society, and pattern of piety till God saw good to call her
from this vale of tears to reap those incorruptible joys that are at his right
hand for ever more.

About two years before her departure, the symptoms of a consumption were first
dis^^^^rable. A dry tickling cough, the wearing away of the flesh, a quick
pulse, shortness of breath, etc. seemed to portend her approaching dissolution.
As her body weakened, and the disorder increased, her soul ripened apace, for
the eternal reward. Relying on the word of him who has promised, that "All
things shall work together for good to them that love God;" She did not appear
to dread her approaching change, but resigned herself into the hands of God:
and when she was asked, if she dreaded death? would reply, "I have a hope
beyond the grave!"

After a variety of means had been used to check the disorder without the
desired effect; she was advised about August 1792, to use the waters of a
mineral spring. The person at whose house she stay^^ ^hile she used these
waters, writes thus: During her stay with us, she appeared truly devoted to
God, and spent much time in private retirement. She had daily an intermitting
fever, and her cough, at times, was very troublesome; Yet her countenance
discovered a serenity and tranquillity of mind, that death (though apparently
not far off) could not take from (...) And although she was generally serious,
and solemn, yet she never discovered the smallest symptom of that alarming
dread that seizes the sinner,

"When life sinks apace and death is in view;" but on the contrary, appeared to
enjoy an uninterrupted composure of mind, and soul resigned to the will of
Providence.

While she continued to use the waters above mentioned, she thought she found
relief; but on her return home she grew worse, and was confined soon after
mostly to her bed. Death now stared her in the face! And no doubt but the grand
enemy of souls tried to represent it to her view in all its ghastly forms. But
she had been long accustomed to view death as a vanquished enemy; No wonder
then that, "Death could not make her soul afraid."

She could rejoice at the prospect of her approaching dissolution, and would
often s^^ Not my will, but thine be done, O Lo^^

During the fall and beginning of winter, her disorder gained ground very fast,
and her body weakened accordingly; in consequence of which she could sit up but
little: Her cough also was very troublesome, and considerably disturbed her
rest; but instead of murmuring at any of the dispensations of Providence, she
bore all her sufferings with a christian-like patience, and entire resignation
to the Divine will.

On Wednesday (...) After lying for some time in a thoughtful posture, she
addressed herself to her mother who sat by the (...) side, and said, "I shall
have three hard (...), and then I shall go." And accordingly the next day,
being,

Thursday the 21st. Her spirit seemed to be uncommonly depressed; and the
strong and lively hope that she had hitherto enjoyed, seemed almost taken away.
From what cause this distress arose, we cannot positively affirm; but from what
happened the next day, there is reason to believe she was tempted to doubt her
being one of the children of God.

Friday, 22. She appeared to labor still under the same distress. One asked
her if she was afraid of death? She replied, "I think at times I am not so
fearful of it as I ought to be." -- From this it appears that her mind was in
some degree beclouded, so that she durst not consider herself entitled to the
great and precious promises made to the children of God. But he who permits the
trial of his people, can, when it pleases him, wonderfully and strangely
deliver them: An instance of this we have (...) before us. After she had
struggled (...) with the temptation, she fell into a doze. (...) awaking, she
said, I have been dreaming I had stepped out of doors, and as I returned, (...)
a small piece of paper lie on the floor, which I took up, and found on it these
words, Beloved, now are we the sons of God. -- But the rest said she "I cannot
remember." She desired her brother to take the scriptures and search, and see
of he could find such a passage there. He presently found it in 1 John iii. 2.
The whole passage is as follows, Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it
does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear, we
shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. The words when read to her,
seemed to remove her fears; she again took courage. Indeed it appears as if
this was a singular providence of God to communicate comfort to this afflicted
saint, in this hour of darkness and distress.

Saturday 23. She said Mamma, can you give me up? Her mother said, "Yes my
child, if it is the will of God!" She then asked for her father and put the
same question to him. She said, I feel as if I am going to heaven, and I want
you to meet me there. She exhorted him to redeem time; "Precious time!" said
she; and desired him to tell her brothers to redeem time, and meet her in
glory, for she did not think he should stay here long.

Her parents expecting her departure was near, sent for two of their sons and
families. When they arrived she reached them her hand, saying Here they come! I
wish I may see you all come so into heaven. One of her brothers asked her how
she was? She said Poorly in body, but happy in soul! Jesus is sweet in
affliction; and his love is wonderful; -- stronger than death. She then
requested them severally to try to meet her in glory, and on their promising
they would; she thanked God for the hope she had of meeting with them again,
"Where death shall all be done away,
"And bodies part no more."
She exhorted the children to be dutiful to their parents; and above all to try
and save their souls. Then exerting her little strength, addressed herself to
the bystanders in general, and entreated them to persevere; and pressed the
necessity of holiness, and a diligent use of the means of grace, with such
forcible language and melting expressions, as drew tears from their eyes in
abundance. One of those present, speaking of this solemn discourse says "I
think it will never be forgotten; it was truly loud preaching to me!"

Sunday, 24th. She lay still and said but little. The few words, however, that
dropped from her lips, were weighty and powerful, administering grace to the
hearers.

Monday, 25. Was nearly as the day before.

Tuesday 26. She complained a little of her mouth and throat, which were very
sore. To those who came to sit up with her in the evening she spoke most
feelingly and affectionately on the necessity of holiness; and earnestly
exhorted them to meet her in heaven. Observing one who made no profession of
religion, she took him by the hand and entreated him to seek the salvation of
his soul. Nor would she let him go till he gave her a promise that he would
fulfill her request.

Wednesday 27. The enemy of souls again thrust sore at her. She was now tempted
to think she had offended God by impatience; and so powerful was this
temptation that it destroyed her peace, and brought her to the border of
despair. To one of her brothers who visited her in this distress, she said,
"Brother, I have waded through deep waters since I saw you, and still I fear I
have not been enough resigned to the will of God." He told her this was the
travail of a christian, and encouraged her to look to God for deliverance. He
instanced the case of David, who, when the waves and the billows went over him,
cried out, "Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted
within me? Hope thou in God for I shall yet praise him." But she could take no
comfort from this, for the cloud still hovered over her mind. In the evening
many people came and offered their service to sit up. She thanked them and
said, "I hope the Lord will reward you for your kindness." And then entreated
them in the most endearing and affectionate manner to seek the salvation of
their souls; "For if I should miss of heaven (said she) I want you to get
there." From this it appears that she was not yet freed from the temptation
above mentioned. Her great resignation when so violently attacked by the devil
is peculiarly observable: For, when asked by one which she would choose, life or
death, she said "I will choose neither; the will of the Lord be done."

Thursday 28. She lay very still in the morning, said she felt very weary, and
her throat very sore: she was likewise so hoarse that it was with difficulty
she could be understood. The enemy in the mean time plied his fiery darts: and
a fear that she should miss of heaven at last, plunged her into the depth of
distress: -- But he, who permitted the trial of holy Job, and faithful Abraham;
-- that delivered Daniel in the lion's den, and Jonah in the whale's belly; --
now saw good to rebuke the tempter, and once more set her soul at liberty.

About 12 or 1 o'clock the cloud was dispelled, the darkness dispersed, her
fears and doubts removed, and heavenly light restored. The spirit of the Lord
came upon her, his glory shone round her, and heaven sprang up in her soul. Her
mourning was now turned into joy, her heaviness into happiness and her sorrow
to songs of praise. She began to exhort the family, encouraging and persuading
them to press on, and secure their eternal happiness. She told them of the
goodness of God; and the more she spoke of his goodness, the more of it seemed
poured down into her soul, till all her powers seemed lost in wonder, love and
praise.

At length reaching forth her trembling hand, she said, "I want my dear
sister;" and taking her by the hand, said farewell! you are my only sister; --
observing her sister to be bathed in tears, she said, "Weep not for me, for I
feel as if I am going to glory, and I want you to meet me there." She then took
leave of her father and mother in the same manner; then of the rest of the
family; leaving this charge with them all, "Try to meet me in glory." To her
brothers she said, "Take care of your children, and bring them up in the fear
of God; and don't forget to tell your other brother (who lived at a distance
and was not present) to do the same by his." Then turning to some of the
neighbors who were present, entreated them to meet her in glory, and then bid
them all an affectionate farewell.

She then lay still a while: but the nearer she approached the heavenly
Jerusalem, the more lively and clear her views were, of the glory of the place.
New discoveries, and still more glorious prospects, seemed to open to her view;
and her triumphant soul appeared to want nothing but wings: Indeed she seemed
insensible of her great weakness, and with a strength of voice that was truly
astonshing, cried out, "Jesus is come, and the glory of God shines brighter
than I ever saw it before. Why will you not help me to praise him? O that all
my neighbors were here, that I might tell them how good Jesus is." She would
extend her arms and say, "The door of mercy is yet open! Come, come for yet
there is room! and the Lord is willing to save your souls." Thus she continued
for a considerable length of time, rejoicing -- praising God -- and exhorting
the people. The solid, weighty and melting expressions, which dropped from her
lips at this time: -- the deep and genuine piety that they breathed: -- the
affectionate and pathetic manner in which she delivered them: -- and the
cheerfulness of her countenance during the whole time; were enough to strike
conviction into the hardest hearts. She continued happy all the afternoon, but
her bodily strength failed; and she lay still calmly resigned, and cheerfully
submissive to her fate.

Observing in the evening, among those who came to visit her, some whose states
she feared were dangerous; she did not sail to tell them "That she feared for
their souls!" And earnestly entreated them to seek and serve God. To one who
asked her how she was? she replied "poorly in body, but happy in soul! I wish
you could say so: you are a kind man, and have done me many favors, and never
denied me one: I have still one more to ask, and hope you will not deny me
that: -- It is that you will try to save your soul?" This last, important, and
dying request he durst not deny, but promised he would; which appeared to give
her much satisfaction. To another she said "Now is the time! and it is very
precious therefore redeem time and prepare for eternity."

These her dying requests, it is to be hoped were not in vain. Some good effects
have already appeared, and we trust that when her sleeping dust shall awake she
will find some, who through her importunate entreaties, were prevailed on to
seek and serve God, and will in consequence arise with her to a glorious
immortality.

Friday March 1. The soreness in her mouth and throat increased: and although
she was a remarkable instance of patience and resignation, yet at all times she
complained a little of this; though not from a murmuring or discontented
principle, for these were strangers to her breast.

The springs of life now sink apace, and the awful symptoms of approaching
death, discover themselves! What can be so desirable in such a situation, as an
assurance of the favor of God? This assurance she had been favored with the
preceding day in a very uncommon manner. But how dreadful the thought of losing
this in times of the greatest extremity? This, however distressing, appears to
have been the case: For, as she informed one, "she waded through deep waters
for some hours." But the God whom she served was able to deliver her, and would
not suffer her to be carried away of the flood. For although like one of old,
"the waters might come in to her very soul, yet was it for her good that
through suffering she might be made perfect: "That power at whose command the
thunders roll,
"Curbs the wild storm, and bids its fury cease;
"Can whisper comfort to the laboring soul,
"And hush its sorrows into lasting peace."


When, therefore, he whom the winds and the seas obey, shall speak the word,
all will be peace.

Saturday 2. After this severe storm had lasted for some hours, He who has
power to say, "Hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and here shall thy
proud wave be stayed," He said, " Peace! be still: and, indeed, there was a
great calm." She then dropped into a doze, and appeared to enjoy comfortable
rest in sleep for some time. When she awoke, she said to her mother, "I want
you to breakfast early," and being told that they had breakfasted, she said
very well." Her mother asked, "what do you want, my child?" She replied, "I
told you I should have three hard struggles, and then I should go: they are
over." Her mother said, "Do you dread death?" She said "not at all." After
lying still for some time, she said, "I feel strange; but I don't think I shall
die to day." This appeared strange to those present; one of whom says, "we were
expecting every moment to see her depart." She then closed her eyes and
appeared to doze, but soon after burst into raptures of praise, saying,
"wonderful, wonderful! Why don't you help me praise God?" She then asked for a
little water, to wash her mouth, that she might, as she said, "be the better
enabled to praise God."

She seemed, (during the time she appeared to doze) to have a view of, and
communion with some of the blessed inhabitants of the celestial world! This
will not appear strange when we consider that "they are ministering spirits,
sent forth to minister to the heirs of salvation." She had passed through many
severe conflicts, and had happily weathered the storms: Her patience had been
sufficiently proved; and her faith like gold seven times tried. She was now
just entering the conflict with her last enemy, " the King of Terrors:" And as
she had stood firm hitherto, her merciful and heavenly Father would not now
forsake her; for "right precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his
Saints." He, therefore, who has promised to be with his people, in, and through
the valley of the shadow of death, no doubt commissioned a convoy of these
ministering spirits to earth, with the pleasing and welcome news, "That her
warfare was accomplished, her trials at an end, and her soul called to receive
its reward. Indeed, it appears as if she was perfectly sensible, that such a
message was arrived, for she said with an audible voice, and with a pleasing
cheerful countenance, "Don't leave me, I will go with you." Which abundantly
manifested that the sting of death was quite destroyed, and her soul ripe for a
glorious immortality.

After taking a little refreshment, she desired the company present to sing an
hymn. She desired a book might be brought to her, and chose herself the
following words, which they sung, and she, though her voice was extremely weak,
joined with them in the praises of her great deliverer. These being the last
words in which she ever attempted to attune the praises of God here below, we
take the liberty of transcribing them.

1.
"O joyful sound of Gospel grace,
"Christ shall in me appear:
"I, even I shall see his face;
"I shall be holy here.
2.
"The glorious crown of righteousness,
"To me reached out I view;
"Conqueror through him I soon shall seize,
"And wear it as my due.
3.
"The promised land from Pisgah's top,
"I now exult to see;
"My hope is full, (Oh glorious hope!)
"Of immortality.
4.
"He visits now the house of clay;
"He shakes his future home:
"O would thou, Lord, on this glad day:
"Into thy temple come."
5.
"Come, O my God, thyself reveal!
"Fill all this mighty void:
"Thou only can my spirit fill:
"Come, O my God, my God!
6.
"Fulfill, fulfill, my large desires,
"Large as infinity!
"Give, give me all my soul requires,
"All, all that is in thee!"
Whoever considers the above words attentively, cannot but observe how
peculiarly applicable they were. They appear to be the language of a soul
standing on the border of eternity, looking over the narrow sea, death; and
viewing, by faith, the glories of the place, of which the earthly Canaan was
only a type. She appeared earnestly to desire to drop the clay tenement, and
and to be with Christ, which is far better.

After they had done singing the hymn, she continued rejoicing and talking of
God's goodness for some time, then dropped into a doze, and slept calmly for
about one hour; she then awoke with a shortness of breath, and frequently said
"Lord have Mercy on me." When asked what she wanted, she would say, "rest." The
pangs of death were now strong upon her, but she would frequently say, "My
suffering time will soon be over,
"When I shall sigh and weep no more."


Being asked by Mr. G --, how she was? replied, "Happy in God, and entirely
resigned to his will." What a comfort it is, (said one) to have such an
assurance! She said "Wonderful!, Wonderful!" One taking her leave of her said
"God bless you my child; if I never see you more on earth, I will try to meet
you in heaven." She said "where parting will be no more," and soon after slept
in Jesus, and her spirit went to rest, in the 27th year of her age.

Thus lived, and thus died that humble and devout follower of her Lord, a
remarkable instance of faith and patience. But -- O reader thou also must die!
This dreadful debt thou must surely pay! Art thou prepared, or art thou yet a
sinner? Resolve this question before it is too late. Dreadful! horribly
dreadful will it be to die without real religion! The many hard struggles this
young woman encountered will clearly evince, that death is no trifling thing!
Then to prevent a miserable death, take her advice, -- follow her example, --
and seek God with all your heart; So shall you die the death of the righteous,
and your last end shall be like here is.

FINIS.

