NOTES ON THE STATE OF VIRGINIA.

BY THOMAS JEFFERSON.

Second American Edition.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR MATTHEW CAREY, NO. 118, MARKET-STREET. NOVEMBER 12,
1794.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following Notes were written in Virginia, in the year 1781, and somewhat
corrected and enlarged in the winter of 1782, in answer to Queries proposed to
the Author, by a Foreigner of Distinction, then residing among us. The subjects
are all treated imperfectly; some scarcely touched on. To apologize for this by
developing the circumstances of the time and place of their composition, would
be to open wounds which have already bled enough. To these circumstances some
of their imperfections may with truth be ascribed; the great mass to the want
of information and want of talents in the writer. He had a few copies printed,
which he gave among his friends: and a translation of them has been lately
published in France, but with such alterations as the laws of the press in that
country rendered necessary. They are now offered to the public in their
original form and language.

Feb. 27, 1787.
CONTENTS.
1. BOUNDARIES of Virginia, Page 1 2. Rivers, 3 3. Seaports, 21 4. Mountains,
ibid. 5. Cascades, 26 6. Productions mineral, vegetable, and animal, 32 7.
Climate, 107 8. Population, 121 9. Military force, 130 10. Marine force 132 11.
Aborigines 133 12. Counties and towns, 152 13. Constitution, 154 14. Laws, 187
15. Colleges, buildings, and roads, 218 16. Proceedings as to Tories, 225 17.
Religion, 228 18. Manners, 236 19. Manufactures, 239 20. Subjects of commerce,
241 21. Weights, measures and money, 247 22. Public revenue and expenses, 249
23. Histories, memorials and state-papers, 256 Appendix, No. I. 293 -- No. II.
313 -- No. III. 333
map

QUERY I.
AN exact description of the limits and boundaries of the state of Virginia?

Virginia is bounded on the East by the Atlantic: on the North by a line of
latitude, crossing the Eastern Shore through Watkins's Point, being about 37.
57 North latitude; from thence by a straight line to Cinquac, near the mouth of
Patowmac; thence by the Patowmac, which is common to Virginia and Maryland, to
the first fountain of its northern branch; thence by a meridian line, passing
through that fountain till it intersects a line running East and West, in
latitude 39. 43. 42.4. which divides Maryland from Pennsylvania, and which was
marked by Messrs. Mason and Dixon; thence by that line, and a continuation of
it westwardly to the completion of five degrees of longitude from the eastern
boundary of Pennsylvania, in the same latitude, and thence by a meridian line
to the Ohio: on the West by the Ohio and Missisipi, to latitude 36. 30. North:
and on the South by the line of latitude last mentioned. By admeasurements
through nearly the whole of this last line, and supplying the unmeasured parts
from good data, the Atlantic and Missisipi are found in this latitude to be 758
miles distant, equal to 30. 38. of longitude, reckoning 55 miles and 3144 feet
to the degree. This being our comprehension of longitude, that of our latitude,
taken between this and Mason and Dixon's line, is 3 13. 42.4. equal to 223.3
miles, supposing a degree of a great circle to be 69 m. 864 f. as computed by
Cassini. These boundaries include an area somewhat triangular, of 121, 525
square miles, whereof 79,650 lie westward of the Alleghaney mountains, and
57,034 westward of the meridian of the mouth of the Great Kanhaway. This state
is therefore one third larger than the islands of Great Britain and Ireland,
which are reckoned at 88,357 square miles.

These limits result from, 1: The ancient charters from the crown of England.
2. The grant of Maryland to the Lord Baltimore, and the subsequent
determinations of the British court as to the extent of that grant. 3. The
grant of Pennsylvania to William Penn, and a compact between the general
assemblies of the commonwealths of Virginia and Pennsylvania as to the extent
of that grant. 4. The grant of Carolina, and actual location of its northern
boundary, by consent of both parties. 5. The treaty of Paris of 1763. 6. The
confirmation of the charters of the neighboring states by the convention of
Virginia at the time of constituting their commonwealth. 7. The cession made by
Virginia to Congress of all the lands to which they had title on the North side
of the Ohio.

QUERY II.
A NOTICE of its rivers, rivulets, and how far they are navigable?

An inspection of a map of Virginia, will give a better idea of the geography
of its rivers, than any description in writing. Their navigation may be
imperfectly noted.

Roanoke, so far as it lies within this state, is no where navigable, but for
canoes, or light batteaux; and, even for these, in such detached parcels as to
have prevented the inhabitants from availing themselves of it at all.

James River, and its waters, afford navigation as follows.

The whole of Elizabeth River, the lowest of those which run into James River,
is a harbor, and would contain upwards of 300 ships. The channel is from 150
to 200 fathom wide, and at common flood tide, affords 18 feet water to Norfolk.
The Strafford, a 60 gun ship, went there, lightening herself to cross the bar
at Sowell's Point. The Fire Rodrigue, pierced for 64 guns, and carrying 50,
went there without lightening. Craney island, at the mouth of this river,
commands its channel tolerably well.

Nansemond River is navigable to Sleepy Hole, for vessels of 250 tons; to
Suffolk, for those of 100 tons; and to Milner's, for those of 25.

Pagan Creek affords 8 or 10 feet water to Smithfield, which admits vessels of
20 tons.

Chickahominy has at its mouth a bar, on which is only 12 feet water at common
flood tide. Vessels passing that, may go 8 miles up the river; those of 10 feet
draught may go four miles further, and those of six tons burden, 20 miles
further.

Appamattox may be navigated as far as Broadways, by any vessel which has
crossed Harrison's bar in James River; it keeps 8 or 10 feet water a mile or
two higher up to Fisher's bar, and 4 feet on that and upwards to Petersburgh,
where all navigation ceases.

James River itself affords harbor for vessels of any size in Hampton Road,
but not in safety through the whole winter; and there is navigable water for
them as far as Mulberry Island. A 40 gun ship goes to James town, and,
lightening herself, may pass to Harrison's bar, on which there is only 15 feet
water. Vessels of 250 tons may go to Warwick; those of 125 go to Rocket's, a
mile below Richmond; from thence is about 7 feet water to Richmond; and about
the center of the town, four feet and a half, where the navigation is
interrupted by falls, which in a course of six miles, descend about 80 feet
perpendicular: above these it is resumed in canoes, and batteaux, and is
prosecuted safely and advantageously to within 10 miles of the Blue Ridge; and
even through the Blue Ridge a ton weight has been brought; and the expense
would not be great, when compared with its object, to open a tolerable
navigation up Jackson's river and Carpenter's creek, to within 25 miles of
Howard's creek of Green Briar, both of which have then water enough to float
vessels into the Great Kanhaway. In some future state of population, I think it
possible, that its navigation may also be made to interlock with that of the
Patowmac, and through that to communicate by a short portage with the Ohio. It
is to be noted, that this river is called in the maps James River, only to its
confluence with the Rivanna: thence to the Blue Ridge it is called the
Fluvanna; and thence to its source, Jackson's river. But in common speech, it
is called James River to its source.

The Rivanna, a branch of James River, is navigable for canoes and batteaux to
its intersection with the South West mountains, which is about 22 miles; and
may easily be opened to navigation through these mountains to its fork above
Charlottesville.

York River, at York town, affords the best harbor in the State for vessels of
the largest size. The river there narrows to the width of a mile, and is
contained within very high banks, close under which the vessels may ride. It
holds 4 fathom water at high tide for 25 miles above York to the mouth of
Poropotank, where the river is a mile and a half wide, and the channel only 75
fathom, and passing under a high bank. At the confluence of Pamunkey and
Mattapony, it is reduced to 3 fathom depth, which continues up Pamunkey to
Cumberland, where the width is 100 yards, and up Mattapony to within two miles
of Frazer's ferry, where it becomes 2 fathom deep, and holds that about five
miles. Pamunkey is then capable of navigation for loaded flats to Brockman's
bridge, fifty miles above Hanover town, and Mattapony to Downer's bridge, 70
miles above its mouth.

Piankatank, the little rivers making out of Mobjack Bay and those of the
Eastern shore, receive only very small vessels, and these can but enter them.

Rappahannock affords 4 fathom water to Hobb's hole, and 2 fathom from thence
to Fredericksburg.

Patowmac is 7 miles wide at the mouth; 4 at Nomony bay; 3 at Aquia; 1 at
Hallooing Point; 1 at Alexandria. Its soundings are, 7 fathom at the mouth; 5
at St. George's island; 4 at Lower Matchodic; 3 at Swan's point, and thence up
to Alexandria; thence 10 feet water to the falls, which are 13 miles above
Alexandria. These falls are 15 miles in length, and of very great descent, and
the navigation above them for batteaux and canoes, is so much interrupted as to
be little used. It is, however, used in a small degree up the Cohongoronta
branch as far as Fort Cumberland, which was at the mouth of Wills's creek; and
is capable, at no great expense, of being rendered very practicable. The
Shenandoah branch interlocks with James river about the Blue Ridge, and may
perhaps in future be opened.

The Missisipi will be one of the Principal channels of future commerce for the
country westward of the Alleghaney. From the mouth of this river to where it
receives the Ohio, is 1000 miles by water, but only 500 by land, passing
through the Chickasaw country. From the mouth of the Ohio to that of the
Missouri, is 230 miles by water, and 140 by land. From thence to the mouth of
the Illinois river, is about 25 miles. The Missisipi, below the mouth of the
Missouri, is always muddy, and abounding with sand bars, which frequently
change their places. However, it carries 15 feet water to the mouth of the
Ohio, to which place it is from one and a half to two miles wide, and thence to
Kaskaskia from one mile to a mile and a quarter wide. Its current is so rapid,
that it never can be stemmed by the force of the wind alone, acting on sails.
Any vessel, however, navigated with oars, may come up at any time, and receive
much aid from the wind. A batteau passes from the mouth of Ohio to the mouth of
Missisipi in three weeks, and is from two to three months getting up again.
During its floods, which are periodical as those of the Nile, the largest
vessels may pass down it, if their steerage can be insured. These floods begin
in April, and the river returns into its banks early in August. The inundation
extends further on the western than eastern side, covering the lands in some
places for 50 miles from its banks. Above the mouth of the Missouri, it becomes
much such a river as the Ohio, like it clear, and gentle in its current, not
quite so wide, the period of its floods nearly the same, but not rising to so
great a height. The streets of the village at Cohoes are not more than 10 feet
above the ordinary level of the water, and yet were never overflowed. Its bed
deepens every year. Cohoes, in the memory of many people now living, was
insulated by every flood of the river. What was the eastern channel has now
become a lake, 9 miles in length and one in width, into which the river at this
day never flows. This river yields turtle of a peculiar kind, perch, trout,
gar, pike, mullets, herrings, carp, spatula-fish of 50lb. weight, cat-fish of
100lb. weight, buffalo fish, and sturgeon. Aligators or crocodiles have been
seen as high up as the Acansas. It also abounds in herons, cranes, ducks,
brant, geese, and swans. Its passage is commanded by a fort established by this
state, five miles below the mouth of Ohio, and ten miles above the Carolina
boundary.

The Missouri, since the treaty of Paris, the Illinois and northern branches of
the Ohio, since the cession to Congress, are no longer within our limits. Yet
having been so heretofore, and still opening to us channels of extensive
communication with the western and north-western country, they shall be noted
in their order.

The Missouri is, in fact, the principal river, contributing more to the common
stream than does the Missisipi, even after its junction with the Illinois. It
is remarkably cold, muddy and rapid. Its overflowings are considerable. They
happen during the months of June and July. Their commencement being so much
later than those of the Missisipi, would induce a belief that the sources of
the Missouri are northward of those of the Missisipi, unless we suppose that
the cold increases again with the ascent of the land from the Missisipi
westwardly. That this ascent is great, is proved by the rapidity of the river.
Six miles above the mouth it is brought within the compass of a quarter of a
mile's width: yet the Spanish merchants at Pancore, or St. Louis, say they go
two thousand miles up it. It heads far westward of the Rio Norte, or North
River. There is, in the villages of Kaskaskia, Cohoes and St. Vincennes, no
inconsiderable quantity of plate, said to have been plundered during the last
war by the Indians from the churches and private houses of Santa Fe, on the
North river, and brought to these villages for sale. From the mouth of Ohio to
Santa Fe are forty days journey, or about 1000 miles. What is the shortest
distance between the navigable waters of the Missouri, and those of the North
river, or how far this is navigable above Santa Fe, I could never learn. From
Santa Fe to its mouth in the Gulf of Mexico is about 1200 miles. The road from
New Orleans to Mexico crosses this river at the post of Rio Norte, 800 miles
below Santa Fe: and from this post to New Orleans is about 1200 miles; thus
making 2000 miles between Santa Fe and New Orleans, passing down the North
river, Red river and Missisipi; whereas it is 2230 through the Missouri and
Missisipi. From the same post of Rio Norte, passing near the mines of La Sierra
and Laiguana, which are between the North river and the river Salina to
Sarti^^^ is 375 miles; and from thence, passing the mines of Char^as,
Zaccatecas and Potosi, to the city of Mexico is 375 miles; in all, 1550 miles
from Santa Fe to the city of Mexico. From New Orleans to the city of Mexico is
about 1950 miles: the roads, after setting out from the Red river, near
Natchitoches, keeping generally parallel with the coast, and about two hundred
miles from it, till it enters the city of Mexico.

The Illinois is a fine river, clear, gentle, and without rapids; insomuch that
it is navigable for batteaux to its source. From thence is a portage of two
miles only to the Chickago, which affords a batteau navigation of 16 miles to
its entrance into lake Michigan. The Illinois, about 10 miles above its mouth,
is 300 yards wide.

The Kaskaskia is 100 yards wide at its entrance into the Missisipi, and
preserves that breadth to the Buffalo plains, 70 miles above. So far also it is
navigable for loaded batteaux, and perhaps much further. It is not rapid.

The Ohio is the most beautiful river on earth. Its current gentle, waters
clear, and bosom smooth and unbroken by rocks and rapids, a single instance
only excepted.

It is of a mile wide at Fort Pit:

500 yards at the mouth of the Great Kanhaway:

1 mile and ^5 pules at Louisville:

of a mile on the rapids, three or four miles below Louisville:

a mile where the low country begins, which is 20 miles above Green river:

1 at the receipt of the Tanissee:

And a mile wide at the mouth.

Its length (...) measured according to its meanders by Capt. Hutchins, is as
follows:

From Fort Pit

Miles. To Log's (...) 18 Big Beaver creek 10 Little Beaver creek 13 Yellow
creek 11 Two creeks 21 Long reach 53(...) End Long reach 16(...) Muskingum 25
Little Kanhaway 12(...) Hockhocking 16 Great Kanhaway 82(...) Guiandot 43 Sandy
creek 14 Sioto 48 Miles. Little Miami 126 Licking creek 8 Great Miami 26 Big
Bones 32 Kentucky 4^ Rapids 77(...); Low country 155 Buffalo river 64 Wabash 97
Big Cave 42 Shawanee river 52 Cher^kee river 13 Massac 11 Missisipi 46 1188

In common winter and spring tides it affords 15 feet water to Louisville, 10
feet to Le Tarte's rapids, 40 miles above the mouth of the Great Kanhaway, and
a sufficiency at all times for light batteaux and canoes to Fort Pit. The
rapids are in latitude 38 8. The inundations of this river begin about the last
of March, and subside in July. During these a first rate man of war may be
carried from Louisville to New Orleans, if the sudden turns of the river and
the strength of its current will admit a safe steerage. The rapids at
Louisville descend about 30 feet in a length of a mile and a half. The bed of
the river there is a solid rock, and is divided by an island into two branches,
the southern of which is about 200 yards wide, and is dry four months in the
year. The bed of the northern branch is worn into channels by the constant
course of the water, and attrition of the pebble stones carried on with that,
so as to be passable for batteaux through the greater part of the year. Yet it
is thought that the southern arm may be the most easily opened for constant
navigation. The rise of the waters in these rapids does not exceed 10 or 12
feet. A part of this island is so high as to have been never overflowed, and to
command the settlement at Louisville, which is opposite to it. The sort,
however, is situated at the head of the falls. The ground on the south side
rises very gradually.

The Tanissee, Cherokee or Hogohege river is 600 yards wide at its mouth, of a
mile at the mouth of Holston, and 200 yards at Chotee, which is 20 miles above
Holston, and 300 miles above the mouth of the Tanissee. This river crosses the
southern boundary of Virginia, 58 miles from the Missisipi. Its current is
moderate. It is navigable for loaded boats of any burden to the Muscle shoals,
where the river passes through the Cumberland mountain. These shoals are 6 or 8
miles long, passable downwards for loaded canoes, but not upwards, unless there
be a swell in the river. Above these the navigation for loaded canoes and
batteaux continues to the Long island. This river has its inundations also.
Above the Chickamogga towns is a whirlpool called the Sucking-pot, which takes
in trunks of trees or boats, and throws them out again half a mile below. It is
avoided by keeping very close to the bank, on the South side. There are but a
few miles portage between a branch of this river and the navigable waters of
the river Mobile, which runs into the Gulf of Mexico.

Cumberland, or Shawanee river, intersects the boundary between Virginia and
North Carolina 67 miles from the Missisipi, and again 198 miles from the same
river, a little above the entrance of Obey's river into the Cumberland. Its
Clear fork crosses the same boundary about 300 miles from the Missisipi.
Cumberland is a very gentle stream, navigable for loaded batteaux 800 miles,
without interruption; then intervene some rapids of 15 miles in length, after
which it is again navigable 70 miles upwards, which brings you within 10 miles
of the Cumberland mountains. It is about 120 yards wide through its whole
course, from the head of its navigation to its mouth.

The Wabash is a very beautiful river, 400 yards wide at the mouth, and 300 at
St. Vincennes, which is a post 100 miles above the mouth, in a direct line.
Within this space there are two small rapids, which give very little
obstruction to the navigation. It is 400 yards wide at the mouth, and navigable
30 leagues upwards for canoes and small boats. From the mouth of Maple river to
that of Eel river is about 80 miles in a direct line, the river continuing
navigable, and from one to two hundred yards in width. The Eel river is 150
yards wide, and affords at all times navigation for periaguas, to within 18
miles of the Miami of the Lake. The Wabash, from the mouth of Eel river to
Little river, a distance of 50 miles direct, is interrupted with frequent
rapids and shoals, which obstruct the navigation, except in a swell. Little
river affords navigation during a swell to within 3 miles of the Miami, which
thence affords a similar navigation into Lake Erie, 100 miles distant in a
direct line. The Wabash overflows periodically in correspondence with the Ohio,
and in some places two leagues from its banks.

Green River is navigable for loaded batteaux at all times 50 miles upwards;
but it is then interrupted by impassable rapids, above which the navigation
again commences, and continues good 30 or 40 miles to the mouth of Barren river.

Kentucky River is 90 yards wide at the mouth, and also at Boonsborough, 80
miles above. It affords a navigation for loaded batteaux 180 miles in a direct
line, in the winter tides.

The Great Miami of the Ohio, is ^00 yards wide at the mouth. At the Piccawee
towns, 75 miles above, it is reduced to 30 yards, it is, neverthless, navigable
for loaded canoe^ 50 miles above these towns. The portage from its western
branch into the Miami of Lake Erie, is 5 miles; that from its eastern branch
into ^andusky river, is of 9 miles.

Salt River is at all times navigable for loaded batteaux 70 or 80 miles. It is
80 yards wide at its mouth, and keeps that width to its fork, 25 miles above.

The Little Miami of the Ohio, is 60 or 70 yards wide at its mouth, 60 miles to
its source, and affords no navigation.

The Sioto is 250 yards wide at its mouth, which is in latitude 38 22. and at
the Saltilick towns, 200 miles above the mouth, it is yet 100 yards wide. To
these towns it is navigable for loaded batteaux, and its eastern branch affords
navigation almost to its source.

Great Sandy River is about sixty yards wide, and navigable sixty miles for
loaded batteaux.

Guiandot is about the width of the river last mentioned, but is more rapid. It
may be navigated by canoes 60 miles.

The Great Kanhaway is a river of considerable note for the fertility of its
lands, and still more, as leading toward the head waters of James river.
Nevertheless, it is doubtful whether its great and numerous rapids will admit a
navigation, but at an expense to which it will require ages to render its
inhabitants equal. The great obstacles begin at what are called the Great
Falls, 90 miles above the mouth, below which are only five or six rapids, and
these passable, with some difficulty, even at low water. From the falls to the
mouth of Greenb^ar is 100 miles, and thence to the lead mines 120. It is 280
yards wide at its mouth.

Hockhocking is 80 yards wide at its mouth, and yields navigation for loaded
batteaux to the Pressplace, 60 miles above its mouth.

The Little Kanhaway is 150 yards wide at the mouth. It yields a navigation of
10 miles only. Perhaps its northern branch, called Junius's creek, which
interlocks with the western of Monongahela, may one day admit a shorter passage
from the latter into the Ohio.

The Muskingum is 280 yards wide at its mouth, and 200 yards at the lower
Indian towns, 150 miles upwards. It is navigable for small batteaux to within
one mile of a navigable part of Cayahoga river, which runs into Lake Erie.

At Fort Pit the river Ohio loses its name, branching into the Monongahela and
Alleghaney.

The Monongahela is 400 yards wide at its mouth. From thence is 12 or 15 miles
to the mouth of Yohoganey, where it is 300 yards wide. Thence to Redstone by
water is 50 miles, by land 30. Then to the mouth of Cheat river by water 40
miles, by land 28, the width continuing at 300 yards, and the navigation good
for boats. Thence the width is about 200 yards to the western fork, 50 miles
higher, and the navigation frequently interrupted by rapids, which however with
a swell of two or three feet become very passable for boats. It then admits
light boats, except in dry seasons, 65 miles further to the head of Tygart's
valley, presenting only some small rapids and falls of one or two feet
perpendicular, and lessening in its width to 20 yards. The Western fork is
navigable in the winter 10 or 15 miles toward the northern of the Little
Kanhaway, and will admit a good wagon road to it. The Yohoganey is the
principal branch of this river. It passes through the Laurel mountain, about 30
miles from its mouth; is so far from 300 to 150 yards wide, and the navigation
much obstructed in dry weather by rapids and shoals. In its passage through the
mountain it makes very great falls, admitting no navigation for 10 miles to the
Turkey Foot. Thence to the Great Crossing, about 20 miles, it is again
navigable, except in dry seasons, and at this place is 200 yards wide. The
sources of this river are divided from those of the Patowmac by the Alleghaney
mountain. From the falls, where it intersects the Laurel mountain, to Fort
Cumberland, the head of the navigation on the Patowmac, is 40 miles of very
mountainous road. Wills's creek, at the mouth of which was Fort Cumberland, is
30 or 40 yards wide, but affords no navigation as yet. Cheat river, another
considerable branch of the Monongahela, is 200 yards wide at its mouth, and 100
yards at the Dunkards' settlement, 50 miles higher. It is navigable for boats,
except in dry seasons. The boundary between Virginia and Pennsylvania crosses
it about 3 or 4 miles above its mouth.

The Alleghaney river, with a slight swell, affords navigation for light
batteaux to Venango, at the mouth of French creek, where it is 200 yards wide;
and it is practiced even to Le Boeuf, from whence there is a portage of 15
miles to Presque Isle on Lake Erie.

The country watered by the Missisipi and its eastern branches, constitutes
five-eighths of the United States, two of which five-eighths are occupied by
the Ohio and its waters: the residuary streams which run into the Gulf of
Mexico, the Atlantic, and the St. Laurence, water the remaining three-eighths.

Before we quit the subject of the western waters, we will take a view of their
principal connexions with the Atlantic. These are three; the Hudson's river,
the Patowmac, and the Missisipi itself. Down the last will pass all heavy
commodities. But the navigation through the Gulf of Mexico is so dangerous,
and that up the Missisipi so difficult and tedious, that it is thought probable
that European merchandise will not return through that channel. It is most
likely that flour, timber, and other heavy articles will be floated on rafts,
which will themselves be an article for sale as well as their loading, the
navigators returning by land or in light batteaux. There will therefore be a
competition between the Hudson and Patowmac rivers for the residue of the
commerce of all the country westward of Lake Erie, on the waters of the lakes,
of the Ohio, and upper parts of the Missisipi. To go to New York, that part of
the trade which comes from the lakes or their waters must first be brought into
Lake Erie. Between Lake Superior and its waters and Huron are the rapids of St.
Mary, which will permit boats to pass, but not larger vessels. Lakes Huron and
Michigan afford communication with Lake Erie by vessels of 8 feet draft. That
part of the ^rade which comes from the waters of the Missisipi must pass from
them through some portage into the waters of the lakes. The portage from the
Illinois river into a water of Michigan is of one mile only. From the Wabash,
Miami, Muskingum, or Alleghaney, are portages into the waters of Lake Erie, of
from one to 15 miles. When the commodities are brought into, and have passed
through Lake Erie, there is between that and Ontario an interruption by the
falls of Niagara, where the portage is of 8 miles; and between Ontario and the
Hudson's river are portages at the falls of Onondago, a little above Oswego, of
a quarter of a mile; from Wood creek to the Mohawks river two miles; at the
little falls of the Mohawks river half a mile, and from Schenectady to Albany
16 miles. Besides the increase of expense occasioned by frequent change of
carriage, there is an increased risk of pillage produced by committing
merchandise to a greater number of hands successively. The Patowmac offers
itself under the following circumstances. For the trade of the lakes and their
waters westward of Lake Erie, when it shall have entered that lake, it must
coast along its southern shore, on account of the number and excellence of its
harbors; the northern, though shortest, having few harbors, and these unsafe.
Having reached Cayahoga, to proceed on to New York it will have 825 miles and
five portages; whereas it is but 425 miles to Alexandria, its emporium on the
Patowmac, if it turns into the Cayahoga, and passes through that, Bigbeaver,
Ohio, Yohoganey, (or Monongahela and Cheat) and Patowmac, and there are but two
portages; the first of which between Cayahoga and Beaver may be removed by
uniting the sources of these waters, which are lakes in the neighborhood of
each other, and in a champaign country; the other from the waters of Ohio to
Patowmac will be from 15 to 40 miles, according to the trouble which shall be
taken to approach the two navigations. For the trade of the Ohio, or that which
shall come into it from its own waters or the Missisipi, it is nearer through
the Patowmac to Alexandria than to New York by 580 miles, and it is interrupted
by one portage only. There is another circumstance of difference too. The lakes
themselves never freeze, but the communications between them freeze, and the
Hudson's river is itself shut up by the ice three months in the year; whereas
the channel to the Chesapeak leads directly into a warmer climate. The southern
parts of it very rarely freeze at all, and whenever the northern do, it is so
near the sources of the rivers, that the frequent floods to which they are
there liable, break up the ice immediately, so that vessels may pass through
the whole winter, subject only to accidental and short delays. Add to all this,
that in case of a war with our neighbors, the Anglo-Americans or the Indians,
the route to New York becomes a frontier through almost its whole length, and
all commerce through it ceases from that moment. But the channel to New York is
already known to practice; whereas the upper waetrs of the Ohio and the
Patowmac, and the great falls of the latter, are yet to be cleared of their
fixed obstructions. (A.)

QUERY III.
A NOTICE of the best Seaports of the state, and how big are the vessels they
can receive?

Having no ports but our rivers and creeks, this Query has been answered under
the preceding one.

QUERY IV.
A NOTICE of its Mountains?

For the particular geography of our mountains I must refer to Fry and
Jefferson's map of Virginia; and to Evans's analysis of his map of America, for
a more philosophical view of them than is to be found in any other work. It is
worthy notice, that our mountains are not solitary and scattered confusedly
over the face of the country; but that they commence at about 150 miles from
the seacoast, are disposed in ridges one behind another, running nearly
parallel with the seacoast, though rather approaching it as they advance
north-eastwardly. To the south-west, as the tract of country between the
seacoast and the Missisipi becomes narrower, the mountains converge into a
single ridge, which, as it approaches the Gulf of Mexico, subsides into plain
country, and gives rise to some of the waters of that gulf, and particularly
to a river called the Apalachicola, probably from the Apalachies, an Indian
nation formerly residing on it. Hence the mountains giving rise to that river,
and seen from its various parts, were called the Apalachian mountains, being in
fact the end or termination only of the great ridges passing through the
continent. European geographers however extended the name northwardly as far as
the mountains extended; some giving it, after their separation into different
ridges, to the Blue ridge, others to the North mountain, others to the
Alleghaney, others to the Laurel ridge, as may be seen in their different maps.
But the fact I believe is, that none of these ridges were ever known by that
name to the inhabitants, either native or emigrant, but as they saw them so
called in European maps. In the same direction generally are the veins of
limestone, coal, and other minerals hitherto discovered: and so range the falls
of our great rivers. But the courses of the great rivers are at right angles
with these. James and Patowmac penetrate through all the ridges of mountains
castward of the Alleghaney; that is broken by no water course. It is in fact
the spine of the country between the Atlantic on one side, and the Missisipi
and St. Laurence on the other. The passage of the Patowmac through the Blue
ridge is perhaps one of the most stupendous scenes in nature. You stand on a
very high point of land. On your right comes up the Shenandoah, having ranged
along the foot of the mountain an hundred miles to seek a vent. On your left
approaches the Patowmac, in quest of a passage also. In the moment of their
junction they rush together against the mountain, rend it asunder, and pass off
to the sea. The first glance of this scene hurries our senses into the opinion,
that this earth has been created in time, that the mountains were formed first,
that the rivers began to flow afterward, that in this place particularly they
have been dammed up by the Blue ridge of mountains, and have formed an ocean
which filled the whole valley; that continuing to rise they have at length
broken over at this spot, and have torn the mountain down from its summit to
its base. The piles of rock on each hand, but particularly on the Shenandoah,
the evident marks of their disrupture and avulsion from their beds by the most
powerful agents of nature, corroborate the impression. But the distant
finishing which nature has given to the picture, is of a very different
character. It is a true contrast to the fore-ground. It is as placid and
delightful, as that is wild and tremendous. For the mountain being cloven
asunder, she presents to your eye, through the cleft, a small catch of smooth
blue horizon, at an infinite distance in the plain country, inviting you, as it
were, from the riot and tumult roaring around, to pass through the breach and
participate of the calm below. Here the eye ultimately composes itself; and
that way too the road happens actually to lead. You cross the Patowmac above
the junction, pass along its side through the base of the mountain for three
miles, its terrible precipices hanging in fragments over you, and within about
20 miles reach Fredericktown, and the fine country round that. This scene is
worth a voyage across the Atlantic. Yet here, as in the neighborhood of the
Natural Bridge, are people who have passed their lives within half a dozen
miles, and have never been to survey these monuments of a war between rivers
and mountains, which must have shaken the earth itself to its center. (B.)

The height of our mountains has not yet been estimated with any degree of
exactness. The Alleghaney being the great ridge which divides the waters of the
Atlantic from those of the Missisipi, its summit is doubtless more elevated
above the ocean than that of any other mountain. But its relative height,
compared with the base on which it stands, is not so great as that of some
others, the country rising behind the successive ridges like the steps of
stairs. The mountains of the Blue ridge, and of these the Peaks of Otter, are
thought to be of a greater height, measured from their base, than any others in
our country, and perhaps in North America. From data, which may found a
tolerable conjecture, we suppose the highest peak to be about 4000 feet
perpendicular, which is not a fifth part of the height of the mountains of
South America, nor one third of the height which would be necessary in our
latitude to preserve ice in the open air unmelted through the year. The ridge
of mountains next beyond the Blue ridge, called by us the North mountain, is of
the greatest extent; for which reason they were named by the Indians the
Endless mountains.

A substance, supposed to be Pumice, found floating on the Missisippi, has
induced a conjecture, that there is a volcano on some of its waters: and as
these are mostly known to their sources, except the Missouri, our expectations
of verifying the conjecture would of course be led to the mountains which
divided the waters of the Mexican Gulf from those of the South Sea; but no
volcano having ever yet been known at such a distance from the sea, we must
rather suppose that this floating substance has been erroneously deemed Pumice.

QUERY V.
ITS Cascades and Caverns?

The only remarkable Cascade in this country, is that of the Falling Spring in
Augusta. It is a water of James' river, where it is called Jackson's river,
rising in the warm spring mountains, about twenty miles south west of the warm
spring, and flowing into that valley. About three quarters of a mile from its
source, it falls over a rock 200 feet into the valley below. The sheet of water
is broken in its breadth by the rock, in two or three places, but not at all in
its height. Between the sheet and the rock, at the bottom, you may walk across
dry. This cataract will bear no comparison with that of Niagara, as to the
quantity of water composing it; the sheet being only 12 or 15 feet wide above,
and somewhat more spread below; but it is half as high again, the latter being
only 156 feet, according to the mensuration made by order of M. Vaudreuil,
Governor of Canada, and 130 according to a more recent account.

In the limestone country, there are many caverns of very considerable extent.
The most noted is called Madison's Cave, and is on the north side of the Blue
ridge, near the intersection of the Rockingham and Augusta line with the south
fork of the southern river of Shenandoah. It is in a hill of about 200 feet
perpendicular height, the ascent of which, on one side, is so steep, that you
may pitch a biscuit from its summit into the river which washes its base. The
entrance of the cave is, in this side, about two thirds of the way up. It
extends into the earth about 300 feet, branching into subordinate caverns,
sometimes ascending a little, but more generally descending, and at length
terminates, in two different places, at basins of water of unknown extent, and
which I should judge to be nearly on a level with the water of the river;
however, I do not think they are formed by refluent water from that, because
they are never turbid; because they do not rise and fall in correspondence with
that in times of flood, or of drought; and because the water is always cool. It
is probably one of the many reservoirs with which the interior parts of the
earth are supposed to abound, and which yield supplies to the fountains of
water, distinguished from others only by its being accessible. The vault of
this cave is of solid limestone, from 20 to 40 or 50 feet high, through which
water is continually percolating. This, trickling down the sides of the cave,
has incrusted them over in the form of elegant drapery; and dripping from the
top of the vault generates on that, and on the base below, stalactites of a
conical form, some of which have met, and formed massive columns.

An eye draught of Madison's cave, on a scale of 50 feet to the inch. The
arrows show (...) it descends or ascends.


Another of these caves is near the North mountain, in the county of Frederic,
on the lands of Mr. Zane. The entrance into this is on the top of an extensive
ridge. You descend 30 or 40 feet, as into a well, from whence the cave then
extends, nearly horizontally, 400 feet into the earth, preserving a breadth of
from 20 to 50 feet, and a height of from 5 to 12 feet. After entering this cave
a few feet, the mercury, which in the open air was at 50. rose to 57. of
Farenheit's thermometer, answering to 11. of Reaumur's, and it continued at
that to the remotest parts of the cave. The uniform temperature of the cellars
of the observatory of Paris, which are 90 feet deep, and of all subterraneous
cavities of any depth, where no chemical agents may be supposed to produce a
factitious heat, has been found to be 10. of (...), equal to 54* of Farenheit.
The temperature of the cave abovementioned so nearly corresponds with this,
that the difference may be ascribed to a difference of instruments.

At the Panther gap, in the ridge which divides the waters of the Cow and the
Calf pasture, is what is called the Blowing cave. It is in the side of a hill,
is of about 100 feet diameter, and emits constantly a current of air, of such
force, as to keep the weeds prostrate to the distance of twenty yards before
it. This current is strongest in dry, frosty weather, and in long spells of
rain weakest. Regular inspirations and exspirations of air, by caverns and
fissures, have been probably enough accounted for, by supposing them combined
with intermitting fountains; as they must of course inhale air while their
reservoirs are emptying themselves, and again emit it while they are filling.
But a constant issue of air, only varying in its force as the weather is drier
or damper, will require a new hypothesis. There is another blowing cave in the
Cumberland mountain, about a mile from where it crosses the Carolina line. All
we know of this is, that it is not constant, and that a fountain of water
issues from it.

The Natural Bridge, the most sublime of nature's works, though not
comprehended under the present head, must not be pretermitted. It is on the
ascent of a hill, which seems to have been cloven through its length by some
great convulsion. The fissure, just at the bridge, is, by some admeasurements,
270 feet deep, by others only 205. It is about 45 feet wide at the bottom, and
90 feet at the top; this of course determines the length of the bridge, and its
height from the water. Its breadth in the middle, is about 60 feet, but more at
the ends, and the thickness of the mass, at the summit of the arch, about 40
feet. A part of this thickness is constituted by a coat of earth, which gives
growth to many large trees. The residue, with the hill on both sides, is one
solid rock of limestone. -- The arch approaches the semi-elliptical form; but
the larger axis of the ellipsis, which would be the cord of the arch, is many
times longer than the transverse. Though the sides of this bridge are provided
i^ some parts with a parapet of fixed rocks, yet few men have resolution to
walk to them, and look over into the abyss. You involuntarily fall on your
hands and feet, creep to the parapet, and peep over it. Looking down from this
height about a minute, gave me a violent headache. If the view from the top be
painful and intolerable, that from below is delightful in an equa^ extreme. It
is impossible for the emotions arising from the sublime, to be felt beyond what
they are here: so beautiful an arch, so elevated, so light, and springing as it
were up to heaven! the rapture of the spectator is really indescribable! The
fissure continuing narrow, deep, and straight, for a considerable distance
above and below the bridge, opens a short but very pleasing view of the North
mountain on one side, and Blue ridge on the other, at the distance each of them
of about five miles. This bridge is in the county of Rockbridge, to which it
has given name, and affords a public and commodious passage over a valley,
which cannot be crossed elsewhere for a considerable distance. The stream
passing under it is called Cedarcreek. It is a water of James' river, and
sufficient in the driest seasons to turn a grist-mill, though its fountain is
not more than two miles above. Don Ulloa mentions a break, similar to this, in
the province of Angarae^, in South America. It is from 16 to 22 feet wide, 111
feet deep, and of 1.3 miles continuance, English measure. Its breadth at top is
not sensibly greater than at bottom. But the following fact is remarkable, and
will furnish some light for conjecturing the probable origin of our (...)
bridge. 'Esta caxa, o cause esta cortada en pena viva con tanta precision, ^ue
las (...) del un lado entrantes, corresponden a las del (...) lado salientes,
como (...) se hubiese abierto expresamente, con sus bueltas^^y tortuosid^des,
p^^a darle transito a los aguas por enter los dos murallones que la forman;
siendo tal su igualdad, que si Hega^en a juntarse se endentarian uno con (...)
sin de^^ar hueco." Not. Amer. 11. 10. Don Ulloa inclines to the opinion, that
this channel has been effected by the wearing of the water which runs through
it, rather than that the mountain should have been broken open by any
convulsion of nature. But if it had been worn by the running of water, would
not the rocks which form the sides, have been worn plane? or if, meeting in
some parts with veins of harder stone, the water had left prominences on the
one side, would not the same cause have sometimes, or perhaps generally,
occasioned prominences on the other side also? Yet Don Ulloa tells us, that on
the other side there are always corresponding cavities, and that these tally
with the prominences so perfectly, that, were the two sides to come together,
they would fit in all their indentures, without leaving any void. I think that
this does not resemble the effect of running water, but look^ rather as if the
two sides had parted asunder. The sides of the break, over which is the natural
bridge of Virginia, consisting of a veiny rock which yields to time, the
correspondence between the salient and re-entering inequalities, if it existed
at all, has now disappeared. This break has the advantage of the one described
by Don Ulloa in its finest circumstance; no portion in that instance having
held together, during the separation of the other parts, so (...) to form a
bridge over the abyss.


QUERY VI.
A NOTICE of the mines and other subterraneous riches; its trees, plants,
fruits, etc.

I knew a single instance of gold found in this state. It was interspersed in
small specks through a lump of ore, of about four pounds weight, which yielded
seventeen pennyweight of gold, of extraordinary ductility. This ore was found
on the north side of Rappahanoc, about four miles below the falls. I never
heard of any other indication of gold in its neighborhood.

On the great Kanhaway, opposite to the mouth of Cripple creek, and about
twenty five miles from our southern boundary, in the county of Montgomery, are
mines of lead. The metal is mixed, sometimes with earth, and sometimes with
rock, which requires the force of gunpowder to open it; and is accompanied with
a portion of silver, too small to be worth separation under any process
hitherto attempted there. The proportion yielded is from 50 to 80lb. of pure
metal from 100lb. of washed ore. The most common is that of 60 to the 100lb.
The veins are at sometimes most flattering; at others they disappear suddenly
and totally. They enter the side of the hill, and proceed horizontally. Two of
them are wrought at present by the public, the best of of which is 100 yards
under the hill. These would employ about 50 laborers to advantage. We have
not, however, more than 30 generally, and these cultivate their own corn. They
have produced 60 tons of (...) in the year; but the general quantity is from 20
to 25 tons. The present furnace is a mile from the ore bank, and on the
opposite side of the river. The ore is first waggoned to the river, a quarter
of a mile, then laden on board of canoes, and carried across the river, which
is there about 200 yards wide, and then again taken into wagons and carried to
the furnace. This mode was originally adopted, that they might avail themselves
of a good situation on a creek, for a pounding mill: but it would be easy to
have the furnace and pounding mill on the same side of the river, which would
yield water, without any dam, by a canal of about half a mile in length. From
the furnace the lead is transported 130 miles along a good road, leading
through the peaks of Otter to Lynch's ferry, or Winston's, on James' river,
from whence it is carried by water about the same distance to Westham. This
land carriage may be greatly shortened, by delivering the lead on James' river,
above the blue ridge, from whence a ton weight has been brought on two canoes.
The great Kanhaway has considerable falls in the neighborhood of the mines.
About seven miles below are three falls, of three or four feet perpendicular
each; and three miles above is a rapid of three miles continuance, which has
been compared in its descent to the great falls of James' river. Yet it is the
opinion, that they may be laid open for useful navigation, so as to reduce very
much the portage between the Kanhaway and James' river.

A valuable lead mine is said to have been lately discovered in Cumberland,
below the mouth of Red river. The greatest, however, known in the western
country, are on the Mississippi, extending from the mouth of Rock river 150
miles upwards. These are not wrought, the lead used in that country being from
the banks on the Spanish side of the Mississippi, opposite to Kaskaskia.

A mine of copper was once opened in the county of Amherst, on the north side
of James' river, and another in the opposite country, on the south side.
However, either from bad management or the poverty of the veins, they were
discontinued. We are told of a rich mine of native copper on the Ouabache,
below the upper Wiaw.

The mines of iron worked at present are Callaway's, Ross's, and Ballendine's,
on the south side of James' river; Old's on the north side, in Albemarle;
Miller's in Augusta, and Zane's in Frederic. These two last are in the valley
between the Blue ridge and North mountain. Callaway's, Ross's, Miller's, and
Zane's, make about 150 tons of bar iron each, in the year. Ross's makes also
about 1600 tons of pig iron annually; Ballendine's 1000; Callaway's, Millar's,
and Zane's, about 600 each. Besides these, a forge of Mr. Hunter's, at
Fredericksburgh, makes about 300 tons a year of bar iron, from pigs imported
from Maryland; and Taylor's forge on Neapsco of Potowmac, works in the same
way, but to what extent I am not informed. The indications of iron in other
places are numerous, and dispersed through all the middle country. The
toughness of the cast iron of Ross's and Zane's furnaces is very remarkable.
Pots and other utensils, cast thinner than usual, of this iron, may be safely
thrown into, or out of the wagons in which they are transported. Saltpans made
of the same, and no longer wanted for that purpose, cannot be broken up, in
order to be melted again, unless previously drilled in many parts.

In the western country, we are told of iron mines between the Muskingum and
Ohio; of others on Kentucky, between the Cumberland and Barren rivers, between
Cumberland and Tennassee, on Reedy creek, near the Long island, and on Chestnut
creek, a branch of the Great Kanhaway, near where it crosses the Carolina line.
What are called the iron banks, on the Mississippi, are believed, by a good
judge, to have no iron in them. In general, from what is hitherto known of that
country, it seems to want iron.

Considerable quantities of black lead are taken occasionally for use from
Winterham, in the county of Amelia. I am not able, however, to give a
particular state of the mine. There is no work established at it; those who
want, going and procuring it for themselves.

The country on James' river, from 15 to 20 miles above Richmond, and for
several miles northward and southward, is replete with mineral coal of a very
excellent quality. Being in the hands of many proprietors, pits have been
opened, and* before the interruption of our commerce, were worked to an extent
equal to the demand.

In the western country coal is known to be in so many places, as to have
induced an opinion, that the whole tract between the Laurel mountain,
Mississippi, and Ohio, yields coal. It is also known (...) many places on the
north side of the Ohio. The coal at Pittsburg is of very superior quality. A
bed of it at that place has been a-fire since the year 1765. Another coal-hill
on the Pike-run of Monongahela has been a-fire ten years; yet it has burnt away
about twenty yards only.

I have known one instance of an emerald found in this country. Amethysts have
been frequent, and crystals common; yet not in such numbers any of them as to
be worth seeking.

There is very good marble, and in very great abundance, on James' river, at
the mouth of Rockfish. The samples* I have seen, were some of them of a white
as pure as one might expect to find on the surface of the earth: but most of
them were variegated with red, blue, and purple. None of it has been ever
worked. It forms a very large precipice, which hangs over a navigable part of
the river. It is said there is marble at Kentucky.

But one vein of limestone is known below the Blue-ridge. Its first
appearance, in our country, is in Prince William, two miles below the Pignut
ridge of mountains; thence it passes on nearly parallel with that, and crosses
the Rivanna about five miles below it, where it is called the South-west ridge.
It then crosses Hardware, above the mouth of Hudson's creek, James' river at
the mouth of Rockfish, at the marble quarry before spoken of, probably runs up
that river to where it appears again at Ross's iron-works, and so passes off
south-westwardly by Flat creek of Otter river. It is never more than one
hundred yards wide. From the blue ridge westwardly, the whole country seems to
be founded on a rock of limestone, besides infinite quantities on the surface,
both loose and fixed. This is cut into beds, which range, as the mountains and
seacoast do, from south-west to northeast, the lamina of each bed declining
from the horizon toward a parallelism with the axis of the earth. Being struck
with this observation, I made, with a quadrant, a great number of trials on the
angles of their declination, and found them to vary from 22. to 60.; but
averaging all my trials, the result was within one-third of a degree of the
elevation of the pole or latitude of the place, and much the greatest part of
them taken separately were little different from that: by which it appears,
that these lamina are, in the main, parallel with the axis of the earth. In
some instances, indeed, I found them perpendicular, and even reclining the
other way: but these were extremely rare, and always attended with signs of
convulsion, or other circumstances of singularity, which admitted a possibility
of removal from their original position. These trials were made between
Madison's cave and the Patowmac. We hear of limestone on the Mississippi and
Ohio, and in all the mountainous country between the eastern and western
waters, not on the mountains themselves, but occupying the valleys between them.

Near the eastern foot of the North mountain are immense bodies of Schist,
containing impressions of shells in a variety of forms. I have received
petrified shells of very different kinds from the first sources of the
Kentucky, which bear no resemblance to any I have ever seen on the tide-waters.
It is said that shells are found in the Andes, in South-America, fifteen
thousand feet above the level of the ocean. This is considered by many, both of
the learned and unlearned, as a proof of an universal deluge. To the many
considerations opposing this opinion, the following may be added. The
atmosphere, and all its contents, whether of water, air, or other matters,
gravitate to the earth; that is to say, they have weight. Experience tells us,
that the weight of all these together never exceeds that of a column of mercury
of 31 inches height, which is equal to one of rain water of 35 feet high. If
the whole contents of the atmosphere then were water, instead of what they are,
it would cover the globe but 35 feet deep; but as these waters, as they fell,
would run into the seas, the superficial measure of which is to that of the dry
parts of the globe, as two to one, the seas would be raised only 52 feet above
their present level, and of course would overflow the lands to that height
only. In Virginia this would be a very small proportion even of the champaign
country, the banks of our tide-waters being frequently, if not generally of a
greater height. Deluges beyond this extent then, as for instance, to the North
mountain or to Kentucky, seem out of the laws of nature. But within it they may
have taken place to a greater or less degree, in proportion to the combination
of natural causes which may be supposed to have produced them. History renders
probable some instances of a partial deluge in the country lying round the
Mediterranean sea. It has been often 2. Buffon Epoques, 96,
supposed, and is not unlikely that that sea was once a lake. While such, let
us admit an extraordinary collection of the waters of the atmosphere from the
other parts of the globe to have been discharged over that and the countries
whose waters run into it. Or without supposing it a lake, admit such an
extraordinary collection of the waters of the atmosphere, and an influx of
waters from the Atlantic ocean, forced by long continued western winds. The
lake, or that sea, may thus have been so raised as to overflow the low lands
adjacent to it, as those of Egypt and Armenia, which, according to a tradition
of the Egyptians and Hebrews, were overflowed about 2300 years before the
Christian era; those of Attica, said to have been overflowed in the time of
Ogyges, about five hundred years later; and those of Thessaly, in the time of
Deucalion, still 300 years posterior. But such deluges as these will not
account for the shells found in the higher lands. A second opinion has been
entertained, which is, that, in times anterior to the records either of history
or tradition, the bed of the ocean, the principal residence of the shelled
tribe, has, by some great convulsion of nature, been heaved to the heights at
which we now find shells and other remains of marine animals. The favorers of
this opinion do well to suppose the great events on which it rests to have
taken place beyond all the aeras of history; for within these, certainly none
such are to be found; and we may venture to say further, that no fact has taken
place, either in our own days, or in the thousands of years recorded in
history, which proves the existence of any natural agents, within or without
the bowels of the earth, of force sufficient to heave, to the height of 15,000
feet, such masses as the Andes. The difference between the power necessary to
produce such an effect, and that which shuffled together the different parts of
Calabria in our days, is so immense, that, from the existence of the latter we
are not authorized to infer that of the former.

M. de Voltaire has suggested a third solution of this difficulty (Quest.
Encycl. Coquilles.) He cites an instance in Touraine, where, in the space of 80
years, a particular spot of earth had been twice metamorphosed into soft stone,
which had become hard when employed in building. In this stone shells of
various kinds were produced, discoverable at first only with the microscope,
but afterward growing with the stone. From this fact, I suppose, he would have
us infer, that, besides the usual process for generating shells by the
elaboration of earth and water in animal vessels, nature may have provided an
equivalent operation, by passing the same materials through the pores of
calcareous earths and stones; as we see calcareous drop-stones generating every
day by the percolation of water through limestone, and new marble forming in
the quarries from which the old has been taken out; and it might be asked,
whether it is more difficult for nature, to shoot the caleareous juice into the
form of a shell, than other juices into the forms of crystals, plants, animals,
according to the construction of the vessels through which they pass? There is
a wonder somewhere. Is it greatest on this branch of the dilemma; on that which
supposes the existence of a power, of which we have no evidence in any other
case; or on the first, which requires us to believe the creation of a body of
water and its subsequent annihilation? The establishment of the instance, cited
by M. de Voltaire, of the growth of shells unattached to animal bodies, would
have been that of his theory. But he has not established it. He has not even
left it on ground so respectable as to have rendered it* an object of enquiry
to the literati of his own country. Abandoning this fact, therefore, the three
hypotheses are equally unsatisfactory; and we must be contented to acknowledge,
that this great phenomenon is as yet unsolved. Ignorance is preferable to
error; and he is less remote from the truth who believes nothing, than he who
believes what is wrong.

There is great abundance (more especially when you approach the mountains) of
stone, white, blue, brown, etc. fit for the chissel, good millstone, such also
as stands the fire, and firestone. We are told of flint, fit for ^^n-flints,
(...) the Meherrin in Brunswick, on the Mississippi between the mouth of Ohio
and Kaskaskia, and on others of the western waters. Isinglass or mica is in
several places; loadstone also; and an Asbestos of a ligneous texture, is
sometimes to be met with.

Marle abounds generally. A clay, of which, like the Sturbridge in England,
bricks are made, which will resist long the violent action of fire, has been
found on Tuckahoe creek of James river, and no doubt will be found in other
places. Chalk is said to be in Botetourt and Bedford. In the latter county is
some earth believed to be gypseous. Ochres are found in various parts.

In the limestone country are many caves, the earthy floors of which are
impregnated with nitre. On Rich creek, a branch of the Great Kanhaway, about 60
miles below the lead mines, is a very large one, about 20 yards wide, and
entering a hill a quarter of half a mile. The vault is of rock, from 9 to 15 or
20 feet above the floor. A Mr. Lynch, who gives me this account, undertook to
extract the nitre. Besides a coat of the salt which had formed on the vault and
floor, he found the earth highly impregnated to the depth of seven feet in some
places, and generally of three, every bushel yielding on an average three
pounds of nitre. Mr. Lynch having made about 1000lb. of the salt from it,
consigned it to some others, who have since made 10,000lb. They have done this
by pursuing the cave into the hill, never trying a second time the earth they
have once exhausted, to see how far or soon it receives another impregnation.
At least fifty of these caves are worked on the Greenbriar. There are many of
them known on Cumberland river.

The country westward of the Alleghany abounds with springs of common salt. The
most remarkable we have heard of are at Bullet's lick, the Big bones, the blue
licks, and on the North fork of Holston. The area of Bullet's lick, is of many
acres. Digging the earth to the depth of three feet, the water begins to boil
up, and the deeper you go, and the drier the weather, the stronger is the
brine. A thousand gallons of water, yield from a bushel to a bushel and a half
of salt, which is about 80lb. of water to 1lb. of salt* but of seawater 25lb.
yield 1lb. of salt. So that seawater is more than three times as strong as
that of these springs. A salt spring has been lately discovered at the Turkey
foot on Yohog^^y, by which river it is overflowed, except (...) very low water.
Its merit is not yet known. ^^nning's lick is also as yet untried, but it is
supposed to be the best on this side the Ohio. The salt springs on the margin
of the Onondago lake are said to give a saline taste to the waters of the lake.

There are several medicinal springs, some of which are indubitably
efficacious, while others seem to owe their reputation as much to fancy and
change of air and regimen, as to their real virtues. None of them having
undergone a chemical analysis in skilful hands, nor been so far the subject of
observations as to have produced a reduction into ^asses of the disorders which
they relieve, it is in (...) power to give little more than an enumeration of
them.

The most efficacious of these are two springs in Augusta, near the first
sources of James river, where it is called Jackson's river. They rise near the
foot of the ridge of mountains, generally called the Warm spring mountains, but
in the maps Jackson's mountains. The one is distinguished by the name of the
Warm spring, and the other of the Hot spring. The Warm spring issues with a
very bold stream, sufficient to work a grist mill, and to keep the waters of
its basin, which is 30 feet in diameter, at the vital warmth, viz. 96 of
Farenheit's thermometer. The matter with which these waters is allied is very
volatile; its smell indicates it to be sulphurous, as also does the
circumstance of its turning silver black. They relieve rheumatisms. Other
complaints also of very different natures have been removed or lessened by
them. It rains here four or five days in every week.

The Hot spring is about six miles from the Warm, is much smaller, and has been
so hot as to have boiled an egg. Some believe its degree of heat to be
lessened. It raises the mercury in Farenheit's thermometer to 112 degrees,
which is fever heat. It sometimes relieves where the Warm spring fails. A
fountain of common water, issuing within a few inches of its margin, gives it a
singular appearance. Comparing the temperature of these with that of the Hot
springs of Kamschatka, of which Krachininnikow gives an account, the difference
is very great, the latter raising the mercury to 200 which is within 12 of
boiling water. These springs are very much resorted to in spite of a total want
of accommodation for the sick. Their waters are strongest in the hottest
months, which occasions their being visited in July and August principally.

The (...) springs are in the county of Botetourt, at the eastern foot of the
Alleghany, about 42 miles from the Warm springs. They are still less known.
Having been found to relieve cases in which the others had been ineffectually
tried, it is probable their composition is different. They are different also
in their temperature, being as cold as common water: which is not mentioned,
however, as a proof of a distinct impregnation. This is among the first sources
of James' river.

On Patowmac river, in Berkely county, above the North mountain, are medicinal
springs, much more frequented than those of Augusta. Their powers, however, are
less, the waters weakly mineralized, and scarcely warm. They are more visited,
because situated in a fertile, plentiful, and populous country, better provided
with accommodations, always safe from the Indians, and nearest to the more
populous states.

In Louisa county, on the head waters of the South Anna branch of York river,
are springs of some medicinal virtue. They are not much used however. There is
a weak chalybeate at Richmond; and many others in various parts of the country,
which are of too little worth, or too little note, to be enumerated after those
before mentioned.

We are told of a sulphur spring on Howard's creek of Greenbriar, and another
at Boonsborough on Kentucky.

In the low grounds of the Great Kanhaway, seven miles above the mouth of Elk
river, and 67 above that of the Kanhaway itself, is a hole in the earth of the
capacity of 30 or 40 gallons, from which issues constantly a bituminous vapor,
in so strong a current, as to give to the sand about its orifice the motion
which it has in a boiling spring. On presenting a lighted candle or torch
within 18 inches of the hole, it flames up in a column of 18 inches diameter,
and four or five feet height, which sometimes burns out within ^0 minutes, and
at other times has been known to continue three days, and then has been still
left burning. The flame is unsteady, of the density of that of burning spirits,
and smells like burning pit-coal. Water sometimes collects in the basin, which
is remarkably cold, and is kept in ebullition by the vapor issuing through it.
If the vapor be fired in that state, the water soon becomes so warm that the
hand cannot bear it, and evaporates wholly in a short time. This, with the
circumjacent lands, is the property of his excellency general Washington and of
general Lewis.

There is a similar one on Sandy river, the flame of which is a column of about
12 inches diameter, and three feet high. General Clarke, who informs me of it,
kindled the vapor, staid about an hour, and left it burning.

The mention of uncommon springs leads me to that of Siphon fountains. There is
one of these near the intersection of the lord Fairfax's boundary with the
North mountain, not far from Brock's gap, on the stream of which is a
gristmill, which grinds two bushels of grain at every flood of the spring:
another, near the Cowpasture river, a mile and a half below its confluence with
the Bull-pasture river, and 16 or 17 miles from the Hot springs, which
intermits once in every twelve hours: one also near the mouth of the North
Holston.

After these may be mentioned the Natural Well, on the lands of a Mr. Lewis in
Frederick county. It is somewhat larger than a common well: the water rises in
it as near the surface of the earth as in the neighboring artificial wells,
and is of a depth as yet unknown. It is said there is a current in it tending
sensibly downwards. If this be true, it probably feeds some fountain, of which
it is the natural reservoir, distinguished from others, like that of Madison's
cave, by being accessible. It is used with bucket and windlass as an ordinary
well.

A complete catalogue of the trees, plants, fruits, etc. is probably not
desired. I will sketch out those which would principally attract notice, as
being 1. Medicinal, 2. Esculent, 3. Ornamental. or 4. Useful for fabrication;
adding the Linnaean to the popular names, as the latter might not convey
precise information to a foreigner. I shall confine myself too to native plants.

1. Senna. Cassia ligustrina. Arsmart. Polygonum Sagittatum. Clivers, or
goose-grass. Galium spurium. Lobelia of several species. Palma Christi.
Ricinus. (3.) James-town weed. Datura Stramonium. Mallow. Malva rotundifolia.
Syrian mallow. Hibiscus moschentos. Hibiscus virginicus.
Indian mallow. Sida rhombifolia. Sida abutilon.
Virginia Marshmallow. Napaea hermaphrodita. Napaea dioica.
Indian physic. Spiria trifoliata. Euphorbia Ipecacuanhae. Pleurisy root.
Asclepias decumbens. Virginia snake root. Aristolochia serpentaria. Black
snake-root. Actaea racemosa. Seneca rattlesnake-root. Polygala Senega.
Valerian. Valeriana locusta radiata. Gentiana, Saponaria, Villosa and
Centaurium. Ginseng. Panax quinquefolium. Angelica. Angelica sylvestris.
Cassava. Jatropha urens. 2. Tuckahoe. Lycoperdon tuber. Jerusalem artichoke.
Helianthus tuberosus. Long potatoes. Convolvulas batatas. Granadillas.
Maycocks. Maracocks. Passiflora incarnata. Panic. Panicum of many species.
Indian millet. Holcus laxus. Holcus striosus.
Wild oat. Zizania aquaticia. Wild pea. Dolichos of Clayton. Lupine. Lupinus
perennis. Wild hop. Humulus lupulus. Wild cherry. Prunus Virginiana. Cherokee
plumb. Prunus sylvestris fructu majori. Clayton. Wild plumb. Prunus sylvestris
fructu minori. Clayton. Wild crab-apple. Pyrus coronaria. Red Mulberry. Morus
rubra. Persimmon. Diospyros Virginiana. Sugar maple. Acer saccharinum. Scaly
bark hiccory. Juglans alba cortice squamoso. Clayton. Common hiccory. Juglans
alba, fructu minore rancido. Clayton. Paccan, or Illinois nut. Not described by
Linnaeus, Millar, or Clayton. Were I to venture to describe this, speaking of
the fruit from memory, and of the leaf from plants of two years growth, I
should specify it as the Juglans alba, foliolis lanceolatis, acuminatis,
serratis, tomentosis, fructu minore, ovato, compresso, vix insculpto, dulci,
putamine tenerrimo. It grows on the Illinois, Wabash, Ohio, and Mississippi. It
is spoken of by Don Ulloa under the name of Pacanos, in his Noticias
Americanas. Entret. 6. Black walnut. Juglans nigra. White walnut. Juglans alba.
Chestnut. Fagus castanea. Chinquapin. Fagus pumila. Hazlenut. Corylus avellana.
Grapes. Vitis. Various kinds, though only three described by Clayton. Scarlet
Strawberries. Fragaria Virginiana of Millar. Whortleberries. Vaccinium
uliginosum. Wild gooseberries. Ribes grossularia. Cranberries. Vaccinium
oxycoccos. Black raspberries. Rubus occidentalis. Blackberries. Rubus
fruticosus. Dewberries. Rubus caesius. Cloudberries. Rubus Chamaemorus. 3.
Plane-tree. Platanus occidentalis. Poplar. Liriodendron tulipifera. Populus
heterophylla.
Black poplar. Populus nigra. Aspen. Populus tremula. Linden, or lime. Telia
Americana. Red flowering maple. Acer rubrum. Horse-chesnut, or buck's-eye.
AEsculus pavia. Catalpa. Bignonia catalpa. Umbrella. Magnolia tripetala. Swamp
laurel. Magnolia glauca. Cucumber-tree. Magnolia acuminata. Portugal bay.
Laurus indica. Red bay. Laurus borbonia. Dwarf-rose bay. Rhododendron maximum.
Laurel of the western country. Qu. species.? Wild pimento. Laurus benzoin.
Sassafras. Laurus sassafras. Locust. Robinia pseudo-acacia. Honey-locust.
Gleditsia. 1. ^ Dogwood. Cornus florida. Fringe or snow-drop tree. Chionanthus
Virginica. Barberry. Berberis vulgaris. Redbud, or Judas-tree. Cercis
Canadensis. Holly. Ilex aquifolium. Cockspur hawthorn. Crataegus coccinea.
Spindle-tree. Euonymus Europaeus. Evergreen spindle-tree. Euonymus Americanus.
Itea Virginica. Elder. Sambucus nigra. Papaw. Annona triloba. Candleberry
myrtle. Myrica cerifera. Dwarf-laurel. Kalmia angustifolia called ivy with us.
Kalmia latifolia. Called ivy with us.
Ivy. Hedera quinquefolia. Trumpet honeysuckle. Lonicera sempervirens. Upright
honeysuckle. Azalea nudiflora. Yellow jasmine. Bignonia sempervirens.
Calycanthus floridus. American aloe. Agave Virginica. Sumach. Rhus. Qu.
species? Poke. Phytolacca decandra. Long moss. Tillandsia Usneoides. 4. Reed.
Arundo phragmitis. Virginia hemp. Acnida cannabina. Flax. Linum Virginianum.
Black, or pitch-pine. Pinus taeda. White pine. Pinus strobus. Yellow pine.
Pinus Virginica. Spruce pine. Pinus foliis singularibus. Clayton. Hemlock
spruce fir. Pinus Canadensis. Arbor vitae. Thuya occidentalis. Juniper.
Juniperus Virginica (called cedar with us.) Cypress. Cupressus disticha. White
cedar. Cupressus Thyoides. Black oak. Quercus nigra. White oak. Quercus alba.
Red oak. Quercus rubra. Willow oak. Quercus phellos. Chestnut oak. Quercus
prinus. Black jack oak. Quercus aquatica. Clayton. Ground oak. Quercus pumila.
Clayton. Live oak. Quercus Virginiana. Millar. Black birch. Betula nigra. White
birch. Betula alba. Beach. Fagus sylvatica. Ash. Fraxinus Americana. Fraxinus
Novae Angliae. Millar.
Elm. Ulmus Americana. Willow. Salix. Query species? Sweet Gum. Liquidambar
styraciflua.
The following were found in Virginia when first visited by the English; but it
is not said whether of spontaneous growth, or by cultivation only. Most
probably they were natives of more southern climates, and handed along the
continent from one nation to another of the savages.

Tobacco. Nicotiana. Maize. Zea mays. Round potatoes. Solanum tuberosum.
Pumkins. Cucurbita pepo. Cymlings. Cucurbita verrucosa. Squashes. Cucurbita
melopepo.
There is an infinitude of other plants and flowers, for an enumeration and
scientific description of which I must refer to the Flora Virginica of our
great botanist, Dr. Clayton, published by Gronovius at Leyden, in 1762. This
accurate observer was a native and resident of this state, passed a long life
in exploring and describing its plants, and is supposed to have enlarged the
botanical catalogue as much as almost any man who has lived.

Besides these plants, which are native, our farms produce wheat, rye, barley,
oats, buck wheat, broom corn, and Indian corn. The climate suits rice well
enough, wherever the lands do. Tobacco, hemp, flax, and cotton, are staple
commodities. Indigo yields two cuttings. The silkworm is a native, and the
mulberry, proper for its food, grows kindly.

We cultivate also potatoes, both the long and the round, turnips, carrots,
^parsneps, pumkins, and ground nuts (Arachis.) Our grasses are lucerne, st.
foin, burnet, timothy, ray and orchard grass; red, white, and yellow clover;
greenswerd, blue grass, and crab grass.

The gardens yield musk-melons, water-melons, tomatas, okra, pomegranates,
figs, and the esculent plants of Europe.

The orchards produce apples, pears, cherries, quinces, peaches, nectarines,
apricots, almonds, and plumbs.

Our quadrupeds have been mostly described by Linnaeus and Mons. de Buffon. Of
these the Mammoth, or big buffalo, as called by the Indians, must certainly
have been the largest. Their tradition is, that he was carnivorous, and still
exists in the northern parts of America. A delegation of warriors from the
Delaware tribe having visited the governor of Virginia, during the revolution,
on matters of business, after these had been discussed and settled in council,
the governor asked them some questions relative to their country, and among
others, what they knew or had heard of the animal whose bones were found at the
Saltlicks on the Ohio. Their chief speaker immediately put himself into an
attitude of oratory, and with a pomp suited to what he conceived the elevation
of his subject, informed him that it was a tradition handed down from their
fathers, That in ancient times a herd of these tremendous animals came to the
Big-bone licks, and began an universal destruction of the bear, deer, elks,
buffaloes, and other animals which had been created for the use of the Indians:
that the Great Man above, looking down and seeing this, was so enraged, that he
seized his lightning, decended on the earth, seated himself on a neighboring
mountain, on a rock of which his seat and the print of his feet are still to be
seen, and hurled his bolts among them till the whole were slaughtered, except
the big bull, who presenting his forehead to the shafts, shook them off as they
fell; but missing one at length, it wounded him in the side; whereon, springing
round, he bounded over the Ohio, over the Wabash, the Illinois, and finally
over the great lakes, where he is living at this day. It is well known that on
the Ohio, and in many parts of America further north, tusks, grinders, and
skeletons of unparalleled magnitude, are found in great numbers, some lying on
the surface of the earth, and some a little below it. A Mr. Stanley, taken
prisoner by the Indians near the mouth of the Tenassee, relates, that, after
being transferred through several tribes, from one to another, he was at length
carried over the mountains west of the Missouri to a river which runs
westwardly: that these bones abounded there; and that the natives described to
him the animal to which they belonged as still existing in the northern parts
of their country; from which description he judged it to be an elephant. Bones
of the same kind have been lately found, some feet below the surface of the
earth, in salines opened on the North Holston, a branch of the Tanissee, about
the latitude of 36 north. From the accounts published in Europe, I suppose it
to be decided, that these are of the same kind with those found in Siberia.
Instances are mentioned of like animal remains found in the more southern
climates of both hemispheres; but they are either so loosely mentioned as to
leave a doubt of the fact, so inaccurately described as not to authorize the
classing them with the great northern bones, or so rare as to found a suspicion
that they have been carried thither as curiosities from more northern regions.
So that on the whole there seem to be no certain vestiges of the existence of
this animal further south than the salines last mentioned. It is remarkable
that the tusks and skeletons have been ascribed by the naturalists of Europe to
the elephant, while the grinders have been given to the hippopotamus, or river
horse. Yet it is acknowledged, that the tusks and skeletons are much larger
than those of the elephant, and the grinders many times greater than those of
the hippopotamus, and essentially different in form. Wherever these grinders
are found, there also we find the tusks and skeleton; but no skeleton of the
hippopotamus nor grinders of the elephant. It will not be said that the
hippopotamus and elephant came always to the same spot, the former to deposit
his grinders, and the latter his tusks and skeleton. For what became of the
parts not deposited there? We must agree then that these remains belong to each
other, that they are of one and the same animal, that this was not a
hippopotamus, because the hippopotamus had no tusks nor such a frame, and
because the grinders differ in their size as well as in the number and form of
their points. That it was not an elephant, I think ascertained by proofs
equally decisive. I will not avail myself of the authority of the celebrated
Hunter.
anatomist, who, from an examination of the form and structure of the tusks,
has declared they were essentially different from those of the elephant;
because another D'Aubenton.
anatomist, equally celebrated, has declared, on a like examination, that they
are precisely the same. Between two such authorities I will suppose this
circumstance equivocal. But, 1. The skeleton of the mammoth (for so the
incognitum has been called) bespeaks an animal of five or six times the cubit
volume of the elephant, as Mons. de Buffon has admitted. 2. The grinders are
five times as large, are square, and the grinding surface studded with four or
five rows of blunt points: whereas those of the elephant are broad and thin,
and their grinding surface flat. 3. I have never heard an instance, and suppose
there has been none, of the grinder of an elephant being found in America. 4.
From the known temperature and constitution of the elephant he could never have
existed in those regions where the remains of the mammoth have been found. The
elephant is a native only of the torrid zone and its vicinities: if, with the
assistance of warm apartments and warm clothing, he has been preserved in life
in the temperate climates of Europe, it has only been for a small portion of
what would have been his natural period, and no instance of his multiplication
in them has ever been known. But no bones of the mammoth, as I have before
observed, have been ever found further south than the salines of the Holston,
and they have been found as far north as the Arctic circle. Those, therefore,
who are of opinion that the elephant and mammoth are the same, must believe, 1.
That the elephant known to us can exist and multiply in the frozen zone; or, 2.
That an eternal fire may once have warmed those regions, and since abandoned
them, of which, however, the globe exhibits no unequivocal indications; or, 3.
That the obliquity of the ecliptic, when these elephants lived, was so great as
to include within the tropics all those regions in which the bones are found:
the tropics being, as is before observed, the natural limits of habitation for
the elephant. But if it be admitted that this obliquity has really decreased,
and we adopt the highest rate of decrease yet pretended, that is of one minute
in a century, to transfer the northern tropic to the Arctic circle, would carry
the existence of these supposed elephants 250,000 years back; a period far
beyond our conception of the duration of animal bones left exposed to the open
air, as these are in many instances. Besides, though these regions would then
be supposed within the tropics, yet their winters would have been too severe
for the sensibility of the elephant. They would have had too but one day and
one night in the year, a circumstance to which we have no reason to suppose the
nature of the elephant fitted. However, it has been demonstrated, that, if a
variation of obliquity in the ecliptic takes place at all, it is vibratory, and
never exceeds the limits of 9 degrees, which is not sufficient to bring these
bones within the tropics. One of these hypotheses, or some other equally
voluntary and inadmissible to cautious philosophy, must be adopted to support
the opinion that these are the bones of the elephant. For my own part, I find
it easier to believe that an animal may have existed, resembling the elephant
in his tusks, and general anatomy, while his nature was in other respects
extremely different. From the 30th degree of south latitude to the 30th of
north, are nearly the limits which nature has fixed for the existence and
multiplication of the elephant known to us. Proceeding thence northwardly to 36
degrees, we enter those assigned to the mammoth. The further we advance north,
the more their vestiges multiply as far as the earth has been explored in that
direction; and it is as probable as otherwise, that this progression continues
to the pole itself, if land extends so for. The center of the frozen zone then
may be the achme of their vigor, as that of the (...) is of the elephant. Thus
nature seems to have drawn a belt of separation between these (...) tremendous
animals, whose breadth indeed is not precisely known, though at present we may
suppose it about 6 degrees of latitude; to have assigned to the elephant the
regions south of these confines, and those north to the mammoth, founding the
constitution of the one in her extreme of heat, and that of the other in the
extreme of cold. When the creator has therefore separated their nature as far
as the extent of the scale of animal (...) allowed to this planet would permit,
it seemsperverse to declare it the same, from a partial (...) of their tusks
and bones. But to whatever animal we ascribe these remains, it is certain such
a one has existed in America, and that it has been the largest of all
terrestrial beings. It should have sufficed to have rescued the earth it
inhabited, and the atmosphere it breathed, from the imputation of impotence in
the conception and nourishment of animal life on a large scale: to have
stifled, in its birth, the opinion of a writer, the most learned too of all
others in the science of animal history, that in the new world, La nature
vivante est beaucoup moins agissante, beaucoup moins forte: Buffon, xviii. 122
edit. Paris, 1764.
that nature is less active, less energetic on one side of the globe than she
is on the other. As if both sides were not warmed by the same genial sun; as if
a soil of the same chemical composition, was less capable of elaboration into
animal nutriment; as if the fruits and grains from that soil and sun, yielded a
less rich chyle, gave less extension to the solids and fluids of the body, or
poduced sooner in the cartilages, membranes, and fibers, that rigidity which
restrains all further extension, and terminates animal growth. The truth is,
that a Pigmy and a Patagonian, a Mouse and a Mammoth, derive their dimensions
from the same nutritive juices. The difference of increment depends on
circumstances unsearchable to beings with our capacities. Every race of animals
seems to have received from their Maker certain laws of extension at the time
of their formation. Their elaborative organs were formed to produce this, while
proper obstacles were opposed to its further progress. Below these limits they
cannot fall, nor rise above them. What intermediate station they shall take may
depend on soil, on climate, on food, on a careful choice of breeders. But all
the manna of heaven would never raise the mouse to the bulk of the mammoth.

The opinion advanced by the Count de Buffon xviii. 100 -- 156.
, is 1. That the animals common both to the old and new world, are smaller in
the latter. 2. That those peculiar to the new are on a smaller scale. 3. That
those which have been domesticated in both, have degenerated in America: and 4.
That on the whole it exhibits fewer species. And the reason he thinks is, that
the heats of America are less; that more waters are spread over its surface by
nature, and fewer of these drained off by the hand of man. In other words, that
heat is friendly, and moisture adverse to the production and developement of
large quadrupeds. I will not meet this hypothesis on its first doubtful ground,
whether the climateof America be comparatively more humid? Because we are not
furnished with observations sufficient to decide this question. And though,
till it be decided, we are as free to deny, as others are to affirm the fact,
yet for a moment let it be supposed. The hypothesis, after this supposition,
proceeds to another; that moisture is unfriendly to animal growth. The truth of
this is inscrutable to us by reasonings a priori* Nature has hidden from us her
modus agendi. Our only appeal on such questions is to experience; and I think
that experience is against the supposition. It is by the assistance of heat and
moisture that vegetables are elaborated from the elements of earth, air, water,
and fire. We accordingly see the more humid climates produce the greater
quantity of vegetables. Vegetables are mediately or immediately the food of
every animal: and in proportion to the quantity of food, we see animals not
only multiplied in their numbers, but improved in their bulk, as far as the
laws of their nature will admit. Of this opinion is the Count de Buffon himself
in another part of his work viii. 134.
: en general il paroit ques les pays un peu froids conviennent mieux a nos
boeufs que les pays chauds, et qu'ils font d'autant plus gross et plus grands
que le climat est plus humide et plus abondans en paturages. Les boeufs de
Danemarck, de la Podolie, de I'Ukraine et de la Tartarie qu habitent les
Calmouques sont les plus grands de tous. Here then a race of animals, and one
of the largest too, has been increased in its dimensions by cold and moisture,
in direct opposition to the hypothesis, which supposes that these two
circumstances diminish animal bulk, and that it is their contraries heat and
dryness which enlarge it. But when we appeal to experience, we are not to rest
satisfied with a single fact. Let us therefore try our question on more general
ground. Let us take two portions of the earth, Europe and America for instance,
sufficiently extensive to give operation to general causes; let us consider the
circumstances peculiar to each, and observe their effect on animal nature.
America, running through the torrid as well as temperate zone, has more heat
collectively taken, than Europe. But Europe, according to our hypothesis, is
the dryest. They are equally adapted then 10 animal productions; each being
endowed with one of those causes which befriend animal growth, and with one
which opposes it. If it be thought unequal to compare Europe with America,
which is so much larger, I answer, not more so than to compare America with the
whole world. Besides, the purpose of the comparison is to try an hypothesis,
which makes the size of animals depend on the heat and moisture of climate. If
therefore we take a region, so extensive as to comprehend a sensible
distinction of climate, and so extensive too as that local accidents, or the
intercourse of animals on its borders, may not materially affect the size of
those in its interior parts, we shall comply with those conditions which the
hypothesis may reasonably demand. The objection would be the weaker in the
present case, because any intercourse of animals which may take place on the
confines of Europe and Asia, is to the advantage of the former, Asia producing
certainly larger animals than Europe. Let us then take a comparative view of
the quadrupeds of Europe and America, presenting them to the eye in three
different tables, in one of which shall be enumerated those found in both
countries; in a second, those found in one only; in a third, those which have
been domesticated in both. To facilitate the comparison, let those of each
table be arranged in gradation according to their sizes, from the greatest to
the smallest, so far as their sizes can be conjectured. The weights of the
large animals shall be expressed in the English avoirdupoise pound and its
decimals: those of the smaller, in the same ounce and its decimals. Those which
are marked thus,* are actual weights of particular subjects, deemed among the
largest of their species. Those marked thus, are furnished by judicious
persons, well acquainted with the species, and saying, from conjecture only,
what the largest individual they had seen would probably have weighed. The
other weights are taken from Messrs. Buffon and D'Aubenton, and are of such
subjects as came casually to their hands for dissection. This circumstance must
be remembered where their weights and mine stand opposed: the latter being
stated, not to produce a conclusion in favor of the American species, but to
justify a suspension of opinion until we are better informed, and a suspicion,
in the mean time, that there is no uniform difference in favor of either;
which is all I pretend.

A comparative View of the Quadrupeds of Europe and of America.
I. Aboriginals of both.
Europe. America. Ib. Ib. Mammoth Buffalo. Bison *1800 White bear. Ours blanc.
Carribou. Run. Bear. Ours. 153.7 *410 Elk. Elan. Original palmated Red deer.
Cerf. 288.8 *273 Fallow deer. Daim. 167.8 Wolf. Loup 69.8 Roe. Chevreuil 56.7
Glutton. Glouton. Carcajou Wild cat. Chat sauvage 30 Lynx. Loup cervier 25.
Beaver. Castor 18.5 *45 Badger. Blaireau 13.6 Red fox. Renard 13.5 Gray fox.
Isatis Otter. Loutre 8.9 12 Monax. Marmotte 6.5 Vison. Fouine 2.8 Hedgehog.
Herisson 2.2 Marten. Mart 1.9 6 OZ. Water rat. Rat d'eau 7.5 Weasel. Belette
2.2 OZ. Flying squirrel. Polatouche 2.2 4 Shrew mouse. Musaraigne 1. II.
Aboriginals of one only.
EUROPE. AMERICA. Ib. Ib. Sanglier. Wild boar 280. Tapir 534. Mouflon. Wild
sheep 56. Elk, round horned 450. Bo^quetin. Wild goat Puma Lievre. Hare 7.6
Jaguar 218. Lapin, Rabbit 3.4 Cabiai 109. Putois. Polecat 3.3 Tamanoir 109.
Genette 3.1 Tammandua 65.4 Desman. Muskrat OZ. Cougar of N. America 75.
Ecureuil. Squirrel 12. Cougar of S. America 59.4 Hermine. Ermin 8.2 Ocelot Rat.
Rat 7.5 Pecars 46.3 Loirs 3.1 Jaguaret 43.6 Lerot. Dormouse 1.8 Alco Taupe.
Mole 1.2 Lama Hamster.9 Paco Zisel Paca 32.7 Leming Serval Souris. Mouse.6
Sloth. Unau 27.25 Saricovienne Kincajou Tatou Kabassou 21.8 Urson. Urchin
Raccoon. Raton 16.5 Coati Coendou 16.3 Sloth. Ai 13. Sapajou Ouarini Sap^jou
Coaita 9.8 Tatou Encubert Tatou Apar Tatou Cachica 7. Little Coendou 6.5
Opossum. Sarigue Tapeti Margay Crabier Agouti 4.2 Sapajou Sai 3.5 Tatou
Cirquinetc;cedil;on Tatou Tatouate 3.3 Mouffette Squash Mouffette Chinche
Mouffette Conepate. Scunk Mouffette. Zorilla Whabus. Hare. Rabbit Aperea
Akouchi Ondatra. Muskrat Pilori Great gray squirrel 2.7 Fox squirrel of
Virginia 2.625 Surikate 2. Mink 2. Sapajou. Sajou 1.8 Indian pig. Cochon d'
Inde 1.6 Sepajou Saimiri 1.5 Phalanger Coquallin Lesser gray squirrel 1.5 Black
squirrel 1.5 Red squirrel 10. OZ. Sagoin Saki Sagoin Pinche Sagoin Tamarin OZ.
Sagoin Ouistiti 4.4 Sagoin Marakine Sagoin Mico Cayopollin Fourmillier Marmose
Sarigue of Cayenne Tucan Red mole OZ. Ground squirrel 4. III. Domesticated in
both.
Europe. America. Ib. Ib. Cow 765. *2500 Horse *1366 Ass Hog *1200 Sheep *125
Goat *80 Dog 67.6 Cat 7.

I have not inserted in the first table the Phoca It is said, that this animal
is seldom seen above 30 miles from shore, or beyond the 56th degree of
latitude. The interj^cent islands between Asia and America admit his passing
from one continent to the other without exceeding these bounds. And in fact,
travelers tells us that these islands are places of principal resort for them,
and especially in the season of ^^inging forth their young.
nor leather-winged bat, because the one living half the year in the water, and
the other being a winged animal, the individuals of each species may visit both
continents.

Of the animals in the Is It table, Mos. de Buffon himself informs us, [XXVII.
130. XXX. 213.] that the beaver, the otter, and shrew mouse, though of the same
species, are larger in America than Europe. This should therefore have
corrected the generality of his expressions XVIII. 145. and elsewhere, that the
animals common to the two countries, are considerably less in America than in
Europe, 'and cela sans aucune exception.' He tells us too, [Quadrup. VIII. 334.
edit. Paris, 1777] that on examining a bear from America, he remarked no
difference, dans la form de cet ours d'Amerique compare a celui d'Europe; but
adds from Bartram's journal, that an American bear weighed 400lb. English,
equal to 367lb. French: whereas we find the European bear examined by Mons.
D'Aubenton, [XVII. 82.] weighed but 141lb. French. That the palmated elk is
larger in America than Europe, we are informed by Kalm, I 233. Lon. 1772.
a naturalist who visited the former by public appointment, for the express
purpose of examining the subjects of natural history. In this fact Pennant
concurs with him. [Barrington's Miscellanies.] The same Kalm tells us Ib. 233.
that the black moose, or run of America is as high as a tall horse; and
Catesby, I. xxvii.
that it is about the bigness of a middle-sized ox. The same account of their
size has been given me by many who have seen them. But Mons. D'Aubenton says
XXIV. 162.
that the run of Europe is but about the size of a red deer. The weasel is
larger in America than in Europe, as may be seen by comparing its dimensions as
reported by Mons. D'Aubenton XV. 42.
and Kalm. The latter tells us, I. 359. I. 48. 221. 251. M. 52.
that the lynx, badger, red fox, and flying squirrel, are the same in America
as in Europe: by which expression I understand, they are the same in all
material circumstances, in size as well as others: for if they were smaller,
they would differ from the European. Our gray fox is, by Catesby's account, II.
78.
little different in size and shape from the European fox. I presume he means
the red fox of Europe, as does Kalm, where he says, I. 220.
that in size 'they do not quite come up to our foxes.' For proceeding next to
the red fox of America, he says 'they are entirely the same with the European
sort:' which shows he had in view one European sort only, which was the red. So
that the result of their testimony is, that the American gray fox is somewhat
less than the European red; which is equally true of the gray fox of Europe, as
may be seen by comparing the measures of the Count de Buffon and Mons.
D'Aubenton XXVII. 63. XIV. 119. Harris, 11. 387. Buffon. Quad. IX. 1.
. The white bear of America is as large as that of Europe. The bones of the
mammoth which have been found in America, are as large as those found in the
old world. It may be asked, why I insert the mammoth, as if it still existed? I
ask in return, why I should omit it, as if it did not exist? Such is the
economy of nature, that no instance can be produced, of her having permitted
any one race of her animals to become extinct; of her having formed any link in
her great work so weak as to be broken. To add to this, the traditionary
testimony of the Indians, that this animal still exists in the northern and
western parts of America, would be adding the light of a taper to that of the
meridian sun. Those parts still remain in their aboriginal state, unexplored
and undisturbed by us, or by others for us. He may as well exist there now, as
he did formerly where we find his bones. If he be a carnivorous animal, as some
anatomists have conjectured, and the Indians affirm, his early retirement may
be accounted for from the general destruction of the wild game by the Indians,
which commences in the first instant of their connection with us, for the
purpose of purchasing matchcoats, hatchets, and firelocks, with their skins.
There remain then the buffaloe, red deer, fallow deer, wolf, roe, glutton,
wild-cat, monax, vison, hedgehog, marten, and water rat, of the comparative
sizes of which we have not sufficient testimony. It does not appear that
Messrs. de Buffon and D'Aubenton have measured, weighed, or seen those of
America. It is said of some of them, by some travelers, that they are smaller
than the European. But who were these travelers? Have they not been men of a
very different description from those who have laid open to us the other three
quarters of the world? Was natural history the object of their travels? Did
they measure or weigh the animals they speak of? or did they not judge of them
by sight, or perhaps even from report only? Were they acquainted with the
animals of their own country, with which they undartake to compare them? Have
they not been so ignorant as often to mistake the species? A true answer to
these questions would probably lighten their authority, so as to render it
insufficient for the foundation of an hypothesis. How unripe we yet are, for an
accurate comparison of the animals of the two countries, will appear from the
work of Monsieur de Buffon. The ideas we should have formed of the sizes of
some animals, from the information he had received at his first publications
concerning them, are very different from what his subsequent communications
give us. And indeed his candor in this can never be too much praised. One
sentence of his book must do him immortal honor. J'aime autant une person
qui me releve d'une erreur, qu'une autre qui m'apprend une verite, parce qu'en
effet une erreur corrigee eft une veritye Quad. IX. 158.
. He seems to have thought the cabiai he first examined wanted little of its
full growth. Il n'etoit pas encore tout-a-fait adulte. XXV. 184.
Yet he weighed but 46lb, and he found afterward, Quad. IX. 13^.
that these animals, when full grown, weigh 100lb. He had supposed, from the
examination of a jaugar, XIX. 2.
said to be two years old, which weighed but 16lb. 12OZ. that when he should
have acquired his full growth, he would not be larger than a middle sized dog.
But a subsequent account (...) IX. (...).
raises his weight to 200lb. Further information will, doubtless, produce
further corrections. The wonder is, not that there is yet something in this
great work to correct, but that there is so little. The result of this view
then is, that of 26 quadrupeds common to both countries, 7 are said to be
larger in America, 7 of equal size, and 12 not sufficiently examined. So that
the first table impeaches the first member of the assertion, that of the
animals common to both countries, the American are smallest, et cela sans
aucune exception. It shows it not just, in all the latitude in which its author
has advanced it, and probably not to such a degree as to found a distinction
between the two countries.

Proceeding to the second table, which arranges the animals found in one of the
two countries only, Mons. de Buffon observes, that the tapir, the elephant of
America, is but of the size of a small cow. To preserve our comparison, I will
add, that the wild boar, the elephant of Europe, is little more than half that
size. I have made an elk with round or cylindrical horns an animal of America,
and peculiar to it; because I have seen many of them myself, and more of their
horns; and because I can say, from the best information, that, in Virginia,
this kind of elk has abounded much, and still exists in smaller numbers; and I
could never learn that the palmated kind had been seen here at all. I suppose
this confined to the more northern latitudes The descriptions of Theodat, Denis
and La Honton, cited by Mons. de Buffon, under the article Elan, authorize the
supposition, that the flat-horned elk is found in the northern parts of
America. It has not however extended to our latitudes. On the other hand, I
could never learn that the round-horned elk has been seen further north than
the Hudson's river. This agrees with the former elk in its general character,
being, like that, when compared with a deer, very much larger, its ears longer,
broader, and thicker in proportion, its hair much longer, neck and tail
shorter, having a dewlap before the breast (caruncula gutturalis Linnaei) a
white spot often, if not always, of a foot diameter, on the hinder part of the
buttocks round the tail; its gait a trot, and attended with a rattling of the
hoofs: but distinguished from that decisively by its horns, which are not
palmated, but round and pointed. This is the animal described by Catesby as the
Cervus major Americanus, the stag of America, le Cerf de I'Amerique. But it
differs from the Cervus as totally, as does the palmated elk from the dama. And
in fact it seems to stand in the same relation to the palmated elk, as the red
deer does to the fallow. It has abounded in Virginia, has been seen, within my
knowledge, on the eastern side of the Blue ridge since the year 1765, is now
common beyond those mountains, has been often brought to us and tamed, and its
horns are in the hands of many. I should designate* it as the 'Alces Americanus
cornibus teretilius.' It were to be wished, that naturalists, who are
acquainted with the run and elk of Europe, and who may hereafter visit the
northern parts of America, would examine well the animals called there by the
names of gray and black moose, caribou, orignal and elk. Mons. de Buffon has
done what could be done from the materials in his hands. toward clearing up the
confusion introduced by the loose application of these names among the animals
they are mean^ to designate. He reduces the whole to the run and flat-horned
elk. From all the information I have been able to collect, I strongly suspect
they will be found to cover three, if not four distinct species of animals. I
have seen skins of a moose, and of the caribou; they differ more from each
other, and from that of the round-horned elk, than I ever saw two skins differ
which belonged to different individuals of any wild species. These differences
are in the color, length, and coarseness of the hair, and in the size,
texture, and marks of the skin. Perhaps it will be found that there is, 1. the
moose, black and gray, the former being said to be the male, and the latter the
female. 2. The caribou or run. 3. The flat-horned elk, or orignal. 4. The
round-horned elk. Should this last, though possessing so nearly the characters
of the elk, be found to be the same with the Cerf d'Ardennes or Brandhirtz of
Germany, still there will remain the three species first enumerated
. I have made our hare or rabbit peculiar, believing it to be different from
both the European animals of those denominations, and calling it therefore by
its Algonquin name, Whabus, to keep it distinct from these. Kalm is of the same
opinion. Kalm II. 340. 1. 82.
I have enumerated the squirrels according to our own knowledge, derived from
daily sight of them, because I am not able to reconcile with that the European
appellations and descriptions. I have heard of other species, but they have
never come within my own notice. These, I think, are the only instances in
which I have departed from the authority of Mons. de Buffon in the construction
of this table. I take him for my ground work, because I think him the best
informed of any naturalist who has ever written. The result is, that there are
18 quadrupeds peculiar to Europe; more than four times as many, to wit 74,
peculiar to America; that the The Tapir is the largest of the animals peculiar
to America. I collect his weight thus. Mons. de Buffon says, XXIII. 274, that
he is of the size of a Zebu, or a small cow. He gives us the measures of a
Zebu, ib. 94. as taken by himself, viz. 5 feet 7 inches from the muzzle to the
root of the tail, and 5 feet 1 inch circumference behind the fore legs. A bull,
measuring in the same way 6 feet 9 inches and 5 feet 2 inches, weighed 600lb.
VIII. 153. The Zebu then, and of course the Tapir, would weigh about 500lb. But
one individual of every species of European peculiars would probably weigh less
than 400lb. These are French measures and weights.
first of these 74 weighs more than the whole column of Europeans; and
consequently this second table disproves the second member of the assertion,
that the animals peculiar to the new world are on a smaller scale, so far as
that assertion relied on European animals for support: and it is in full
opposition to the theory which makes the animal volume to depend on the
circumstances of heat and moisture.

The IIId table comprehends those quadrupeds only which are domestic in both
countries. That some of these, in some parts of America, have become less than
their original stock, is doubtless true; and the reason is very obvious. In a
thinly peopled country, the spontaneous productions of the forests and waste
fields are sufficient to support indifferently the domestic animals of the
farmer, with a very little aid from him in the severest and scarcest season. He
therefore finds it more convenient to receive them from the hand of nature in
that indifferent state, than to keep up their size by a care and nourishment
which would cost him much labor. If, on this low fare, these animals dwindle,
it is no more than they do in those parts of Europe where the poverty of the
soil, or poverty of the owner, reduces them to the same scanty subsistence. It
is the uniform effect of one and the same cause, whether acting on this or that
side of the globe. It would be erring therefore against that rule of
philosophy, which teaches us to ascribe like effects to like causes, should we
impute this diminution of size in America to any imbecility or want of
uniformity in the operations of nature. It may be affirmed with truth, that, in
those countries, and with those individuals of America, where necessity or
curiosity has produced equal attention as in Europe to the nourishment of
animals, the horses, cattle, sheep and hogs of the one continent are as large
as those of the other. There are particular instances, well attested, where
individuals of this country have imported good breeders from England, and have
improved their size by care in the course of some years. To make a fair
comparison between the two countries, it will not answer to bring together
animals of what might be deemed the middle or ordinary size of their species;
because an error in judging of that middle or ordinary size would vary the
result of the comparison. Thus Monsieur D'Aubenton VII. 432.
considers a horse of 4 feet 5 inches high and 400lb. weight French, equal to 4
feet 8.6 inches and 436lb. English, as a middle sized horse. Such a one is
deemed a small horse in America. The extremes must therefore be resorted to.
The same anatomist VII. 474.
dissected a horse of 5 feet 9 inches height, French measure, equal to 6 feet
1.7 English. This is near 6 inches higher than any horse I have seen: and could
it be supposed that I had seen the largest horses in America, the conclusion
would be, that ours have diminished, or that we have bred from a smaller stock.
In Connecticut and Rhode Island, where the climate is favorable to the
production of grass, bullocks have been slaughtered which weighed 2500, 2200,
and 2100 lb. nett; and those of 1800 lb. have been frequent. I have seen a In
Williamsburg, April, 1769.
hog weigh 1050 lb. after the blood, bowels, and hair had been taken from him.
Before he was killed, an attempt was made to weigh him with a pair of
steel-yards, graduated to 1200 lb. but he weighed more. Yet this hog was
probably not within fifty generations of the European stock. I am well informed
of another which weighed 1100 lb. gross. Asses have been still more neglected
than any other domestic animal in America. They are neither fed nor housed in
the most rigorous season of the year. Yet they are larger than those measured
by Mons. D'Aubenton VIII. 48. 55. 66.
, of 3 feet 7 inches, 3 feet 4 inches, and 3 feet 2 inches, the latter weighing
only 215*8 lb. These sizes, I suppose, have been produced by the same
negligence in Europe, which has produced a like diminution here. Where care has
been taken of them on that side of the water, they have been raised to a size
bordering on that of the horse; not by the heat and dryness of the climate, but
by good food and shelter. Goats have been also much neglected in America. Yet
they are very prolific here, bearing twice or three times a year, and from one
to five kids at a birth. Mons. de Buffon has been sensible of a difference in
this circumstance in favor of America XVIII. 96.
. But what are their greatest weights, I cannot say. A large sheep here weighs
100 lb. I observe Mons. D'Aubenton calls a ram of 62 lb. one of the middle size
IX. 41.
. But to say what are the extremes of growth in these and the other domestic
animals of America, would require information of which no one individual is
possessed. The weights actually known and stated in the third table preceding
will suffice to show, that we may conclude, on probable grounds, that, with
equal food and care, the climate of America will preserve the races of domestic
animals as large as the European stock from which they are derived; and
consequently that the third member of Mons. de Buffon's assertion, that the
domestic animals are subject to degeneration from the climate of America, is as
probably wrong as the first and second were certainly so.

That the last part of it is erroneous, which affirms that the species of
American quadrupeds are comparatively few, is evident from the tables taken
together. By these it appears that there are an hundred species aboriginal of
America. Mons. de Buffon supposes about double that number existing on the
whole earth XXX. 219.
. Of these Europe, Asia, and Africa, furnish suppose 126; that is, the 26
common to Europe and America, and about 100 which are not in America at all.
The American species then are to those of the rest of the earth, as 100 to 126,
or 4 to 5. But the residue of the earth being double the extent of America, the
exact proportion would have been but as 4 to 8.

Hitherto I have considered this hypothesis as applied to brute animals only,
and not in its extension to the man of America, whether aboriginal or
transplanted. It is the opinion of Mons. de Buffon that the former furnishes no
exception to it. XVIII. 246.
Quoique le sauvage du nouveau monde soit a peu-pres de meme stature que
l'homme de notre monde, cela ne suffit pas pour qu'il puisse fair une
exception au fait general du rapetissement de la nature vivante dans tout ce
continent: le sauvage est foible and petit pa^ les organes de la generation; il
n'a ni poil, ni barbe, and nulle ardeur pour sa femelle. Quoique plus ledger que
^'Europeen, parce qu'il a plus d'habitude a courir, il est cependant beaucoup
moins fort de corpse; il est aussi bien moins sensible, and cependant plus
craintif and plus lache; il n'a nulle vivacite, nulle activite dans l'ame;
celle du crops est moins un exercice, un mouvement volontaire qu'une necessite
d'action causee par le besoin; otez lui la faim and la soif, vous detruirez en
meme temps le principe actif de tous ses mouvemens; il demeurera stupidement en
repos sur ses jambes ou couche pendant des (...) entiers. Il ne faut pas aller
chercher plus loin la cause de la vie dispersee des sauvages and de leur
eloignement pour la societe: la plus precieuse etincelle du feu de la nature
leur a ete refusee; ils manquent d'ardeur pour leur femelle, and par consequent
d'amour pour leur semblables: ne connoissant pas l'att^^ ement le plus vif, le
plus tender de tous, leurs antres sentimens de ce genre, sont froids and
languissans; ils aiment foiblement leurs peers and leurs enfans; la societe la
plus intime de toutes, celle de la meme famille, n'a done chez eux que de
foibles liens; la societe d'une famille a l'autre n'en a point du tout: des
lors nulle reunion, nulle republique, nulle etat social. La physique de l'amour
fait chez eux le moral des moeurs; leur coeu^est glace, leur societe and leur
empire dur. Ils ne regardent leurs femmes que comme des servantes de peine ou
des betes de sum qu'ils chargent, sans menagement, du fardeau de leur chasse,
and qu'ils forcent, sans pity, sans reconnoissance, a des ouvrages qui souvent
sont audessus de leurs forces: ils n'ont que peu d'enfans; ils en ont peu de
soin; tout se ^^ssent de leur premier defaut; ils sont indifferents parce
qu'ils sont peu puissants, and cette indifference pour le sex est la tache
originelle qui fletrit la nature, qui l'empeche de s'epanouir, and qui
detruisant les germes de la vie, coupe en meme temps la racine de la societe.
L'homme ne fait done point d'exception ici. La nature en lui refusant less
puissances de l'amour l'a plus maltraite and plus rapetisse qu'aucun des
animaux. An afflicting picture, indeed, which, for the honor of human nature,
I am glad to believe has no original. Of the Indian of South America I know
nothing; for I would not honor with the appellation of knowledge, what I
derive, from the fables published of them. These I believe to be just as true
as the fables of Esop. This belief is founded on what I have seen of man,
white, red, and black, and what has been written of him by authors, enlightened
themselves, and writing amidst an enlightened people. The Indian of North
America being more within our reach, I can speak of him somewhat from my own
knowledge, but more from the information of others better acquainted with him,
and on whose truth and judgment I can rely. From these sources I am able to
say, in contradiction to this representation, that he is neither more defective
in ardour, nor more impotent with his female, than the white reduced to the
same diet and exercise: that he is brave, when an enterprise depends on
bravery; education with him making the point of honor consist in the
destruction of an enemy by stratagem, and in the preservation of his own person
free from injury; or perhaps this is nature; while it is education which
teaches us to Sol Rodomonte sprezza di venire
Se non, dove la via meno e sicura.
Ariosto. 14. 117.
honor force more than finesse: that he will defend himself against an host of
enemies, always choosing to be killed, rather than In so judicious an author as
Don Ulloa, and one to whom we are indebted for the most precise information we
have of South America, I did not expect to find such assertions as the
following 'Los Indios vencidos son los mas cobardes y pusilanimes que se peuden
vei: -- Se hacen inoce^tes, le humillan hasta el desprecio, disculpan su
inconsiderado arrojo, y con las suplicas y los ruegos dan seguras pruebus de su
pusilanimidad. -- o lo que refieren las historias de la Conquista, sobre sus
grandes acciones, es en un sendito figurado, o el caracter de estas gentes no
es ahora segun era entonces; pero lo que no t^ene duda es, que las Naciones de
la part Septentrional subsisten en la misina libertad que siempre (...)
tenido, sin haber sido sojuzgados por algun Principe extrano, y que viven segun
(...) regimen y costumbres de toda la vida, sin que haya habido motivo para que
muden de caracter; y en estos se ve lo misino, que sucede en los del Peru, y de
(...) la America Meridional, reducidos, y que nunca lo han estado.' Noticias
Americanas. Entretenimiento XVIII.. I. Don Ulloa here admits, that the authors
who have described the Indians of South-America, before they were enslaved, had
represented them as a brave people, and therefore seems to have suspected that
the cowardice which he had observed in those of the present race might be the
effect of subjugation. But, supposing the Indians of North America to be
cowards also, he concludes the ancestors of those of South-America to have been
so too, and therefore that those author^ have given fictions for truth. He was
probably not acquainted himself with the Indians of North America, and had
formed his opinion of them from hearsay. Great numbers of French, of English,
and of Americans, are perfectly acquainted with these people. Had he had an
opportunity of enquiring of any of these, they would have told him, that there
never was an instance known of an Indian begging his life when in the power of
his enemies: on the contrary, that he courts death by every possible insult and
p^^^^ation. His reasoning then would have been reversed thus. 'Since the (...)
Indian of North America is brave, and authors tell us, that the ancest^^ of
those of South-America were brave also; it must follow, that the cowardice
(...) descendants is the effect of subjugation and (...) treatment.' For he
observes, (...).. 27. that 'les obrages los aniquilan por la ^^humanidad con
quese (...).
to surrender, though it be to the whites, who he knows will treat him well:
that in other situations also he meets death with more deliberation, and
endures tortures with a firmness unknown almost to religious enthusiasm with
us: that he is affectionate to his children, careful of them, and indulgent in
the extreme: that his affections comprehend his other connections, weakening,
as with us, from circle to circle, as they recede from the center: that his
friendships are strong and faithful to the uttermost A (...) ^^stance of this
appeared in the case of the late Col. Byrd, who was (...) Cherokee nation to
transact some business with them. It happened that so (...) disorderly people
had just killed one or two of that nation. It was therefore proposed in the
council of the Cherokees that Col. Byrd should (...) to death, in revenge for
the loss of their countrymen. Among them (...) chief called Silovee, who, on
some former occasion, had contracted an acquaintance and friendship with Col.
Byrd. He came to him every night in his (...), and told him not to be afraid,
they should not kill him. After many days deliberation, however, the
determination was, contrary to Silouee's expectation, that Byrd should be put
to death, and some warriors were dispatched as executioners. Silouee attended
them, and when they entered the tent, he threw himself between them and Byrd,
and said to the warriors, 'This man is my friend: before you get at him, you
must kill me.' On which they returned, and the council respected the principle
so much as to recede from their determination.
extremity: that his sensibility is keen, even the warriors weeping most
bitterly on the loss of their children, though in general they endeavor to
appear superior to human events: that his vivacity and activity of mind is
equal to ours in the same situation; hence his eagerness for hunting, and for
games of chance. The women are submitted to unjust drudgery. This I believe is
the case with every barbarous people. With such, force is law. The stronger sex
therefore imposes on the weaker. It is civilization alone which replaces women
in the enjoyment of their natural equality. That first teaches us to subdu^^^^^
selfish passions, and to respect those rights in others which we value in
ourselves. Were we in equal barbarism, our females would be equal drudges. The
man with them is less strong than with us, but their women stronger than ours;
and both for the same obvious reason; because our man and their woman is
habituated to labor, and formed by it. With both races the sex which is
indulged with ease is least athletic. An Indian man is small in the hand and
wrist, for the same reason for which a sailor is large and strong in the arms
and shoulders, and a porter in the legs and thighs. -- They raise fewer
children than we do. The causes of this are to be found, not in a difference of
nature, but of circumstance. The women very frequently attending the men in
their parties of war and of hunting, childbearing becomes extremely
inconvenient to them. It is said, therefore, that they have learned the
practice of procuring abortion by the use of some vegetable; and that it even
extends to prevent conception for a considerable time after. During these
parties they are exposed to numerous hazards, to excessive exertions, to the
greaest extremities of hunger. Even at their homes the nation depends for food,
through a certain part of every year, on the gleanings of the forest: that is,
they experience a famine once in every year. With all animals, if the female be
badly fed, or not fed at all, her young perish: and if both male and female be
reduced to like want, generation becomes less active, less productive. To the
obstacles then of want and hazard, which nature has opposed to the
multiplication of wild animals, for the purpose of restraining their numbers
within certain bounds, those of labor and of voluntary abortion are added with
the Indian. No wonder then if they multiply less than we do. Where food is
regularly supplied, a single farm will show more of cattle, than a whole
country of forests can of buffaloes. The same Indian women, when married to
white traders, who feed them and their children plentifully and regularly, who
exempt them from excessive drudgery, who keep them stationary and unexposed to
accident, produce and raise as many children as the white women. Instances are
known, under these circumstances, of their rearing a dozen children. An inhuman
practice once prevailed in this country, of making slaves of the Indians. It is
a fact well known with us, that the Indian women so enslaved produced and
raised as numerous families as either the whites or blacks among whom they
lived. -- It has been said, that Indians have less hair than the whites, except
on the head. But this is a fact of which fair proof can scarcely be had. With
them it is disgraceful to be hairy on the body. They say it likens them to
hogs. They therefore pluck the hair as fast as it appears. But the traders who
marry their women, and prevail on them to discontinue this practice, say, that
nature is the same with them as with the whites. Nor, if the fact be true, is
the consequence necessary which has been drawn from it. Negroes have
notoriously less hair than the whites; yet they are more ardent. But if cold
and moisture be the agents of nature for diminishing the races of animals, how
comes she all at once to suspend their operation as to the physical man of the
new world, whom the Count acknowledges to be a peu pres de meme stature que
l'homme de notre monde, and to let loose their influence on his moral
faculties? How has this combination of the elements and other physical causes,
so contrary to the enlargement of animal nature in this new world, these
obstacles to the development and formation of great germs XVIII. 146.
, been arrested and suspended, so as to permit the human body to acquire its
just dimensions, and by what inconceivable process has their action been
directed on his mind alone? To judge of the truth of this, to form a just
estimate of their genius and mental powers, more facts are wanting, and great
allowance to be made for those circumstances of their situation which call for
a display of particular talents only. This done, we shall probably find that
they are formed in mind as well as in body, on the same module with the Linn.
Syst. Definition of a Man.
'Homo sapiens Europaeus.' The principles of their society forbidding all
compulsion, they are to be led to duty and to enterprise by personal influence
and persuasion. Hence eloquence in council, bravery and address in war, become
the foundations of all consequence with them. To these acquirements all their
faculties are directed. Of their bravery and address in war we have multiplied
proofs, because we have been the subjects on which they were exercised. Of
their eminence in oratory, we have fewer examples, because it is displayed
chiefly in their own councils. Some, however, we have of very superior luster.
I may challenge the whole orations of Demosthenes and Cicero, and of any more
eminent orator, if Europe has furnished more eminent, to produce a single
passage, superior to the speech of Logan, a Mingo chief, to Lord Dunmore, when
governor of this state. And, as a testimony of their talents in this line, I
beg leave to introduce it, first stating the incidents necessary for
understanding it. In the spring of the year 1774, a robbery and murder were
committed on an inhabitant of the frontiers of Virginia, by two Indians of the
Shawanee tribe. The neighboring whites, according to their custom, undertook
to punish this outrage in a summary way. Col. Cresap, a man infamous for the
many murders he had committed on those much injure^ people, collected a party,
and proceeded down the Kanhaway in quest of vengeance. Unfortunately, a canoe
of women and children, with one man only, was seen coming from the opposite
shore, unarmed, and unsuspecting an hostile attack from the whites. Cresap and
his party concealed themselves on the bank of the river, and the moment the
canoe reached the shore, singled out their objects, and, at one fire, killed
every person in it. This happened to be the family of Logan, who had long been
distinguished as a friend of the whites. This unworthy return provoked his
vengeance. He accordingly signalized himself in the war which ensued. In the
autumn of the same year, a decisive battle was fought at the mouth of the Great
Kanhaway, between the collected forces of the Shawanees, Mingoes, and
Delawares, and a detachment of the Virginia militia. The Indians were defeated,
and sued for peace. Logan however disdained to be seen among the suppliants.
But, lest the sincerity of a treaty should be distrusted, from which so
distinguished a chief absented himself, he sent by a messenger the following
speech to be delivered to lord Dunmore.

I appeal to any white man to say, if ever he entered Logan's cabin hungry, and
he gave him not meat; if ever he came cold and asked, and he clothed him not.
During the course of the last long and bloody war, Logan remained idle in his
cabin, an advocate for peace. Such was my love for the whites, that my
countrymen pointed as they passed, and said, 'Logan is the friend of white
men.' I had even thought to have lived with you, but for the injuries of one
man. Col. Cresap, the last spring, in cold blood, and unprovoked, murdered all
the relations of Logan, not sparing even my women and children. There runs not
a drop of my blood in the veins of any living creature. This called on me for
revenge. I have sought it: I have killed many: I have fully glutted my
vengeance. For my country, I rejoice at the beams of peace. But do not harbor
a thought, that mine is the joy of fear. Logan never felt fear. He will not
turn on his heel to save his life. Who is there to mourn for Logan? -- Not one.

Before we condemn the Indians of this continent as wanting genius, we must
consider that letters have not yet been introduced among them. Were we to
compare them in their present state with the Europeans, North of the Alps, when
the Roman arms and arts first crossed those mountains, the comparison would be
unequal, because, at that time, those parts of Europe were swarming with
numbers; because numbers produce emulation, and multiply the chances of
improvement, and one improvement begets another. Yet I may safely ask, how many
good poets, how many able mathematicians, how many great inventors in arts or
sciences, had Europe, North of the Alps, then produced? And it was sixteen
centuries (...) this before a Newton could be formed. I do not mean to deny,
that there are varieties in the race of man, distinguished by their powers both
of body and mind. I believe there are, as I see to be the case in the races of
other animals. I only mean to suggest a doubt, whether the bulk and faculties
of animals depend on the side of the Atlantic on which their food happens to
grow, or which furnishes the elements of which they are compounded? Whether
nature has enlisted herself as a Cis or Trans-Atlantic partisan? I am induced
to suspect, there has been more eloquence than sound reasoning displayed in
support of this theory; that it is one of those cases where the judgment has
been seduced by a glowing pen: and whilst I render every tribute of honor and
esteem to the celebrated zoologist, who has added, and is still adding, so so
many precious things to the treasures of science, I must doubt whether in this
instance he has not cherished error also, by lending her for a moment his vivid
imagination and bewitching language. (4)

So far the Count de Buffon has carried this new theory of the tendency of
nature to belittle her productions on this side the Atlantic. Its application
to the race of whites, transplanted from Europe, remained for the Abbe Raynal.
On doit etre etonne (he says) que l'Amerique n'ait pas encore produit un bon
poet, un habile mathematicien, un homme de genie dans un seul art, ou une
seule science. 7. Hist. Philos. p. 92. ed. Maestricht. 1774. America has not
yet produced one good poet. When we shall have existed as a people as long as
the Greeks did before they produced a Homer, the Romans a Vi^^^, the French a
Ra ^ine and Voltaire, the English a Shakespeare and Milton, should this reproach
be still true, we will enquire from what unfriendly causes it has proceeded,
that the other countries of Europe and quarters of the earth shall not have
inscribed any name in the roll of poets. Has the world as yet produced more
than two poets, acknowledged to be such by all nations? An Englishm^n, only,
reads Milton with delight, an Italian Tasso, a Frenchma^ the Henriade, a
Portugue's Camoens: but Homer and Virgil have been the rapture of every age and
nation: they are read with enthusiasm in their originals by those who can read
the originals, and in translations by those who cannot.
But neither has America produced 'one able mathematician, one man of genius in
a single art or a single science.' In war we have produced a Washington, whose
memory will be adored while liberty shall have votaries, whose name will
triumph over time, and will in future ages assume its just station among the
most celebrated worthies of the world, when that wretched philosophy shall be
forgotten which would have arranged him among the degeneracies of nature. In
physics we have produced a Franklin, than whom no one of the present age has
made more important discoveries, nor has enriched philosophy with more, or more
ingenious solutions of the phenomena of nature. We have supposed Mr.
Rittenhouse second to no stronomer living: that in genius he must be the first,
because he is self-taught. As an artist he has exhibited as great a proof of
mechanical genius as the world has ever produced. He has not indeed made a
world; but he has by imitation approached nearer its Maker than any man who has
lived from the creation to this day. There are various ways of keeping truth
out of sight. Mr. Rittenhouse's model of the planetary system has the plagiary
appellation of an Orrery; and the quadrant invented by Godfrey, an American
also, and with the aid of which the European nations traverse the globe. (...)
Hadley's quadrant.
As in philosophy and war, so in government, in oratory, in painting, in the
plastic art, we might show that America, though but a child of yesterday, has
already given hopeful proofs of genius, as well of the nobler kinds, which
arouse the best feelings of man, which call him into action, which substantiate
his freedom, and conduct him to happiness, as of the subordinate, which serve
to amuse him only. We therefore suppose, that this reproach is as unjust as it
is unkind; and that, of the geniuses which adorn the present age, America
contributes its full share. For comparing it with those countries, where genius
is most cultivated, where are the most excellent models for art, and
scaffoldings for the attainment of science, as France and England for instance,
we calculate thus. The United States contain three millions of inhabitants;
France twenty millions; and the British islands ten. We produce a Washington, a
Franklin, a Rittenhouse. France then should have half a dozen in each of these
lines, and Great Britain half that number, equally eminent. It may be true,
that France has: we are but just becoming acquainted with her, and our
acquaintance so far gives us high ideas of the genius of her inhabitants. It
would be injuring too many of them to name particularly a Voltaire, a Buffon,
the constellation of Encyclopedists, the Abbe (...) himself, etc. etc. We
therefore have reason to believe she can produce her full quota of genius. The
present war having so long cut off all communication with Great Britain, we are
not able to make a fair estimate of the state of science in that country. The
spirit in which she wages war, is the only sample before our eyes, and that
does not seem the legitimate offspring either of science or of civilization.
The sun of her glory is fast descending to the horizon. Her philosophy has
crossed the Channel, her freedom the Atlantic, and herself seems passing to
that awful dissolution, whose issue is not given human foresight to scan In a
later edition of the Abbe Raynal's work, he has withdrawn his censure from that
part of the new world inhabited by the Federo-Americans; but has left it still
on the other parts. North America has always been more accessible to strangers
than South. If he was mistaken then as to the former, he may be so as to the
latter. The glimmerings which reach us from South-America enable us only to see
that its inhabitants are held under the accumulated pressure of slavery,
superstition and ignorance. Whenever they shall be able to rise under this
weight, and to show themselves to the rest of the world, they will probably
show they are like the rest of the world. We have not yet sufficient evidence
that there are more lakes and fogs in South-America than in other parts of the
earth. As little do we know what would be their operation on the mind of man.
That country has been visited by Spaniards and Portugueze chiefly, and almost
exclusively. These, going from a country of the old world remarkably dry in its
soil and climate, fancied there were more lakes and fogs in South-America than
in Europe. An inhabitant of Ireland, Sweden, or Finland would have formed the
contrary opinion. Had South-America then been discovered and settled by a
people from a fenny country, it would probably have been represented as much
drier than the old world. A patient pursuit of facts, and cautious combination
and comparison of them, is the drudgery to which man is subjected by his Maker,
if he wishes to attain sure knowledge.
.

Having given a sketch of our minerals, vegetables, and quadrupeds, and being
led by a proud theory to make a comparison of the latter with those of Europe,
and to extend it to the man of America, both aboriginal and emigrant, I will
proceed to the remaining articles comprehended under the present query.

Between ninety and an hundred of our birds have been described by Catesby. His
drawings are better as to form and attitude, than coloring, which is generally
too high. They are the following.

BIRDS OF VIRGINIA.
Linnoean Designation. Catesby's Designation. Popular Names. Buffon oiseaux.
Lanius tyrannus Muscicapa corona rubra 1.55 Tyrant. Field marten 8.398 Vultur
aura Buteo specie Gallo-pavonis 1.6 Turkey buzzard 1.246 Falco leucocephalus
Aquila capite albo 1.1 Bald Eagle 1.138 Falco sparverius Accipiter minor 1.5
Little hawk. Sparrow hawk Falco columbarius Accipiter palumbarius 1.3 Pigeon
hawk 1.338 Falco furcatus Accipiter cauda furcata 1.4 Forked tail hawk
1.286.312 Accipiter piscatorius 1.2 Fishing hawk 1.199 Strix asio Noctua aurita
minor 1.7 Little owl 1.141 Psittacus Caroliniensis Psittacus Caroliniensis 1.11
Parrot of Carolina. Perroquet 11.383 Corvus cristatus Pica glandaria, caerulea,
cristata 1.15 Blue jay 5.164 Oriolus Baltimore Icterus ex aureo nigroque varius
1.48 Baltimore bird 5.318 Oriolus spurius Icterus minor 1.49 Bastard Baltimore
5.321 Gracula quiscula Monedula purpurea 1.12 Purple jackdaw. Crow blackbird
5.134 Cuculus Americanus Cuculus Caroliniensis 1.9 Carolina cuckoo 12.62 Picus
principalis Picus maximus rostro albo 1.16 White bill woodpecker 13.69 Picus
pileatus Picus niger maximus, capite rubro 1.17 Larger red-crested woodpecker
13.72 Picus erythrocephalus Picus capite toto rubro 1.20 Red-headed woodpecker
13.83 Picus auratus Picus major alis aureis 1.18 Gold winged woodpecker. Yucker
13.59 Picus Carolinus Picus ventre rubro 1.19 Red bellied woodpecker 13.105
Picus pubescens Picus varius minimus 1.21 Smallest spotted woodpecker 13.113
Picus villosus Picus medius quasi-villosus 1.19 Hairy woodpecker. Spec.
woodpec. 13.111 Picus varius Picus varius minor ventre luteo 1.21 Yellow
bellied woodpecker 13.115 Sitta Europaea Sitta capite nigro 1.22 Nuthatch
10.213 Sitta Europaea Sitta capite fusco 1.22 Small Nuthatch 10.214 Alcedo
alcyon Ispida 1.69 Kingfisher 13.310 Certhia pinus Parus Americanus lutescens
1.61 Pinecreeper 9.433 Trochilus colubris Mellivora avis Caroliniensis 1.65
Humming bird 11.16 Anas Canadensis Anser Canadensis 1.92 Wild goose 17.122 Anas
bucephala Anas minor purpureo capite 1.95 Buffel's-head duck 17.356 Anas
rustica Anas minor ex albo and fusco vario 1.98 Little brown duck 17.413 Anas
discors. Querquedula Americana variegata 1.10 White face teal 17.403 Anas
discors. ^. Querquedula Americana fusca 1.99 Blue wing teal 17.405 Anas sponsa
Anas Americanus cristatus elegans 1.97 Summer duck 17.351 Anas Americanus lato
rostro 1.96 Blue wing shoveler 17.275 Mergus cucullatus Anas cristatus 1.94
Round crested duck 15.437 Columbus podiceps Prodicipes minor rostro vario 1.91
Pied bill dopchick 15.383 Ardea Herodias Ardea cristata maxima Americana 3.10
Largest crested heron 14.113 Ardea violacea Ardea stellaris cristata Americana
1.79 Crested bittern 14.134 Ardea caerulea Ardea caerulea 1.76 Blue heron.
Crane 14.131 Ardea virescens Ardea stellaris minima 1.80 Small bittern 14.142
Ardea aequinoctialis Ardea alba minor Caroliniensis 1.77 Little white heron
14.136 Ardea stellaris Americana 1.78 Brown bittern. Indian hen 14.175 Tantalus
loculator Pelicanus Americanus 1.81 Wood pelican 13.403 Tantalus alber Numenius
albus 1.82 White curlew 15.62 Tantalus fuscus Numenius fuscus 1.83 Brown curlew
15.64 Charadrius vociferus Pluvialis vociferus 1.71 Chattering plover. Kildee
15.151 Haematopus ostralegus Haematopus 1.85 Oyster catcher 15.185 Rallus
Virginianus Gallinula Americana 1.70 Soree. Ral-bird 15.256 Meleagris Gallopavo
Gallopavo Sylvestris x^iv. Wild turkey 3.187.229 Tetrao Virginianus Perdix
Sylvestris Virginiana [pus 3.12 American partridge. American quail 4.237
Urogallus minor, or a kind of Lago 3.1 Pheasant. Mountain partridge 3.409
Columba passerina Turtur minimus guttatus 1.26 Ground dove 4.404 Columba
migratoria Palumbus migratorius 1.23 Pigeon of passage. Wild pigeon 4.351
Columba Caroliniensis Turtur Caroliniensis 1.24 Turtle. Turtle dove. 4.401
Alauda alpestris. Alauda gutture flavo 1.32 Lark. Sky lark 9.79 Alauda magna
Alauda magna 1.33 Field lark. Large lark 6.59 Sturnusniger alis superne
rubentibus 1.13 Red wing. Starling. Marsh blackbird 5.293 Turdus migratorius
Turdus pilaris migratorius 1.29 Fieldfare of Carolina Rob. redbreast 5.426
9.257 Turdus rufus Turdus rufus 1.28 Fox colored thrush. Thrush 5.449 Turdus
polyglottos Turdus minor cinereo albus non ma[culatus 1.27 Mocking bird 5.451
Turdus minimus 1.31 Little thrush 5.400 Ampelis garrulus. ^. Garrulus
Caroliniensis 1.46 Chatterer 6.162 Loxia Cardinalis Coccothraustes rubra 1.38
Red bird. Virginia nightingale 6.185 Loxia Caerulea Coccothraustes caerulea
1.39 Blue gross beak 8.125 Emberiza hyemalis Passer nivalis 1.36 Snow bird 8.47
Emberiza Oryzivora Hortulanus Caroliniensis 1.14 Rice bird 8.49 Emberiza Ciris
Fringilla tricolor 1.44 Painted finch 7.247 Tanagra cyanea Linaria caerulea
1.45 Blue linnet 7.122 Passerculos 1.35 Little sparrow 7.1^0 Passer fuscus 1.34
Cowpen bird 7.196 Fringilla erythroph[thalma Passer niger oculis rubris 1.34
Towhe bird 7.201 Fringilla tristis Carduelis Americanus 1.43 American
goldfinch. Le^tuce bird 7.297 Fringilla purpurea 1.41 Purple finch 8.129
Muscicapa crinita Muscicapa cristata ventre luteo 1.52 Crested flycatcher 8.379
Muscicapa rubra Muscicapa rubra 1.56 Summer red bird 8.410 Muscicapa ruticilla
Ruticilla Americana 1.67 Red start 8.349 9.259 Muscicapa Caroliniensis
Muscicapa vertice nigro 1.66 Cat bird 8.372 Muscicapa nigrescens 1.53 Black cap
flycatcher 8.341 Muscicapa fusca 1.54 Little brown flycatcher 8.344 Muscicapa
oculis rubris 1.54 Red eyed flycatcher 8.337 Motacilla Sialis Rubicula
Americana caerulea 1.47 Blue bird 9.308 Motacilla regulus Regulus cristatus
3.13 Wren 10.58 Motacilla trochisus. ^. Oenanthe Americana pectore luteo 1.50
Yellow breasted chat 6.96 Parus bicolor Parus cristatus 1.57 Crested titmouse
10.181 Parus Americanus Parus fringillaris 1.64 Finch creeper 9.442 Parus
Virginianus Parus uropygeo luteo 1.58 Yellow rump 10.184 Parus cucullo nigro
1.60 Hooded titmouse 10.183 Parus Americanus gutture luteo 1.62 Yellow throated
creeper Parus Caroliniensis 1.63 Yellow titmouse 9.431 Hirundo Pelasgia Hirundo
cauda aculeata Americana 3.8 American swallow 12.478 Hirundo purpurea Hirundo
purpurea 1.51 Purple marten. House marten 12.445 Caprimulgus Europaeus ^
Caprimulgus 1.8 Goatsucker. Great bat 12.243 Caprimulgus Europaeus ^
Caprimulgus minor Americanus 3.16 Whip poor will 12.246

Besides these, we have, The Royston crow. Corvus cornix. Crane. Ardea
Canadensis. House swallow. Hirundo ru^^ica. Ground swallow. Hirundo riparia.
Greatest gray eagle. Smaller turkey buzzard, with a feathered head. Greatest
owl, or night hawk. Wet hawk, which feeds flying. Raven. Water pelican of the
Mississippi, whose pouch holds a peck. Swan. Loon. Cormorant. The Duck and
Mallard. Widgeon. Sheldrach, or Canvas back. Black head. Ballcoot. Sprigtail.
Didapper, or Dopchick. Spoon billed duck. Water-witch. Water-pheasant.
Mow-bird. Blue Peter. Water wag^ail. Yellow-legged snipe. Squatting snipe.
Small plover. Whistling plover. Woodcock. Red bird, with black head, wings and
tail.


And doubtless many others which have not yet been described and classed.

To this catalogue of our indigenous animals, I will add a short account of an
anomaly of nature, taking place sometimes in the race of negroes brought from
Africa, who, though black themselves, have, in rare instances, white children,
called Albinos. I have known four of these myself, and have faithful accounts
of three others. The circumstances in which all the individuals agree are
these. They are of a pallid cadaverous white, untinged with red, without any
colored spots or seams; their hair of the sa^^ kind of white, short, coarse,
and curled as (...) that of the negro; all of them well formed, strong,
healthy, perfect in their senses, except that of sight, and born of parents who
had no mixture of white blood. Three of these Albinos were sisters, having two
other full sisters, who were black. The youngest of the three was killed by
lightning, at twelve years of age. The eldest died at about 27 years of age, in
childbed, with her second child. The middle one is now alive in health, and has
issue, as the eldest had, by a black man, which issue was black. They are
uncommonly shrewd, quick in their apprehensions and in reply. Their eyes are in
a perpetual tremulous vibration, very weak, and much affected by the sun: but
they see much better in the night than we do. They are of the property of Col.
Skipwith, of Cumberland. The fourth is a negro woman, whose parents came from
Guinea, and had three other children, who were of their own color. She is
freckled, her eyesight so weak that she is obliged to wear a bonnet in the
summer; but it is better in the night than day. She had an Albino child by a
black man. It died at the age of a few weeks. These were the property of Col.
Carter, of Albemarle. A sixth instance is a woman of the property of a Mr.
Butler, near Petersburg. She is stout and robust, has issue a daughter, jet
black, by a black man. I am not informed as to her eyesight. The seventh
instance is of a male belonging to a Mr. Lee of Cumberland. His eyes are
tremulous and weak. He is (...) of stature, and now advanced in years. He is
the only male of the Albinos which have come within my information. Whatever be
the cause of the disease in the skin, or in its coloring matter, which
produces this change, it seems more incident to the female than male sex. To
these I may add the mention of a negro man within my own knowledge, born black,
and of black parents; on whose chin, when a boy, a white spot appeared. This
continued to increase till he became a man by which time it had extended over
his chin, lips, one cheek, the under jaw, and neck on that side. It is of the
Albino white, without any mixture of red, and has for several years been
stationary. He is robust and healthy, and the change of color was not
accompanied with any sensible disease, either general or topical.

Of our fish and insects there has been nothing like a full description or
collection. More of them are described in Catesby than in any other work. Many
also are to be found in Sir Hans Sloane's Jamaica, as being common to that and
this country. The honey-bee is not a native of our continent. Marcgrave indeed
mentions a species of honey-bee in Brasil. But this has no sting, and is
therefore different from the one we have, which resembles perfectly that of
Europe. The Indians concur with us in the tradition that it was brought from
Europe; but when, and by whom, we know not. The bees have generally extended
themselves into the country, a little in advance of the white settlers. The
Indians therefore call them the white man's fly, and consider their approach as
indicating the approach of the settlements of the whites. A question here
occurs, How far northwardly have these insects been found? That they are
unknown in Lapland, I infer from Scheffer's information, that the Laplanders
eat the pine bark, prepared in a certain way, instead of those things sweetened
with sugar. Hoc comedunt pro rebus saccharo conditis. Scheff. Lapp. c. 18.
Certainly if they had honey, it would be a better substitute for sugar than any
preparation of the pine bark. Kalm tells us I. 126.
the honey-bee cannot live through the winter in Canada. They furnish then an
additional proof of the remarkable fact first observed by the Count de Buffon,
and which has thrown such a blaze of light on the field of natural history,
that no animals are found in both continents, but those which are able to bear
the cold of those regions where they probably join.

QUERY VII.
A NOTICE of all that can increase the progress of human knowledge?

Under the latitude of this query, I will presume it not improper nor
unacceptable to furnish some data for estimating the climate of Virginia.
Journals of observations on the quantity of rain, and degree of heat, being
lengthy, confused, and too minute to produce general and distinct ideas, I have
taken five years' observations, to wit, from 1772 to 1777, made in
Williamsburgh and its neighborhood, have reduced them to an average for every
month in the year, and stated those averages in the following table, adding an
analytical view of the winds during the same period.

Fall of rain. etc. in inches. Least and greatest daily heat by Fahrenheit's
thermometer. WINDS. N. N.E. E. S. E. S. S. W. W. N. W. Total. Jan. 3.192 38 to
44 73 47 32 10 11 78 40 46 337 Feb. 2.049 41 47 61 52 24 11 4 63 30 31 276
March 3.95 48 54 49 44 38 28 14 83 29 33 318 April 3.68 56 62 35 44 54 1^ 9 58
18 20 257 May 2.871 63 70 27 36 62 23 7 74 32 20 281 June 3.751 71 78 22 34 43
24 13 81 25 25 267 July 4.497 77 82 41 44 75 15 7 95 32 19 328 August 9.153 76
81 43 52 40 30 9 103 27 30 334 Sept. 4.761 69 74 70 60 51 18 10 81 18 37 345
Oct. 3.633 61 66 52 77 64 15 6 56 23 34 327 Nov. 2.617 47 53 74 21 20 14 9 63
35 58 294 Dec. 2.877 43 48 64 37 18 16 10 91 42 56 334 Total. 47.038 8 AM. 4
PM. 611 548 521 223 109 926 351 409 3698

The rains of every month, (as of January, for instance) through the whole
period of years, were added separately, and an average drawn from them. The
coolest and warmest point of the same day in each year of the period, were
added separately, and an average of the greatest cold and greatest heat of that
day, was formed. From the averages of every day in the month, a general average
for the whole month was formed. The point from which the wind blew, was
observed two or three times in every day. These observations, in the month of
January, for instance, through the whole period, amounted to 337. At 73 of
these, the wind was from the north; at 47 from the North-east, etc. So that it
will be easy to see in what proportion each wind usually prevails in each
month: or, taking the whole year, the total of observations through the whole
period having been 3698, it will be observed that 611 of them were from the
North, 558 from the North-east, etc.

Though by this table it appears we have on an average 47 inches of rain
annually, which is considerably more than usually falls in Europe, yet from the
information I have collected, I suppose we have a much greater proportion of
sunshine here than there. Perhaps it will be found, there are twice as many
cloudy days in the middle parts of Europe, as in the United States of America.
I mention the middle parts of Europe, because my information does not extend to
its Northern or Southern parts.

In an extensive country, it will of course be expected that the climate is not
the same in all its parts. It is remarkable, that, proceeding on the same
parallel of latitude westwardly, the climate becomes colder in like manner as
when you proceed northwardly. This continues to be the case till you attain the
summit of the Alleghaney, which is the highest land between the ocean and the
Mississippi. From thence, descending in the same latitude to the Mississippi,
the change reverses; and, if we may believe travelers, it becomes warmer there
than it is in the same latitude on the sea side. Their testimony is
strengthened by the vegetables and animals which subsist and multiply there
naturally, and do not on our seacoast. Thus Catalpas grow spontaneously on the
Mississippi, as far as the latitude of 37, and ^^^ds as far as 38. Perroquets
even winter on the S^^oto, in the 39th degree of latitude. In the summer of
1779, when the thermometer was at 90 at Monticello, and 96 at Williamsburgh, it
was 110 at Kaskaskia. Perhaps the mountain, which overhangs this village on the
north side, may, by its reflection, have contributed somewhat to produce this
heat. The difference of temperature of the air at the seacoast, or on the
Chesapeak bay, and at the Alleghaney, has not been ascertained; but cotemporary
observations, made at Williamsburgh, or in its neighborhood, and at
Monticello, which is on the most eastern ridge of the mountains, called the
South West, where they are intersected by the Rivanna, have furnished a ratio
by which that difference may in some degree be conjectured. These observations
make the difference between Williamsburgh and the nearest mountains, at the
position beforementioned, to be on an average 6 degrees of Farenheits's
thermometer. Some allowance, however, is to be made for the difference of
latitude between these two places, the latter being 38 8 17 which is 52 22
North of the former. By cotemporary observations of between five and six weeks,
the averaged and almost unvaried difference of the height of mercury in the
barometer* at those two places, was 784 of an inch, the atmosphere at
Monticello being so much the lightest, that is to say, about one-thirty-seventh
of its whole weight. It should be observed, however, that the hill of
Monticello is of 500 feet perpendicular height above the river which washes its
base. This position being nearly central between our northern and southern
boundaries, and between the bay and Alleghaney, may be considered as furnishing
the best average of the temperature of our climate. Williamsburgh is much too
near the South-eastern corner to give a fair idea of our general temperature.

But a more remarkable difference is in the winds which prevail in the
different parts of the country. The following table exhibits a comparative view
of the winds prevailing at Williamsburgh, and at Monticello. It is formed by
reducing nine months observations at Monticello to four principal points, to
wit, the North-east, South-east, South-west, and North-west; these points being
perpendicular to, or parallel with our coast, mountains, and rivers: and by
reducing in like manner, an equal number of observations, to wit, 421 from the
preceding table of winds at Williamsburgh, taking them proportionably from
every point.

N.E. S.E. S.W. N.W. Total. Williamsburgh 127 61 132 101 421 Monticello 32 91
126 172 421

By this it may be seen that the South-west wind prevails equally at both
places; that the North-east is, next to this, the principal wind toward the
seacoast, and the North-west is the predominant wind at the mountains. The
difference between these two winds to sensation, and in fact, is very great.
The North-east is loaded with vapor, insomuch, that the salt-makers have found
that their crystals would not shoot while that blows; it brings a distressing
chill, and is heavy and oppressive to the spirits: the North-west is dry,
cooling, elastic and animating. The Eastern and South-eastern breezes come on
generally in the afternoon. They have advanced into the country very sensibly
within the memory of people now living. They formerly did not penetrate far
above Williamsburgh. They are now frequent at Richmond, and every now and then
reach the mountains. They deposit most of their moisture however before they
get that far. As the lands become more cleared, it is probable they will extend
still further westward.

Going out into the open air, in the temperate, and warm months of the year, we
often meet with bodies of warm air, which passing by us in two or three
seconds, do not afford time to the most sensible thermometor to seize their
temperature. Judging from my feelings only, I think they approach the ordinary
heat of the human body. Some of them perhaps go a little beyond it. They are of
about 20 or 30 feet diamiter horizontally. Of their height we have no
experience, but probably they are globular volums wasted or rolled along with
the wind. But whence taken, where found, or how generated? They are not to be
ascribed to volcanos, because we have none. They do not happen in the winter
when the farmers kindle large fires in clearing up their grounds. They are not
confined to the spring season, when we have fires which traverse whole
counties, consuming the leaves which have fallen from the trees. And they are
too frequent and general to be ascribed to accidental fires. I am persuaded
their cause must be sought for in the atmosphere itself, to aid us in which I
know but of these constant circumstances; a dry air; a temperature as warm at
least as that of the spring or autumn; and a moderate current of wind. They are
most frequent about sunset; rare in the middle parts of the day; and I do not
recollect having ever met with them in the morning.

The variation in the weight of our atmosphere, as indicated by the barometer,
is not equal to two inches of mercury. During twelve months observation at
Williamsburgh, the extremes were 29, and 30.86 inches, the difference being
1.86 of an inch: and in nine months, during which the height of the mercury was
noted at Monticello, the extremes were 28.48 and 29.69 inches, the variation
being 1.21 of an inch. A gentleman, who has observed his barometer many years,
assures me it has never varied two inches. Cotemporary observations, made at
Monticello and Williamsburgh, proved the variations in the weight of air to be
simultaneous and corresponding in these two places.

Our changes from heat to cold, and cold to heat, are very sudden and great.
The mercury in Farenheit's thermometer has been known to descend from 92 to 47
in thirteen hours.

It is taken for granted, that the preceding table of average heat will not
give a false idea on this subject, as it proposes to state only the ordinary
heat and cold of each month, and not those which are extraordinary. At
Williamsburgh in August 1766, the mercury in Farenheit's thermometor was at 98
corresponding with 29 of Reaumur. At the same place in January 1780, it was 6
corresponding with 11 below 0, of Reaumur. I believe At Paris, in 1753, the
mercury in Reaumur's thermometer was at 30(...) above o, and in 1770, it was at
16 below o. The extremities of heat and cold therefore at Paris, are greater
than at Williamsburgh, which is in the hottest part of Virginia.
these may be considered to be nearly the extremes of heat and cold in that
part of the country. The latter may most certainly, as at that time, York
river, at York town, was frozen over, so that people walked across it; a
circumstance which proves it to have been colder than the winter of 1740, 1741,
usually called the cold winter, when York river did not freeze over at that
place. In the same season of 1780, Chesapeak bay was solid, from its head to
the mouth of Patowmac. At Annapolis, where it is 5 miles over between the
nearest points of land, the ice was from 5 to 7 inches thick quite across, so
that loaded carriages went over on it. Those, our extremes of heat and cold, of
6 and 98 were indeed very distressing to us, and were thought to put the extent
of the human constitution to considerable trial. Yet a Siberian would have
considered them as scarcely a sensible variation. At Jenniseitz in that
country, in latitude 58 27 we are told, that the cold in 1735 sunk the mercury
by Farenheit's scale to 126 below nothing; and the inhabitants of the same
country use stove rooms two or three times a week, in which they stay two hours
at a time, the atmosphere of which raises the mercury to 135 above nothing.
Late experiments show that the human body will exist in rooms heated to 140 of
Reaumur, equal to 347 of Farenheit's, and 135 above boiling water. The hottest
point of the 24 hours is about four o'clock, P.M. and the dawn of day the
coldest.

The access of frost in autumn, and its recess the spring, do not seem to
depend merely on the degree of cold; much less on the air's being at the
freezing point. White frosts are frequent when the thermometer is at 47 have
killed young plants of Indian corn at 48 and have been known at 54. Black
frost, and even ice, have been produced at 38, which is 6 degrees above the
freezing point. That other circumstances must be combined with the cold to
produce frost, is evident from this also, on the higher parts of mountains,
where it is absolutely colder than in the plains on which they stand, frosts do
not appear so early by a considerable space of time in autumn, and go off
sooner in the spring, than in the plains. I have known frosts so severe as to
kill the hiccory trees round about Monticello, and yet not injure the tender
fruit blossoms then in bloom on the top and higher parts of the mountain; and
in the course of 40 years, during which it has been settled, there have been
but two instances of a general loss of fruit on it: while, in the circumjacent
country, the fruit has escaped but twice in the last seven years. The plants of
tobacco, which grow from the roots of those which have been cut off in the
summer, are frequently green here at Christmas. This privilege against the
frost is undoubtedly combined with the want of dew on the mountains. That the
dew is very rare on their higher parts, I may say with certainty, from 12 years
observations, having scarcely ever, during that time seen an unequivocal proof
of its existence on them at all during summer. Severe frosts in the depth of
winter prove that the region of dews extends higher in that season than the
tops of the mountains: but certainly, (...) the summer season, the vapors, by
the time they attain that height, are become so attenuated as not to subside
and form a dew when the sun retires.

The weavil has not yet ascended the high mountains.

A more satisfactory estimate of our climate to some, may perhaps be formed, by
nothing the plants which grow here, subject however to be killed by our
severests colds. These are the fig, pomegranate, artichoke, and European
walnut. In mild winters, lettuce and endive require no shelter; but generally
they need a slight covering. I do not know that the want of long moss, reed,
myrtle, swamp laurel, holly and cypress, in the upper country, proeeds from a
greater degree of cold, nor that they were ever killed with any degree of cold
in the lower country. The aloe lived in Williamsburgh, in the open air, through
the severe winter of 1779, 1780.

A change in our climate, however, is taking place very sensibly. Both heats
and colds are become much more moderate within the memory even of the
middle-aged. Snows are less frequent and less deep. They do not often lie,
below the mountains, more than one, two, or three days, and very rarely a week.
They are remembered to have been formerly frequent, deep and of long
continuance. The elderly inform me, the earth used to be covered with snow
about three months in every year. The rivers, which then seldom failed to
freeze over in the course of the winter, scarcely ever do so now. This change
has produced an unfortunate fluctuation between heat and cold, in the spring of
the year, which is very fatal to fruits. From the year 1741 to 1769, an
interval of twenty-eight years, there was no instance of fruit killed by the
frost in the neighborhood of Monticello. An intense cold, produced by constant
snows, kept the buds locked up till the sun could obtain, in the spring of the
year, so fixed an ascendency as to dissolve those snows, and protect the buds,
during their devlopement, from every danger of returning cold. The accumulated
snows of the winter remaining to be dissolved all together in the spring,
produced those overflowings of our rivers, so frequent then, and so rare now.

Having had occasion to mention the particular situation of Monticello for
other purposes, I will just take notice that its elevation affords an
opportunity of seeing a phenomenon which is rare at land, though frequent at
sea. The seamen call it looming. Philosophy is as yet in the rear of the
seamen, for so far from having acconnted for it, she has not given ^t a name.
Its principal effect is to make distant objects appear larger, in opposition to
the general law of vision, by which they are diminished. I knew an instance, at
York-town, from whence the water prospect eastwardly is without termination,
wherein a canoe with three men, at a great distance was taken for a ship with
its three masts. I am little acquainted with the phenomenon as it shows itself
at sea; but at Monticello it is familiar. There is a solitary mountain about
forty miles off in the South, whose natural shape, as presented to view there,
is a regular cone; but, by the effect of looming, it sometimes subsides almost
totally in the horizon; sometimes it rises more acute and more elevated;
sometimes it is hemispherical; and sometimes its sides are perpendicular, its
top flat, and as broad as its base. In short it assumes at times the most
whimsical shapes, and all these perhaps successively in the same morning. The
blue ridge of mountains comes into view, in the north-east, at about 100 miles
distance, and approaching in a direct line, passes by within 20 miles, and goes
off to the south-west. This phenomenon begins to show itself on these
mountains, at about 50 miles distance and continues beyond that as far as they
are seen. I remark no particular state, either in the weight, moisture, or heat
of the atmosphere, necessary to produce this. The only constant circumstances
are its appearance in the morning only, and on objects at least 40 or 50 miles
distant. In this later circumstance, if not in both, it differs from the
looming on the water. Refraction will not account for the metamorphosis. That
only changes the proportions of length and breadth, base and altitude,
preserving the general outlines. Thus it may make a circle appear elliptical,
raise or depress a cone, but by none of its laws, as yet developed, will it
make a circle appear a square, or a cone a sphere.

QUERY VIII.
THE number of its inhabitants?

The following table shows the number of persons imported for the establishment
of our colony in its infant state, and the census of inhabitants at different
periods, extracted from our historians and public records, as particularly as I
have had opportunities and leisure to examine them. Successive lines in the
same year show successive periods of time in that year. I have stated the
census in two different columns, the whole inhabitants having been sometimes
numbered, and sometimes the tithes only. This term, with us, includes the free
males above 16 years of age, and slaves above that age of both sexes. A further
examination of our records would render this history of our population much
more satisfactory and perfect, by furnishing a greater number of intermediate
terms. Those however which are here stated will enable us to calculate, with a
considerable degree of precision, the rate at which we have increased. During
the infancy of the colony, while numbers were small, wars, importations, and
other accidental circumstances render the progression fluctuating and
irregular. By the year 1654, however it becomes tolerably uniform, importations
having in a great measure ceased from the Years. Settlers imported. Census of
Inhabitants. Census of Tithes. 1607 100 10 120 1608 130 70 1609 400 16 60 1610
150 200 1611 3 (...) ^00 1612 ^0 1^^^ 400 16^^ 200 40 600 ^^^^ ^^^ 16^^ ^00
1622 3^00 2500 162^ 3000 1632 2000 1644 48^^ 1645 ^000 1652 ^^^0 1654 ^200 1^00
22,000 1748 82,100 17^0 10^,000 1772 153,000 178^ 567,614 dissolution of the
company, and the inhabitants become too numerous to be sensibly affected by
Indian wars. Beginning at that period, therefore, we find that from thence to
the year 1772, our tithes had increased from 7209 to 153,000. The whole term
being of 118 years, yields a duplication once in every 27 years. The
intermediate enumerations taken in 1700, 1748, and 1759, furnish proofs of the
uniformity of this progression. Should this race of increase continue, we shall
have between six and seven millions of inhabitants within 95 years. If we
suppose our country to be bounded, at some future day, by the meridian of the
mouth of the Great Kanhaway, (within which it has been before conjectured, are
64,461 square miles) there will then be 100 inhabitants for every square mile,
which is nearly the state of population in the British islands.

Here I will beg leave to propose a doubt. The present desire of America is to
produce rapid population by as great importations of foreigners as possible.
But is this founded in good policy? The advantage proposed is the
multiplication of numbers. Now let us suppose (for example only) that, in this
state, we could double our numbers in one year by the importation of
foreigners; and this is a greater accession than the most sanguine advocate for
emigration has a right to expect. Then I say, beginning with a double stock, we
shall attain any given degree of population only 27 years and 3 months sooner
than if we proceed on our single stock. If we propose four millions and a half
as a competent population for this state, we should be 54 years attaining it,
could we at once double our numbers; and 81 years, if we rely on natural
propagation, as may be seen by the following table.

Proceeding on our present stock. Proceeding on a double stock. 17^^ 567,614
1,135,228 180^ 1,135,228 2,2^0,456 1835 2,270,456 4,540,^12 1862 4,540,912

In the first column are stated periods of 27 years; in the second are our
numbers, at each period, as they will be if we proceed on our actual stock; and
in the third are what they would be, at the same periods, were we to set out
from the double of our present stock. I have taken the term of four millions
and a half of inhabitants for example's sake only. Yet I am persuaded it is a
greater number than the country spoken of, considering how much inarrable land
it contains, can clothe and feed, without a material change in the quality of
their diet. But are there no inconveniences to be thrown into the scale against
the advantage expected from a multiplication of numbers by the importation of
foreigners? It is for the happiness of those united in society to harmonize as
much as possible in matters which they must of necessity transact together.
Civil government being the sole object of forming societies, its administration
must be conducted by common consent. Every species of government has its
specific principles. Ours perhaps are more peculiar than those of any other in
the universe. It is a composition of the freest principles of the English
constitution, with others derived from natural right and natural reason. To
these nothing can be more opposed than the maxims of absolute monarchies. Yet,
from such, we are to expect the greatest number of emigrants. They will bring
with them the principles of the governments they leave, imbibed in their early
youth; or, if able to throw them off, it will be in exchange for an unbounded
licentiousness, passing, as is usual, from one extreme to another. It would be
a miracle were they to stop precisely at the point of temperate liberty. These
principles, with their language, they will transmit to their children. In
proportion to their numbers, they will share with us the legislation. They will
infuse into it their spirit, warp and bias its directions, and render it a
heterogeneous, incoherent, distracted mass. I may appeal to experience, during
the present contest, for a verification of these conjectures. But, if they be
not certain in event, are they not possible, are they not probable? Is it not
safer to wait with patience 27 years and three months longer, for the
attainment of any degree of population desired or expected? May not our
government be more homogeneous, more peaceable, more durable? Suppose 20
millions of republican Americans thrown all of a sudden into France, what would
be the condition of that kingdom? If it would be more turbulent, less happy,
less strong, we may believe that the addition of half a million of foreigners
to our present numbers would produce a similar effect here. If they come of
themselves, they are entitled to all the rights of citizenship: but I doubt the
expediency of inviting them by extraordinary encouragements. I mean not that
these doubts should be extended to the importation of useful artificers. The
policy of that measure depends on very different considerations. Spare no
expense in obtaining them. They will after a while go to the plough and the
hoe; but, in the mean time, they will teach us something we do not know. It is
not so in agriculture. The indifferent state of that among us does not proceed
from a want of knowledge merely; it is from our having such quantities of land
to waste as we please. In Europe the object is to make the most of their land,
labor being abundant: here it is to make the most of our labor, land being
abundant.

It will be proper to explain how the numbers for the year 1782 have been
obtained; as it was not from a perfect census of the inhabitants. It will at
the same time develope the proportion between the free inhabitants and slaves.
The following return of taxable articles for that year was given in.

53,289 free males above 21 years of age. 211,698 slaves of all ages and sexes.
23,766 not distinguished in the returns, but said to be tytheable slaves.
195,439 horses. 609,734 cattle. 5,126 wheels of riding carriages. 191 taverns.

There were no returns from the 8 counties of Lincoln, Jefferson, Fayette,
Monongalia, Yohogania, Ohio, Northampton, and York. To find the number of
slaves which should have been returned instead of the 23,766 tytheables, we
must mention that some observations on a former census had given reason to
believe that the numbers above and below 16 years of age were equal. The double
of this number, therefore, to wit, 47,532 must be added to 211,698, which will
give us 259,230 slaves of all ages and sexes. To find the number of free
inhabitants, we must repeat the observation, that those above and below 16 are
nearly equal. But as the number 53,289 omits the males below 16 and 21 we must
supply them from conjecture. On a former experiment it had appeared that about
one-third of our militia, that is, of the males between 16 and 50, were
unmarried. Knowing how early marriage takes place here, we shall not be far
wrong in supposing that the unmarried part of our militia are those between 16
and 21. If there be young men who do not marry till after 21, there are many
who marry before that age. But as the men above 50 were not included in the
militia, we will suppose the unmarried, or those between 16 and 21, to be
one-fourth of the whole number above 16, then we have the following
calculation: 53,289 free males above 21 years of age. 17,763 free males between
16 and 21. 71,052 free males under 16. 142,104 free females of all ages.
284,208 free inhabitants of all ages. 259,230 slaves of all ages.

543,438 inhabitants, exclusive of the 8 counties from which were no returns.
In these 8 counties in the years 1779 and 1780, were 3,161 militia. Say then,
3,161 free males above the age of 16. 3,161 ditto under 16. 6,322 free females.

12,644 free inhabitants in these 8 counties. To find the number of slaves,
say, as 284,208 to 259,230, so is 12,644 to 11,532. Adding the third of these
numbers to the first, and the fourth to the second, we have, 296,852 free
inhabitants. 270,762 slaves.

567,614 inhabitants of every age, sex, and condition. But 296,852, the number
of free inhabitants, are to 270,762, the number of slaves, nearly as 11 to 10.
Under the mild treatment our slaves experience, and their wholesome, though
coarse, food, this blot in our country increases as fast, or faster, than the
whites. During the regal government, we had at one time obtained a law. which
imposed such a duty on the importation of slaves, as amounted nearly to a
prohibition, when one inconsiderate assembly, placed under a peculiarity of
circumstance repealed the law. This repeal met a joyful sanction from the then
sovereign, and no devices, no expedients, which could ever after be attempted
by subsequent assemblies, and they seldom met without attempting them, could
succeed in getting the royal assent to a renewal of the duty. In the very first
session held under the republican government, the assembly passed a law for the
perpetual prohibition of the importation of slaves. This will in some measure
stop the increase of this great political and moral evil, while the minds of
our citizens may be ripening for a complete emancipation of human nature.

QUERY IX.
THE number and condition of the militia and regular troops, and their pay?

The following is a state of the militia, taken from returns of 1780 and 1781,
except in those counties marked with an asterisk, the returns from which are
somewhat older.

Every able bodied freeman, between the ages of 16 and 50 is enrolled in the
militia. Those of every county are formed into companies, and these again into
one or more battalions, according to the numbers in the county. They are
commanded by colonels, and other surbordinate officers, as in the regular
service. In every county is a county-lieutenant, who commands the whole militia
of his county, but ranks only as a colonel in the field. We have no general
officers always existing. These are appointed occasionally, when an invasion or
insurrection happens, and their commission determines with the occasion. The
governor is head of the military, as well as civil power. The law requires
every militia man to provide himself with the arms usual in the regular
service. But this injunction was always indifferently complied with, and the
arms they had have been so frequently called for to arm the regulars, that in
ON THE TIDE WATERS, AND IN FLAT PARALLEL. 19,012.
Situation. Counties. Militia. Westward of the Alleghaney. 4458. Lincoln 600
(...) 300 ^^yette 156 Ohio Monongalia *1000 Washington *829 Montgomery 1071
Greenbriar 502 Between the Alleghaney and Blue Ridge. 7673. Hampshire 930
Berkeley *1100 Frederick 1143 Shenando *925 Rockingham 875 Augusta 1375
Rockbridge *625 Bo^^^urt *700 Between the Blue Ridge and Tide Waters. 18,828.
Londoun 1746 Fa^uier 1078 Cadpepper 1513 Spotsylvania 480 Orange *600 Louisa
603 Goochland *550 Fluvanna *296 Albemarle 873 Amherst 896 Buckingham *625
Bedford 1300 Henry 1004 Pittsylvania *725 Halifax *1139 Charlotte 612 Prince
Edward 589 Cumberland 408 Powhatan 330 Amelia *1125 Lunenburg 677 Mecklenburg
1100 Brunswic 559 Between James River and Carolina. 6959. Greenesville 500
Dinwiddie *750 Chesterfield 655 Prince George 382 Surry 380 Sussex *700
Southampton 874 Isle of White *600 Nansemond *644 Norfolk *880 Princess Anne
*594 Between James (...) York Rivers. 3009. Henrico 619 Hanover 706 New Kent
*418 Charles City 286 James City 235 Williamsburgh 129 York *244 Warwick *100
Elizabeth City 182 Between York and Rappahanoc. 3269. Caroline 305 King William
436 King and Queen 500 Essex 468 Middlesex *210 Gloucester 850 Between
Rappahanoc and Patowmac. 4137. Fairfax 652 Prince William 614 Stafford *500
King George 483 Richmond 412 Westmoreland 544 Northumberl. 630 Lancaster 302
East^^^ Shore. 1638 Accomac *1208 Northampton. *430 Whole Militia of the State
49971 the lower parts of the country they are entirely disarmed. In the middle
country a fourth or fifth part of them may have such firelocks as they had
provided to destroy the noxious animals which infest their farms; and on the
western side of the Blue ridge they are generally armed with rifles. The pay of
our militia, as well as of our regulars is that of the continental regulars.
The condition of our regulars, of whom we have none but continentals, and part
of a battalion of state troops, is so constantly on the change, that a state of
it at this day would not be its state a month hence. It is much the same with
the condition of the other continental troops, which is well enough known.

QUERY X.
THE marine?

Before the present invasion of this state by the British under the command of
General Phillips, we had three vessels of 16 guns, one of 14, five small
galleys, and two or three armed boats. They were generally so badly manned as
seldom to be in condition for service. Since the perfect possession of our
rivers assumed by the enemy, I believe we are left with a single armed boat
only.

QUERY XI.
A DESCRIPTION of the Indians established in that state?

When the first effectual settlement of our coloney was made, which was in
1607, the country from the seacoast to the mountains, and from Potowmac to the
most southern waters of James river, was occupied by upwards of forty different
tribes of Indians. Of these the Powhatans, the Mannahoacs, and Monacans, were
the most powerful. Those between the seacoast and falls of the rivers, were in
amity with one another, and attached to the Powhatans as their link of union.
Those between the falls of the rivers and the mountains, were divided into two
confederacies; the tribes inhabiting the head waters of Potowmac and Rappahanoc
being attached to the Mannahoacs; and those on the upper parts of James river
to the Monacans. But the Monacans and their friends were in amity with the
Mannahoacs and their friends and waged joint and perpetual war against the
Powhatans. We are told that the Powhatans, Mannahoacs, and Monacans, spoke
languages so radically different, that interpreters were necessary when they
transacted business. Hence we may conjecture, that this was not the case
between all the tribes, and probably that each spoke the language of the nation
to which it was attached; which we know to have been the case in many
particular instances. Very possibly there may have been anciently three
different stocks, each of which multiplying in a long course of time, had
separated into so many little societies. This practice results from the
circumstance of their having never submitted themselves to any laws, any
coercive power, any shadow of government. Their only controuls are their
manners, and that moral sense of right and wrong, which, like the sense of
tasting and feeling, in every man makes a part of his nature. An offense
against these is punished by contempt, by exclusion from society, or, where the
case is serious, as that of murder, by the individuals whom it concerns.
Imperfect as this species of coercion may seem, crimes are very rare among
them; insomuch that were it made a question, whether no law as among the savage
Americans, or too much law, as among the civilized Europeans, submits man to
the greatest evil, one who has seen both conditions of existence would
pronounce it to be the last: and that the sheep are happier of themselves, than
under care of the wolves. It will be said, that great societies cannot exist
without government. The savages therefore break them into small ones.

The territories of the Powhatan confederacy, south of the Potowmac,
comprehended about 8000 square miles, 30 tribes, and 2400 warriors. MANNAHOACS.
TRIBES. COUNTRY. CHIEF TOWN. WARRIORS. 160^ 1669 Between PATOWMAC and
RAPPAHANOC. Whonkenties Fanquier Tegninaties Culpeper O^tponies Orange
Tauxitanians Fauquier Hassinungaes Culpeper Between RAPPAHANOC and YORK.
Stegar^kies Orange Shackakonies Spotsylvania Manaho^cs Stafford. Spotsylvania
Between YORK and JAMES. MONACANS. Monacans James R. above the falls Fork of
James R. 30 Monasiccapanoes Louisa. Fluvanna Between JAMES and CAROLINA.
Monahassanoes ^edford. Buckingham Massinacacs C^^^^erland Mohemenchoes Powhatan
EASTERN SHORE. POWHATANS.
TRIBES. COUNTRY. CHIEF TOWN. WARRIORS. 1607 1669 Tau^enents Fairfax About
General Washington's 40 By the name of Matchotics. U. Matchodic. Nanxaticos.
Nanzatico. Appamatox Matox. Patowomekes Stafford. King George Patowmac creek
200 Cuttatawomans King George About Lamb creek 20 60 Pissasecs King Geo.
Richmond Above Leeds town -- Onaumaments Westmoreland Nomony river 100
Rappahanocs Richmond county Rappahanoc creek 100 30 Moraughtacunds Lancaster:
Richmond Moratico river 80 40 by the name of Totuskeys Secacaonies
Northumberland Coan river 30 Wighcocomicoes Northumberland Wicocomico river 130
^ Cuttatawomans Lancaster Corotoman 30 Nantaughtacunds Essex. Caroline Port
tobacco creek 150 60 Mattapoments Mattapony river 30 20 Pamuakies King William
Romuncock 300 50 We^owocomicos Gloucester About Rosewell 40 Payankatonks
Piankatank river Turk's Ferry. Grimesby 55 Youghtanunds Pamunkey river 60
Chickahominies Chickahominy river Orapaks 250 60 Powhatans Henrico Powhatan.
Mayo's 40 10 Arrowhatocs Henrico Arrohatocs 30 Weanocs Charles city Weynoke 100
15 Paspaheghes Charles city. James city Sandy point 40 Chiskiacs York Chiskiac
45 15 Kecoughtaans Elizabeth city Roscows 20 Appamattocs Chesterfield Bermuda
hundred 60 50 1669 Quiocohanoes Surry About Upper Chipoak 25 3 Pohics Nottoways
Warrasqueaks Isle of Wight Warrasqueoc Meherrics 90 Nasamonds Nansamond About
the mouth of West. branch 200 45 Tuteloes 50 Chesapeaks Princess Anne About
Lynhaven river 100 Accohanocs Accom. Northampton Accohanoc river 40 Accomacks
Northampton About Ch^^iton's 80 This Table to be placed between Pages 134 and
135.
Capt. Smith tells us, that within 60 miles of James town were 5000 people, of
whom 1500 were warriors. From this we find the proportion of their warriors to
their whole inhabitants, was as 3 to 10. The Powhatan confederacy then would
consist of about 8000 inhabitants, which was one for every square mile; being
about the twentieth part of our present population in the same territory, and
the hundredth of that of the British islands.

Besides these, were the Nottoways, living on Nottoway river, the Meherrins and
Tuteloes on Meherrin river, who were connected with the Indians of Carolina,
probably with the Chowanocs.

The preceding table contains a state of these sever^^ tribes, according to
their confederacies and ^eographical situation, with their numbers when we
first became acquainted with them, where these numbers are known. The numbers
of some of them are again stated as they were in the year 1669, when an attempt
was made by the assembly to enumerate them. Probably the enumeration is
imperfect, and in some measure conjectural, and that a further search into the
records would furnish many more particulars. What would be the melancholy
sequel of their history, may however be argued from the census of 1669; by
which we discover that the tribes therein enumerated were, in the space of 62
years, reduced to about one-third of their former numbers. Spirituous liquors,
the smallpox, war and an abridgment of territory, to a people who lived
principally on the spontaneous productions of nature, had committed terrible
havoc among them, which generation, under the obstacles opposed to it among
them, was not likely to make good. That the lands of this country were taken
from them by conquest, is not so general a truth as is supposed. I find in our
historians and records, repeated proofs of purchase, which cover a considerable
part of the lower country; and many more would doubtless be found on further
search. The upper country we know has been acquired altogether by purchases
made in the most unexceptionable form.

Westward of all these tribes, beyond the mountains, and extending to the great
lakes, were the Massawomees, a most powerful confederacy, who harrassed
unremittingly the Powhatans and Manahoacs. These were probably the ancestors of
tribes known at present by the name of the Six Nations.

Very little can now be discovered of the subsequent history of these tribes
severally. The Chickahominies removed about the year 1661, to Mattapony river.
Their chief, with one from each of the tribes of the Pamunkies and Mattaponies,
attended the treaty of Albany in 1685. This seems to have been the last chapter
in their history. They retained however their separate name so late as 1705,
and were at length blended with the Pamunkies and Mattaponies, and exist at
present only under their names. There remain of the Mattaponies three or four
men only, and they have more negro than Indian blood in them. They have lost
their language, have reduced themselves, by voluntary sales, to about fifty
acres of land, which lie on the river of their own name, and have from time to
time, been joining the Pamunkies, from whom they are distant but 10 miles. The
Pamunkies are reduced to about 10 or 12 men, tolerably pure from mixture with
other colors. The older ones among them preserve their language in a small
degree, which are the last vestiges on earth, as far as we know, of the
Powhatan language. They have about 300 acres of very fertile land, on Pamunkey
river, so encompassed by water that a gate shuts in the whole. Of the
Nottoways, not a male is left. A few women constitute the remains of that
tribe. They are seated on Nottoway river, in Southampton county, on very
fertile lands. At a very early period, certain lands were marked out and
appropriated to these tribes, and were kept from encroachment by the authority
of the laws. They have usually had trustees appointed, whose duty was to watch
over their interests, and guard them from insult and injury.

The Monacans and their friends, better known latterly by the name of
Tuscaroras, were probably connected with the Maslawomecs, or Five Nations. For
though we are Smith.
told their languages were so different that the intervention of interpreters
was necessary between them, yet do we also Evans.
learn that the Erigas, a nation formerly inhabiting on the Ohio, were of the
same original stock with the Five Nations, and that they partook also of the
Tuscarora language. Their dialects might, by long separation, have become so
unlike as to be unintelligible to one another. We know that in 1712, the Five
Nations received the Tuscaroras into their confederacy, and made them the Sixth
Nation. They received the Meherrins and Tuteloes also into their protection:
and it is most probable, that the remains of many other of the tribes, of whom
we find no particular account, retired westwardly in like manner, and were
incorporated with one or other of the western tribes. (5)

I know of no such thing existing as an Indian monument: for I would not honor
with that name arrow points, stone hatchets, stone pipes, and half-shapen
images. Of labor on the large scale, I think there is no remain as respectable
as would be a common ditch for the draining of lands: unless indeed it would be
the Barrows, of which many are to be found all over this country. These are of
different sizes, some of them constructed of earth, and some of loose stones.
That they were repositories of the dead, has been obvious to all: but on what
particular occasion constructed, was a matter of doubt. Some have thought they
covered the bones of those who have fallen in battles fought on the spot of
inter^^^^. Some ascribed them to the custom, said to prevail among the Indians,
of collecting, at certain periods the bones of all their dead, wheresoever
deposited at the time of death. Others again supposed them the general
sepulchers for towns, conjectured to have been on or near these grounds; and
this opinion was supported by the quality of the lands in which they are found,
(those constructed of earth being generally in the softest and most fertile
meadow-grounds on river sides) and by a tradition, said to be handed down from
the aboriginal Indians, that, when they settled in a town, the first person who
died was placed erect, and earth put about him, so as to cover and support him;
that when another died, a narrow passage was dug to the first, the second
reclined against him, and the cover of earth replaced, and so on. There being
one of these in my neighborhood, I wished to satisfy myself whether any, and
which of these opinions were just. For this purpose I determined to open and
examine it thoroughly. It was situated on the low grounds of the Rivanna, about
two miles above its principle fork, and opposite to some hills, on which had
been an Indian town. It was of a spheroidical form, of about 40 feet diameter
at the base, and had been of about twelve feet altitude, though now reduced by
the plough to seven and a half, having been under cultivation about a dozen
years. Before this it was covered with trees of 12 inches diameter, and round
the base was an excavation of five feet depth and width, from whence the earth
had been taken of which the hillock was formed. I first dug superficially in
several parts of it, and came to collections of human bones, at different
depths, from six inches to three feet below the surface. These were lying in
the utmost confusion, some vertical, some oblique, some horizontal, and
directed to every point of the compass, entangled, and held together in
clusters by the earth. Bones of the most distant parts were found together, as,
for instance, the small bones of the foot in the hollow of a scull, many sculls
would sometimes be in contact, lying on the face, on the side, on the back, top
or bottom, so as, on the whole, to give the idea of bones emptied promiscuously
from a bag or basket, and covered over with earth, without any attention to
their order. The bones of which the greatest numbers remained, were sculls,
jaw-bones, teeth, the bones of the arms, thighs, legs, feet, and hands. A few
ribs remained, some vertebrae of the neck and spine, without their processes,
and one instance only of the The os sacrum.
bone which serves as a base to the vertebral column. The sculls were so
tender, that they generally fell to pieces on being touched. The other bones
were stronger. There were some teeth which were judged to be smaller than those
of an adult; a scull which on a slight view, appeared to be that of an infant,
but it fell to pieces on being taken out, so as to prevent satisfactory
examination; a rib and a fragment of the under jaw of a person abo^^ half
grown; another rib of an infant; and part of the jaw of a child, which had not
cut its teeth. This last furnishing the most decisive proof of the burial of
children here, I was particular in my attention to it. It was part of the right
half of the under jaw. The processes, by which it was articulated to the
temporal bones, were entire, and the bone itself firm to where it had been
broken off, which, as nearly as I could judge, was about the place of the eye
^ooth. Its upper edge, wherein would have been the sockets of the teeth, was
perfectly smooth. Measuring it with that of an adult, by placing their hinder
processes together, its broken end extended to the penultimate grinder of the
adult. This bone was white, all the others of a sand color. The bones of
infants being soft, they probably decay sooner, which might be the cause so few
were found here. I proceeded then to make a perpendicular cut through the body
of the barrow, that I might examine its internal structure. This passed about
three feet from its center, was opened to the former surface of the earth, and
was wide enough for a man to walk through and examine its sides. At the bottom,
that is, on the level of the circumjacent plain, I found bones; above these a
few stones, brought from a cliff a quarter of a mile off, and from the river
one-eighth of a mile off; then a large interval of earth, then a stratum of
bones, and so on. At one end of the section were four strata of bones plainly
distinguishable; at the other, three; the strata in one part not ranging with
those in another. The bones nearest the surface were least decayed. No holes
were discovered in any of them, as if made with bullets, arrows, or other
weapons. I conjectured that in this barrow might have been a thousand
skeletons. Every one (...) readily seize the circumstances above related, which
militate against the opinion, that it covered the bones only of persons fallen
in battle; and against the tradition also, which would make it the common
sepulcher of a town, in which the bodies were placed upright, and touching each
other. Appearances certainly indicate that it has derived both origin and
growth from the accustomary collection of bones, and deposition of them
together; that the first collection had been deposited on the common surface of
the earth, a few stones put over it, and then a covering of earth, that the
second had been laid on this, had covered more or less of it in proportion to
the number of bones, and was then also covered with earth; and so on. The
following are the the particular circumstances which give it this aspect. 1.
The number of bones. 2. Their confused position. 3. Their being in different
strata. 4. The strata in one part having no correspondence with those in
another. 5. The different states of decay in these strata, which seem to
indicate a difference in the time of inhumation. 6. The existence of infant
bones among them.

But on whatever occasion they may have been made, they are of considerable
notoriety among the Indians: for a party passing, about thirty years ago,
through the part of the country where this barrow is, went through the woods
directly to it, without any instructions or enquiry, and having staid about it
some time, with expressions which were construed to be those of sorrow, they
returned to the high road, which they had left about half a dozen miles to pay
this visit, and pursued their journey. There is another barrow much resembling
this, in the low grounds of the south branch of Shenandoah where it is crossed
by the road leading from the Rockfish gap to Staunton. Both of these have
within these dozen years, been cleared of their trees and put under
cultivation, are much reduced in their height, and spread in width, by the
plough, and will probably disappear in time. There is another on a hill in the
Blue ridge of mountains, a few miles north of Wood's gap, which is made up of
small stones thrown together. This has been opened and found to contain human
bones, as the others do. There are also many others in other parts of the
country.

Great question has arisen from whence came those aboriginals of America?
Discoveries, long ago made, were sufficient to show that a passage from Europe
to America was always practicable, even to the imperfect navigation of ancient
times. In going from Norway to Iceland, from Iceland to Groenland, from
Groenland to Labrador, the first traject is the widest: and this having been
practiced from the earliest times of which we have any account of that part of
the earth, it is not difficult to suppose that the subsequent trajects may have
been sometimes passed. Again, the late discoveries of Captain Cook, coasting
from Kamschatka to California, have proved that if the two continents of Asia
and America be separated at all, it is only by a narrow straight. So that from
this side also, inhabitants may have passed into America: and the resemblance
between the Indians of America and the eastern inhabitants of Asia, would
induce us to conjecture, that the former are the descendants of the latter, or
the latter of the former: excepting indeed the Eskimaux, who, from the same
circumstance of resemblance, and from indentity of language, must be derived
from the Groenlanders, and these probably from some of the northern parts of
the old continent. A knowledge of their several languages would be the most
certain evidence of their derivation which could be produced. In fact, it is
the best proof of the affinity of nations which ever can be referred to. How
many ages have elapsed since the English, the Dutch, the Germans, the Swiss,
the Norwegians, Danes and Swedes have separated from their common stock? Yet
how many more must elapse before the proofs of their common origin, which exist
in their several languages, will disappear? It is to be lamented then, very
much to be lamented, that we have suffered so many of the Indian tribes already
to extinguish, without our having previously collected and deposited in the
records of literature, the general rudiments at least of the languages they
spoke. Were vocabularies formed of all the languages spoken in North and South
America, preserving their appellations of the most common objects in nature, of
those which must be present to every nation barbarous or civilized, with the
inflections of their nouns and verbs, their principles of reigmen and concord,
and these deposited in all the public libraries, it would furnish opportunities
to those skilled in the languages of the old world to compare them with these,
no^ or at any future time, and hence to construct the best evidence of the
derivation of this part of the human race.

But imperfect as is our knowledge of the tongues spoken in America, it
suffices to discover the following remarkable fact. Arranging them under the
radical ones to which they may be palpably traced, and doing the same by those
of the red men of Asia, there will be found probably twenty in America, for one
in Asia, of those radical languages, so called because, if they were ever the
same they have lost all resemblance to one another. A separation into dialects
may be the work of a few ages only, but for two dialects to recede from one
another till they have lost all vestiges of their common origin, must require
an immense course of time; perhaps not less than many people give to the age of
the earth. A greater number of those radical changes of language having taken
place among the red men of America proves them of greater antiquity than those
of Asia.

I will now proceed to state the nations and numbers of the Aborigines which
still exist in a respectable and independent form. And as their undefined
boundaries would render it difficult to specify those only which may be within
any certain limits, and it may not be unacceptable to present a more general
view of them, I will reduce within the form of a catalogue all those within,
and circumjacent to, the United States, whose names and numbers have come to my
notice. These are taken from four different lists, the first of which was given
in the year 1759 to general Stanwix by George Croghan, deputy agent for Indian
affairs under Sir William Johnson* the second was drawn up by a French trader
of considerable note, resident among the Indians many years, and annexed to
colonel Bouquet's printed account of his expedition in 1764. The third was made
out by captain Hutchins. who visited most of the tribes, by order, for the
pupose of learning their numbers in 1768. And the fourth by John Dodge, an
Indian trader, in 1779, except the numbers marked, which are from other
information.

TRIBES. Croghan. 1759. Bouquet. 1764. Hutchins. 1768. Where they reside.
Oswegatchies -- -- 100 At Swagatchy, on the river St. Laurence. Connasedagoes
-- -- 300 Near Montreal. Cohunnewagoes -- 200 Orondocs -- -- 100 Near Trois
Rivieres. Abenakies -- 350 150 Near Trois Rivieres. Little Algonkins -- -- 100
Near Trois Rivieres. Michmacs -- 700 -- River St. Laurence. Amelistes -- 550 --
River St. Laurence. Chalas -- 130 -- River St. Laurence. Nipissins -- 400 --
Toward the heads of the Ottawas river. Algonquins -- 300 -- Toward the heads
of the Ottawas river. Round heads -- 2500 -- Riviere aux Tetes boules on the E.
side of Lake Superior. Messasagues -- 2000 -- Lakes Huron and Superior.
Christinaux. Kris. -- 3000 -- Lake Christinaux. Assinaboes -- 1500 -- Lake
Assinaboes. Blancs, or Barbus -- 1500 -- Sioux of the Meadows 10,000 2500
10,000 On the heads of the Missisippi and westward of that river. Sioux of the
Woods 1800 Sioux -- Ajoues -- 1100 -- North of the Padoucas. Panis. White --
2000 -- South of the Missouri. Panis. Freckled -- 1700 -- South of the
Missouri. Padoucas -- 500 -- South of the Missouri. Grandes eaux -- 1000 --
Canses -- 1600 -- South of the Missouri. Osages -- 600 -- South of the
Missorui. Missouris 400 3000 -- On the river Missouri. Arkanzas -- 2000 -- On
the river Arkanzas. Caouitas -- 700 -- East of the Alibamous. Northward and
Westward of the United States.


TRIBES. Croghan. 1759. Bouquet. 1764. Hutchins. 1768. Dodge. 1779. Where they
reside. Mohocks -- -- 160 100 Mohocks river. [Susquehanna. Oneidas -- -- 300
400 East side of Oneida Lake and head branches of Tuscaroras -- -- 200 Between
the Oneidas and Onondagoes. Onondagoes -- 1550 260 230 Near Onondago L.
[Susquehanna. Cayugas -- -- 200 220 On the Cayuga Lake near the N. branch of
Senecas -- -- 1000 650 On the waters of Susquehanna, of Ontario, and the heads
of the Ohio. Aughquagahs -- -- 150 -- East branch of Susquehanna, and on
Aughquagah. Nanticoes -- -- 100 -- Utsanango, Chaghtnet, and Owegy, on the East
branch of Susquehanna. Mohiccons -- -- 100 -- In the same parts. Conoies -- --
30 -- In the same parts. Sapoonies -- -- 30 -- At Diahago and other villages up
the North branch of Susquehanna. Munsies -- -- 150 *150 At Diahago and other
villages up the North branch of Susquehanna. Delawares, or Linnelinopies -- --
150 *500 At Diahago and other villages up the North branch of Susquehanna.
Delawares, or Linnelinopies 600 600 600 Between Ohio and Lake Erie and the
branches of Beaver creek, Cayahoga and Muskingum. Shawanees 500 400 300 300
Sioto and the branches of Muskingum. Mingoes -- -- -- 60 On a branch of Sioto.
Within the Limits of the United States.


TRIBES. Croghan. 1759. Bouquet. 1764. Hutchins. 1768. Dodge. 1779. Where they
reside. Mohiccons -- -- 300 *60 Cohunnewagos -- -- -- Near Sandusky. Wyandots
300 300 Wyandots 250 180 Near fort St. Joseph's and Detroit. Twightwees 300 --
250 -- Miami river near fort Miami. Miamis -- 350 -- 300 Miami river, about
fort St. Joseph, Ouiatonons 200 400 300 *300 On the banks of the Wabash, near
fort Ouiatonon. Piankishas 300 250 300 *400 On the banks of the Wabash, near
fort Ouiatonon. Shakirs -- -- 200 -- On the banks of the Wabash, near fort
Ouiatonon. Kaskaskias -- 600 300 -- Near Kaskaskia. [Mitchigamis? Illinois 400
300 -- Near Cahokia. Query, If not the same with the Piorias -- 800 -- -- On
the Illinois river, called Piaurias, but supposed to mean Piorias. Pouteotamies
-- 350 300 450 Near fort St. Joseph's and fort Detroit. Ottawas -- -- 550 *300
Near fort St. Joseph's and fort Detroit. Chippawas -- -- 200 -- On Saguinam bay
of lake Huron. Ottawas -- -- -- On Saguinam bay of lake Huron. Chippawas -- --
400 -- Near Michillimackinac. Ottawas 2000 5900 250 5450 Near Michillimackinac.
Chippawas 400 Near fort St. Mary's on lake Superior. Chippawas -- -- -- --
Several other villages along the banks of lake Superior. Numbers unknown.
Chippawas -- -- -- -- Near Puans bay on lake Michigan. Shakies 200 400 550 --
Near Puans bay on lake Michigan. Mynonamies -- -- -- -- Near Puans bay on lake
Michigan. Within the Limits of the United States.


TRIBES. Croghan. 1759. Bouquet. 1764. Hutchins. 1768. Dodge. 1779. Where they
reside. Ouisconsings -- 550 -- -- Ouisconsing river. Kickapous 600 300 -- 250
On lake Michigan, and between that and the Mississippi. Otogamies. Foxes -- --
-- -- M^scoutens -- 500 4000 -- Misco^h^s -- -- -- Outimacs -- -- -- --
Musquakies 200 250 -- 250 Sioux. Eastern -- -- -- 500 On the eastern heads of
the Mississippi, and the islands of lake Superior. Galphin. 1768. Cherokees
1500 2500 3000 -- Western parts of North Carolina. Chickasaws -- 750 500 --
Western parts of Georgia. Catawbas -- 150 -- -- On the Catawba river in
South Carolina. Chacktaws 2000 4500 6000 -- Western parts of Georgia. Upper
Creeks -- -- 3000 -- Western parts of Georgia. Lower Creeks -- 1180 Natchez --
150 -- -- Alibamous -- 600 -- -- Alibama river, in the western parts of
Georgia. Within the Limits of the United States.


The following tribes are also mentioned: Croghan's Catal. Lezar, 400 From the
mouth of Chio to the mouth of Wabash. Webings, 200 On the Missisippi below the
Shakies. Ousasoys 4000 On White Creek, a branch of the Missisippi. Grand Tuc.
Linways, 1000 On the Missisippi. Bouquet's. Les Puans, 700 Near Puans Bay,
Folle Avoine 350 Near Puans Bay. Ouanakina, 300 Conjectured to be Tribes of the
Creeks. Chiakanessou, 350 Machecous, 800 Souikilas, 200 Dodge's. Mineamis, 2000
North-West of L. Michigan, to the heads of Missisippi, and up to L. Superior.
Piankishas, 800 On and near the Wabash toward the Illinois. Mascoutins,
Vermillions,

But apprehending these might be different appellations for some of the tribes
already enumerated, I have not inserted them in the table, but state them
separately as worthy of further inquiry. The variations observable in numbering
the same tribe may sometimes be ascribed to imperfect information, and
sometimes to a greater or less comprehension of settlements under the same
name. (7)

QUERY XII.
A NOTICE of the counties, cities, townships, and villages?

The counties have been enumerated under Query IX. They are 74 in number, of
very unequal size and population. Of these 35 are on the tide waters, or in
that parallel; 23 are in the midlands, between the tide waters and Blue ridge
of mountains; 8 between the Blue ridge and Alleghaney; and 8 westward of the
Alleghaney.

The state, by another division, is formed into parishes, many of which are
commensurate with the counties: but sometimes a county comprehends more than
one parish, and sometimes a parish more than one county. This division had
relation to the religion of the state, a parson of the Anglican church, with a
fixed salary, having been heretofore established in each parish. The care of
the poor was another object of the parochial division.

We have no townships. Our country being much intersected with navigable
waters, and trade brought generally to our doors, instead of our being obliged
to go in quest of it, has probably been one of the causes why we have no towns
of any consequence. Williamsburgh, which till the year 1780, was the seat of
our government, never contained above 1800 inhabitants; and Norfolk the most
populous town we ever had, contained but 6000. Our towns, but more properly our
villages or hamlets, are as follows.

On James river and its waters, Norfolk, Portsmouth, Hampton, Suffolk,
Smithfield, Williamsburgh, Petersburgh, Richmond the seat of our government,
Manchester, Charlottesville, New London.

On York river and its waters, York, Newcastle, Hanover.

On Rappahannoc, Urbanna, Portroyal, Fredericksburgh, Falmouth.

On Potowmac and its waters, Dumfries, Colchester, Alexandria, Winchester,
Staunton.

On Ohio, Louisville.

There are other places at which, like some of the foregoing, the laws have
said there shall be towns; but Nature has said there shall not, and they remain
unworthy of enumeration. Norfolk will probably be the emporium for all the
trade of the Chesapeak bay and its waters; and a canal of 8 or 10 miles will
bring to it all that of Albemarle sound and its waters. Secondary to this
place, are the towns at the head of the tide waters, to wit, Petersburgh on
Appomattox. Richmond on James river. Newcastle on York river. Alexandria on
Potowmac, and Baltimore on Patapsco. From these the distribution will be to
subordinate situations in the country. Accidental circumstances however may
control the indications of nature, and in no instances do they do it more
frequently than in the rise and fall of towns.

QUERY XIII.
THE constitution of the state, and its several charters?

Queen Elizabeth by her letters-patent, bearing date March 25, 1584, licensed
Sir Walter Raleigh to search for remote heathen lands, not inhabited by
Christian people, and granted to him, in fee simple, all the soil within 200
leagues of the places where his people should, within 6 years make their
dwellings or abidings; reserving only to herself and her successors, their
allegiance and one-fifth part of all the gold and silver ore they should
obtain. Sir Walter immediately sent out two ships which visited Wococon island
in North Carolina, and the next year dispatched seven with 107 men, who settled
in Roanoke island, about latitude 35 50. Here Okisko, king of the Weopomeiocs,
in a full council of his people is said to have acknowledged himself the
homager of the Queen of England, and, after her, of Sir Walter Raleigh. A
supply of 50 men were sent in 1586, and 150 in 1587. With these last, Sir
Walter sent a governor, appointed him 12 assistants, gave them a charter of
incorporation, and instructed them to settle on Chesapeak bay. They landed
however at Hatorask. In 1588, when a fleet was ready to sail with a new supply
of colonists and necessaries, they were detained by the Queen to assist against
the Spanish armada. Sir Walter having now expended 40,000l. in these
enterprises, obstructed occasionally by the crown without a shilling of aid
from it, was under a necessity of engaging others to adventure their money. He
therefore, by deed bearing date the 7th of March 1589, by the name of Sir
Walter Raleigh, Chief Governor of Assamacomoc, (probably Acomac,) alias
Wingadacoia alias Virginia, granted to Thomas Smith and others, in
consideration of their adventuring certain sums of money, liberty of trade to
his new country, free from all customs and taxes for seven years, excepting the
fifth part of the gold and silver ore to be obtained; and stipulated with them,
and the other assistants, then in Virginia, that he would confirm the deed of
incorporation which he had given in 1587, with all the prerogatives,
jurisdictions, royalties and privileges granted to him by the Queen. Sir
Walter, at different times, sent five other adventurers hither, the last of
which was in 1602: for in 1603 he was attainted, and put into close
imprisonment, which put an end to his cares over his infant colony. What was
the particular fate of the colonists he had before sent and seated, has never
been known: whether they were murdered, or incorporated with the savages.

Some gentlemen and merchants, supposing that by the attainder of Sir Walter
Raleigh the grant to him was forfeited, not enquiring overcarefully whether the
sentence of an English court could affect lands not within the jurisdiction of
that court, petitioned king James for a new grant of Virginia to them. He
accordingly executed a grant to Sir Thomas Gates and others bearing date the
9th of March 1607, under which, in the same year a settlement was effected at
James-town and ever after maintained. Of this grant however no particular
notice need be taken, as it was superseded by letters-patent of the same king,
of May 23, 1609 to the Earl of Salisbury and others, incorporating them, by the
name of the Treasurer and Company of adventurers and planters of the City of
London for the first colony in Virginia, granting to them and their successors
all the lands in Virginia from Point Comfort along the seacoast to the
northward 200 miles and from the same point along the seacoast to the
southward 200 miles, and all the space from this precinct on the sea coast up
into the land, west and north-west, from sea to sea, and the islands within one
hundred miles of it, with all the commodities, jurisdictions, royalties,
privileges, franchises and preeminencies within the same, and thereto and
thereabouts, by sea and land, appertaining in as ample manner as had before
been granted to any adventurer: to be held of the king and his successors, in
common soccage, yielding one-fifth part of the gold and silver ore to be
therein found, for all manner of services; establishing a council in England
for the direction of the enterprise, the members of which were to be chosen and
displaced by the voice of the majority of the company and adventurers, and were
to have the nomination and revocation of governors, officers, and ministers,
which by them should be thought needful for the colony, the power of
establishing laws and forms of government and magistracy, obligatory not only
within the colony, but also on the seas in going and coming to and from it;
authorizing them to carry thither any persons who should consent to go, freeing
them for ever from all taxes and impositions on any goods or merchandise on
importations into the colony, or exportation out of it, except the five per
cent. due for custom on all goods imported into the British dominions,
according to the ancient trade of merchants; which five per per cent. only
being paid they might, within 13 months re-export the same goods into foreign
parts, without any custom, tax, or other duty, to the king or any of his
officers or deputies; with powers of waging war against those who should annoy
them; giving to the inhabitants of the colony all the rights of natural
subjects, as if born and abiding in England; and declaring that these letters
should be construed, in all doubtful parts, in such manner as should be most
for the benefit of the grantees.

Afterward on the 12th of March 1612, by other letters-patent, the king added
to his former grants, all islands in any part of the ocean between the 30th and
41st degrees of latitude, and within 300 leagues of any of the parts before
granted to the treasurer and company, not being possessed or inhabited by any
other Christian prince or state, nor within the limits of the northern colony.

In pursuance of the authorities given to the company by these charters, and
more especially of that part in the charter of 1609, which authorized them to
establish a form of government, they on the 24th of July 1621, by charter under
their common seal, declared that from thenceforward there should be two supreme
councils in Virginia, the one to be called the council of state, to be placed
and displaced by the treasurer, council in England, and company, from time to
time, whose office was to be that of assisting and advising the governor; the
other to be called the general assembly to be convened by the governor once
yearly or oftener, which was to consist of the council of state, and two
burgesses out of every town, hundred, or plantation, to be respectively chosen
by the inhabitants. In this all matters were to be decided by the greater part
of the votes present; reserving to the governor a negative voice; and they were
to have power to treat, consult, and conclude all emergent occasions concerning
the public weal, and to make laws for the behoof and government of the colony,
imitating and following the laws and policy of England as nearly as might be:
providing that these laws should have no force till ratified in a general
quarter court of the company in England and returned under their common seal,
and declaring that, after the government of the colony should be well framed
and settled, no orders of the council in England should bind the colony unless
ratified in the said general assembly. The king and company quarrelled, and by
a mixture of law and force, the latter were ousted of all their rights, without
retribution, after having expended 100,000l. in establishing the colony,
without the smallest aid from government. King James suspended their powers by
proclamation of July 15, 1624, and Charles I. took the government into his own
hands. Both sides had their partisans in the colony; but in truth the people of
the colony in general thought themselves little concerned in the dispute. There
being three parties interested in these several charters, what passed between
the first and second it was thought could not affect the third. If the king
seized on the powers of the company, they only passed into other hands, without
increase or diminution, while the rights of the people remained as they were.
But they did not remain so long. The northern parts of their country were
granted away to the lords Baltimore and Fairfax, the first of these obtaining
also the rights of separate jurisdiction and government. And in 1650 the
parliament, considering itself as standing in the place of their deposed king,
and as having succeeded to all his powers, without as well as within the realm,
began to assume a right over the colonies, passing an act for inhibiting their
trade with foreign nations. This succession to the exercise of kingly authority
gave the first color for parliamentary interference with the colonies, and
produced that fatal precedent which they continued to follow after they had
retired, in other respects, within their proper functions. When this colony,
therefore, which still maintained its opposition to Cromwell and the
parliament, was induced in 1651 to lay down their arms, they previously secured
their most essential rights, by a solemn convention, which having never seen in
print, I will here insert literally from the records.

ARTICLES agreed on and concluded at James City in Virginia for the
surrendering and settling of that plantation under the obedience and government
of the common wealth of England by the Commissioners of the Council of state
by authority of the parliamt. of England and by the Grand assembly of the
Governor, Council and Burgesses of that country.

First it is agreed and consted that the plantation of Virginia, and all the
inhabitants thereof shall be and remain in due obedience and subjection to the
Common wealth of England, according to the laws there established, and that this
submission and subscription be acknowledged a voluntary act not forced nor
constrained by a conquest upon the country, and that they shall have and enjoy
such freedoms and privileges as belong to the free borne people of England,
and that the former government by the Commissions and Instructions be void and
null.

2ly. Secondly that the Grand assembly as formerly shall convene and transact
the affairs of Virginia wherein nothing is to be acted or done contrary to the
government of the Common wealth of England and the laws there established.

3ly, That there shall be a full and total remission and indempnitie of all
acts, words, or writeings done or spoken against the parliament of England in
relation to the same.

4ly, That Virginia shall have and enjoy the ancient bounds and Lymitts granted
by the charters of the former kings, and that we shall seek a new charter from
the parliament to that purpose against any that have intrencht upon the rights
thereof.

5ly. That all the pattents of land granted under the colony seal by any of the
precedent governors shall be and remain in their full force and strength.

6ly, That the privilege of having ffiftie acres of land for every person
transported in that collonie shall continue as formerly granted.

7ly, That the people of Virginia have free trade as the people of England do
enjoy to all places and with all nations according to the laws of that common
wealth, and that Virginia shall enjoy all privileges equal with any English
plantations in America.

8ly, That Virginia shall be free from all taxes, customs and impositions
whatsoever, and none to be imposed on them without consent of the Grand
assembly, And so that neither ffortes nor castles be erected or garrisons
maintained without their consent.

9ly, That noe charge shall be required from this country in respect of this
present ffleet.

10ly, That for the future settlement of the country in their due obedience,
the Engagement shall be tendered to all the inhabitants according to act of
parliament made to that purpose, that all persons who shall refuse to subscribe
the said engagement, shall have a yeare's time if they please to remove
themselves and their estates out of Virginia, and in the mean time during the
said year to have equal justice as formerly.

11ly, That the use of the book of common prayer shall be permitted for one
year ensueinge with referrence to the consent of the major part of the
parishes, provided that those which relate to kingshipp or that government be
not used publicly, and the continuance of ministers in their places, they not
misdemeaning themselves, and the payment of their accustomed dues and
agreements made with them respectively shall be left as they now stand dureing
this ensueing year.

12ly, That no man's cattle shall be questioned as the companies unless such
as have been entrusted with them or have disposed of them without order.

13ly, That all ammunition, powder and arms, other than for private use, shall
be delivered up, security being given to make satisfaction for it.

14ly, That all goods allreadie brought hither by the Dutch or others which are
now on shore shall be free from surpri^^^.

15ly, That the quittrents granted unto us by the late king for seven years
be confirmed.

16ly, That the commissioners for the parliament subscribeing these articles
engage themselves and the honor of parliament for the full performance
thereof: and that the present governor and the council and the burgesses do
likewise subscribe and engage the whole collony on their parts.

RICH. BENNETT. -- Seal. Wm. CLAIBORNE. -- Seal. EDMOND CURTIS. -- Seal.

These articles were signed and sealed by the Commissioners of the Council of
state for the Commonwealth of England the twelveth day of March 1651.



Then follow the articles stipulated by the governor and council, which relate
merely to their own persons and property, and then the ensuing instrument:

An act of indempnitie made at the surrender of the country.

Whereas by the authority of the parliament we the commissioners appointed by
the council of state authorized thereto having brought a fleet and force
before James city in Virginia to reduce that collonie under the obedience of
the commonwealth of England, and findeing force raised by the Governor and
country to make opposition against the said ffleet whereby assured danger
appearing^ of the ruin and destruction of the plantation, for prevention
whereof the Burgesses of all the several plantations being called to advise
and affist therein, upon long and serious debate, and in sad contemplation of
the great miseries and certain destruction which were so nearly hovering
over the whole country; We the said Commissioners have thought fit and
condescended and granted to sign and confirm under our hands, seals and by
our oath, Articles bearinge date with these presents, and do further declare
that by the authority of the parliament and commonwealth of England derived
unto us their comissioners, that according to the articles in general we have
granted an act of indempnitie and oblivion to all the inhabitants of this
coloney from all words, actions, or writings that have been spoken acted or
writ against the parliament or commonwealth of England or any other person
from the beginning of the world to this day. And this we have done that all
the inhabitants of the collonie may live quietly and securely under the
commonwealth of England. And we do promise that the parliament and
commonwealth of England shall confirm and make good all those transactions of
ours.

Wittnes our hands and seals this 12th of Match 1651. Richard Bennett -- Seal.
Wm. Claiborn -- Seal. Edm. Curtis -- Seal.


The colony supposed, that, by this solemn convention, entered into with arms
in their hands, they had secured the ancient limits Art. 4.
of their country, its free trade, Art. 7.
its exemption from taxation Art. 8.
but by their own assembly, and exclusion of military force Art. 8.
from among them. Yet in every of these points was this convention violated by
subsequent kings and parliaments, and other infractions of their constitution,
equally dangerous committed. Their general assembly, which was composed of the
council of state and burgesses, sitting together and deciding by plurality of
voices, was split into two houses, by which the council obtained a separate
negative on their laws. Appeals from their supreme court, which had been fixed
by law in their general assembly, were arbitrarily revoked to England, to be
there heard before the king and council. Instead of four hundred miles on the
sea coast, they were reduced, in the space of thirty years, to about one
hundred miles. Their trade with foreigners was totally suppressed, and when
carried to Great Britain, was there loaded with imposts. It is unnecessary,
however, to glean up the several instances of injury, as scattered through
American and British history, and the more especially as, by passing on to the
accession of the present king, we shall find specimens of them all, aggravated,
multiplied and crowded within a small compass of time, so as to evince a fixed
design of considering our rights natural, conventional and chartered as mere
nullities. The following is an epitome of the first fifteen years of his reign.
The colonies were taxed internally and externally; their essential interests
sacrificed to individuals in Great Britain; their legislatures suspended;
charters annulled; trials by jurses taken away; their persons subjected to
transportation across the Atlantic, and to trial before foreign judicatories;
their applications for redress thought beneath answer; themselves published as
cowards in the councils of their mother country and courts of Europe; armed
troops sent amongst them to enforce submission to these violencies; and actual
hostilities commenced against them. No alternative was presented but
resistance, or unconditional submission. Between these could be no hesitation.
They closed in the appeal to arms. They declared themselves independent
sttates. They confederated together into one great republic; thus securing to
every state the benefit of an union of their whole force. In each state
seperately a new form of government was established. Of ours particularly the
following are the out lines. The executive powers are lodged in the hands of a
governor, chosen annually, and incapable of acting more than three years in
seven. He is assisted by a council of eight members. The judiciary powers are
divided among several courts, as will be hereafter explained. Legislation is
exercised by two houses of assembly, the one called the house of Delegates,
composed of two members from each county, chosen annually by the citizens
possessing an estate for life in 100 acres of uninhabited land, or 25 acres
with a house on it, or in a house or lot in some town: the other called the
Senate, consisting of 24 members, chosen quadrenially by the same electors, who
for this purpose are distributed into 24 districts. The concurrence of both
houses is necessary to the passage of a law. They have the appointment of the
governor and council, the judges of the superior courts, auditors,
attorney general, treasurer, register of the land office, and delegates to
congress. As the dismemberment of the state had never had its confirmation,
but, on the contrary, had always been the subject of protestation and
complaint, that it might never be in our own power to raise scruples on that
subject, or to disturb the harmony of our new confederacy, the grants to
Maryland, Pennsylvania, and the two Carolinas, were ratified.

This constitution was formed when we were new and unexperienced, in the
science of government. It was the first too which was formed in the whole
United States. No wonder then that time and trial have discovered very capital
defects in it.

1. The majority of the men in the state, who pay and fight for its support,
are unrepresented in the legislature, the roll of freeholders entitled to vote,
not including generally the half of those on the roll of the militia, or of the
tax-gatherers.

2. Among those who share the representation, the shares are very unequal. Thus
the county of Warwick, with only 100 fighting men, has an equal representation
with the county of Loudon which has 1746. So that every man in Warwick has as
much influence in the government as 17 men in Loudon. But lest it should be
thought that an equal interspersion of small among large counties, through the
whole state, may prevent any danger of injury to particular parts of it, we
will divide it into districts, and show the proportions of land, of fighting
men, and of representation in each.

Square miles. Fighting men. Delegates. Senators. Between the seacoast and
falls of the rivers Of these 542 are on the Eastern shore.
11,205 19,012 71 12 Between the falls of the rivers and the Blue ridge of
mountains 18,759 18,828 46 8 Between the Blue ridge and the Alleghaney 11,911
7,673 16 2 Between the Alleghaney and Ohio Of these, 22,616 are eastward of the
meridean of the north of the Great Kanhaway.
79,650 4,458 16 2 Total 121,525 49,971 149 24

An inspection of this table will supply the place of commentaries on it. It
will appear at once that 19,000 men, living below the falls of the rivers,
possess half the senate, and want four members only of possessing a majority of
the house of delegates; a want more than supplied by the vicinity of their
situation to the seat of government, and of course the greater degree of
convenience and punctuality with which their members may and will attend in the
legislature. These 19,000 therefore, living in one part of the country, give
law to upwards of 30,000 living in another, and appoint all their chief
officers executive and judiciary. From the difference of their situation and
circumstances, their interests will often be very different.

3. The senate is, by its constitution, too homogeneous with the house of
delegates. Being chosen by the same electors, at the same time, and out of the
same subjects, the choice falls of course on men of the same description. The
purpose of establishing different houses of legislation is to introduce the
influence of different interests or different principles. Thus in Great Britain
it is said their constitution relies on the house of commons for honesty, and
the lords for wisdom; which would be a rational reliance if honesty were to be
bought with money, and if wisdom were hereditary. In some of the American
states the delegates and senators are so chosen, as that the first represent
the persons, and the second the property of the state. But with us, wealth and
wisdom have equal chance for admission into both houses. We do not therefore
derive from the separation of our legislature into two houses, those benefits
which a proper complication of principles is capable of producing, and those
which alone can compensate the evils which may be produced by their dissentions.

4. All the powers of government, legislative, executive, and judiciary, result
to the legislative body. The concentrating these in the same hands is precisely
the definition of despotic government. It will be no alleviation that these
powers will be exercised by a plurality of hands. and not by a single one. 173
despots would surely be as oppressive as one. Let those who doubt it turn their
eyes on the republic of Venice. As little will it avail us that they are chosen
by ourselves. An elective despotism was not the government we fought for; but
one which should not only be founded on free principles, but in which the
powers of government should be so divided and balanced among several bodies of
magistracy, as that no one could transcend their legal limits, without being
effectually checked and restrained by the others. For this reason that
convention, which passed the ordinance of government, laid its foundation on
this basis, that the legislative, executive and judiciary departments should be
separate and distinct, so that no person should exercise the powers of more
than one of them at the same time. But no barrier was provided between these
several powers. The judiciary and executive members were left dependant on the
legislative, for their subsistence in office, and some of them for their
continuance in it. If therefore the legislature assumes executive and judiciary
powers, no opposition is likely to be made; nor, if made, can it be effectual:
because in that case they may put their proceedings into the form of an act of
assembly, which will render them obligatory on the other branches. They have
accordingly, in many instances, decided rights which should have been left to
judiciary controversy: and the direction of the executive, during the whole
time of their session, is becoming habitual and familiar. And this is done with
no ill intention. The views of the present members are perfectly upright. When
they are led out of their regular province, it is by art in others, and
inadvertence in themselves. And this will probably be the case for some time to
come. But it will not be a very long time. Mankind soon learn to make
interested uses of every right and power which they possess, or may assume. The
public money and public liberty, intended to have been deposited with three
branches of magistracy but found inadvertently to be in the hands of one only,
will soon be discovered to be sources of wealth and dominion to those who hold
them; distinguished too by this tempting circumstance, that they are the
instrument, as well as the object of acquisition. With money we will get men,
said Caesar, and with men we will get money. Nor should our assembly be deluded
by the integrity of their own purposes, and conclude that these unlimited
powers will never be abused, because themselves are not disposed to abuse them.
They should look forword to a time, and that not a distant one, when corruption
in this, as in the country from which we derive our origin, will have seized
the heads of government, and be spread by them through the body of the people;
when they will purchase the voices of the people, and make them pay the price.
Human nature is the same on every side of the Atlantic, and will be alike
influenced by the same causes. The time to guard against corruption and
tyranny, is before they shall have gotten hold on us. It is better to keep the
wolf out of the fold, than to trust to drawing his teeth and talons after he
shall have entered. To render these considerations the more cogent, we must
observe in addition.

5. That the ordinary legislature may alter the constitution itself. On the
discontinuance of assemblies, it became necessary to substitute in their place
some other body, competent to the ordinary business of government, and to the
calling forth the powers of the state for the maintenance of our opposition to
Great Britain. Conventions were therefore introduced, consisting of two
delegates from each county, meeting together and forming one house, on the plan
of the former house of burgesses, to whose places they succeeded. These were at
first chosen anew for every particular session. But in march 1775, they
recommended to the people to choose a convention, which should continue in
office a year. This was done accordingly in April 1775, and in the July
following that convention passed an ordinance for the election of delegates in
the month of April annually. It is well known, that in July 1775, a separation
from Great Britain and establishment of republican government had never yet
entered into any person's mind. A convention therefore, chosen under that
ordinance, cannot be said to have been chosen for the purposes which certainly
did not exist in the minds of those who passed it. Under this ordinance, at the
annual election in April 1776, a convention for the year was chosen.
Independence, and the establishment of a new form of government, were not even
yet the objects of the people at large. One extract from the pamphlet called
common sense had appeared in the Virginia papers in February, and copies of the
pamphlet itself had got into a few hands. But the idea had not been opened to
the mass of the people in April, much less can it be said that they had made up
their minds in its favor. So that the electors of April 1776, no more than the
legislators of July 1775, not thinking of independence and a permanent
republic, could not mean to vest in these delegates powers of establishing
them, or any authorities other than those of the ordinary legislature. So far
as a temporary organization of government was necessary to render our
opposition energetic, so far their organization was valid. But they received in
their creation no powers but what were given to every legislature before and
since. They could not therefore pass an act transcendant to the powers of other
legislatures. If the present assembly pass an act, and declare it shall be
irrevocable by subsequent assemblies, the declaration is merely void, and the
act repealable, as other acts are. So far, and no farther authorized, they
organized the government by the ordinance entitled a constitution or form of
government. It pretends to no higher authority than the other ordinances of the
same session; it does not say, that it shall be perpetual; that it shall be
unalterable by other legislatures; that it shall be transcendant above the
powers of those, who they knew would have equal power with themselves. Not only
the silence of the instrument is a proof they thought it would be alterable,
but their own practice also: for this very convention, meeting as a house of
delegates in general assembly with the senate in the autumn of that year,
passed acts of assembly in contradiction to their ordinance of government: and
every assembly from that time to this has done the same. I am safe therefore in
the position, that the constitution itself is alterable by the ordinary
legislature. Though this opinion seems founded on the first elements of common
sense, yet is the contrary maintained by some persons. 1. Because say they, the
conventions were vested with every power necessary to make effectual opposition
to Great Britain. But to complete this argument, they must go on, and say
further, that effectual opposition could not be made to Great Britain, without
establishing a form of government perpetual and unalterable by the legislature;
which is not true. An opposition which at some time or other was to come to an
end, could not need a perpetual institution to carry it on: and a government,
amendable as its defects should be discovered, was as likely to make effectual
resistance, as one which should be unalterably wrong. Besides, the assemblies
were as much vested with all powers requisite for resistance as the conventions
were. If therefore these powers included that of modelling the form of
government in the one case, they did so in the other. The assemblies then as
well as the conventions may model the government; that is they may alter the
ordinance of government. 2. They urge, that if the convention had meant that
this instrument should be alterable, as their other ordinances were, they would
have called it an ordinance: but they have called it a constitution, which ex
vi termini means 'an act above the power of the ordinary legislature.' I answer
that constitutio, constitutium, statutum, lex, are convertible terms.
'Constitutio dicitur jus quod a principe conditure.' Constitutum, quod ab
imperatoribus rescriptum statutumve est.' Statutum, idem quod lex.' Calvini
Lexicon juridicum. Constitution and statute were originally terms of the To
bid, to set, was the ancient legislative word of the English. Ll. Hlotharii and
Eadrici. Ll. Inae. Ll. Eadwerdi. Ll. Aathelstani.
civil law, and from thence introduced by ecclesiastics into the English law.
Thus in the statute 25 Hen. 8. c. 19.. 1. 'Constitutions and ordinances' are
used as synonimous. The term constitution has many other significations in
physics and in politics; but in jurisprudence, whenever it is applied to any
act of the legislature, it invariably means a statute, law, or ordinance, which
is the present case. No inference then of a different meaning can be drawn from
the adoption of this title; on the contrary, we might conclude, that, by their
affixing to it a term synonimous with ordinanceor statute. But of what
consequence is their meaning, where their power is denied? If they meant to do
more than they had power to do, did this give them power? It is not the name,
but the authority that renders an act obligatory. Lord Coke says, an article of
the statute 11 R. 2. c. 5. that no person should attempt to revoke any
ordinance then made, is repealed, for that such restraint is against the
jurisdiction and power of the parliament, 4. Inst. 42. and again, though diverse
parliaments have attempted to restrain subsequent parliaments, yet could they
never effect it; for the latter parliament has ever power to abrogate,
suspend, qualify, explain, or make void the former in the whole or in any part
thereof, notwithstanding any words of restraint, prohibition, or penalty, in
the former: for it is a maxim in the laws of the parliament, quod leges
posteriores priores contrarias abrogant. 4. 'Inst. 43. -- To get rid of the
magic supposed to be in the word constitution, let us translate it into its
definition as given by those who think it above the power of the law; and let
us suppose the convention instead of saying, We the ordinary legislature
establish a constitution, had said, We the ordinary legislature, establish an
act above the power of the ordinary legislature. Does not this expose the
absurdity of the attempt? 3. But, say they, the people have acquiesced, and
this has given it an authority superior to the laws. It is true, that the
people did not rebel against it: and was that a time for the people to rise in
rebellion? Should a prudent acquiescence, at a critical time, be construed into
a confirmation of every illegal thing done during that period? Besides, why
should they rebel? At an annual election, they had chosen delegates for the
year, to exercise the ordinary powers of legislation, and to manage the great
contest in which they were engaged. These delegates thought the contest would
be best managed by an organized government. They therefore* among others,
passed an ordinance of government. They did not presume to call it perpetual
and unalterable. They well knew they had no power to make it so; that our
choice of them had been for no such purpose, and at a time when we could have
no such purpose in contemplation. Had an unalterable form of government been
meditated, perhaps we should have chosen a different set of people. There was
no cause then for the people to rise in rebellion. But to what dangerous
lengths will this argument lead? Did the acquiescence of the colonies under the
various acts of power exercised by Great Britain in our infant state, confirm
these acts, and so far invest them with the authority of the people as to
render them unalterable, and our present resistance wrong? On every
unauthoritative exercise of power by the legislature, must the people rise in
rebellion, or their silence be construed into a surrender of that power to
them? If so, how many rebellions should we have had already? One certainly for
every session of assembly. The other states in the union have been of opinion,
that to render a form of government unalterable by ordinary acts of assembly,
the people must delegate persons with special powers. They have accordingly
chosen special conventions to form and fix their governments. The individuals
then who maintain contrary opinion in this country, should have the modesty to
suppose it possible that they may be wrong and the rest of America right. But
if (...) be only a possibility of their being wrong, if only a plausible doubt
remains of the validity of the ordinance of government, is it not better to
remove that doubt, by placing it on a bottom which none will dispute? If they
be right we shall only have the unnecessary trouble of meeting once in
convention. If they be wrong, they expose us to the hazard of having no
fundamental rights at all. True it is, this is no time for deliberating on
forms of government. While an enemy is within our bowels, the first object is
to expel him. But when this shall be done, when peace shall be established, and
leisure given us for intrenching within good forms, the rights for which we
have bled, let no man be found indolent enough to decline a little more trouble
for placing them beyond the reach of question. If any thing more (...) requis^^
to produce a conviction of the expediency of calling a convention at a proper
season to fix our form of government, let it be the reflection.

6. That the assembly exercises a power of determining the quorum of their own
body which may legislate for us. After the establishment of the n^w form they
adhered to the Lex majoris partis, founded in, Bro. abr. Corporations. 31. 34.
Hakewell, 93.
common law as well as common right. It is the Puff. Off. hom, 1. 2. c. 6.. 12.
natural law of every assembly of men, whose numbers are not fixed by any other
law. They continued for sometime to require the presence of a majority of their
whole number, to pass an act. But the British parliament fixes its own quorum:
our former assemblies fixed their own quorum: and one precedent in favor of
power is stronger than an hundred against it. The house of delegates therefore
(...) June 4, 1781.
lately voted that, during the present dangerous invasion, forty members shall
be a house to proceed to business. They have been moved to this by the fear of
not being able to collect a house. But this danger could not authorize them to
call that a house which was none: and if they may fix it one number, they may
at another, till it loses its fundamental character of being a representative
body. As this vote expires with the present invasion, it is probable the former
rule will be permitted to revive: because at present no ill is meant. The power
however of fixing their own quorum has been avowed, and a precedent set. From
forty it may be reduced to four, and from four to one: from a house to a
committee, from a committee to a chairman or speaker, and thus an oligarchy or
monarchy be substituted under forms supposed to be regular. (...) mala exempla
ex bonis orta sunt: sed ubi imperium ad ignaros aut minus bonos pervenit, novum
illud exemplum ab dignis et idoneis ad indignos et non idoneos fertur. When
therefore it is considered, that there is no legal obstacle to the assumption
by the assembly of all the powers legislative, executive, and judiciary, and
that these may come to the hands of the smallest rag of delegation, surely the
people will say, and their representatives, while yet they have honest
representatives, will advise them to say, that they will not acknowledge as
laws any acts not considered and assented to by the major part of their
delegates.

In enumerating the defects of the constitution, it would be wrong to count
among them what is only the error of particular persons. In December 1776, our
circumstances being much distressed, it was proposed in the house of delegates
to create a dictator, invested with every power legislative, executive and
judiciary, civil and military, of life and of death, over our persons and over
our properties: and in June 1781, again under calamity, the same proposition
was repeated, and wanted a few votes only of being passed. -- One who entered
into this contest from a pure love of liberty, and a sense of injured rights,
who determined to make every sacrifice, and to meet every danger, for the
re-establishment of those rights on a firm basis, who did not mean to expend
his blood and substance for the wretched purpose of changing this master for
that, but to place the powers of governing him in a plurality of hands of his
own choice, so that the corrupt will of no one man might in future oppress him,
must stand confounded and dismayed when he is told, that a considerable portion
of that plurality had meditated the surrender of them into a single hand, and,
in lieu of a limited monarchy, to deliver him over to a despotic one! How must
we find his efforts and sacrifices abused and ba^^ed, if he may still by a
single vote be laid prostrate at the feet of one man! In God's name from whence
have they derived this power? Is it from our ancient laws? None such can be
produced. Is it from any principle in our new constitution expressed or
implied? Every lineament of that expressed or implied, is in fu^l opposition to
it. Its fundamental principle is, that the state shall be governed as a
commonwealth. It provides a republican organization, proscribes under the name
of prerogative the exercise of all powers undefined by the laws; places on this
bsias the whole system of our laws; and by consolidating them together, chooses
that should be left to ^^and or fall together, never providing for any
circumstances, nor admitting that such could arise, wherein either should be
suspended, no, not for a moment. Our ancient laws expressly declare, that those
who are but delegates themselves shall not delegate to others powers which
require judgment and integrity in their exercise. -- Or was this proposition
moved on a supposed right in the movers of abandoning their posts in a moment
of distress? The same laws forbid the abandonment of that post, even on
ordinary occasions; and much more a transfer of their powers into other hands
and other forms, without consulting the people. They never admit the idea that
these, like sheep or cattle, may be given from hand to hand without an appeal
to their own will. -- Was it from the necessity of the case? Necessities which
dissolve a government, do not convey its authority to an oligarchy or a
monarchy. They throw back, into the hands of the people, the powers they had
delegated, and leave them as individuals to shift for themselves. A leader may
offer, but not impose himself, nor be imposed on them. Much less can their
necks be submitted to his sword, their breath to be held at his will or
caprice. The necessity which should operate these tremendous effects should at
least be palpable and irresistible. Yet in both instances, where it was feared,
or pretended with us, it was belied by the event. It was belied too by the
preceding experience of our sister states, several of whom had grappled through
greater difficulties without abandoning their forms of government. When the
proposition was first made, Massachusetts had found even the government of
committees sufficient to carry them through an invasion. But we at the time of
that proposition were under no invasion. When the second was made, there had
been added to this example those of Rhode Island, New York, New Jersey, and
Pennsylvania, in all of which the republican form had been found equal to the
talk of carrying them through the severest trials. In this state alone did
there exist so little virtue, that fear was to be fixed in the hearts of the
people, and to become the motive of their exertions and the principle of their
government? The very thought alone was treason against the people; was treason
against mankind in general; as rivetting for ever the chains which bow down
their necks, by giving to their oppressors a proof, which they would have
trumpeted through the universe, of the imbecility of republican government, in
times of pressing danger, to shield them from harm. Those who assume the right
of giving away the reins of government in any case, must be sure that the herd,
whom they hand on to the rods and hatchet of the dictator, will lay their necks
on the block when he shall nod to them. But if our assemblies supposed such a
resignation in the people, I hope they mistook their character. I am of
opinion, that the government, instead of being braced and invigorated for
greater exertions under their difficulties, would have been thrown back upon
the bungling machinery of county committees for administration, till a
convention could have been called, and its wheels again set into regular
motion. What a cruel moment was this for creating such an embarassment, for
putting to the proof the attachment of our countrymen to republican government!
Those who meant well, of the advocates for this measure, (and most of them
meant well, for I know them personally, had been their fellow laborers in the
common cause, and had often proved the purity of their principles,) had been
seduced in their judgment by the example of an ancient republic, whose
constitution and circumstances were fundamentally different. They had sought
this precedent in the history of Rome, where alone it was to be found, and
where at length too it had proved fatal. They had taken it from a republic rent
by the most bitter factions and tumults, where the government was of a
heavy-handed unfeeling aristrocacy, over a people ferocious, and rendered
desperate by poverty and wretchedness; tumults which could not be allayed under
the most trying circumstances, but by the omnipotent hand of a single despot.
Their constitution therefore allowed a temporary tyrant to be erected, under
the name of a dictator; and and that temporary tyrant, after a few examples,
became perpetual. They misapplied this precedent to a people, mild in their
dispositions, patient under their trial, united for the public liberty, and
affectionate to their leaders. But if from the constitution of the Roman
government there resulted to their senate a power of submitting all their
rights to the will of one man, does it follow, that the assembly of Virginia
have the same authority? What clause in our constitution has substituted that
of Rome, by way of residuary provision, for all cases not otherwise provided
for? Or if they may step ad libitum into any other form of government for
precedents to rule us by, for what oppression may not a precedent be found in
this world of the bellum omnium in omnia? -- Searching for the foundations of
this proposition, I can find none which may pretend a color of right or
reason, but the defect before developed, that there being no barrier between
the legislative, executive, and jucidiary departments, the legislature may
seize the whole: that having seized it, and possessing a right to fix their own
quorum, they may reduce that quorum to one, whom they may call a chairman,
speaker, dictator, or by any other name they please. -- Our situation is indeed
perilous, and I hope my countrymen will be sensible of it, and will apply, at a
proper season the proper remedy; which is a convention to fix the constitution,
to amend its defects, to bind up the several branches of government by certain
laws, which when they transgress their acts shall become nullities; to render
unnecessary an appeal to the people, or in other words a rebellion, on every
infraction of their rights, on the peril that their acquiescence shall be
construed into an intention to surrender those rights.

QUERY XIV.
THE administration of justice and the description of the laws?

The state is divided into counties. In every county are appointed magistrates,
called justices of the peace, usually from eigth to thirty or forty in number,
in proportion to the size of the county, of the most discreet and honest
inhabitants. They are nominated by their fellows, but commissioned by the
governor, and act without reward. These magistrates have jurisdiction both
criminal and civil. If the question before them be a question of law only, they
decide on it themselves: but if it be of fact, or of fact and law combined, it
must be referred to a jury. In the latter case, of a combination of law and
fact, it is usual for the jurors to decide the fact, and to refer the law
arising on it to the decision of the judges. But this division of the subject
lies with their discretion only. And if the question relate to any point of
public liberty, or if it be one of those in which the judges may be suspected
of bias, the jury undertake to decide both law and fact. If they be mistaken, a
decision against right, which is casual only, is less dangerous to the state,
and less afflicting to the loser, than one which makes part of a regular and
uniform system. In truth it is better to toss up cross and pile in a cause,
than to refer it to a judge whose mind is warped by any motive whatever, in
that particular case. But the common sense of twelve honest men gives still a
better chance of just decision, than the hazard of cross and pile. These judges
execute their process by the sheriff or coroner of the county, or by constables
of their own appointment. If any free person commit an offense against the
commonwealth, if it be below the degree of felony, he is bound by a justice to
appear before their court, to answer it on indictment or information. If it
amount to felony, he is committed to jail, a court of these justices is called;
if they on examination think him guilty, they send him to the jail of the
general court, before which court he is to be tried first by a grand jury of
24, of whom 13 must concur in opinion: if they find him guilty, he is then
tried by a jury of 12 men of the county where the offense was committed, and by
their verdict, which must be unanimous, he is acquitted or condemned without
appeal. If the criminal be a slave the trial by the county court is final. In
every case however, except that of high treason, there resides in the governor
a power of pardon. In high treason, the pardon can only flow from the generally
assembly. In civil matters these justices have jurisdiction in all cases of
whatever value, not appertaining to the department of the admiralty. This
jurisdiction is twofold. If the matter in dispute be of less value than four
dollars and one-sixth, a single member may try it at any time and place within
his county, and may award execution on the goods of the party cast. If it be of
that or greater value, it is determinable before the county court, which
consists of four at the least of those justices, and assembles at the
courthouse of the county on a certain day in every month. From their
determination, if the matter be of the value of ten pounds sterling, or concern
the title or bounds of lands, an appeal lies to one of the superior courts.

There are three superior courts, to wit, the high-court of chancery, the
general court, and the court of admiralty. The first and second of these
recieve appeals from the county courts, and also have original jurisdiction,
where the subject of controversy is of the value of ten pounds sterling, or
where it concerns the title or bounds of land. The jurisdiction of the
admiralty is original altogether. The high court of chancery is composed of
three judges, the general court of five, and the court of admiralty of three.
The two first hold their sessions at Richmond at stated times, the chancery
twice in the year, and the general court twice for business civil and criminal,
and twice more for criminal only. The court of admiralty fits at Williamsburgh
whenever a controversy arises.

There is one supreme court, called the court of appeals, composed of the
judges of the three superior courts, assembling twice a year at stated times at
Ricmond. This court recieves appeals in all civil cases from each of the
superior courts, and determines them finally. But it has no original
jurisdiction.

If a controversy arise between two foreigners of a nation in alliance with the
United States, it is decided by the Consul for their state, or, if both parties
choose it, by the ordinary courts of justice. If one of the parties only be such
a foreigner, it is triable before the courts of justice of the country. But if
it shall have been instituted in a county court, the foreigner may remove itin
to the general court, or court of chancery, who are to determine it at their
first sessions, as they must also do if it be originally commenced before them.
In cases of life and death, such foreigners have a right to be tried by a jury,
the one-half foreigners, the (...) natives.

(...) public accounts are settled with a board of ^^ditors, consisting of
three members, appointed by the general assembly, any two of wh^^ may act. But
an individual, dissatisfied with the determination of that board, may carry his
case into the proper superior court.

A description of the laws.

The general assembly was constituted, as has been already shown, by
letters-patent of March the (...) 1607, in the 4th year of the reign of James
the first. The laws of England seem to have been adopted by consent of the
settlers, which might easily enough be done whilst they were few and living all
together. Of such adoption however, we have no other proof than their practice
till the year 1661, when they were expressly adopted by an act of the assembly,
except so far as 'a difference of condition' rendered them inapplicable. Under
this adoption, the rule, in our courts of judicature was, that the common law
of England, and the general statutes previous to the 4th of James, were in
force here; but that no subequent statutes were, unless we were named in them,
said the judges and other partisans of the crown, but named or not named, said
those who reflected freely. It will be unnecessary to attempt a description of
the laws of England, as that may be found in English publications. To those
which were established here, by the adoption of the legislature, have been
since added a number of acts of assembly passed during the monarchy, and
ordinances of convention and acts of assembly enacted since the establishment
of the republic. The following variations from the British model are perhaps
worthy of being specified.

Debtors unable to pay their debts, and making faithful delivery of their whole
effects, are released from confinement, and their persons for ever discharged
from restraint for such previous debts: but any property they may afterward
acquire will be subject to their creditors.

The poor, unable to support themselves, are maintained by an assessment on the
tytheable persons in their parish. This assessment is levied and administered
by twelve persons in each parish, called vestrymen, originally chosen by the
housekeepers of the parish, but afterward filling vacancies in their own body
by their own choice. These are usually the most discreet farmers, so
distributed through their parish, that every part of it may be under the
immediate eye of some one of them. They are well acquainted with the details
and economy of private life, and they find sufficient inducements to execute
their charge well, in their philanthropy, in the approbation of th^^
neighbors, and the distinction which that gives them. The poor who have
neither property, friends, nor strength to labor, are boarded in the houses of
good farmers to whom a stipulated sum is annually paid. To those who are able
to help themselves a little, or have friends from whom they derive some
succors, inadequate however to their full maintenance, supplementary aids are
given which enable them to live comfortably in their own houses, or in the
houses of their friends. Vagabonds without visible property or vocation, are
placed in workhouses, where they are well clothed, fed, lodged, and made to
labor. Nearly the same method of providing for the poor prevails through all
our states; and from Savannah to Portsmouth you will seldom meet a beggar. In
the larger towns indeed they sometimes present themselves. These are usually
foreigners, who have never obtained a settlement in any parish. I never yet saw
a native American begging in the streets or highways. A subsistence is easily
gained here: and if, by misfortunes, they are thrown on the charities of the
world, those provided by their own country are so comfortable and so certain,
that they never think of relinquishing them to become strolling beggars. Their
situation too, when sick, in the family of a good farmer, where every member is
emulous to do them kind offices, where they are visited by all the neighbors,
who bring them the little rarities which their sickly appetites may crave, and
who take by rotation the nightly watch over them, when their condition requires
it, is without comparison better than in a general hospital, where the sick,
the dying, and the dead are crammed together, in the same rooms, and often in
the same beds. The disadvantages, inseparable from general hospitals, are such
as can never be counterpoised by all the regularities of medicine and regimen.
Nature and kind nursing save a much greater proportion in our plain way, at a
smaller expense, and with less abuse. One branch only of hospital institution
is wanting with us; that is, a general establishment for those laboring under
difficult cases of surgery. The aids of this art are not equivocal. But an
able surgeon cannot be had in every parish. Such a receptacle should
therefore be provided for those patients: but no others should be admitted.

Marriages must be solemnized either on special license, granted by the first
magistrate of the county, on proof of the consent of the parent or guardian of
either party under age, or after solemn publication, on three several Sundays,
at some place of religious worship, in the parishes where the parties reside.
The act of solemnization may be by the minister of any society of Christains,
who shall have been previously licensed for this purpose by the court of the
county. Quakers and Menonists however are exempted from all these conditions,
and marriage among them is to be solemnized by the society itself.

A foreigner of any nation, not in open war with us, becomes naturalized by
removing to the state to reside, and taking an oath of fidelity: and thereupon
acquires every right of a native citizen: and citizens may divest themselves of
that character, by declaring, by solemn deed, or in open court, that they mean
to expatriate themselves, and no longer to be citizens of this state.

Conveyances of land must be registered in the court of the county wherein they
lie, or in the general court, or they are void, as to creditors, and subsequent
purchasers.

Slaves pass by descent and dower as lands do. Where the descent is from a
parent, the heir is bound to pay an equal share of their value in money to each
of his brothers and sisters.

Slaves, as well as lands, were entailable during the monarchy: but, by an act
of the first republican assembly, all donees in tail, present and future, were
vested with the absolute dominion of the entailed subject.

Bills of exchange, being protested, carry 10 per cent. interest from their
date.

No person is allowed, in any other case, to take more than five per cent per
annum simple interest for the loan of moneys.

Gaming debts are made void, and moneys actually paid to discharge such debts.
(if they exceed 40 shillings) may be recovered by the payer within three
months, or by any other person afterward.

Tobacco, flour, beef, pork, tar, pitch, and turpentine, must be inspected by
persons publicly appointed, before they can be exported.

The erecting iron-works and mills is encouraged by many privileges; with
necessary cautions however to prevent their dams from obstructing the
navigation of the watercourse. The general assembly have on several occasions
shown a great desire to encourage the opening the great falls of James and
Potowmac rivers. As yet, however, neither of these have been effected.

The laws have also descended to the preservation and improvement of the races
of useful animals, such as horses, cattle, deer; to the exterpation of those
which are noxious, as wolves, squirrels, crows, blackbirds; and to the guarding
our citizens against infectious disorders, by obliging suspected vessels coming
into the state, to perform quarantine, and by regulating the conduct of persons
having such disorders within the state.

The mode of acquiring lands, in the earliest times of our settlement, was by
petition to the general assembly. If the lands prayed for were already cleared
of the Indian title, and the assembly thought the prayer reasonable, they
passed the property by their vote to the petitioner. But if they had not yet
been ceded by the Indians, it was necessary that the petitioner should
previously purchase their right. This purchase the assembly verified, by
enquiries of the Indian proprietors; and being satisfied of its reality and
fairness, proceeded further to examine the reasonableness of the petition, and
its consistence with policy; and according to the result, either granted or
rejected the petition. The company also sometimes, though very rarely, granted
lands, independantly of the general assembly. As the colony increased, and
individual applications for land multipled, it was found to give too much
occupation to the general assembly to enquire into and execute the grant in
every special case. They therefore thought it better to establish general
rules, according to which all grants should be made, and to leave to the
governor the excution of them, under these rules. This they did by what have
been usually called the land laws amending them from time to time, as their
defects were developed. According to these laws, when an individual wished a
portion of unappropriated land, he was to locate and survey it by a public
officer, appointed for that purpose: its breadth was to bear a certain
proportion to its length: the grant was to be executed by the governor: and the
lands were to be improved in a certain manner, within a given time. From these
regulations there resulted to the state a sole and exclusive power of taking
conveyances of the Indian right of soil: since, according to them an Indian
conveyance alone could give no right to an individual, which the laws would
acknowledge. The state, or the crown, thereafter, made general purchases of the
Indians from time to time, and the governor parcelled them out by special
grants, conformed to the rules before described, which it was not in his power,
or in that of the crown, to dispense with. Grants, unaccompanied by their
proper legal circumstances, were set aside regularly by scire facias, or by
bill in chancery. Since the establishment of our new government, this order of
things is but little changed. An individual, wishing to appropriate to himself
lands still unappropriated by any other, pays to the public treasurer a sum of
money proportioned to the quantity he wants. He carries the treasurer's receipt
to the auditors of public accounts, who thereupon debit the treasurer with the
sum, and order the register of the land-office to give the party a warrant for
his land. With this warrant from the register, he goes to the surveyor of the
county where the land lies on which he has cast his eye. The surveyor lays it
off for him, gives him its exact description, in the form of a certificate,
which certificate he returns to the land office, where a grant is made out, and
is signed by the governor. This vests in him a perfect dominion in his lands,
transmissible to whom he pleases by deed or will, or by descent to his heirs ^f
he die intestate.

Many of the laws which were in force during the monarchy being relative merely
to that form of government, or inculcating principles inconsistent with
republicanism, the first assembly which met after the establishment of the
commonwealth appointed a committee to revise the whole code, to reduce it into
proper form and volume, and report it to the assembly. This work has been
executed by three gentlemen, and reported; but probably will not be taken up
till a restoration of peace shall leave to the legislature leisure to go
through such a work.

The plan of the revisal was this. The common law of England, by which is
meant, that part of the English law which was anterior to the date of the
oldest statutes extant, is made the basis of the work. It was thought dangerous
to attempt to reduce it to a text: it was therefore left to be collected from
the usual monuments of it. Necessary alterations in that, and so much of the
whole body of the British statutes, and of acts of assembly, as were thought
proper to be retained, were digested into 126 new acts, in which simplicity of
style was aimed at, as far as was safe. The following are the most remarkable
alterations proposed:

To change the rules of descent, so as that the lands of any person ^ying
intestate shall be divisible equally among all his children, or other
representatives, in equal degree.

To make slaves distributable among the next of kin, as other movables.

To have all public expenses, whether of the general treasury, or of a parish
or county, (as for the maintenance of the poor, building bridges, court-houses,
etc.) supplied by assessments on the citizens, in proportion to their property.

To hire undertakers for keeping the public roads in repair, and indemnify
individuals through whose lands new roads shall be opened.

To define with precision the rules whereby aliens should become citizens, and
citizens make themselves aliens.

To establish religious freedom on the broadest bottom.

To emancipate all slaves born after passing the act. The bill reported by the
revisors does not itself contain this proposition; but an amendment containing
it was prepared, to be offered to the legislature whenever the bill should be
taken up, and further directing, that they should continue with their parents
to a certain age, then be brought up, at the public expense, to tillage, arts
or sciences, according to their geniusses, till the females should be eighteen,
and the males twenty-one years of age, when they should be colonized to such
place as the circumstances of the time should render most proper, sending them
out with arms, implements of household and of the handicraft arts, seeds, pairs
of the useful domestic animals, etc. to declare them a free and independent
people, and extend to them our alliance and protection, till they have acquired
strength; and to send vessels at the same time to other parts of the world for
an equal number of white inhabitants; to induce whom to migrate hither, proper
encouragements were to* be proposed. It will probably be asked, Why not retain
and incorporate the blacks into the state, and thus save the expense of
supplying by importation of white settlers, the vacancies they will leave? Deep
rooted prejudices entertained by the whites; ten thousand recollections, by the
blacks, of the injuries they have sustained; new provocations; the real
distinctions which nature has made; and many other circumstances, will divide
us into parties, and produce convulsions, which will probably never end but in
the extermination of the one or the other race. -- To these objections, which
are political, may be added others, which are physical and moral. The first
difference which strikes us is that of color. Whether the black of the negro
resides in the reticular membrane between the skin and scarf-skin, or in the
scarf-skin itself; whether it proceeds from the color of the blood, the color
of the bile, or from that of some other secretion, the difference is fixed in
nature, and is as real as if its seat and cause were better known to us. And is
this difference of no importance? Is it not the foundation of a greater or less
share of beauty in the two races? Are not the fine mixtures of red and white,
the expressions of every passion by greater or less suffusions of color in the
one, preferable to that eternal monotony, which reigns in the countenances,
that immovable veil of black which covers all the emotions of the other race?
Add to these, flowing hair, a more elegant symmetry of form, their own judgment
in favor of the whites, declared by their preference of them, as uniformly as
is the preference of the Oranootan for the black women over those of his own
species. The circumstance of superior beauty, is thought worthy attention in
the propagation of our horses, dogs, and other domestic animals; why not in
that of man? Besides those of color, figure, and hair, there are other
physical distinctions proving a difference of race. They have less hair on the
face and body. They secret less by the kidneys, and more by the glands of the
skin, which gives them a very strong and disagreeable odor. This greater
degree of transpiration renders them more tolerant of heat, and less so of cold
than the whites. Perhaps too a difference of structure in the pulmonary
apparatus, which a late ingenious Crawford.
experimentalist has discovered to be the principal regulator of animal heat,
may have disabled them from extricating, in the act of inspiration, so much of
that fluid from the outer air, or obliged them in expiration, to part with more
of it. They seem to require less sleep. A black after hard labor through the
day, will be induced by the slightest amusements to sit up till midnight, or
later though knowing he must be out with the first dawn of the morning. They
are at least as brave, and more adventuresome. But this may perhaps proceed
from a want of forethought, which prevents their seeing a danger till it be
present. When present, they do not go through it with more coolness or
steadiness than the whites. They are more ardent after their female: but love
seems with them to be more an eager desire, than a tender delicate mixture of
sentiment and sensation. Their griefs are transient. Those numberless
afflictions, which render it doubtful whether heaven has given life to us in
mercy or in wrath, are less felt, and sooner forgotten with them. In general,
their existence appears to participate more of sensation than reflection. To
this must be ascribed their disposition to sleep when abstracted from their
diversions, and unemployed in labor. An animal whose body is at rest, and who
does not reflect, must be disposed to sleep of course. Comparing them by their
faculties of memory, reason, and imagination, it appears to me that in memory
they* are equal to the whites; in reason much inferior, as I think one could
scarcely be found capable of tracing and comprehending the investigations of
Euclid; and that in imagination they are dull, tasteless, and anomalous. It
would be unfair to follow them to Africa for this investigation. We will
consider them here, on the same stage with the whites, and where the facts are
not apocryphal on which a judgment is to be formed. It will be right to make
great allowances for the difference of condition, of education, of
conversation, of the sphere in which they move. Many millions of them have been
brought to, and born in America. Most of them indeed have been confined to
tillage, to their own homes, and their own society: yet many have been so
situated, that they might have availed themselves of the conversation of their
masters; many have been brought up to the handicraft arts, and from that
circumstance have always been associated with the whites. Some have been
liberally educated, and all have lived in countries where the arts and sciences
are cultivated to a considerable degree, and have had before their eyes samples
of the best works from abroad. The Indians, with no advantages of this kind,
will often carve figures on their pipes not destitute of design and merit. They
will crayon out an animal, a plant, or a country, so as to prove the existence
of a germ in their minds which only wants cultivation. They astonish you with
strokes of the most sublime oratory; such as prove their reason and sentiment
strong, their imagination glowing and elevated. But never yet could I find that
a black had uttered a thought above the level of plain narration; never see
even an elementary trait of painting or sculpture. In music they are more
generally gifted than the whites with accurate ears for tune and time, and they
have been found capable of imagining a small catch. The instrument proper to
them is the Banjar, which they brought hither from Africa, and which is the
original of the guitar, its chords being precisely the four lower chords of the
guitar.
Whether they will be equal to the composition of a more extensive run of
melody, or of complicated harmony, is yet to be proved. Misery is often the
parent of the most affecting touches in poetry. -- Among the blacks is misery
enough, God knows, but no poetry. Love is the peculiar oestrum of the poet.
Their love is ardent, but it kindles the senses only, not the imagination.
Religion indeed has produced a Phyllis Whately; but it could not produce a
poet. The compositions published under her name are below the dignity of
criticism. The heroes of the Dunciad are to her, as Hercules to the author of
that poem. Ignatius Sancho has approached nearer to merit in composition; yet
his letters do more honor to the heart than the head. They breath the purest
effusions of friendship and general philanthropy, and show how great a degree
of the latter may be compounded with strong religious zeal. He is often happy
in the turn of his compliments, and his style is easy and familiar, except when
he affects a Shandean fabrication of words. But his imagination is wild and
extravagant, escapes incessantly from every restraint of reason and taste, and,
in the course of its vagaries, leaves a tract of thought as incoherent and
eccentric, as is the course of a meteor through the sky. His subjects should
often have led him to a process of sober reasoning: yet we find him always
substituting sentiment for demonstration. Upon the whole, though we admit him
to the first place among those of his own color who have presented themselves
to the public judgment, yet when we compare him with the writers of the race
among whom he lived and particularly with the epistolary class, in which he has
taken his own stand, we are compelled to enroll him at the bottom of the
column. This criticism supposes the letters published under his name to be
genuine, and to have received amendment from no other hand; points which would
not be of easy investigation. The improvement of the blacks in body and mind,
in the first instance of their mixture with the whites, has been observed by
every one, and proves that their inferiority is not the effect merely of their
condition of life. We know that among the Romans, about the Augustan age
especially, the condition of their slaves was much more deplorable than that of
the blacks on the continent of America. The two sexes were confined in separate
apartments, because to raise a child cost the master more than to buy one.
Cato, for a very restricted indulgence to his slaves in this particular, Tous
doulous etax^n o^ismenou nomesmatos homilein tais therapainisin. Plutarch. Cato.
took from them a certain price. But in this country the slaves multiply as
fast as the free inhabitants. Their situation and manners place the commerce
between the two sexes almost without restraint. -- The same Cato, on a
principle of economy, always sold his sick and superannuated slaves. He gives
it as a standing precept to a master visiting his farm, to sell his old oxen,
old wagons, old tools, old and diseased servants, and every thing else become
useless. Vendat boves vetulos, plaustrum vetus, ferramenta vetera, servum
senem, servum morbosum, and si quid aliud supersit vendat. Cato de re rustica
c. 2. The American slaves cannot enumerate this among the injuries and insults
they receive. It was the common practice to expose in the island Aesculapius,
in the Tyber, diseased slaves, whose cure was like to become tedious. Su^t*
Claud* 2^.
The emperor Claudius, by an edict, gave freedom to such of them as should
recover, and first declared that if any person chose to kill rather than expose
them, it should be deemed homicide. The exposing them is a crime of which no
instance has existed with us; and were it to be followed by death, it would be
punished capitally. We are told of a certain Vedius Pollio, who, in the
presence of Augustus, would have given a slave as food to his fish, for having
broken a glass. With the Romans, the regular method of taking the evidence of
their slaves was under torture. Here it has been thought better never to resort
to their evidence. When a master was murdered, all his slaves, in the same
house, or within hearing, were condemned to death. Here punishment falls on the
guilty only, and as precise proof is required against him as against a freeman.
Yet notwithstanding these and other discouraging circumstances among the
Romans, their slaves were often their rarest artists. They excelled too in
science, insomuch as to be usually employed as tutors to their master's
children. Epictetus, Terence, and Phaedrus, were slaves. But they were of the
race of whites. It is not their condition then, but nature, which has produced
the distinction. -- Whether further observation will or will not verify the
conjecture, that nature has been less bountiful to them in the endowments of
the head, I believe that in those of the heart she will be found to have done
them justice. That disposition to theft with which they have been branded, must
be ascribed to their situation, and not to any depravity of the moral sense.
The man, in whose favor no laws of property exist, probably feels himself less
bound to respect those made in favor of others. When arguing for ourselves, we
lay it down as a fundamental, that laws, to be just, must give a reciprocation
of right: that, without this, they are mere arbitary rules of conduct, founded
in force, and not in conscience: and it is a problem which I give to the master
to solve, whether the religious precepts against the violation of property were
not framed for him as well as his slave? And whether the slave may not as
justifiably take a little from one, who has taken all from him, as he may slay
one who would slay him? That a change in the relations in which a man is placed
should change his ideas of moral right and wrong, is neither new, nor peculiar
to the color of the blacks. Homer tells us it was so 2600 years ago.

'Er^isu, ger to aretes apoainutai euruopa Zeus
Haneros, cut' an min kata doulion ema elefin.
Od. 17. 323. Jove fixed it certain, that whatever day
Makes man a slave takes half his worth away.
But the slaves of which Homer speaks were whites. Notwithstanding these
considerations which must weaken their respect for the laws of property, we
find among them numerous instances of the most rigid integrity, and as many as
among their better instructed masters, of benevolence, gratitude, and unshaken
fidelity. -- The opinion, that they are inferior in the faculties of reason and
imagination, must be hazarded with great diffidence. To justify a general
conclusion, requires many observations, even where the subject may be submitted
to the anatomical knife, to optical classes, to analysis by fire, or by
solvents. How much more then where it is a faculty, not a substance, we are
examining; where it eludes the research of all the senses; where the conditions
of its existence are various and variously combined; where the effects of those
which are present or absent bid defiance to calculation; let me add too, as a
circumstance of great tenderness, where our conclusion would degrade a whole
race of men from the rank in the scale of beings which their Creator may
perhaps have given them. To our reproach it must be said, that though for a
century and a half we have had under our eyes the races of black and of red
men, they have never yet been viewed by us as subjects of natural history. I
advance it therefore as a suspicion only, that the blacks, whether originally a
distinct race, or made distinct by time and circumstances, are inferior to the
whites in the endowments both of body and mind. It is not against experience to
suppose, that different species of the same genus, or varieties of the same
species, may possess different qualifications. Will not a lover of natural
history then, one who views the gradations in all the races of animals with the
eye of philosophy, excuse an effort to keep those in the department of man as
distinct as nature has formed them? This unfortunate difference of color, and
perhaps of faculty, is a powerful obstacle to the emancipation of these people.
Many of their advocates, while they wish to vindicate the liberty of human
nature are anxious also to preserve its dignity and beauty. Some of these,
embarrassed by the question What further is to be done with them? join
themselves in opposition with those who are actuated by sordid avarice only.
Among the Romans emancipation required but one effort. The slave, when made
free, might mix with, without staining the blood of his master. But with us a
second is necessary, unknown to history. When freed, he is to be removed beyond
the reach of mixture.

The revised code further proposes to proportion crimes and punishments. This
is attempted on the following scale.

I. Crimes whose punishment extends to LIFE. 1. High treason. Death by hanging.
Forfeiture of lands and goods to the commonwealth.
2. Petty treason. Death by hanging. Dissection. Forfeiture of half the lands
and goods to the representatives of the party slain.
3. Murder. 1. by poison. Death by poison. Forfeiture of one-half, as before.
2. in duel. Death by hanging. Gibbeting, if the challenger Forfeiture of
one-half as before, unless it be the party challenged, then the forfeiture is
to the commonwealth.
3. in any other way. Death by hanging. Forfeiture of one-half as before.

4. Manslaughter. The second offense is murder.
II. Crimes whose punishment goes to LIMB. Dismemberment. 1. Rape. 2. Sodomy.
Retaliation, and the forfeiture of half the lands and goods to the sufferer.
3. Maiming. 4. Disfiguring

III. Crimes punishable by LABOR. 1. Manslaughter, 1st offense. Labor VII.
years for the public. Forfeiture of half, as in murder. 2. Counterfeiting
money. Labor VI. years. Forfeiture of lands and goods to the commonwealth. 3.
Arson Labor V. years Reparation threefold. 4. Asportation of vessels 5.
Robbery Labor IV. Years Reparation double. 6. Burglary 7. House-breaking
Labor III. years Reparation. 8. Horse-stealing 9. Grand larceny Labor II.
Years Reparation. Pillory. 10. Petty larceny Labor I. Year Reparation.
Pillory. 11. Pretensions to witchcraft, etc. Ducking Stripes. 12. Excusable
homicide To be pitied, not punished. Suicide 14. Apostasy. Heresy
Pardon and privilege of clergy are proposed to be abolished; but if the
verdict be against the defendant, the court in their discretion, may allow a
new trial. No attainder to cause a corruption of blood, or forfeiture of dower.
Slaves guilty of offenses punishable in others by labor, to be transported to
Africa, or elsewhere, as the circumstances of the time admit, there to be
continued in slavery. A rigorous regimen proposed for those condemned to labor.

Another object of the revisal is, to diffuse knowledge more generally through
the mass of the people. This bill proposes to lay off every county into small
districts of five or six miles square, called hundreds, and in each of them to
establish a school for teaching reading, writing, and arithmetic. The tutor to
be supported by the hundred and every person in it entitled to send their
children three years gratis, and as much longer as they please, paying for it.
These schools to be under a visitor who is annually to choose the boy, of best
genius in the school, of those whose parents are too poor to give them further
education, and to send him forward to one of the grammar schools, of which
twenty are proposed to be erected in different parts of the country, for
teaching Greek, Latin, geography, and the higher branches of numerical
arithmetic. Of the boys thus sent in one year, trial is to be made at the
grammar schools one or two years, and the best genius of the whole selected,
and continued six years, and the residue dismissed. By this means twenty of the
best geniusses will be raked from the rubbish annually, and be instructed, at
the public exp^^ce, so far as the grammar schools go. At the end of six years
instruction, one half are to be discontinued (from among whom the grammar
schools will probably be supplied with future masters;) and the other half, who
are to be chosen for the superiority of their parts and disposition, are to be
sent and continued three years in the study of such sciences as they shall
choose, at William and Mary college, the plan of which is proposed to be
enlarged, as will be hereafter explained, and extended to all the useful
sciences. The ultimate result of the whole scheme of education would be the
teaching all the children of the state reading, writing, and common arithmetic:
turning out ten annually of superior genius, well taught in Greek, Latin,
geography, and the higher branches of arithmetic: turning out ten others
annually, of still superior parts, who, to those branches of learning, shall
have added such of the sciences as their genius shall have led them to: the
furnishing to the wealthier part of the people convenient schools, at which
their children may be educated at their own expense. -- The general objects of
this law are to provide an education adapted to the years to the capacity, and
the condition of every one, and directed to their freedom and happiness.
Specific details were not proper for the law. These must be the business of the
visitors entrusted with its execution. The first stage of this education being
the schools of the hundreds, wherein the great mass of the people will receive
their instruction, the principle foundations of future order will be laid here.
Instead therefore of putting the Bible and Testament into the hands of the
children at an age when their judgments are not sufficiently matured for
religious inquiries, their memories may here be stored with the most useful
facts from Grecian, Roman, European and American history. The first elements of
morality too may be instilled into their minds; such as, when further developed
as their judgments advance in strength, may teach them how to work out their
own greatest happiness, by showing them that it does not depend on the
condition of life in which chance has placed them, but is always the result of
a good conscience, good health, occupation, and freedom in all just pursuits.
-- Those whom either the wealth of their parents or the adoption of the state
shall destine to higher degrees of learning, will go on to the grammar schools,
which constitute the next stage, there to be instructed in the languages. The
learning Greek and Latin, I am told, is going into disuse in Europe. I know not
what their manners and occupations may call for: but it would be very
ill-judged in us to follow their example in this instance. There is a certain
period of life, say from eight to fifteen or sixteen years of age, when the
mind like the body is not yet firm enough for laborious and close operations.
If applied to such, it falls an early victim to premature exertion: exhibiting
indeed at first, in these young and tender subjects, the flattering appearance
of their being men while they are yet children, but ending in reducing them to
be children when they should be men. The memory is then most susceptible and
tenacious of impressions; and the learning of languages being chiefly a work of
memory, it seems precisely fitted to the powers of this period, which is long
enough too for acquiring the most useful languages ancient and modern. I do not
pretend that language is science. It is only an instrument for the attainment
of science. But that time is not lost which is employed in providing tools for
future operation: more especially as in this case the books put into the hands
of the youth for this purpose may be such as will at the same time impress
their minds with useful facts and good principles. If this period be suffered
to pass in idleness, the mind becomes lethargic and impotent, as would the body
it inhabits if unexercised during the same time. The sympathy between body and
mind during their rise, progress and decline, is too strict and obvious to
endanger our being misled while we reason from the one to the other. -- As soon
as they are of sufficient age, it is supposed they will be sent on from the
grammar schools to the university, which constitutes our third and last stage,
there to study those sciences which may be adapted to their views. -- By that
part of our plan which prescribes the selection of the youths of genius from
among the classes of the poor, we hope to avail the state of those talents
which nature has sown as liberally among the poor as the rich, but which perish
without use, if not sought for and cultivated. -- But of the views of this law
none is more important, none more legitimate, than that of rendering the people
the safe, as they are the ultimate, guardians of their own liberty. For this
purpose the reading in the first stage, where they will receive their whole
education, is proposed, as has been said, to be chiefly historical. History by
apprising them of the past will enable them to judge of the future; it will
avail them of the experience of other times and other nations; it will qualify
them as judges of the actions and designs of men; it will enable them to know
ambition under every disguise it may assume; and knowing it, to defeat its
views. In every government on earth is some trace of human weakness, some germ
of corruption and degeneracy, which cunning will discover, and wickedness
insensibly open, cultivate and improve. Every government degenerates when
trusted to the rulers of the people alone. The people themselves therefore are
its only safe depositories. And to render even them safe their minds must be
improved to a certain degree. This indeed is not all that is necessary, though
it be essen^ially necessary. An amendment of our constitution must here come in
aid of the public education. The influence over government must be shared among
all the people. If every individual which composes their mass participates of
the ultimate authority, the government will be safe; because the corrupting the
whole mass will exceed any private resources of wealth* and public ones cannot
be provided but by levies on the people. In this case every man would have to
pay his own price. The government of Great Britain has been corrupted, because
but one man in ten has a right to vote for members of parliament. The sellers
of the government therefore get nine-tenths of their price clear. It has been
thought that corruption is restrained by confining the right of suffrage to a
few of the wealthier of the people: but it would be more effectually restrained
by an extension of that right to such numbers as would bid defiance to the
means of corruption.

Lastly, it is proposed, by a bill in this revisal, to begin a public library
and gallery, by laying out a certain sum annually in books, paintings, and
statues.

QUERY XV.
THE colleges and public establishments, the roads, buildings, etc.?

The college of William and Mary is the only public seminary of learning in
this state. It was founded in the time of king William and queen Mary, who
granted to it 20,000 acres of land, and a penny a pound duty on certain
tobaccoes exported from Virginia and Maryland, which had been levied by the
statute of 25 Car. 2. The assembly also gave it, by temporary laws, a duty on
liquors imported, and skins and furs exported. From these resources it received
upwards of 3000l. communibus annis. The buildings are of brick, sufficient for
an indifferent accommodation of perhaps a^ hundred students. By its charter it
was to be under the government of twenty visitors, who were to be its
legislators, and to have a president and six professors, who were incorported.
It was allowed a representative in the general assembly. Under this charter, a
professorship of the Greek and Latin languages, a professorship of mathematics,
one of moral philosophy, and two of divinity, were established. To these were
annexed, for a sixth professorship, a considerable donation by Mr. Boil of
England, for the instruction of the Indians, and their conversion to
Christianity. This was called the professorship of Brafferton, from an estate
of that name in England, purchased with the moneys given. The admission of the
learners of Latin and Greek filled the college with children. This rendering it
disagreeable and degrading to young gentlemen already prepared for entering on
the sciences, they were discouraged from resorting to it, and thus the schools
for mathematics and moral philosophy, which might have been of some service,
became of very little. The revenues too were exhausted in accommodating those
who came only to acquire the rudiments of science. After the present
revolution, the visitors, having no power to change those circumstances in the
constitution of the college which were fixed by the charter, and being
therefore confined in the number of professorships, undertook to change the
objects of the professorships. They excluded the two schools for divinity, and
that for the Greek and Latin languages, and substituted others; so that at
present they stand thus: A Professorship for Law and Police; Anatomy and
Medicine: Natural Philosophy and Mathematics: Moral Philosophy, the Law of
Nature and Nations, the Fine Arts: Modern Languages: For the Brafferton.


And it is proposed, so soon as the legislature shall have leisure to take up
this subject, to desire authority from them to increase the number of
professorships, as well for the purpose of subdividing those already
instituted, as of adding others for other branches of science. To the
professorships usually established in the universities of Europe, it would seem
proper to add one for the ancient languages and literature of the North, on
account of their connection with our own language, laws, customs, and history.
The purposes of the Brafferton instution would be better answered by
maintaining a perpetual mission among the Indian tribes, the object of which,
besides instructing them in the principles of Christianity, as the founder
requires, should be to collect their traditions, laws, customs, languages, and
other circumstances which might lead to a discovery of their relation with one
another, or descent from other nations. When these objects are accomplished
with one tribe, missionary might pass on to another.

The roads are under the government of the county courts, subject to be
controuled by the general court. They order new roads to be opened wherever
they think them necessary. The inhabitants of the county are by them laid off
into precincts, to each of which they allot a convenient portion of the public
roads to be kept in repair. Such bridges as may be built without the assistance
of artificers, they are to build. If the stream be such as to require a bridge
of regular workmanship, the court employs workmen to build it, at the expense
of the whole county. If it be too great for the county, application is made to
the general assembly, who authorize individuals to build it, and to take a
fixed toll from all passengers, or give sanction to such other proposition as
to them appears reasonable.

Ferries are admitted only at such places as are particularly pointed out by
law, and the rates of ferriage are fixed.

Taverns are licensed by the courts, who fix their rates from time to time.

The private buildings are very rarely constructed of stone or brick; much the
greatest portion being of scantling and boards, plaistered with lime. It is
impossible to devise things more ugly, uncomfortable, and happily more
perishable. There are two or three plans, on one of which, according to its
size, most of the houses in the state are built. The poorest people build huts
of logs, laid horizontally in pens, stopping the interstices with mud. These
are warmer in winter, and cooler in summer, than the more expensive
construction of scantling and plank. The wealthy are attentive to the raising
of vegetables, but very little so to fruits. The poorer people attend to
neither, living principally on milk and animal diet. This is the more
inexcusable, as the climate requires indispensably a free use of vegetable
food, for health as well as comfort, and is very friendly to the raising of
fruits. The only public buildings worthy mention are the capitol, the palace,
the college, and the hospital for lunatics, all of them in Williamsburgh,
heretofore the seat of our government. The capitol is a light and airy
structure, with a portico in front of two orders, the lower of which, being
Doric, is tolerably just in its proportions and ornaments, save only that the
interco^onations are too large. The upper is Ionic, much too small for that on
which it is mounted, its ornaments not proper to the order, nor proportioned
within themselves. It is crowned with a pediment, which is too high for its
span. Yet, on the whole, it is the most pleasing piece of architecture we have.
The palace is not handsome without: but it is spacious and commodious within,
is prettily situated, and with the grounds annexed to it, is capable of being
made an elegant seat. The college and hospital are rude, misshapen piles,
which, but that they have roofs, would be taken for brick-kilns. There are no
other public buildings but churches and court-houses, in which no attempts are
made at elegance. Indeed it would not be easy to execute such an attempt, as a
workman could scarcely be found here capable of drawing an order. The genius of
architecture seems to have shed its maledictions over this land. Buildings are
often erected, by individuals, of considerable expense. To give these symmetry
and taste would not increase their cost. It would only change the arrangement
of the materials, the form and combination of the members. This would often
cost less than the burden of barbarous ornaments with which these buildings
are sometimes charged. But the first principles of the art are unknown, and
there exists scarcely a model among us sufficiently chaste to give an idea of
them. Architecture being one of the fine arts, and as such within the
department of a professor of the college, according to the new arrangement,
perhaps a spark may fall on some young subjects of natural taste, kindle up
their genius, and produce a reformation in this elegant and useful art. But all
we shall do in this way will produce no permanent improvement to our country,
while the unhappy prejudice prevails that houses of brick or stone are less
wholesome than those of wood. A dew is often observed on the walls of the
former in rainy weather, and the most obvious solution is, that the rain has
penetrated through these walls. The following facts however are sufficient to
prove the error of this solution. 1. This dew upon the walls appears when there
is no rain, if the state of the atmosphere be moist. 2. It appears on the
partition as well as the exterior walls. 3. So also on pavements of brick or
stone. 4. It is more copious in proportion as the walls are thicker; the
reverse of which ought to be the case, if this hypothesis were just. If cold
water be poured into a vessel of stone, or glass, a dew forms instantly on the
outside: but if it be poured into a vessel of wood, there is no such
appearance. It is not supposed, in the first case, that the water has exuded
through the glass, but that it is precipitated from the circumambient air; as
the humid particles of vapor, passing from the boiler of an alembic through
its refrigerant, are precipitated from the air, in which they were suspended,
on the internal surface of the refrigerant. Walls of brick or stone act as the
refrigerant in this instance. They are sufficiently cold to condense and
precipitate the moisture suspended in the air of the room, when it is heavily
charged therewith. But walls of wood are not so. The question then is, whether
air in which this moisture is left floating, or that which is deprived of it,
be most wholesome? In both cases the remedy is easy. A little fire kindled in
the room, whenever the air is damp, prevents the precipitation on the walls:
and this practice, found healthy in the warmest as well as coldest seasons, is
as necessary in a wooden as in a stone or a brick house. I do not mean to say,
that the rain never penetrates through walls of brick. On the contrary I have
seen instances of it. But with us it is only through the northern and eastern
walls of the house, after a north-easterly storm, these being the only ones
which continue long enough to force through the walls. This however happens too
rarely to give a just character of unwholesomeness to such houses. In a house,
the walls of which are of well-burnt brick and good mortar, I have seen the
rain penetrate through but twice in a dozen or fifteen years. The inhabitants
of Europe, who dwell chiefly in houses of stone or brick, are surely as healthy
as those of Virginia. These houses have the advantage too of being warmer in
winter and cooler in summer than those of wood; of being cheaper in their first
construction, where lime is convenient, and infinitely more durable. The latter
consideration renders it of great importance to eradicate this prejudice from
the minds of our countrymen. A country whose buildings are of wood, can never
increase in its improvements to any considerable degree. Their duration is
highly estimated at 50 years. Every half century then our country becomes a
tabula ra^a, whereon we have to set out anew, as in the first moment of seating
it. Whereas when buildings are of durable materials, every new edifice is an
actual and permanent acquisition to the state, adding to its value as well as
to its ornament.

QUERY XVI.
THE measures taken with regard to the estates and possessions of the rebels,
commonly called tories?

A tory has been properly defined to be a traitor in thought but not in deed.
The only description, by which the laws have endeavored to come at them, was
that of non-jurors, or persons refusing to take the oath of fidelity to the
state. Persons of this description were at one time subjected to double
taxation, at another to treble, and lastly were allowed retribution, and placed
on a level with good citizens. It may be mentioned as a proof both of the
lenity of our government, and unanimity of its inhabitants, that though this
war has now raged near seven years, not a single execution for treason has
taken place.

Under this query I will state the measures which have been adopted as to
British property, the owners of which stand on a much fairer footing than the
tories. By our laws, the same as the English in this respect, no alien can hold
lands, nor alien enemy maintain an action for money, or other moveable thing.
Lands acquired or held by aliens become forfeited to the state; and, on an
action by an alien enemy to recover money, or other moveable property, the
defendant may plead that he is an alien enemy. This extinguishes his right in
the hands of the debtor or holder of his moveable property. By our separation
from Great Britain, British subjects became aliens, and being at war, they were
alien enemies. Their lands were of course forfeited, and their debts
irrecoverable. The assembly however passed laws, at various times, for saving
their property. They first sequestered their lands, slaves, and other property
on their farms in the hands of commissioners, who were mostly the confidential
friends or agents of the owners, and directed their clear profits to be paid
into the treasury: and they gave leave to all persons owing debts to British
subjects to pay them also into the treasury. The moneys so to be brought in
were declared to remain the property of the British subject, and, if used by
the state, were to be repaid, unless an improper conduct in Great Britain
should render a detention of it reasonable. Depreciation had at that time,
though unacknowledged and unperceived by the whigs, begun in some small degree.
Great sums of money were paid in by debtors. At a later period, the assembly,
adhering to the political principles which forbid an alien to hold lands in the
state, ordered all British property to be sold: and, become sensible of the
real progress of depreciation, and of the losses which would thence occur, if
not guarded against, they ordered that the proceeds of the sales should be
converted into their then worth in tobacco, subject to the future direction of
the legislature. This act has left the question of retribution more
problematical. In May, 1780, another act took away the permission to pay into
the public treasury debts due to British subjects.

QUERY XVII.
THE different religions received into that state?

The first settlers i^ this country were (...) from England, of the English
church, just at a point of time when it was flushed with complete victory over
the religious of all other persuasions. Possessed, as they became, of the
powers of making, administering, and executing the laws, they showed equal
intolerance in this country with their Presbyterian brethren, who had emigrated
to the northern government. The poor Quakers were flying from persecution in
England. They cast their eyes on these new countries as asylums of civil and
religious freedom; but they found them free only for the reigning sect. Several
acts of the Virginia assembly of 1659, 1662 and 1693, had made it penal in
parents to refuse to have their children baptized; had prohibited the unlawful
assembling of Quakers; had made it penal for any master of a vessel to bring a
Quaker into the state; had ordered those already here, and such as should come
thereafter, to be imprisoned till they should abjure the country; provided a
milder punishment for their first and second return, but death for their third;
had inhibited all persons from suffering their meetings in or near their
houses, entertaining them individually, or disposing of books which supported
their tenets. If no execution took place here, as did in New England, it was
not owing to the moderation of the church, or spirit of the legislature, as may
be inferred from the law itself; but to historical circumstances which have not
been handed down to us. The Anglicans retained full possession of the country
about a century. Other opinions began then to creep in, and the great care of
the government to support their own church, having begotten an equal degree of
indolence in its clergy, two-thirds of the people had become dissenters at the
commencement of the present revolution. The laws indeed were still oppressive
on them, but the spirit of the one party had subsided into moderation, and of
the other had risen to a degree of determination which commanded respect.

The present state of our laws on the subject of religion is this. The
convention of May 1776, in their declaration of rights, declared it to be a
truth, and a natural right, that the exercise of religion should be free; but
when they proceeded to form on that declaration the ordinance of government,
instead of taking up every principle declared in the bill of rights, and
guarding it by legislative sanction, they passed over that which asserted our
religious rights, leaving them as they found them. The same convention,
however, when they met as a member of the general assembly in October, 1776,
repealed all acts of parliament which had rendered criminal the maintaining any
opinions in matters of religion, the forbearing to repair to church, and the
exercising any mode of worship; and suspended the laws giving salaries to the
clergy, which suspension was made perpetual in October 1779. Statutory
oppressions in religion being thus wiped away, we remain at present under those
only imposed by the common law, or by our own acts of assembly. At the common
law, heresy was a capital offense, punishable by burning. Its definition was
l^^t to the ecclesiastical judges, before whom the conviction was, till the
statute of the 1 El. c. 1. circumscribed it, by declaring, that nothing should
be deemed heresy, but what had been so determined by authority of the canonical
scriptures, or by one of the four first general councils, or by some other
council having for the grounds of their declaration the express and plain words
of the scriptures. Heresy, thus circumscribed, being an offense at the common
law, our act of assembly of October, 1777, c. 17. gives cognizance of it to the
general court, by declaring, that the jurisdiction of that court shall be
general in all matters at the common law. The execution is by the writ De
hoeretico comburendo. By our own act of assembly of 1705, c. 30. if a person
brought up in the Christian religion denies the being of a God, or the Trinity,
or asserts there are more gods than one, or denies the Christian religion to be
(...) or the scriptures to be of divine authority, he is punishable on the
first offense by* incapacity to hold any office or employment ecclesiastical,
civil, or mililitary; on the second by disability to su^, to take any gift or
legacy, to be guardian, executor, or administrator, and by three years
imprisonment without bail. A farther's right to the custody of his own children
being founded in law on his right of guardianship, this being taken away, they
may of course be severed from him, and put by the authority of a court, into
more orthodox hands. This is a summary view of that religious slavery, under
which a people have been willing to remain, who have lavished their lives and
fortunes for the establishment of their civil freedom. Furneaux passim.
The error seems not sufficiently eradicated, that the operations of the mind,
as well as the acts of the body, are subject to the coercion of the laws. But
our rulers can have no authority over such natural rights only as we have
submitted to them. The rights of conscience we never submitted, we could not
submit. We are answerable for them to our God. The legitimate powers of
government extend to such acts only as are injurious to others. But it does me
no injury for my neighbor to say there are twenty gods, or no god. It neither
picks my pocket nor breaks my leg. If it be said, his testimony in a court of
justice cannot be relied on, reject it then, and be the stigma on him.
Constraint may make him worse by making him a hypocrite, but it will never make
him a truer man. It may fix him obstinately in his errors, but will not cure
them. Reason and free inquiry are the only effectual agents against error. Give
a loose to them, they will support the true religion, by bringing every false
one to their tribunal, to the test of their investigation. They are the natural
enemies of error, and of error only. Had not the Roman government permitted
free inquiry, Christianity could never have been introduced. Had not free
inquiry been indulged at the era of the reformation, the corruptions of
Christianity could not have been purged away. If it be restrained now, the
present corruptions will be protected and new ones encouraged. Was the
government to prescribe to us our medicine and diet, our bodi^^ would be in
such keeping as our souls are now. Thus in France the emetic was once forbidden
as a medicine, and the potatoe as an article of food. Government is just as
infallible too when it fixes systems in physics. Galileo was sent to the
inquisition for affirming that the earth was a sphere: the government had
declared it to be as flat as a trencher, and Galileo was obliged to abjure his
error. This error however at length prevailed, the earth became a globe, and
Descartes declared it was whirled round its axis by a vortex. The government in
which he lived was wise enough to see that this w^^ no question of civil
jurisdiction, or we should all have been involved by authority in vortices. In
fact, the vortices have been exploded, and the Newtonian principle of
gravitation is now more firmly established, on the basis of reason, than it
would be were the government to step in, and to make it an article of necessary
faith. Reason and experiment have been indulged, and error has fled before
them. It is error alone which needs the support of government. Truth can stand
by itself. Subject opinion to coercion: whom will you make your inquisitors?
Fallible men; men governed by bad passions, by private as well as public
reasons. And why subject it to coercion? To produce uniformity. But is
uniformity of opinion desirable? No more than of face and stature. Introduce
the bed of Procrustes then, and as there is danger that the large men may beat
the small, make us all of a size, by lopping the former and stretching the
latter. Difference of opinion is advantageous in religion. The several sects
perform the office of a censor morum over each other. Is uniformity attainable?
Millions of innocent men, women, and children, since the introduction of
Christianity, have been burnt, tortured, sined, imprisoned; yet we have not
advanced one inch toward uniformity. What has been the effect of coercion? to
make one half the world fools, and the other half hypocrites. To support
roguery and error all over the earth. Let us reflect that it is inhabited by a
thousand millions of people. That these profess probably a thousand different
systems of religion. That o^rs is but one of that thousand. That if there be
but one right, and ours that one, we should wish to see the 999 wandering sects
gathered into the fold of truth. But against such a majority we cannot effect
this by force. Reason and persuasion are the only practicable instruments. To
make way for these, free inquiry must be indulged; and how can we wish others
to indulge it while we refuse it ourselves. But every state, says an
inquisitor, has established some religion. No two, say I, have established the
same. Is this a proof of the infallibility of establishments? Our sister states
of Pennsylvania and New York, however, have long subsisted without any
establishment at all. The experiment was new and doubtful when they made it. It
has answered beyond conception. They flourish infinitely. Religion is well
supported; of various kinds, indeed, but all good enough; all sufficient to
preserve peace and order: or if a sect arises, whose tenets would subvert
morals, good sense has fair play, and reasons and laughs it out of doors,
without suffering the state to be troubled with it. They do not hang more
malefactors than we do. They are not more disturbed with religious dissensions.
On the contrary, their harmony is unparalled, and can be ascribed to nothing
but their unbounded tolerance, because there is no other circumstance in which
they differ from every nation on earth. They have made the happy discovery,
that the way to silence religious disputes, is to take no notice of them. Let
us too give this experiment fair play, and get rid, while we may, of those
tyrannical laws. It is true, we are as yet secured against them by the spirit
of the times. I doubt whether the people of this country would suffer an
execution for heresy, or a three years imprisonment for not comprehending the
mysteries of the Trinity. But is the spirit of the people an infallible, a
permanent reliance? Is it government? Is this the kind of protection we receive
in return for the rights we give up? Besides, the spirit of the times may
alter, will alter. Our rulers will become corrupt, our people careless. A
single zealot may commence persecutor, and better men be his victims. It can
never be too often repeated, that the time for fixing every essential right on
a legal basis is while our rulers are honest, and ourselves united. From the
conclusion of this war we shall be going down hill. It will not then be
necessary to resort every moment to the people for support. They will be
forgotten, therefore, and their rights disregarded. They will forget
themselves, but in the sole faculty of making money, and will never think of
uniting to effect a due respect for their rights. The shackles, therefore,
which shall not be knocked off at the conclusion of this war, will remain on us
long, will be made heavier and heavier, till our rights shall revive or expire
in a convulsion.

QUERY XVIII.
THE particular customs and manners that may happen to be received in that
state?

It is difficult to determine on the standard by which the manners of a nation
may be tr^ed, whether ^atholic, or particular. It is more difficult for a
native to bring to that standard the manners of his own nation, familiarized to
him by habit. There must doubtless be an unhappy influence on the manners of
our people produced by the existence of slavery among us. The whole commerce
between master and slave is a perpetual exercise of the most boisterous
passions, the most unremitting despotism on the one part, and degrading
submissions on the other. Our children see this, and learn to imitate it; for
man is an imitative animal. This quality is the germ of all education in him.
From his cradle to his grave he is learning to do what he sees others do. If a
parent could find no motive either in his philanthropy or his self-love, for
restraining the intemperance of passion toward his slave, it should always be
a sufficient one that his child is present. But generally it is not sufficient.
The parent storms, the child looks on, catches the lineaments of wrath, puts on
the same airs in the circle of smaller slaves, gives a loose to the (...) worst
of passions, and thus nursed, educated, and daily exercised in tyranny, cannot
but be stamped by it with odious peculiarities. The man must be a prodigy who
can retain his manners and morals undepraved by such circumstances. And with
what execration should the statesman be loaded, who permitting one half the
citizens thus to trample on the rights of the other, transforms those into
despots, and these into enemies, destroys the morals of the one part, and the
amor patriae of the other. For if a slave can have a country in this world, it
must be any other in preference to that in which he is born to live and labor
for another: in which he must lock up the faculties of his nature, contribute
as far as depends on his individual endeavors to the evanishment of the human
race, or entail his own miserable condition on the endless generations
proceeding from him. With the morals of the people, their industry also is
destroyed. For in a warm climate, no man will labor for himself who can make
another labor for him. This is so true, that of the proprietors of slaves a
very small proportion indeed are ever seen to labor. And can the liberties of
a nation be thought secure when we have removed their only firm basis, a
conviction in the minds of the people that these liberties are of the gift of
God? That they are not to be violated but with his wrath? Indeed I tremble for
my country when I reflect that God is just: that his justice cannot sleep for
ever: that considering numbers, nature and natural means only, a revolution of
the wheel of fortune, an exchange of situation is among possible events: that
it may become probable by supernatural interference! The almighty has no
attribute which can take side with us in such a contest. -- But it is
impossible to be temperate and to pursue this subject through the various
considerations of policy, of morals, of history natural and civil. We must be
contented to hope they will force their way into every one's mind. I think a
change already perceptible, since the origin of the present revolution. The
spirit of the master is abating, that of the slave rising from the dust, his
condition mollifying, the way I hope preparing, under the auspices of heaven,
for a total emancipation, and that this is disposed, in the order of events, to
be with the consent of the masters, rather than by their extirpation.

QUERY XIX.
THE present state of manufactures, commerce, interior and exterior trade?

We never had an interior trade of any importance. Our exterior commerce has
suffered very much from the beginning of the present contest. During this time
we have manufactured within our families the most necessary articles of
clothing. Those of cotton will bear some comparison with the same kinds of
manufacture in Europe; but those of wool, flax and hemp are very coarse,
unsightly, and unpleasant: and such is our attachment to agriculture, and such
our preference for foreign manufactures, that be it wise or unwise, our people
will certainly return as soon as they can, to the raising raw materials, and
exchanging them for finer manufactures than they are able to execute themselves.

The political oeconomists of Europe have established it as a principle that
every state should endeavor to manufacture for itself: and this principle,
like many others, we transfer to America, without calculating the difference of
circumstance which should often produce a difference of result. In Europe the
lands are either cultivated, or locked up against the cultivator. Manufacture
must therefore be resorted to of necessity not of choice, to support the
surplus of their people. But we have an immensity of land courting the industry
of the husbandman. Is it best then that all our citizens should be employed in
its improvement, or that one half should be called off from that to exercise
manufactures and handicraft arts for the other? Those who labor in the earth
are the chosen people of God, if ever he had a chosen people, whose breasts he
has made his peculiar deposit for substantial and genuine virtue. It is the
focus in which he keeps alive that sacred fire, which otherwise might escape
from the face of the earth. Corruption of morals in the mass of cultivat^rs is
a phenomenon of which no age nor nation has furnished an example. It is the
mark set on those, who not looking up to heaven, to their own soil and
industry, as does the husbandman, for their subsistence, depend for it on the
casualties and caprice of customers. Dependence beg^ts subservience and
venality, suffocates the germ of virtue, and prepares fit tools for the designs
of ambition. This, the natural progress and consequence of the arts, has
sometimes perhaps been retarded by accidental circumstances: but, generally
speaking, the proportion which the aggregate of the other classes of citizens
bears in any state to that of its husbandman, is the proportion of its unsound
to its healthy parts, and is a good enough barometer whereby to measure its
degree of corruption. While we have land to labor then, let us never wish to
see our citizens occupied at a work-bench, or twirling a distaff. Carpenters,
masons, smiths, are wanting in husbandry: but, for the general operations of
manufacture, let our work-shops remain in Europe. It is better to carry
provisions and materials to w^^^men there, than bring them to the provisions
and materials, and with them their manners and principles. The loss by the
transportation of commodities across the Atlantic will be made up in happiness
and permanence of government. The mobs of great cities add just so much to the
support of pure government, as sores do to the strenth of the human body. It is
the manners and spirit of a people* which preserve a republic in vigor. A
degeneracy in these is a canker which soon eats to the heart of its laws and
constitution.

QUERY XX.
A NOTICE of the commercial productions particular to the state, and of those
objects which the inhabitants are obliged to get from Europe and from other
parts of the world?

Before the present war we exported, communibus annis, according to the best
information I can get, nearly as follows: ARTICLES. Quantity. Price in dollars.
Am. in dollars. Tobacco 55,000 hhds. of ^000 lb. at 30 d. per hhd. 1,650,000
Wheat 800,000 bushels at d. per bushel. 666,666 Indian corn 600,000 bushels at
d. per bushel. 200,000 Shipping 100,000 Masts, planks, scantling, shingles,
staves 66,666^3; Tar, pitch, turpentine 30,000 barrels at 1d. per bar. 40,000
Peltry, viz. skins of deer, beavers, otters, muskrats, racoons, foxes 180 hhds.
of 600 lb. at 5 d. per lb. 42,000 Pork 4,000 barrels at 10 d. per bar. 40,000
Flax-seed, hemp, cotton 8,000 Pit-coal, pig-iron 6,6662^; Peace 5,000 bushels at
^3; d. per bushel. 3,333^3; Beef 1,000 barrels at 3 d. per bar. 3,333^^;
Sturgeon, white shad, herring 3,333 Brandy from peaches and apples, and whiskey
1,666^3; Horses 1,666 This sum is equal to 850,000l. Virginia money, 607,142
guineas. 2,833,333 Dols.

In the year 1758 we exported seventy thousand hogsheads of tobacco, which was
the greatest quantity ever produced in this country in one year. But its
culture was fast declining at the commencement of this war and that of wheat
taken its place: and it must continue to decline on the return of peace. I
suspect that the change in the temperature of our climate has become sensible
to that plant, which, to be good, requires an extraordinary degree of heat. But
it requires still more indispensably an uncommon fertility of soil: and the
price which it commands at market will not enable the planter to produce this
by manure. Was the supply still to depend on Virginia and Maryland alone, as
its culture becomes more difficult, the price would rise, so as to enable the
planter to surmount those difficulties and to live. But the western country on
the Mississippi, and the midlands of Georgia, having fresh and fertile lands in
abundance, and a hotter sun, will be able to undersell these two states, and
will oblige them to abandon the raising tobacco altogether. And a happy
obligation for them it will be. It is a culture productive of infinite
wretchedness. Those employed in it are in a continual state of exertion beyond
the power of nature to support. Little food of any kind is raised by them; so
that the men and animals on these farms are badly fed, and the earth is rapidly
impoverished. The cultivation of wheat is the reverse in every circumstance.
Besides clothing the earth with herbage, and preserving its fertility, it
feeds the laborers plentifully, requires from them only a modrate toil, except
in the season of harvest, raises great numbers of animals for food and service,
and diffuses plenty and happiness among the whole. We find it easier to make an
hundred bushels of wheat than a thousand weight of tobacco, and they are worth
more when made. The weavil indeed is a formidable obstacle to the cultivation
of this grain with us. But principles are already known which must lead to a
remedy. Thus a certain degree of heat, to wit, that of the common air in
summer, is necessary to hatch the egg. If subterranean granaries, or others,
therefore, can be contrived below that temperature, the evil will be cured by
cold. A degree of heat beyond that which hatches the egg we know will kill it.
But in aiming at this we easily run into that which produces putrefaction. To
produce putrefaction, however, three agents are requisite, heat, moisture, and
the external air. If the absence of any one of these be secured, the other two
may safely be admitted. Heat is the one we want. Moisture then, or external
air, must be excluded. The former has been done by exposing the grain in kilns
to the action of fire, which produces heat, and extracts moisture at the same
time: the latter, by putting the grain into hogsheads covering it with a coat
of lime, and heading it up. In this situation its bulk produced a heat
sufficient to kill the egg; the moisture is suffered to remain indeed, but the
external air is excluded. A nicer operation yet has been attempted; that is, to
produce an intermediete temperature of heat between that which kills the egg,
and that which produces putrefaction. The threshing the grain as soon as it is
cut, and laying it in its chaff in large heaps, has been found very nearly to
hit this temperature, though not perfectly, nor always. The heap generates heat
sufficient to kill most of the eggs, whilst the chaff commonly restrains it
from rising into putrefaction. But all these methods abridge too much the
quantity which the farmer can manage, and enable other countries to undersell
him which are not infested with this insect. There is still a desideratum then
to give with us decisive triumph to this branch of agriculture over that of
tobacco. -- The culture of wheat, by enlarging our pasture, will render the
Arabian horse an article of very considerable profit. Experience has shown that
ours is the particular climate of America where he may be raised without
degeneracy. Southwardly the heat of the sun occasions a deficiency of pasture,
and nothwardly the winters are too cold for the short and fine hair, the
particular sensibility and constitutiou of that race. Animals transplanted into
unfriendly climates, either change their nature and acquire new fences against
the new difficulties in which they are placed, or they multiply poorly and
become extinct. A good foundation is laid for their propagation here by our
possessing already great numbers of horses of that blood, and by a decided
taste and preference for them established among the people. Their patience of
heat without injury, their superior wind, fit them better in this and the more
southern climates even for the drudgeries of the plough and wagon. Northwardly
they will become an object only to persons of taste and fortune, for the saddle
and light carriages. To those, and for these uses, their fleetness and beauty
will recommend them. -- Besides these there will be other valuable substitutes
when the cultivation of tobacco shall be discontinued, such as cotton in the
eastern parts of the state, and hemp and flax in the western.

It is not easy to say what are the articles either of necessity, comfort, or
luxury, which we cannot raise, and which we therefore shall be under a
necessity of importing from abroad, as every thing hardier than the olive, and
as hardy as the fig, may be raised here in the open air. Sugar, coffee and tea,
indeed, are not between these limits; and habit having placed them among the
necessaries of life with the wealthy part of our citizens, as long as these
habits remain we must go for them to those countries which are able to furnish
them.

QUERY XXI.
THE weights, measures, and the currency of the hard money? Some details
relating to exchange with Europe?

Our weights and measures are the same which are fixed by acts of parliament in
England. -- How it has happened that in this as well as the other American
states the nominal value of coin, was made to differ from what it was in the
country we had left, and to differ among ourselves too, I am not able to say
with certainty. I find that in 1631 our house of burgesses desired of the privy
council in England, a coin debased to twenty five per cent: that in 1645 they
forbid dealing by barter for tobacco, and established the Spanish piece of
eight at six shillings, as the standard of their currency: that in 1655 they
changed it to five shillings sterling. In 1680 they sent an address to the
king, in consequence of which, by proclamation in 1683, he fixed the value of
French crowns, rixdollars and pieces of eight at six shillings, and the coin of
New England at one shilling. That in 1710, 1714, 1727, and 1762, other
regulations were made, which will be better presented to the eye stated in the
form of a table as follows: 1710. 1714. 1727. 1762. Guineas -- -- 26s. British
gold coin not milled, coined gold of Spain and France, chequins, Arabian gold,
moidores of Portugal -- -- 5s. the dwt. Coined gold of the empire -- -- 5s. the
dwt. -- -- 4s3. the dwt. English milled silver money, in proportion to the
crown, at -- -- 5s10. 6s^, Pieces of eight of Mexico, Seville, and Pillar,
ducatoons of Flanders, French ecus, or silver Louis, crusados of Portugal 3 d.
the dwt. -- -- 4d. the dwt. Peru pieces, cross dollars, and old rix-dollars of
the empire 3 d. the dwt. -- -- 3 d. the dwt. Old British silver coin not
milled. -- -- 3 d. the dwt.

The first sympton of the depreciation of our present paper-money, was that of
silver dollars selling at six shillings, which had before been worth but five
shillings and nine-pence. The assembly thereupon raised them by law to six
shillings. As the dollar is now likely to become the money-unit of America, as
it passes at this rate in some of our sister states, and as it facilitates
their computation in pounds and shillings, and e converso, this seems to be
more convenient than its former denomination. But as this particular coin now
stands higher than any other in the proportion of 133 to 125, or 16 to 15, it
will be necessary to raise the others in proportion.

QUERY XXII.
THE public income and expenses?

The nominal amount of these varying constantly and rapidly, with the constant
and rapid depreciation of our paper money, it becomes impracticable to say what
they are. We find ourselves cheated in every essay by the depreciation
intervening between the declaration of the tax and its actual receipt. It will
therefore be more satisfactory to consider what our income may be when we shall
find means of collecting what our people may spare. I should estimate the whole
taxable property of the state at an hundred millions of dollars, or thirty
millions of pounds our money. One per cent. on this, compared with any thing we
ever yet paid, would be deemed a very heavy tax. Yet I think that those who
manage well, and use reasonable economy, could pay one and a half per cent* and
maintain their household comfortably in the mean time, without aliening any
part of their principle, and that the people would submit to this willingly for
the purpose of supporting their present contest. We may say then, that we could
raise, and ought to raise, from one million to one million and a half of
dollars annually, that is from three hundred to four hundred and fifty thousand
pounds, Virginia money.

Of our expenses it is equally difficult to give an exact state, and for the
same reason. They are mostly stated in paper money, which varying continually,
the legislature endeavors at every session, by new corrections, to adapt the
nominal sums to the value it is wished they would bear. I will state them
therefore in real coin, at the point at which they endeavor to keep them.

Dollars. The annual expenses of the general assembly are about 20,000 The
governor 3,333 The council of state 10,666 Their clerks 1,166 Eleven judges
11,000 The clerk of the chancery 666 The attorney general 1,000 Three auditors
and a solicitor 5,333 Their clerks 2,000 The treasurer 2,000 His clerks 2,000
The keeper of the public jail 1,000 The public printer 1,666 Clerks of the
inferior courts 43,333 Public levy: this is chiefly for the expenses of
criminal justice 40,000 County levy, for bridges, court-houses, prisons, etc.
40,000 Members of Congress 7,000 Quota of the federal civil list, supposed
one-sixth of about 78,000 dollars 13,000 Expenses of collection, six per cent.
on the above 12,310 The clergy receive only volnntary contributions: suppose
them on an average one-eigth of a dollar a tithe on 200,000 tithes 25,000
Contingencies, to make round numbers not far from truth 7,523 250,000

Dollars, or 53,571 guineas. This estimate is exclusive of the military
expense. That varies with the force actually employed, and in time of peace
will probably be little or nothing. It is exclusive also of the public debts,
which are growing while I am writing, and cannot therefore be now fixed. So it
is of the maintenance of the poor, which being merely a matter of charity,
cannot be deemed expended in the administration of government. And if we strike
out the 25,000 dollars for the services of the clergy, which neither makes part
of that administration, more than what is paid to physicians, or lawyers, and
being voluntary, is either much or nothing as every one pleases. it leaves
225,000 dollars, equal to 48,208 guineas, the real cost of the apparatus of
government with us. This divided among the actual inhabitants of our country,
comes to about two-fifths of a dollar, 21d. sterling, or 42 sols, the price
which each pays annually for the protection of the residue of his property, and
the other advantages of a free government. The public revenues of Great Britain
divided in like manner on its inhabitants would be 16 times greater. Deducting
even the double of the expenses of government, as before estimated, from the
million and a half of dollars which we before supposed might be annually paid
without distress, we may conclude that this state can contribute one million of
dollars annually toward supporting the federal army, paying the federal debt,
building a federal navy, or opening roads, clearing rivers, forming safe ports,
and other useful works.

To this estimate of our abilities, let me add a word as to the application of
them. if, when cleared of the present contest, and of the debts with which that
will change us, we come to measure force hereafter with any European power.
Such events are devoutly to be deprecated. Young as we are, and with such a
country before us to fill with people and with happiness, we should point in
that direction the whole generative force of nature, wasting none of it in
efforts of mutual destruction. It should be our endeavor to cultivate the
peace and friendship of every nation, even of that which has injured us most,
when we shall have carried our point against her. Our interest will be to throw
open the doors of commerce, and to knock off all its shackles, giving perfect
freedom to all persons for the vent of whatever they may choose to bring into
our ports, and asking the same in theirs. Never was so much false arithmetic
employed on any subject, as that which has been employed to persuade nations
that it is their interest to go to war. Were the money which it has cost to
gain, at the close of a long war, a little town, or a little territory, the
right to cut wood here, or to catch fish there, expended in improving what they
already possess, in making roads, opening rivers, building ports, improving the
arts, and finding employment for their idle poor, it would render them much
stronger, much wealthier and happier. This I hope will be our wisdom. And,
perhaps, to remove as much as possible the occasions of making war, it might be
better for us to abandon the ocean altogether, that being the element whereon
we shall be principally exposed to jostle with other nations: to leave to
others to bring what we shall want, and to carry what we can spare. This would
make us invulnerable to Europe, by offering none of our property to their
prize, and would turn all our citizens to the cultivation of the earth; and, I
repeat it again, cultivators of the earth are the most virtuous and independent
citizens. It might be time enough to seek employment for them at sea, when the
land no longer offers it. But the actual habits of our countrymen attach them
to commerce. They will exercise it for themseves. Wars then must sometimes be
our lot; and all the wise can do, will be to avoid that half of them which
would be produced by our own follies and our own acts of injustice; and to make
for the other half the best preperations we can. Of what nature should these
be? A land army would be useless for offense, and not the best nor safest
instrument of defense. For either of these purposes, the sea is the field on
which we should meet an European enemy. On that element it is necessary we
should possess some power. To aim at such a navy as the geater nations of
Europe possess, would be a foolish and wicked waste of the energies of our
countrymen. It would be to pull on our own heads that load of military expense
which makes the European labourer go supperless to bed, and moistens his bread
with the sweat of his brows. It will be enough if we enable ourselves to
prevent insults from those nations of Europe which are weak on the sea, because
circumstances exist, which render even the stronger ones weak as to us.
Providence has placed their richest and most defenseless possessions at our
door* has obliged their most precious commerce to pass as it were in review
before us. To protect this, or to assail, a small part only of their naval
force will ever be risqued across the Atlantic. The dangers to which the
elements expose them here are too well known, and the greater dangers to which
they would be exposed at home were any general calamity to involve their whole
fleet. They can attack us by detachment only; and it will suffice to make
ourselves equal to what they may detach. Even a smaller force than they may
detach will be rendered equal or superior by the quickness with which any check
may be repaired with us, while losses with them will be irreparable till too
late. A small naval force then is sufficient for us, and a small one is
necessary. What this should be, I will not undertake to say. I will only say,
it should by no means be so great as we are able to make it. Suppose the
million of dollars, or 300,000 pounds, which Virginia could annually spare
without distress, to be applied to the creating a navy. A single year's
contribution would build, equip, man, and send to sea a force which should
carry 300 guns. The rest of the confederacy, exerting themselves in the same
proportion, would equip in the same time 1500 guns more. So that one year's
contributions would set up a navy of 1800 guns. The British ships of the line
average 76 guns; their frigates 38. 1800 guns then would form a ^leet of 30
ships, 18 of which might be of the line, and 12 frigates. Allowing 8 men, the
British average, for every gun, their annual expense, including subsistence,
clothing, pay, and ordinary repairs, would be about 1280 dollars for every
gun, or 2,304,000 dollars for the whole. I state this only as one year's
possible exertion, without deciding whether more or less than a year's exertion
should be thus applied.

The value of our lands and slaves, taken conjunctly, doubles in about twenty
years. This arises from the multiplication of our slaves, from the extension of
culture, and increased demand for lands. The amount of what may be raised will
of course rise in the same proportion.

QUERY XXIII.
THE histories of the state, the memorials published in its name in the time of
its being a colony, and the pamphlets relating to its interior or exterior
affairs present or ancient?

Captain Smith, who next to Sir Walter Raleigh may be considered as the founder
of our colony, has written its history, from the first adventures to it till
the year 1624. He was a member of the council, and afterward president of the
colony; and to his efforts principally may be ascribed its support against the
opposition of the natives. He was honest, sensible, and well informed; but his
style is barbarous and uncouth. His history, however, is almost the only source
from which we derive any knowledge of the infancy of our state.

The reverend William Stith, a native of Virginia, and president of its
college, has also written the history of the same period, in a large octavo
volume of small print. He was a man of classical learning, and very exact, but
of no taste in style. He is inelegant, therefore, and his details often too
minute to be tolerable, even to a native of the country, whose history he
writes.

Beverley, a native also, has run into the other extreme; he has comprised our
history, from the first propositions of Sir Walter Raleigh to the year 1700, in
the hundredth part of the space which Stith employs for the fourth part of the
period.

Sir William Keith has taken it up at its earliest period, and continued it to
the year 1725. He is agreeable enough in style, and passes over events of
little importance. Of course he is short, and would be preferred by a foreigner.

During the regal government, some contest arose on the exaction of an illegal
fee by governor Dinwiddie, and doubtless there were others on other occasions
not at present recollected. It is supposed, that these are not sufficiently
interesting to a foreigner to merit a detail.

The petition of the council and burgesses of Virginia to the king, their
memorial to the lords, and remonstrance to the commons in the year 1764, began
the present contest; and these having proved ineffectual to prevent the passage
of the stamp act, the resolutions of the house of burgesses of 1765 were
passed, declaring the independence of the people of Virginia on the parliament
of Great Britain, in matters of taxation. From that time till declaration of
independence by Congress in 1776, their journals are filled with assertions of
the public rights.

The pamphlets published in this state on the controverted question were, 1766,
An Inquiry into the rights of the British Colonies, by Richard Bland. 1769, The
Monitor's Letters, by Dr. Arthur Lee. 1774, By the author of these notes.
A summary View of the rights of British America. 1774, Considerations, etc. by
Robert Carter Nicholas.


Since the declaration of independence this state has had no controversy with
any other, except with that of Pennsylvania, on their common boundary. Some
papers on this subject passed between the executive and legislative bodies of
the two states, the result of which was a happy accommodation of their rights.

To this account of our historians, memorals, and pamphlets, it may not be
unuseful to add a chronological catalogue of American state-papers, as far as I
have been able to collect their titles. It is far from being either complete or
correct. Where the title alone, and not the paper itself, has come under my
observation, I cannot answer for the exactness of the date. Sometimes I have
not been able to find any date at ali, and sometimes have not been satisfied
that such a paper exists. An extensive collection of papers of this description
has been for some time in a course of preparation by a gentleman Mr. Hazard.
fully equal to the task, and from whom, therefore, we may hope ere long to
receive it. In the mean time accept this as the result of my labors, and as
closing the tedious detail which you have so undesignedly drawn upon yourself.

Pro Johanne Caboto et siliis suis super terra incognita investiganda. 1496,
Mar. 5. 11. H. 7.
12. Ry. 595. 3. Hakl. 4. 2. Mem. Am. 409. Billa signata anno 13. 1498, Feb. 3.
13. H. 7.
Henrici septimi. 3. Hakluyt's Voiages 5. De potestatibus ad terras incognitas
investigandum. 1502, Dec. 19. 18. H. 7.
13. Rymer. 37. Commission de Franetc;cedil;ois I. 1540, Oct. 17.
a Jacques Catier pour l'establislement du Canada. L'Escarbot. 397. 2. Mem. Am.
416. An act against the exaction of money, 1548, 2. E. 6.
or any other thing, by any officer for license to traffic into Iseland and
Newfoundland, made in An. 2. Edwardi sexti. 3. Hakl. 13^. The letters-patent
granted by her Majesty to Sir Humphrey Gilbert, 1578, June. 11. 20. El.
knight, for the inhabiting and planting of our people in America. 3. Hakl.
135. Letters Patent of Queen Elizabeth to Adrian Gilbert and others, 1583,
Feb. 6.
to discover the northwest passage to China. 3. Hakl. 96. The letters-patent
granted by the Queen's majesty to M. Walter Raleigh, 1584, Mar. 25. 26. El.
now knight, for the discovering and planting of new lands and countries, to
continue the space of six years and no more. 3. Hakl. 243. An assignment by Sir
Walter Raleigh for continuing the action of inhabiting and planting his people
in Virginia. Mar. 7. 31. El.
Hakl. 1st. ed. publ. in 1589, p. 815. Letters de Lieutenant General de
l'Acadie and pays circonvoisins pour le Sieur de Monts. 1603, Nov. 8.
L'Escarbot. 417. Letters-patent to Sir Thomas Gates, 1606, Apr. 10. 4. Jac. 1.
Sir George Summers and others, for two several colonies to be made in Virginia
and other parts of America. Stith. Apend. No. 1. An ordinance and constitution
enlarging the council of the two colonies in Virginia and America, 1607, Mar.
9. 4. Jac. 1.
and augmenting their authority, M. S. The second charter to the treasurer and
company for Virginia, 1609, May 23. 7. Jac. 1.
erecting them into a body politic. Stith. Ap. 2. Letters Patent to the E. of
Northampton, 1610, Apr. 10. Jac. 1.
granting part of the island of Newfoundland. 1. Harris. 861. A third charter
to the treasurer and company for Virginia. 1611, Mar. 12. 9. Jac. 1.
Stith. Ap. 3. A commission to Sir Walter Raleigh. 1617, Jac. 1.
Qu.? Commissio specialis concernens le garbling herbae Nocotianae. 1620, Apr.
7. 18. Jac. 1.
17. Rym. 190. A proclamation for restraint of the disordered trading of
tobacco. 1620, June 29. 18. Jac. 1.
17. Rym. 233. A grant of New England to the council of Plymouth. 1620, Nov. 3.
Jac. 1.
An ordinance and constitution of the treasurer, 1621, July 24. Jac. 1.
council and company in England, for a council of state and general assembly in
Virginia. Stith. Ap. 4. A grant of Nova Scotia to Sir William Alexander. 1621,
Sep. 10. 20. Jac. 1.
2. Mem. de l'Amerique. 193. A proclamation prohibiting interloping and
disorderly trading to New England in America. 1622, Nov. 6. 20. Jac. 1.
17. Rym. 416. De Commissione speciali Willelmo Jones militi directa. 1623, May
9. 21. Jac. 1.
17. Rym. 490. A grant to Sir Edmund Ployden, 1623.
of New Albion. Mentioned in Smith's examination. 82. De Commissione Henrico
vicecomiti Mandevill and aliis. 1624, July 15. 22. Jac. 1.
17. Rym. 609. De Commissione speciali concernenti gubernationem in Virginia.
1624, Aug. 26. 22. Jac. 1.
17. Rym. 618. A proclamation concerning tobacco. 1624, Sep. 29. 22. Jac. 1.
17. Rym. 621. De concessione demiss, 1624, Nov. 9. 22. Jac. 1.
Edwardo Ditchfield et aliis. 17. Rym. 633. A proclamation for the utter
prohibiting the importation and use of all tobacco which is not of the proper
growth of the colony of Virginia and the Somer islands, 1625, Mar. 2. 22. Jac.
1.
or one of them. 17. Rym. 6^8. De commissione directa Georgio Yardeley militi
et aliis. 1625, Mar. 4. 1. Car. 4
18. Rym. 311. Proclamatio de herba Nicotiana. 1625, Apr. 9. 1. Car. 1.
18. Rym. 19. A proclamation for settlinge the plantation of Virginia. 1625,
May 13. 1. Car. 1.
18. Rym. 72. A grant of the soil, 1625, July 12.
barony, and domains of Nova Scotia to Sir Wm. Alexander of Minstrie. 2. Mem.
Am. 226. Commissio directa Johanni Wolstenholme militi et aliis. 1626, Jan. 31.
2. Car. 1.
18 Ry. 831. A proclamation touching tobacco. 1626, Feb. 17. 2. Car. 1.
Ry. 848. A grant of Massachuset's bay by the council of Plymouth to Sir Henry
Roswell and others. 1627, Mar. 19. qu^2. Car. 1.
De concessione commissionis specialis pro concilio in Virginia. 1627, Mar. 26.
3. Car. 1.
18. Ry. 980. De proclamatione de signatione de tobacco. 1627, Mar. 30. 3. Car.
1.
18. Ry. 886. De proclamatione pro ordinatione de tobacco. 1627, Aug. 9. 3.
Car. 1.
18. Ry. 920. A confirmation of the grant of Massachuset's bay by the crown.
1628, Mar. 4. 3. Car. 1.
The capitulation of Quebec. 1629, Aug. 19.
Champlain part. 2. 216. 2. Mem. Am. 489. A proclamation concerning tobacco.
1630, Jan. 6. 5. Car. 1.
19. Ry. 235. Conveyance of Nova Scotia (Port Royal excepted) by Sir William
Alexander to Sir Claude St. Etienne Lord of la Tour and of Uarre and to his son
Sir Charles de St. Etinne Lord of St. Denniscourt, 1630, April 30.
on condition that they continue subjects to the king of Scotland under the
great seal of Scotland. A proclamation forbidding the disorderly trading with
the salvages in New England in America, 1630-31, Nov. 24. 6. Car. 1.
especially the furnishing the natives in those and other parts of America by
the English with weapons and habiliments of war. 19. Ry. 210. 3. Rushw. 82. A
proclamation prohibiting the selling arms, 1630, Dec. 5. 6. Car. 1.
etc. to the savages in America. Mentioned 3. Rushw. 75. A grant of Connecticut
by the council of Plymouth to the E. 1632, Car. 1.
of Warwick. A confirmation by the crown of the grant of Connecticut [said to
be in the petty-bag office in England. 163^, Car. 1.
] A conveiance of Connecticut by the E. 1631, Mar. 19. 6. Car. 1.
of Warwick to Lord Say and Seal and others. Smith's examination, Appendix No.
1. A special commission to Edward Earl of Dorsett and others for the better
plantation of the colony of Virginia. 1631, June 27. 7. Car. 1.
19. Ry. 301. Litere continentes promissionem regis ad tradenum castrum et
habitationem de Kebec in Canada ad regem Francorum. 1631, June 29. 7. Car. 1.
19. Ry. 303. Traite enter le roy Louis XIII. 1632, Mar. 29. 8. Car. 1.
et Charles roi d'Angleterre pour la restitution de la nouvelle France, la
Cadie et Canada et des navires et merchandises pris de part et d'autre. Fait a
St. Germain. 19. Ry. 361. 2. Mem. Am. 5. A grant of Maryland to Caecilius
Calvert, 1632, June 20. 8. Car. 1.
baron of Baltimore in Ireland. A petition of the planters of Virginia against
the grant to lord Baltimore. 1633, July 3. 9. Car. 1.
Order of council upon the dispute between the Virginia planters and lord
Baltimore. 1633, July 3.
Votes of repres. of Pennsylvania. V. A proclamation to prevent abuses growing
by the unordered retailing of tobacco. 1633, Aug. 13. 9. Car. 1.
Mentioned 3. Rushw. 191. A special commission to Thomas Young to search,
discover and find out what parts are not yet inhabited in Virginia and America
and other parts thereunto adjoining. 1633, Sept. 23. 9. Car. 1.
19. Ry. 472. A proclamation for preventing of the abuses growing by the
unordered retailing of tobacco. 1633, Oct. 13. 9. Car. 1.
19. Ry. 474. A proclamation restraining the abusive venting of tobacco. 1633,
Mar. 13. Car. 1.
19. Rym. 522. A proclamation concerning the landing of tobacco, 1634, May 19.
10. Car. 1.
and also forbidding the planting thereof in the king's dominions. 19. Ry. 553.
A commission to the Archbishop of Canterbury and 11 others, 1634. Car. 1.
for governing the American colonies. A commission concerning tobacco. 1634,
June 19. 10. Car. 1.
M. S. A commission from Lord Say, 1635, July 18. 11. Car. 1.
and Seal, and others, to John Winthrop to be governor of Connecticut. Smith's
App. A grant to Duke Hamilton. 1635, Car. 1.
De commissione speciali Johanni Harvey militi pro meliori regemine coloniae in
Virginia. 1636, Apr. 2. 12. Car. 1.
20. Ry. 3. A proclamation concerning tobacco. 1637, Mar. 14. Car. 1.
Title in 3. Rush. 617. De commissione speciali Georgio domino Goring et aliis
concessa concernente venditionem de tobacco absque licentia regia. 1636-7, Mar.
16. 12. Car. 1.
20. Ry. 116. A proclamation against disorderly transporting his Majesty's
subjects to the plantations within the parts of America. 1637, Apr. 30. 13.
Car. 1.
20. Ry. 143. 3. Rush. 409. An order of the privy council to stay 8 ships now
in the Thames from going to New England. 1637, May 1. 13. Car. 1.
3. Rush. 409. A warrant of the Lord Admiral to stop unconformable ministers
from going beyond sea. 1637, Car. 1.
3. Rush. 410. Order of council upon Claiborne's petition against Lord
Baltimore. 1638, Apr. 4. Car. 1.
Votes of representatives of Pennsylvania. vi. An order of the king and council
that the attorney general draw up a proclamation to prohibit transportation of
passengers to New England without license. 1638, Apr. 6. 14. Car. 1.
3. Rush. 718. A proclamation to restrain the transporting of passengers and
provisions to New England without license. 1638, May 1. 14. Car. 1.
20. Ry. 223. A proclamation concerning tobacco. 1639, Mar. 25. Car. 1.
Title 4. Rush. 1060. A proclamation declaring his majesty's pleasure to
continue his commission and letters patents for licensing retailers of tobacco.
1639, Aug. 19. 15. Car. 1.
20. Ry. 348. De commissione speciali Henrico Ashton armiger^ et aliis ad
amovendum Henricum Hawley gubernatorem de Barbados. 1639, Dec. 16 15. Car. 1.
20. Ry. 357. A proclamation concerning retailers of tobacco. 1639, Car. 1.
4. Rush. 966. De constitutione gubernatoris et concilii pro Virginia. 1641,
Aug. 9. 17. Car. 1.
20. Ry. 484. Articles of union and confederacy entered into by Massachusetts,
1643, Car. 1.
Plymouth, Connecticut and New Haven. 1. Neale. 223. Deed from George Fenwick
to the old Connecticut jurisdiction. 1644, Car. 1.
An ordinance of the lords and commons assembled in parliament, for exempting
from custom and imposition all commodities exported for, or imported from
New England, which has been very prosperous and without any public charge to
this state, and is likely to prove very happy for the propagation of the gospel
in those parts. Tit. in Amer. Library 90. 5. No date. But seems by the
neighboring articles to have been in 1644. An act for charging of tobacco
brought from New England with custom and excise. 1644, June 2^. Car. 2.
Title in American library. 99. 8. An act for the advancing and regulating the
trade of this commonwealth. 1644, Aug. 1. Car. 2.
Tit. Amer. libr. 99. 9. Grant of the Northern neck of Virginia to Lord Hopton,
Sep. 18. 1. Car. 2.
Lord Jermyn, Lord Culpeper, Sir John Berkley, Sir William Moreton, Sir Dudly
Wyatt, and Thomas Culpeper. An act prohibiting trade with the Barbados, 1650,
Oct. 3. 2. Car. 2.
Virginia, Bermudas and Antego. Scobell's Acts. 1027. A declaration of Lord
Willoughby, 1650, Car. 2.
governor of Barbados, and of his council, against an act of parliament of 3d
of October 1650. 4. Polit. register. 2. cited from 4. Neal. hist. of the
Puritans. App. No. 12 but not there. A final settlement of boundaries between
the Dutch New Netherlands and Connecticut. 16^0, Car. 2.
Instructions for Captain Robert Dennis, 1651, Sept. 26. 3. Car. 2.
Mr. Richard Bennet, Mr. Thomas Stagge, and Captain William Clabourn, appointed
commissioners for the reducing of Virginia and the inhabitants thereof to their
due obedience to the commonwealth of England. 1. Thurloe's state papers. 197.
An act for increase of shipping and encouragement of the navigation of this
nation. 1651, Oct. 9. 3. Car. 2.
Scobell's acts. 1449. Articles agreed on and concluded at James city in
Virginia for the surrendering and settling of that plantation under the
obedience and government of the commonwealth of England, 1651-2, Mar. 12. 4.
Car. 2.
by the commissioners of the council of state, by authority of the parliament
of England, and by the grand assembly of the governor, council, and burgess of
that state. M. S. [Ante. p. 206.] An act of indempnitie made at the surrender
of the country [of Virginia. 1651-2, Mar. 12. 4. Car. 1.
] [Ante. p. 206.] Capitulation de Port Royal. 1654, Aug. 10.
Mem. Am. 507. A proclamation of the protector relating to Jamaica. 1655. Car.
2.
3. Thurl. 75. The protector to the commissioners of Maryland. A letter. 1655,
Sept. 26. (...). Car. 3.
4. Thurl. 55. An instrument made at the council of Jamaica, 1655, Oct. 8. 7.
Car. 2.
Oct. 8, 1655, for the better carrying on of affairs there. 4. Thurl. 17.
Treaty of Westminster between France and England. 1655, Nov. 3.
6. corpse diplom. part. 2. p. 121. 2. Mem. Am. 10. The assembly at Barbados to
the protector. 1656, Mar. 27. 8. Car. 2.
4. Thurl. 651. A grant by Cromwell to Sir Charles de Saint Etienne, 1656, Aug.
9.
a baron of Scotland, Crown and Temple. A French translation of it. 2. Mem.
Am. 511. A paper concerning the advancement of trade. 1656, Car. 2.
5. Thurl. 80. A brief narration of the English rights to the Northern parts of
America. 1656, Car. 2.
5. Thurl. 81. Mr. R. Bennet and Mr. S. Matthew to Secretary Thurlow. 1656,
Oct. 10. 8. Car. 2.
5. Thurl. 482. Objections against the Lord Baltimore's patent, 1656, Oct. 10.
8. Car. 2.
and reasons why the government of Maryland should not be put into his hands.
5. Thurl. 482. A paper relating to Maryland 5. 1656, Oct. 10. 8. Car. 2.
Thurl. 483. A breviet of the proceedings of the lord Baltimore and his
officers and compliers in Maryland, 1656, Oct. 10. 8. Car. 2.
against the authority of the parliament of the commonwealth of England and
against his highness the lord protector's authority, laws and government. 5.
Thurl. 486. The assembly of Virginia to secretary Thurlow. 1656, Oct. 15. 8.
Car. 2.
5. Thurl. 497. The governor of Barbados to the protector. 1657, Apr. 4. 9.
Car. 2.
6. Thurl. 169. Petition of the general court at Hartford upon Connecticut for
a charter. 1661, Car. 2.
Smith's exam. App. 4. Charter of the colony of Connecticut. 1662, Apr. 23. 14.
Car. 2.
Smith's exam. App. 6. The first charter granted by Charles II. 1662-3, Mar.
24. April 4. 15. Car. 2.
to the proprietaries of Carolina, to wit, to the Earl of Clarendon, Duke of
Albemarle, Lord Craven, Lord Berkeley, Lord Ashley, Sir George Carteret, Sir
William Berkeley, and Sir John Colleton. 4. Mem. Am. 554. The concessions and
agreement of the lords proprietors of the province of New Caesarea, 1664. Feb.
10.
or New Jersey, to and with all and every of the adventurers and all such as
shall settle or plant there. Smith's New Jersey. App. 1. A grant of the colony
of New York to the Duke of York. 1664, Mar. 12. 20. Car. 2.
A commission to Colonel Nichols and others to settle disputes in New England.
1664, Apr. 26. 16. Car. 2.
Hutch. Hist. Mass. Bay. App. 537. The commission to Sir Robert Carre and
others to put the Duke of York in possession of New York, 1664, Apr. 26.
New Jersey, and all other lands thereunto appertaining. Sir Robert Carre and
others proclamation to the inhabitants of New York, New Jersey, etc. Smith's N.
J. 36. Deeds of lease and release of New Jersey by the Duke of York to Lord
Berkely and Sir George Carteret. 1664, June 23, 24. 16. C. 2.
A conveiance of the Delaware counties to William Penn. Letters between
Stuyvesant and Colonel Nichols on the English right. 1664, Aug. 19-29, 20-30,
24. Aug. 25. Sept. 4.
Smith's N. J. 37 -- 42. Treaty between the English and Dutch for the surrender
of the New-Netherlands. 1664, Aug. 27.
Sm. N. J. 42. Nicoll's commission to Sir Robert Carre to reduce the Dutch on
Delaware bay. Sept. 3.
Sm. N. J. 47. Instructions to Sir Robert Carre for reducing of Delaware bay
and settling the people there under his majesty's obedience. Sm. N. J. 47.
Articles of capitulation between Sir Robert Carre and the Dutch and Swedes on
Delaware bay and Delaware river. 1664, Oct. 1.
Sm. N. J. 49. The determination of the commissioners of the boundary between
the Duke of York and Connecticut. 1664, Dec. 1. 16. Car. 2.
Sm. Ex. Ap. 9. The New Haven case. 1664.
Smith's Ex. Ap. 20. The second charter granted by Charles II. 1665, June
13-24. 17 Car. 2.
to the same proprieto^s of Carolina. 4. Mem. Am. 586. Declaration de guerre
par la France contre l'Angleterre. 1666, Jan. 26.
3. Mem. Am. 123. Declaration of war by the king of England against the king of
France. 1666, Feb. 9. 17. Car. 2.
The treaty of peace between France and England made at Breda. 1667, July 31.
7. Corpse Dipl. part 1. p. 41. 2. Mem. Am. 32. The treaty of peace and alliance
between England and the United Provinces made at Breda. 1667, July 31.
7. Cor. Dip. p. 1. p. 44. 2. Mem. Am. 40. Act de la cession de l'Acadie au
roi de France. 1667-8, Feb. 17.
2. Mem. Am. 40. Directions from the governor and council of New York for a
better settlement of the government on Delaware. 1668, April 2^.
Sm. N. J. 5^. Lovelace's order for customs at the Hoarkills. Sm. 1668.
N. J. 55. A confirmation of the grant of the northern neck of Virginia to the
Earl of St. Alban's, 16 -- May 8, 21. Car. 2.
Lord Berkeley, Sir William Moreton and John Tretheway. Incorporation of the
town of Newcastle or Amstell. 1672.
A demise of the colony of Virginia to the Earl of Arlington and Lord Culpeper
for 31 years. 1673, Feb. 25. 25. Car. 2.
M. S. Treaty at London between king Charles II. 1673-4.
and the Dutch. Article VI. Remonstrances against the two grants of Charles II.
of Northern and Southern Virginia. Mentd. Beverly. 65. Sir George Carteret's
instructions to Governor Carteret. 1674, July 13.
Governor Andros's proclamation on taking possession of Newcastle for the Duke
of York. 1674, Nov. 9.
Sm. N. J. 78. A proclamation for prohibiting the importation of commodities of
Europe into any of his majesty's plantations in Africa, 1675, Oct. 1. 27. Car.
2.
Asia, or America, which were not laden in England: and for putting all other
laws relating to the trade of the plantations of effectual execution. The
concessions and agreements of the proprietors, 1676, Mar. 3.
freeholders an inhabitants of the province of West-New-Jersey in America Sm.
N. J. App. 2. A deed quintipartite for the division of New Jersey. 1676, July.
4.
Letter from the proprietors of New Jersey to Richard Hartshorne. 1676, Aug. 18.
Sm. N. J. 80. Proprietors instructions to James Wasse and Richard Hartshorne.
Sm. N. J. 83. The charter of king Charles II. 1676, Oct. 10. 23. Car. 2.
to his subjects of Virginia. M. S. Cautionary epistle from the trustees of
Byllinge's part of New Jersey. 1676.
Sm. N. J. 84. Indian deed for the lands between Rankokas creek and Timber
creek, 1677, Sept. 10.
in New Jersey. Indian deed for the lands from Oldman's creek to Timber creek,
1677, Sept. 27.
in New Jersey. Indian deed for the lands from Rankokas creek to Assunpink
creek, 1677, Oct. 10.
in New Jersey. The will of Sir George Carteret, 1678, Dec. 5.
so^^ proprietor of East Jersey, ordering the same to be sold. An order of the
king in council for the better encouragement of all his majesty's subjects in
their trade to his majesty's plantations, 1680, Feb. 16.
and for the better information of all his majesty's loving subjects in these
matters. -- Land. Gaz. No. 1596. Title in Amer. library. 134. 6. Arguments
against the customs demanded in New West Jersey by the governor of New York,
1680.
addressed to the Duke's commissioners. Sm. N. J. 117. Extracts of proceedings
of the committee of trade and plantations; copies of letters, 1680, June, 14.
23. 25. Oct. 16. Nov. 4. 8. 11. 13. 20. 23. Dec. 16. 1680-1, Jan. 15. 22. Feb.
24.
reports, etc. between the board of trade Mr. Penn, Lord Baltimore and Sir John
Werden, in the behalf of the Duke of York and the settlement of the
Pennsylvania boundaries by the L. C. J. North. Votes of Repr. Pennsyl. vii. --
xiii. A grant of Pennsylvania to William Penn. 1681, Mar. 4. Car. 2.
Votes of Kepre^^^. Pennsyl. xviii. The king's declaration to the inhabitants
and planters of the province of Pennsylvania. 1681, Apr. 2.
Vo. Repr. Penn. xxiv. Certain conditions or concessions agreed upon by William
Penn, 1681, July, 1^.
proprietary and governor of Pennsylvania, and those who are the adventurers
and purchasers in the same province. -- Votes of Rep. Pennsylv. xxiv.
Fundamental laws of the province of West New Jersey. 1681, Nov. 9.
Sm. N. J. 126. The methods of the commissioners for settling and regulation of
lands in New Jersey. 1681-2, Jan. 14.
Sm. N. J. 130. Indentures of lease and release by the executors of Sir George
Carteret to William Penn and 11 others, 1681-2, Feb. 1. 2.
conveying East Jersey. The Duke of York's fresh grant of East New Jersey to
the 24 proprietors. 1682, Mar. 14.
The frame of the government of the province of Pennsylvania, 1682. Apr. 2^.
in America. Votes of ^epr. Penn. xxvii. The Duke of York's deed for
Pennsylvania. 1682, Aug. 21.
Vo. Repr. Penn. xxxv. The Duke of York's deed of feoffment of Newcastle and
twelve miles circle to William Penn. 1682, Aug. 24.
Vo. Repr. Penn. The Duke of York's deed of feoffment of a tract of land 12
miles south from Newcastle to the Whorekills, 1682, Aug. 24.
to William Penn. Vo. Repr. Penn. xxxvii. A commission to Thomas Lord Culpeper
to be lieutenant and governor-general of Virginia. 1682, Nov. 27. 34. Car. 2.
M. S. An act of union for annexing and uniting of the counties of Newcastle,
1682, 10th mon. 6th day.
Jones's and Whorekill's alias Deal, to the province of Pennsylvani^* and of
naturalization of all foreigners in the province and counties aforesaid. An act
of settlement. 1682, Dec. 6.
The frame of the government of the province of Pennsylvania and territories
thereunto annexed in America. 1683, Apr. 2.
Proceedings of the Committee of trade and plantations in the dispute between
Lord Baltimore and Mr. Penn. 1683, Apr. 17, 27. May 30. June 12. 1684, Feb. 12.
July 2, 16, 23. Sept. 30. Dec. 9. 1685, Mar. 17. Aug. 18. 26. Sept. 2. Oct 8
17, 31 Nov 7.
Vo. R. P. xiii -- xviii. A commission by the proprietors of East-New-Jersey to
Robert Barclay to be governor. 1683, July 17.
Sm. N. J. 166. An order of council for issuing a quo warranto against the
charter of the colony of the Massachuset's bay in New England, 1683, July 26,
35. Car. 2.
with his ^ajesty's declaration that in case the said corporation of
Masschuset's bay shall before prosecution had upon the same quo warranto make a
full submission and entire resignation to his royal pleasure, he will then
regulate their charter in such a manner as shall be for his service and the
good of that colony. Title in American library. 139. 6. A commission to Lord
Howard of Effingham to be lieutenant and governor-general of Virginia. 1683,
Sept. 28. 35. Car. 2.
M. S. The humble address of the chief governor, 1684, May 3.
council and representatives of the island of Nevis, in the West Indies,
presented to his majesty by Colonel Netheway and Captain Jefferson, at Windsor,
May 3. 1684. Title in Amer. libr. 142. 3. cites Land. Gaz. No. 1927. A treaty
with the Indians at Albany. 1684, Aug. 2.
A treaty of neutrality for America between France and England. 1686, Nov. 16.
7. Corpse Dipl. part 2. p. 44. 2. Mem. Am. 40. By the king, 1687, Jan. 20.
a proc^amation for the more effectual reducing and suppressing of pirates and
privateers in America, as well on the sea as on the land in great numbers,
committing frequent robberies and piracies, which has occasioned a great
prejudice and obstruction to trade and commerce, and given a great scandal and
disturbance to our government in those parts. Title Amer. libr. 147. 2. ^ites
Land. Gaz. No. 2315. Constitution of the council of proprietors of West-Jersey.
1687, Feb. 12.
Smith's N. Jersey. 199. A confirmation of the grant of the northern neck of
Virginia to Lord Culpeper. 1687, qu. Sept. 27. 4. Jac. 2.
Governor Coxe's declaration to the council of proprietors of West-Jersey.
1687, Sept. 5.
Sm. N. J. 190. Provisional treaty of Whitehall concerning America between
France and England. 1687, Dec. 16.
2. Mem. de l'Am. 89. Governor Coxe's narrative relating to the division line,
1687.
directed to the council of proprietors of West-Jersey. Sm. App. N. 4. The
representation of the council of proprietors of West-Jersey to Governor Burnet.
1687.
Smith. App. No. 5. The remonstrance and petition of the inhabitants of
East-New-Jersey to the king. Sm. App. No. 8. The memorial of the proprietors of
East-New-Jersey to the Lords of trade. Sm. App. No. 9. Agreement of the line of
partition between East and West-New-Jersey. 1688, Sept. 5.
Sm. N. J. 196. Conveyance of the government of West-Jersey and territories by
Dr. Coxe, 1691.
to the West-Jersey society. A charter 1691, Oct. 7.
granted by King William and Queen Mary to the inhabitants(...) of East and
West-Jersey to the king. Sm. App. No. 14. Representation of the Lords of trade
to the Lords justices. 1701, Oct. 2.
Sm. App. No. 13. A treaty with the Indians. 1701.
Report of Lords of trade to king William of draughts of a commission and
instructions for a governor of New Jersey. 1701-2, Jan. 6.
Sm. N. J. 262. Surrender from the proprietors of E. 1702, Apr. 15.
and W. N. Jersey of their pretended right of government to her majesty Q.
Anne. Sm. N. J. 211. The Queen's acceptance of the surrender of government of
East and West-Jersey. 1702, Apr. 17.
Sm. N. J. 219. Instructions to Lord Cornbury. 1702, Nov. 16.
Sm. N. J. 230. A commission from Queen Anne to Lord Cornbury, 1702, Dec. 5.
to be captain general and governor in chief of New Jersey. Sm. N. J. 220.
Recognition by the council of proprietors of the true boundary of the deeds of
Sept. 10 and Oct. 10, 1703, June 27.
1677 (New Jersey). Sm. N. J. 96. Indian deed for the lands above the falls of
the Delaware in West-Jersey. 1703.
Indian deed for the lands at the head of Rankokus river in West-Jersey. A
proclamation by Queen Anne for settling and ascertaining the current rates of
foreign coins in America. 1704, June 18.
Sm. N. J. 281. Additional instructions to Lord Cornbury. 1705, May 3.
Sm. N. J. 235. Additional instructions to Lord Cornbury. 1707, May 3.
Sm. N. J. 258. Additional instructions to Lord Cornbury. 1707, Nov. 20.
Sm. N. J. 259. An answer by the council of proprietors for the western
division of New Jersey, 1707.
to questions, proposed to them by Lord Cornbury. Sm. N. J. 285. Instructions
to Colonel Vetch in his negociations with the governors of America. 1708-9,
Feb. 28.
Sm. N. J. 364. Instructions to the governor of New Jersey and New York.
1708-9, Feb. 28.
Sm. J. 361. Earl of Dartmouth's letter to governor Hunter. 1710, Aug.
Premieres propositions de la France. 1711, Apr. 22.
6. Lamberty, 669. 2. Mem. Am. 341. Reponses de la France aux demanded
preliminaries de la Grande-Bretagne. 1711, Oct. 8.
6. Lamb. 681. 2. Mem. Amer. 344. Demandes preliminaries plus particulieres de
la Grande-Bretagne, 1711, Sept. 27./Oct. 8.
avec les reponses. 2. Mem. de l'Am. 346. L'acceptation de la part de la
Grande-Bretagne. 1711, Sept.27./Oct. 8.
2. Mem. Am. 356. The Queen's instructions to the Bishop of Bristol and Earl of
Stafford, 1711, Dec. 23.
her plenipotentiaries, to treat of a general peace. 6. Lamberty, 744. 2. Mem.
Am. 358. A memorial of Mr. St. John to the Marquis de Torci, 1712, May 24./June
10.
with regard to North America, to commerce, and to the suspension of arms. 7.
Recueil de Lamberty 161, 2. Mem. de l'Amer. 376. Reponse du roi de France au
memoire de Londres. 1712, June 10.
7. Lamberty, p. 163. 2. Mem. Am. 380. Traite pour une suspension d' arms
enter Louis XIV. 1712, Aug. 19.
roi de France, and Anne, reign de la Grande-Bretagne, fait a Paris. 8. Corpse
Diplom. part. 1. p. 308. 2. Mem. d'Am. 104. Offers of France to England, 1712,
Sept. 10
demands of England, and the answers of France* 7. Rec. de Lamb. 491. 2. Mem.
Am. 390. Traite de paix and d'amitie enter Louis XIV. roi de France, 1713, Mar.
31./April 11.
and Anne, reine de la Grande-Bretagne, fait a Utrecht. 15. Corpse Diplomatique
de Dumont, 339. id. Latin. 2. Acts and memoires de la pais d' Utrecht, 457.
id. Lat. Fr. 2. Mem. Am. 113. Traite de navigation and de commerce enter Louis
XIV. roi de France, 1713, Mar. 31./April 11.
and Anne, reine de la Grande-Bretagne. Fait a Utrecht. 8. Corpse. Dipl. part.
1. p. 345. 2. Mem. de l'Am. 137. A treaty with the Indians. 1726.
The petition of the representatives of the province of New Jersey, 1728, Jan.
to have a distinct governor. Sm. N. J. 421. Deed of release by the government
of Connecticut to that of New York. The charter granted by George II. 1732,
June 9-20. 5. G. 2.
for Georgia. 4. Mem. de l'Am. 617. Petition of Lord Fairfax, 1733.
that a commission might issue for running and marking the dividing line
between his district and the province of Virginia. Order of the King in council
for commissioners to survey and settle the said dividing line between the
proprietary and royal territory. 1733, Nov. 29.
Report of the Lords of trade relating to the separating the government of the
province of New Jersey from New York. Aug. 5.
Sm. N. J. 423. Survey and report of the commissioners appointed on the part of
the crown to settle the line between the crown and Lord Fairfax. 1737, Aug. 10.
Survey and report of the commissioners appointed on the part of Lord Fairfax
to settle the line between the crown and him. 1737, Aug.
Order of reference of the surveys between the crown and Lord Fairfax to the
council for plantation affairs. 1733, Dec. 21.
Treaty with the Indians of the 6 nations at Lancaster. 1744, June.
Report of the council for plantation affairs, 1745, Apr. 6.
fixing the head springs of Rappahanoc and Patowmac, and a commission to extend
the line. Order of the king in council confirming the said report of the
council for plantation affairs. 1745, Apr. 11.
Articles preliminaires pour parvenir a la paix, 1748, Apr. 30.
signs a Aixla-Chapelle enter les ministres de France, de la Grande-Bretagne,
and des Provinces-Unies des Pays-Bas. 2. Mem. de l'Am. 159. Declaration des
ministres de France, 1748, May 21.
de la Grande-Bretagne, and des Provinces-Unies des Pays-Bas, pour rectifier
les articles I. and II. des preliminaires. 2. Mem. Am. 165. The general and
definitive treaty of peace concluded at Aixla Chapelle. 1748, Oct. 7-18. 22. G.
2.
Lon. Mag. 1748. 503. French. 2. Mem. Am. 169. A treaty with the Indians. 1754.
A conference between Governor Bernard and Indian nations at Burlington. 1758,
Aug. 7.
Sm. N. J. 449. A conference between Governor Denny, 175^, Oct, 8.
Governor Bernard and others, and Indian nations at Easton. Sm. N. J. 455. The
capitulation of Niagara. 1759, July 25. 33. G. 2.
The king's proclamation promising lands to soldiers. 175 --
The definitive treaty concluded at Paris. 1763, Feb. 10. 3. G. 3.
Lo. Mag. 1763. 149. A proclamation for regulating the cessions made by the
last treaty of peace. 1763, Oct. 7. G. 3.
Guth. Geogr. Gram. 623. The king's proclamation against settling on any lands
on the waters, 1763.
westward of the Alleghaney. Deed from the six nations of Indians to William
Trent and others for lands betwixt the Ohio and Monongahela. 1768, Nov. 3.
View of the title to Indiana. Phil. Steiner and Cist. 1776. Deed from the six
nations of Indians to the crown for certain lands and settling a boundary.
1768, Nov. 5.
M. S.
APPENDIX.
THE preceding sheets having been submitted to my friend Mr. Charles Thomson,
Secretary of Congress, he has furnished me with the following observations,
which have too much merit not to be communicated.

(1.) p. 21. Besides the three channels of communication mentioned between the
western waters and the Atlantic, there are two others, to which the
Pennsylvanians are turning their attention; one from Presque-isle, on Lake
Erie, to Le Boeuf, down the Alleghaney to Kiskiminitas, then up the
Kiskiminitas, and from thence, by a small portage, to Juniata, which falls into
the Susquehanna: the other from Lake Ontario to the East Branch of the
Delaware, and down that to Philadelphia. Both these are said to be very
practicable: and, considering the enterprising temper of the Pennsylvanians,
and particularly of the merchants of Philadelphia, whose object is concentered
in promoting the commerce and trade of one city, it is not improbable but one
or both of these communications will be opened and improved.

(1.) p. 24. The reflections I was led into on viewing this passage of the
Patowmac through the Blue ridge were, that this country must have suffered some
violent convulsion, and that the face of it must have been changed from what it
probably was some centuries ago: that the broken and ragged faces of the
mountain on each side the river; the tremendous rocks, which are left with one
end fixed in the precipice, and the other jutting out, and seemingly ready to
fall for want of support; the bed of the river for several miles below
obstructed, and filled with the loose stones carried from this mound; in short,
every thing on which you cast your eye evidently demonstrates a disrupture and
breach in the mountain, and that, before this happened, what is now a fruitful
vale, was formerly a great lake or collection of water, which possibly might
have here formed a mighty cascade, or had its vent to the ocean by the
Susquehanna, where the Blue ridge seems to terminate. Besides this, there are
other parts of this country which bear evident traces of a like convulsion.
From the best accounts I have been able to obtain, the place where the Delaware
now flows through the Kittatinny mountain, which is a continuation of what is
called the North ridge, or mountain, was not its original course, but that it
passed through what is now called 'the Wind-gap,' a place several miles to the
westward, and above an hundred feet higher than the present bed of the river.
This Wind-gap is about a mile broad, and the stones in it such as seem to have
been washed for ages by water running over them. Should this have been the
case, there must have been a large lake behind that mountain, and by some
uncommon swell in the waters, or by some convulsion of nature the river must
have opened its way through a different part of the mountain, and meeting there
with less obstruction, carried away with it the opposing mounds of earth, and
deluged the country below with the immense collection of waters to which this
new passage gave vent. There are still remaining, and daily discovered,
innumerable instances of such a deluge on both sides of the river, after it
passed the hills above the falls of Trenton, and reached the champaign. On the
New Jersey side, which is flatter than the Pennsylvania side, all the country
below Croswick hills seems to have been overflowed to the distance of from ten
to fifteen miles back from the river, and to have acquired a new soil by the
earth and clay brought down and mixed with the native sand. The spot on which
Philadelphia stands evidently appears to be made ground. The different strata
through which they pass in digging to water, the acorns, leaves, and sometimes
branches, which are found above twenty feet below the surface, all seem to
demonstrate this. I am informed that at Yorktown in Virginia, in the bank of
York river, there are different strata of shells and earth, one above another,
which seem to point out that the country there has undergone several changes;
that the sea has, for a succession of ages, occupied the place where dry land
now appears; and that the ground has been suddenly raised at various periods.
What a change would it make in the country below, should the mountains at
Niagara, by any accident, be cleft asunder, and a passage suddenly opened to
drain off the waters of Erie and the Upper lakes! While ruminating on these
subjects, I have often been hurried away by fancy, and led to imagine, that
what is now the bay of Mexico, was once a champaign country; and that from the
point or cape of Florida, there was a continued range of mountains through
Cuba, Hispanio^a, Porto rico, Martinique, Guadaloupe, Barbados, and Trinidad,
till it reached the coast of America, and formed the shores which bounded the
ocean, and guarded the country behind; that, by some convulsion or shock of
nature, the sea had broken through these mounds, and deluged that vast plain,
till it reached the foot of the Andes; that being there heaped up by the
trade-winds, always belowing from one quarter, it had found its way back, as it
continues to do, through the gulf between Florida and Cuba, carrying with it
the loom and sand it may have scooped from the country it had occupied, part of
which it may have deposited on the shores of North America, and with part
formed the banks of Newfoundland. -- But these are only the visions of fancy.

(3.) p.49. There is a plant, or weed, called the James-town weed Datura
pericarpiis erectis ovatis. Linn.
, of a very singular quality. The late Dr. Bond informed me, that he had under
his care a patient, a young girl, who had put the seeds of this plant into her
eye, which dilated the pupil to such a degree, that she could see in the dark,
but in the light was almost blind. The effect that the leaves had when eaten by
a ship's crew that arrived at James-town, are well known An instance of
temporary imbecility produced by them is mentioned, Beverl. H. of Virg. b. 2.
c. 4.
.

(4.) p.93. Mons. Buffon has indeed given an afflicting picture of human nature
in his descripof the man of America. But sure I am there never was a picture
more unlike the original. He grants indeed that his stature is the same as that
of the man of Europe. He might have admitted, that the Iroquois were larger,
and the Lenopi, or Delawares, taller than people in Europe generally are. But
he says their organs of generation are smaller and weaker than those of
Europeans. Is this a fact? I believe not; at least it is an observation I never
heard before. -- 'They have no beard.' Had he known the pains and trouble it
costs the men to pluck out by the roots the hair that grows on their faces, he
would have seen that nature had not been deficient in that respect. Every
nation has its customs. I have seen an Indian beau, with a looking-glass in his
hand, examining his face for hours together, and plucking out by the roots
every hair he could discover, with a kind of tweezer made of a piece of fine
brass wire, that had been twisted round a stick, and which he used with great
dexterity. -- 'They have no ardour for their females.' It is true, they do not
indulge those excesses, nor discover that fondness which is customary in
Europe; but this is not owing to a defect in nature but to manners. Their soul
is wholly bent upon war. This is what procures them glory among the men, and
makes them the admiration of the women. To this they are educated from their
earliest youth. When they pursue game with ardour, when they bear the fatigues
of the chase, when they sustain and suffer patiently hunger and cold; it is not
so much for the sake of the game they pursue, as to convince their parents and
the council of the nation that they are fit to be enrolled in the number of the
warriors. The songs of the women, the dance of the warriors, the sage counsel
of the chiefs, the tales of the old, the triumphal entry of the warriors
returning with success from battle, and the respect paid to those who
distinguish themselves in war and in subduing their enemies; in short, every
thing they see or hear tends to inspire them with an ardent desire for military
same. If a young man were to discover a fondness for women before he has been
to war, he would become the contempt of the men, and the scorn and ridicule of
the women. Or were he to indulge himself with a captive taken in war, and much
more were he to offer violence in order to gratify his lust, he would incur
indelible disgrace. The seeming frigidity of the men, therefore, is the effect
of manners, and not a defect of nature. Besides, a celebrated warrior is
oftener courted by the females, than he has occasion to court: and this is a
point of honor which the men aim at. Instances similar to that of Ruth and
Boaz When Boaz had eaten and drank, and his heart was merry, he went to lie
down at the end of the heap of corn: and Ruth came softly, and uncovered his
feet, and laid her down. Ruth iii. 7.
are not uncommon among them. For though the women are modest and diffident,
and so bashful that they seldom lift up their eyes, and scarce ever look a man
full in the face, yet, being brought up in great subjection, custom and manners
reconcile them to modes of acting, which, judged of by Europeans, would be
deemed inconsistent with the rules of female decorum and propriety. I once saw
a young widow, whose husband, a warrior, had died about eight days before,
hastening to finish her grief, and who by tearing her hair, beating her breast,
and drinking spirits, made the tears flow in great abundance, in order that she
might grieve much in a short space of time, and be married that evening to
another young warrior. The manner in which this was viewed by the men and women
of the tribe, who stood round, silent and solemn spectators of the scene, and
the indifference with which they answered my question respecting it, convinced
me that it was no unusual custom. I have known men advanced in years, whose
wives were old and past childbearing, take young wives, and have children,
though the practice of polygamy is not common. Does this favor of frigidity,
or want of ardour for the female? Neither do they seem to be deficient in
natural affection. I have seen both fathers and mothers in the deepest
affliction, when their children have been dangerously ill; though I believe the
affection is stronger in the descending than the ascending scale, and though
custom forbids a father to grieve immoderately for a son slain in battle. --
'That they are timorous and cowardly,' is a character with which there is
little reason to charge them, when we recollect^ the manner in which the
Iroquois met Mons. --, who marched into their country; in which the old men,
who scorned to fly, or to survive the capture of their town, braved death, like
the old Romans in the time of the Gauls, and in which they soon after revenged
themselves by sacking and destroying Montreal. But above all, the unshaken
fortitude with which they bear the most excruciating tortures and death when
taken prisoners, ought to exempt them from that character. Much less are they
to be characterised as a people of no vivacity, and who are excited to action
or motion only by the calls of hunger and thirst. Their dances in which they so
much delight, and which to an European would be the most severe exercise, fully
contradict this, not to mention their fatiguing marches, and the toil they
voluntarily and cheerfully undergo in their military expeditions. It is true,
that when at home, they do not employ themselves in labor or the culture of
the soil: but this again is the effect of customs and manners, which have
assigned that to the province of the women. But it is said, they are averse to
society and a social life. Can any thing be more inapplicable than this to a
people who always live in towns or clans? Or can they be said to have no
'republic,' who conduct all their affairs in national councils, who pride
themselves in their national character, who consider an insult or injury done
to an individual by a stranger as done to the whole, and resent it accordingly?
In short this picture is not applicable to any nation of Indians I have ever
known or heard of in North America.

(5.) p. 138. As far as I have been able to learn, the country from the sea
coast to the Alleghany, and from the most southern waters of James river up to
Patuxen river, now in the state of Maryland, was occupied by three different
nations of Indians, each of which spoke a different language, and were under
separate and distinct governments. What the original or real names of those
nations were, I have not been able to learn with certainty: but by us they are
distinguished by the names of Powhatans, Mannahoacs, and Monacans, now commonly
called Tuscaroras. The Powhatans, who occupied the country from the sea shore
up to the falls of the rivers, were a powerful nation, and seem to have
consisted of seven tribes, five on the western and two on the eastern shore.
Each of these tribes was subdivided into towns, families, or clans, who lived
together. All the nations of Indians in North America lived in the hunter state
and depended for subsistence on hunting, fishing, and the spontaneous fruits of
the earth, and a kind of grain which was planted and gathered by the women, and
is now known by the name of Indian corn. Long potatoes, pumpkins of various
kinds, and squashes, were also found in use among them. They had no flocks,
herds, or tamed animals of any kind. Their government is a kind of patriarchal
confederacy. Every town or family has a chief, who is distinguished by a
particular title, and whom we commonly call 'Sachem.' The several towns or
families that compose a tribe, have a chief who presides over it, and the
several tribes composing a nation have a chief who presides over the whole
nation. These chiefs are generally men advanced in years, and distinguished by
their prudence and abilities in council. The matters which merely regard a town
or family are settled by the chief and principal men of the town: those which
regard a tribe, such as the appointment of head warriors or captains, and
settling differences between different towns and families, are regulated at a
meeting or council of the chiefs from the several towns; and those which regard
the whole nation, such as the making war, concluding peace, or forming
alliances with the neighboring nations, are deliberated on and determined in a
national council composed of the chiefs of the tribe, attended by the head
warriors and a number of the chiefs from the towns, who are his counselors. In
every town there is a council house, where the chief and old men of the town
assemble, when occasion requires, and consult what is proper to be done. Every
tribe has a fixed place for the chiefs of the towns to meet and consult on the
business of the tribe: and in every nation there is what they call the central
council house, or central council fire, where the chiefs of the several tribes,
with the principal warriors, convene to consult and determine on their national
affairs. When any matter is proposed in the national council, it is common for
the chiefs of the several tribes to consult thereon apart with their
counselors, and when they have agreed, to deliver the opinion of the tribe at
the national council: and, as their government seems to rest wholly on
persuasion, they endeavor, by mutual concessions, to obtain unanimity. Such is
the government that still subsists among the Indian nations bordering upon the
United States. Some historians seem to think, that the dignity of office of
Sachem was hereditary. But that opinion does not appear to be well founded. The
sachem or chief of the tribe seems to be by election. And sometimes persons who
are strangers, and adopted into the tribe, are promoted to this dignity, on
account of their abilities. Thus on the arrival of Captain Smith, the first
founder of the colony of Virginia, Opechancanough, who was Sachem or chief of
the Chickahominies, one of the tribes of the Powhatans, is said to have been of
another tribe, and even of another nation, so that no certain account could be
obtained of his origin or descent. The chiefs of the nation seem to have been
by a rotation among the tribes. Thus when Capt. Smith, in the year 1609,
questioned Powhatan (who was the chief of the nation, and whose proper name is
said to have been Wahunsonacock) respecting the succession, the old chief
informed him, that he was very old and had seen the death of all his people
thrice This is one generation more than the poet ascribes to the life of
Nestor. To d' ede duo men geneai meropon anthropon
Ephthiath oi oi prosthen ama traphen ed' egneonto
En Pulo egathee, meta de tritatoisin anassen.
I HOM. II. 2^0. Two generations now had past away,
Wise by his rules, and happy by his sway;
Two ages over his native realm he reigned,
And now the example of the third remained.
POPE.
; that not one of these generations were then living except himself; that he
must soon die and the succession descend in order to his brother Opichapan,
Opechancanough, and Catataugh, and then to his two sisters, and their two
daughters. But these were appellations designating the tribes in the
confederacy. For the persons named are not his real brothers, but the chiefs of
different tribes. Accordingly in 1618, when Powhatan died, he was succeeded by
Opichapan, and after his decease Opechancanough became chief of the nation. I
need only mention another instance to show that the chiefs of the tribes
claimed this kindred with the head of the nation. In 1622, when Raleigh Crashaw
was with Japazaw, the Sachem or chief of the Patowmaes, Opechancanough, who had
great power and influence, being the second man in the nation, and next in
succession to Opichapan, and who was a bitter but secret enemy to the English,
and wanted to engage his nation in a war with them, sent two baskets of beads
to the Patowmac chief, and desired him to kill the Englishman that was with
him. Japazaw replied, that the English were his friends, and Opichapan his
brother, and that therefore there should be no blood shed between them by his
means. It is also to be observed, that when the English first came over, in all
their conferences with any of the chiefs, they constantly heard him make
mention of his brother, with whom he must consult, or to whom he referred them,
meaning thereby either the chief of the nation, or the tribes in confederacy.
The Manahoacks are said to have been a confederacy of four tribes, and in
alliance with the Monacans, in the war which they were carrying on against the
Powhatans.

To the northward of these there was another powerful nation, which occupied
the country from the head of the Chesapeak-bay up to the Kittatinney mountain,
and as far eastward as Connecticut river, comprehending that part of New York
which lies between the highlands and the ocean, all the state of New Jersey,
that part of Pennsylvania which is watered, below the range of the Kittatinney
mountains, by the rivers or streams falling into the Delaware, and the county
of Newcastle in the state of Delaware, as far as Duck creek. It is to be
observed, that the nations of Indians distinguished their countries one from
another by natural boundaries, such as ranges of mountains or streams of water.
But as the heads of rivers frequently interlock, or approach near to each
other, as those who live upon a stream claim the country watered by it, they
often encroached on each other, and this is a constant source of war between
the different nations. The nation occupying the tract of country last
described, called themselves Lenopi. The French writers call them Loups; and
among the English they are now commonly called Delawares. This nation or
confederacy consisted of five tribes, who all spoke one language. 1. The
Chihohocki, who dwelt on the west side of the river now called Delaware, a name
which it took from Lord De la War, who put into it on his passage from Virginia
in the year (...), but which by the Indians was called Chihohocki. 2. The
Wanami, who inhabited the country called New Jersey, from the Rariton to the
sea. 3. The Munsey, who dwelt on the upper streams of the Delaware, from the
Kittatinney mountains down to the Lehigh or western branch of the Delaware. 4.
The Wabinga, who are sometimes called River Indians, sometimes Mohickanders,
and who had their dwelling between the west branch of Delaware and Hudson's
river, from the Kittatinney ridge down to the Rariton: and 5. The Mahiccon, or
Mahattan, who occupied Staten island, York island, (which from its being the
principal seat of their residence was formerly called Mahatton) Long island and
that part of New York and Connecticut which lies between Hudson and Connecticut
rivers, from the highland, which is a continuation of the Kittatinney ridge
down to the Sound. This nation had a close alliance with the Shawanese, who
lived on the Susquehanna and to the westward of that river, as far the
Alleghaney mountains, and carried on a long war with another powerful nation or
confederacy of Indians, which lived to the north of them between the
Kittatinney mountains, or highlands, and the lake Ontario, and who call
themselves Mingos, and are called by the French writers Iroquois, by the
English the Five Nations, and by the Indians to the southward, with whom they
were at war, Massawomacs. This war was carrying on, in its greatest fury, when
Captain Smith first arrived in Virginia. The Mingo warriors had penetrated down
the Susquehannah to the mouth of it. In one of his excursions up the bay, at
the mouth of Susquehanna, in 1608, Captain Smith met with six or seven of their
canoes full of warriors, who were coming to attack their enemies in the rear.
In an excursion which he had made a few weeks before, up the the Rappahanock,
and in which he had a skirmish with a party of the Manahoacs, and taken a
brother of one of the their chiefs prisoner, he first heard of this nation. For
when he asked the prisoner, why his nation attacked the English? the prisoner
said, because his nation had heard that the English came from under the world
to to take their world from them. Being asked, how many worlds he knew? he
said, he knew but one, which was under the sky that covered him, and which
consisted of the Powhatans, the Manakins, and the Massawomacs. Being questioned
concerning the latter, he said, they dwelt on a great water to the North, that
they had many boats, and so many men that they waged with all the rest of the
world. The Mingo confederacy then consisted of five tribes; three who are the
elder, to wit, the Senecas, who live to the West, the Mohawks to the East, and
the Onondagas between them; and two who are called the younger tribes, namely,
the Cayugas and One^das. All these tribes speak one language, and were then
united in a close confederacy, and occupied the tract of country from the east
end of lake Erie to lake Champlain, and from the Kittatinney and Highlands to
the lake Ontario and the river Cadaraqui, or St. Laurence. They had, some time
before that, carried on a war with a nation, who lived beyond the lakes, and
were called Adirondacs. In this war they were worsted: but having made a peace
with them, through the intercession of the French, who were then settling
Canada, they turned their arms against the Lenopi; and as this war was long and
doubtful, they, in the course of it, not only exerted their whole force, but
put in practice every measure which prudence or policy could devise to bring it
to a successful issue. For this purpose they bent their course down the
Susquehanna, warring with the Indians in their way, and having penetrated as
far as the mouth of it, they, by the terror of their arms, engaged a nation,
now known by the name of Nanticocks, Conoys, and Tuteloes, and who lived
between Chesapeak and Delaware bays, and bordering on the tribe of Chihohocki,
to enter into an alliance with them. They also formed an alliance with the
Monakans, and stimulated them to a war with the Lenopi and their confederates.
At the same time the Mohawks carried on a furious war down the Hudson against
the Mohiccons and River Indians, and compelled them to purchase a temporary and
precarious peace, by acknowledging them to be their superiors, and paying an
annual tribute. The Lenopi being surrounded with enemies, and hard pressed, and
having lost many of their warriors, were at last compelled to sue for peace,
which was granted to them on the condition that they should put themselves
under the protection of the Mingoes, confine themselves to raising corn,
hunting for the subsistence of their families, and no longer have the power of
making war. This is what the Indians call making them women. And in this
condition the Lenopis were when William Penn first arrived and began the
settlement of Pennsylvania in 1682.

(6.) p. 148. From the figurative language of the Indians, as well as from the
practice of those we are still acquainted with, it is evident that it was, and
still continues to be, a constant custom among the Indians to gather up the
bones of the dead, and deposit them in a particular place. Thus, when they make
peace with any nation, with whom they have been at war, after burying the
hatchet, they take up the belt of wampum, and say, We now gather up all the
bones of those who have been slain, and bury them, etc. See all the treaties of
peace. Besides, it is customary when any of them die at a distance from home,
to bury them, and afterward to come and take up the bones and carry them home.
At a treaty which was held at Lancaster with the fix nations, one of them died,
and was buried in the woods a little distance from the town. Some time after a
party came and took up the body, separated the flesh from the bones by boiling
and scraping them clean, and carried them to be deposited in the sepulchers of
their ancestors. The operation was so offensive and disagreeable, that nobody
could come near them while they were performing it.

(7.) p. 151. The Oswegatchies, Connosedagos and Cohunnegagoes, or, as they are
commonly called, Caghnewagos, are of the Mingo or Sixnation Indians, who, by
the influence of the French missionaries, have been separated from their
nation, and induced to settle there.

I do not know of what nation the Augquagahs are; but suspect they are a family
of the Senecas.

The Nanticocks and Conoies were formerly of a nation that lived at the head of
Chesapeak bay, and who, of late years, have been adopted into the Mingo or
Iroquois confederacy, and make a seventh nation. The Monacans or Tuscaroras,
who were taken into the confederacy in 1712, making the sixth.

The Saponies are families of the Wanamies, who removed from New Jersey, and,
with the Mohiccons, Munsies, and Delawares, belong to the Lenopi nation. The
Mingos are a war colony from the six nations; so are the Cohunnewagos.

Of the rest of the northern tribes I never have been able to learn any thing
certain. But all accounts seem to agree in this, that there is a very powerful
nation, distinguished by a variety of names taken from the several towns or
families, but commonly called Tawas or Outawas, who speak one language, and
live round and on the waters that fall into the western lakes, and extend from
the waters of the Ohio quite to the waters falling into Hudson's bay.

No. II.
In the Summer of the Year 1783, it was expected, that the ASSEMBLY OF VIRGINIA
should call a CONVENTION for the Establishment of a CONSTITUTION. The following
DRAUGHT of a FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUTION for the COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA was then
prepared, with a Design of being proposed in such Convention had it taken place.
TO the Citizens of the Commonwealth of Virginia, and all others whom it may
concern, the Delegates for the said Commonwealth in Convention assembled, send
greeting.

It is known to you, and to the world, that the government of Great Britain,
with which the American States were not long since connected, assumed over them
an authority unwarrantable and oppressive; that they endeavored to enforce
this authority by arms, and that the States of New Hampshire, Massachusetts,
Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware,
Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia, considering
resistance, with all its train of horrors, as a lesser evil than abject
submission, closed in the appeal to arms. It has pleased the Sovereign
Disposer of all human events to give to this appeal an issue favorable to the
rights of the States; to enable them to reject for ever all dependence on a
government which had shown itself so capable of abusing the trusts reposed in
it; and to obtain from that government a solemn and explicit acknowledgment
that they are free, sovereign, and independent States. During the progress of
that war, through which we had to labor for the establishment of our rights,
the legislature of the commonwealth of Virginia found it necessary to make a
temporary orginization of government for preventing anarchy, and pointing our
efforts to the two important objects of war against our invaders, and peace and
happiness among ourselves. But this, like all other acts of legislation, being
subject to change by subsequent legislatures, possessing equal powers with
themselves, it has been thought expedient, that it should receive those
amendments which time and trial have suggested, and be rendered permanent by a
power superior to that of the ordinary legislature. The general assembly
therefore of this state recommend it to the good people thereof, to choose
delegates to meet in general convention, with powers to form a constitution of
government for them, and to declare those fundamentals to which all our laws
present and future shall be subordinate: and, in compliance with this
recommendation, they have thought proper to make choice of us, and to vest us
with powers for this purpose.

We therefore, the delegates, chosen by the said good people of this state for
the purpose aforesaid, and now assembled in general convention, do in execution
of the authority with which we are invested, establish the following
constitution and fundamentals of government for the said state of Virginia.

The said state shall for ever hereafter be governed as a commonwealth.

The powers of government shall be divided into three distinct departments each
of them to be confided to a separate body of magistracy; to wit, those which
are legislative to one, those which are judiciary to another, and those which
are executive to another. No person, or collection of persons, being of one of
these departments, shall exercise any power properly belonging to either of the
others, except in the instances hereinafter expressly permitted.

The legislature shall consist of two branches, the one to be called the House
of Delegates, the other the Senate, and both together the General Assembly. The
concurrence of both of these, expressed on three several readings, shall be
necessary to the passage of a law.

Delegates for the general assembly shall be chosen on the last Monday of
November in every year. But if an election cannot be concluded on that day, it
may be adjourned from day to day till it can be concluded.

The number of delegates which each county may send shall be in proportion to
the number of its qualified electors; and the whole number of delegates for the
state shall be so proportioned to the whole number of qualified electors in it,
that they shall never exceed 300, nor be fewer than 100. Whenever such excess
or deficiency shall take place, the House of Delegates so deficient or
excessive shall, notwithstanding this, continue in being during its legal term:
but they shall, during that term, re-adjust the proportion, so as to bring
their number within the limits before mentioned at the ensuing election. If any
county be reduced in its qualified electors below the number authorized to send
one delegate, let it be annexed to some adjoining county.

For the election of senators, let the several counties be allotted by the
senate, from time to time, into such and so many districts as they shall find
best; and let each county at the time of electing its delegates, choose
senatorial electors, qualified as themselves are, and four in number for each
delegate their county is entitled to send, who shall convene, and conduct
themselves, in such manner as the legislature shall direct, with the senatorial
electors from the other counties of their district, and then choose, by ballot,
one ^^nator for every six delegates which their district is entitled to choose.
Let the senatorial districts be divided into two classes, and let the members
elected for one of them be dissolved at the first ensuing general election of
delegates, the other at the next, and so on alternately for ever.

All free male citizens, of full age, and sane mind, who for one year before
shall have been resident in the county, or shall through the whole of that time
have possessed therein real property of the value of (...) or shall for the
same time have been enrolled in the militia, and no others, shall have a right
to vote for delegates for the said county, and for senatorial electors for the
district. They shall give their votes personally, and viva voce.

The general assembly shall meet at the place to which the last adjournment
was, on the 42d day after the day of the election of delegates, and
thenceforward at any other time or place on their own adjournment, till their
office expires, which shall be on the day preceding that appointed for the
meeting of the next general assembly. But if they shall at any time adjourn for
more than one year, it shall be as if they had adjourned for one year
precisely. Neither house, without the concurrence of the other, shall adjourn
for more than one week, nor to any other place than the one at which they are
sitting. The governor shall also have power, with the advice of the council of
state, to call them at any other time to the same place, or to a different one,
if that shall have become since the last adjournment, dangerous from an enemy,
or from infection.

A majority of either house shall be a quorum, and shall be requisite for doing
business: but any smaller proportion which from time to time shall be thought
expedient by the respective houses, shall be sufficient to call for, and to
punish, their non-attending members, and to adjourn themselves for any time not
exceeding one week.

The members, during their attendance on the general assembly, and for so long
a time before and after as shall be necessary for traveling to and from the
same, shall be privileged from all personal restraint and assault, and shall
have no other privilege whatsoever. They shall receive during the same time,
daily wages in gold or silver, equal to the value of two bushels of wheat. This
value shall be deemed one dollar by the bushel till the year 1790, in which,
and in every tenth year thereafter, the general court, at their first sessions
in the year, shall cause a special jury, of the most respectable merchants and
farmers, to be summoned, to declare what shall have been the averaged value of
wheat during the last ten years; which averaged value shall be the measure of
wages for the ten subsequent years.

Of this general assembly, the treasurer, attorney general, register, ministers
of the gospel, officers of the regular armies of this state, or of the United
States, persons receiving salaries or emoluments from any power foreign to our
confederacy, those who are not resident in the county for which they are chosen
delegates, or districts for which they are chosen senators, those who are not
qualified as electors, persons who shall have committed treason, felony, or
such other crime as would subject them to infamous punishment, o^ who shall
have been convicted by due course of law of bribery or corruption, in
endeavoring to procure an election to the said assembly, shall be incapable of
being members. All others, not herein elsewhere excluded, who may elect, shall
be capable of being elected thereto.

Any member of the said assembly accepting any office of profit under this
state, or the United States, or any of them, shall thereby vacate his seat but
shall be capable of being re-elected.

Vacancies occasioned by such disqualifications, by death, or otherwise, shall
be supplied by the electors, on a writ from the speaker of the respective house.

The general assembly shall not have power to infringe this constitution; to
abridge the civil rights of any person on account of his religious belief; to
restrain him from professing and supporting that belief, or to compel him to
contributions, other than those he shall have personally stipulated for the
support of that or any other; to ordain death for any crime but treason or
murder, or military offenses; to pardon, or give a power of pardoning persons
duly convicted of treason or felony, but instead thereof they may substitute
one or two new ^^^ils, and no more; to pass laws for punishing actions done
before the existence of such laws; to pass any bill of attainder of treason or
felony; to prescribe torture in any case whatever; nor to permit the
introduction of any more slaves to reside in this state, or the continuance of
slavery beyond the generation which shall be living on the thirty-first day of
December, one thousand eight hundred: all persons born after that day being
hereby declared free.

The general assembly shall have power to fever from this state all or any
parts of its territory westward of the Ohio, or of the meridian of the mouth of
the Great Kanhaway, and to cede to Congress one hundred square miles of
territory in any other part of this state, exempted from the jurisdiction and
government of this state so long as Congress shall hold their sessions therein,
or in any territory adjacent thereto, which may be ceded to them by any other
state.

They shall have power to appoint the speakers of their respective houses,
treasurer, auditors, attorney general, register, all general officers of the
military, their own clerks and sergeants, and no other officers, except where,
in other parts of this constitution, such appointment is expressly given them.

The executive powers shall be exercised by a Governor, who shall be chosen by
joint ballot of both houses of assembly, and when chosen shall remain in office
five years, and be ineligible a second time. During his term he shall hold no
other office or emolument under this state, or any other state or power
whatsoever. By executive powers, we mean no reference to those powers exercised
under our former government by the crown as of its prerogative, nor that these
shall be the standard of what may or may not be deemed the rightful powers of
the governor. We give him those powers only, which are necessary to execute the
laws (and administer the government) and which are not in their nature either
legislative or judiciary. The application of this idea must be left to reason.
We do however expressly deny him the prerogative powers of erecting courts,
offices, boroughs, corporations, fairs, markets, ports, beacons, light-houses,
and sea-marks; of laying embargoes, of establishing precedence, of retaining
within the state or recalling to it any citizen thereof, and of making
denizens, except so far as he may be authorized from time to time by the
legislature to exercise any of those powers. The powers of declaring war and
concluding peace, of contracting alliances, of issuing letters of marque and
reprisal, of raising and introducing armed forces, of building armed vessels,
forts, or strong holds, of coining money or regulating its value, of regulating
weights and measures, we leave to be exercised under the authority of the
confederation: but in all cases respecting them which are out of the said
confederation, they shall be exercised by the governor, under the regulation of
such laws as the legislature may think it expedient to pass.

The whole military of the state, whether regular, or of militia, shall be
subject to his directions; but he shall leave the execution of those directions
to the general officers appointed by the legislature.

His salary shall be fixed by the legislature at the session of the assembly in
which he shall be appointed, and before such appointment be made; or if it be
not then fixed, it shall be the same which his next predecessor in office was
entitled to. In either case he may demand it quarterly out of any money which
shall be in the public treasury; and it shall not be in the power of the
legislature to give him less or more, either during his continuance in office,
or after he shall have gone out of it. The lands, houses, and other things
appropriated to the use of the governor, shall remain to his use during his
continuance in office.

A Council of State shall be chosen by joint ballot of both houses of assembly,
who shall hold their offices seven years, and be ineligible a second time, and
who, while they shall be of the said council, shall hold no other office or
emolument under this state, or any other state or power whatsoever. Their duty
shall be to attend and advise the governor when called on by him, and their
advice in any case shall be a sanction to him. They shall also have power, and
it shall be their duty, to meet at their own will, and to give their advice,
though not required by the governor, in cases where they shall think the public
good calls for it. There advice and proceedings shall be entered in books to be
kept for that purpose, and shall be signed as approved or disapproved by the
members present. These books shall be laid before either house of assembly when
called for by them. The said council shall consist of eight members for the
present: but their numbers may be increased or reduced by the legislature,
whenever they shall think it necessary* provided such reduction be made only as
the appointments become vacant by death, resignation, disqualification, or
regular deprivation. A majority of their actual number, and not fewer, shall be
a quorum. They shall be allowed for the present (...) each by the year, payable
quarterly out of any money which shall be in the public treasury. Their salary
however may be increased or abated from time to time, at the discretion of the
legislature; provided such increase or abatement shall not, by any ways or
means, be made to affect either then, or at any future time, any one of those
then actually in office. At the end of each quarter their salary shall be
divided into equal portions by the number of days on which, during that
quarter, a council has been held, or required by the governor, or by their own
adjournment, and one of those portions shall be withheld from each member for
every of the said days which, without cause allowed good by the board, he
failed to attend, or departed before adjournment without their leave. If no
board should have been held during that quarter, there shall be no deduction.

They shall annually choose a President, who shall preside in council in the
absence of the governor, and who, in case of his office becoming vacant by
death or otherwise, shall have authority to exercise all his functions, till a
new appointment be made, as he shall also in any interval during which the
governor shall declare himself unable to attend to the duties of his office.

The Judiciary powers shall be exercised by county courts and such other
inferior courts as the legislature shall think proper to continue or to erect,
by three superior courts, to wit, a court of admiralty, a general court of
common law, and a high court of chancery; and by one supreme court, to be
called the court of appeals.

The judges of the high court of chancery, general court, and court of
admiralty, shall be four in number each, to be appointed by joint ballot of
both houses of assembly, and to hold their offices during good behavior. While
they continue judges, they shall hold no other office or emolument, under this
state, or any other state or power whatsoever, except that they may be
delegated to Congress, receiving no additional allowance.

These judges, assembled together, shall constitute the Court of Appeals, whose
business shall be to receive and determine appeals from the three superior
courts but to receive no original causes, except in the cases expressly
permitted herein.

A majority of the members of either of these courts, and not fewer, shall be a
quorum. But in the Court of Appeals nine members shall be necessary to do
business. Any smaller numbers however may be authorized by the legislature to
adjourn their respective courts.

They shall be allowed for the present (...) each by the year, payable
quarterly out of any money which shall be in the public treasury. Their
salaries however may be increased or abated, from time to time, at the
discretion of the legislature, provided such increase or abatement shall not,
by any ways or means, be made to affect, either then, or at any future time,
any one of those then actually in office. At the end of each quarter their
salary shall be divided into equal portions by the number of days on which,
during that quarter, their respective courts sat, or should have sat, and one
of these portions shall be withheld from each member for every of the said
days, which, without cause allowed good by his court, he failed to attend, or
departed before adjournment without their leave. If no court should have been
held during the quarter, there shall be no deduction.

There shall moreover be a Court of Impeachments to consist of three members of
the Council of State, one of each of the superior Courts of Chancery, Common
Law, and Admiralty, two members of the house of delegates and one of the
Senate, to be chosen by the body respectively of which they are. Before this
court any member of the three branches of government, that is to say, the
governor, any member of the council, of the two houses of legislature, or of
the superior courts, may be impeached by the governor, the council, or either
of the said houses or courts, and by no other, for such misbehaviour in office
as would be sufficient to remove him therefrom: and the only sentence they
shall have authority to pass shall be that of deprivation and future incapacity
of office. Seven members shall be requisite to make a court, and two thirds of
those present must concur in the sentence. The offenses cognizable by this
court shall be cognizable by no other, and they shall be triers of the fact as
well as judges of the law.

The justices or judges of the inferior courts already erected, or hereafter to
be erected, shall be appointed by the governor, on advice of the council of
state, and shall hold their offices during good behavior, or the existence of
their court. For breach of the good behavior, they shall be tried according to
the laws of the land, before the court of Appeals, who sh^^^ be judges of the
fact as well as of the law. The only sent^^^e they shall have authority to
pass, shall be that of deprivation and future incapacity of office, and
two-thirds of the members present mus^ concur in this sentence.

All courts shall appoint their own clerks, who shall hold their offices during
good behavior, or the existence of their court: they shall also appoint all
other their attending officers to continue during their pleasure. Clerks
appointed by the supreme or the superior courts shall be removeable by their
respective courts. Those to be appointed by other courts shall have been
previously examined, and certified to be duly qualified, by some two members of
the general court, and shall be removeable for breach of the good behavior by
the Court of Appeals only, who shall be judges of the fact as well as of the
law. Two-thirds of the members present must concur in the sentence.

The justices or judges of the inferior courts may be members of the
legislature.

The judgment of no inferior court shall be final, in any civil case, of
greater value than 50 bushels of wheat, as last rated in the general court for
settling the allowance to the members of the general assembly, nor in any case
of treason, felony, or other crime which should subject the party to infamous
punishment.

In all causes depending before any court, other than those of impeachments, of
appeals, and military courts, facts put in issue shall be tried by jury, and in
all courts whatever witnesses shall give testimony viva voce in open court,
wherever their attendance can be procured: and all parties shall be allowed
counsel and compulsory process for their witnesses.

Fines, amercements, and terms of imprisonment left indefinite by the law,
other than for contempts, shall be fixed by the jury, triers of the offense.

The governor, two councill^^s of state, and a judge from each of the superior
Courts of Chancery, Common Law, and Admiralty, shall be a council to revise all
bills which shall have passed both houses of assembly, in which council the
governor, when present, shall (...). Every bill, before it becomes a law, shall
be presented to this council, who shall have a right to advise its rejection,
returning the bill, with their advice and reasons in writing, to the house in
which it originated, who shall proceed to reconsider the said bill. But if
after such reconsideration, two-thirds of the house shall be of opinion the
bill should pass finally, they shall pass and send it, with the advice and
written reasons of the said Council of Revision to the other house, wherein, if
two-thirds also shall be of opinion it should pass finally, it shall thereupon
become law: otherwise it shall not.

If any bill, presented to the said council, be not, within one week (exclusive
of the day of presenting it) returned by them, with their advice of rejection
and reasons, to the house wherein it originated, or to the clerk of the said
house, in case of its adjournment over the expiration of the week, it shall be
law from the expiration of the week, and shall then be demandable by the clerk
of the House of Delegates, to be filed of record in his office.

The bills which they approve shall become law from the time of such
approbation, and shall then be returned to, or demandable by, the clerk of the
House of Delegates, to be filed of record in his office.

A bill rejected on advice of the Council of Revision may again be proposed,
during the same session of assembly, with such alterations as will render it
conformable to their advice.

The members of the said Council of Revision shall be appointed from time to
time by the board or court of which they respectively are. Two of the executive
and two of the judiciary members shall be requisite to do business: and to
prevent the evils of non-attendance, the board and courts may, at any time name
all, or so many as they will, of th^^^ members, in the particular order in
which they would choose the duty of attendance to devolve form preceding to
subsequent members, the preceding failing to attend. They shall have
additionally for their services in this council the same allowance as members
of assembly have.

The confederation is made a part of this constitution, subject to such future
alterations as shall be agreed to by the legislature of this state, and by all
the other confederating states.

The delegates to Congress shall be five in number: any three of whom, and no
fewer, may be a representation. They shall be appointed by joint ballot of both
houses of assembly for any term not exceeding one year, subject to be recalled,
within the term, by joint vote of both the said houses. They may at the same
time be members of the legislative or judiciary departments, but not of the
executive.

The benefits of the writ of Habeas Corpus shall be extended, by the
legislature, to every person within this state, and without fee, and shall be
so facilitated that no person may be detained in person more than ten days
after he shall have demanded and been refused such writ by the judge appointed
by law, or if none be appointed, then by any judge of a superior court, nor
more than ten days after such writ shall have been served on the person
detaining him, and no order given, on due examination, for his remandment or
discharge.

The military shall be subordinate to the civil power.

Printing-presses shall be subject to no other restraint than liableness to
legal prosecution for false facts printed and published.

Any two of the three branches of government concuring in opinion, each by the
voices of two-thirds of their whole existing number, that a convention is
necessary for altering this constitution, or correcting breaches of it, they
shall be authorized to issue (...) to every county for the election of so many
delegates as they are authorized to send to the general assembly, which
elections shall be held, and writs returned, as the laws shall have provided in
the case of elections of delegates to assembly, mutatis mutandis, and the said
delegates shall meet at the usual place of holding assemblies, three months
after date of such writs, and shall be acknowledged to have equal powers with
this present convention. The said writs shall be signed by all the members
approving the same.

To introduce this government, the following special and temporary provision is
made.

This convention being authorized only to amend those laws which constituted
the form of government, no general dissolution of the whole system of laws can
be supposed to have taken place: but all laws in force at the meeting of this
convention, and not inconsistent with this constitution, remain in full force,
subject to alterations by the ordinary legislature.

The present general assembly shall continue till the 42d day after the last
Monday of November in this present year. On the said last Monday of November in
this present year, the seve^^ral counties shall by their electors qualified as
provided by this constitution, elect delegates, which for the present shall be,
in number, one for every (...) militia of the said county, according to the
latest returns in possession of the governor, and shall also choose senatorial
electors in proportion thereto, which senatorial electors shall meet on the
14th day after the day of their election, at the courthouse of that county of
their present district which would stand first in an alphabetical arrangement
of their counties, and shall choose senators in the proportion fixed by this
constitution. The elections and returns shall be conducted, in all
circumstances not hereby particularly prescribed, by the same persons and under
the same forms, as prescribed by the present laws in elections of senators and
delegates of assembly. The said senators and delegates shall constitute the
first general assembly of the new government, and shall specially apply
themselves to the procuring an exact return from every county of the number of
its qualified electors, and to the settlement of the number of delegates to be
elected for the ensuing general assembly.

The present governor shall continue in office to the end of the term for which
he was elected.

All other officers of every kind shall continue in office as they would have
done had their appointment been under this constitution, and new ones, where
new are hereby called for, shall be appointed by the authority to which such
appointment is referred. One of the present judges of the general court ^he
consenting thereto, shall by joint ballot (...) both houses of assembly, at
their first meeting, be transferred to the High Court of Chancery.

NO. III. An ACT for establishing RELIGIOUS FREEDOM, passed in the Assembly of
Virginia in the beginning of the year 1786.
WELL aware that Almighty God has created the mind free; that all attempts to
influence it by temporal punishments or burdens, or by civil incapacitations,
tend only to beget habits of hypocrisy and meanness, and are a departure from
the plan of the Holy Author of our religion, who being Lord both of body and
mind, yet chose not to propagate it by coercions on either, as was in his
Almighty power to do; that the impious presumption of legislators and rulers,
civil as well as ecclesiastical, who, being themselves but fallible and
uninspired men have assumed dominion over the faith of others, setting up their
own opinions and modes of thinking as the only true and infallible, and as such
endeavoring to impose them on others, has established and maintained false
religions over the greatest part of the world, and through all time; that to
compel a man to furnish contributions of money for the propagation of opinions
which he disbelieves, is sinful and tyrannical; that even the forcing him to
support this or that teacher of his own religious persuasion, is depriving him
of the comfortable liberty of giving his contributions to the particular pastor
whose morals he would make his pattern, and whose powers he feels most
persuasive to righteousness, and is withdrawing from the ministry those
temporal rewards, which, proceeding from an approbation of their personal
conduct, are an additional incitement to earnest and unremitting labors for
the instruction of mankind; that our civil rights have no dependence on our
religious opinions, more than our opinions in physics or geometry; that
therefore the proscribing any citizen as unworthy the public confidence by
laying upon him an incapacity of being called to offices of trust and
emolument, unless he profess or renounce this or that religious opinion, is
depriving him injuriously of those privileges and advantages to which in common
with his fellowcitizens he has a natural right; that it tends also to corrupt
the principles of that very religion it is meant to encourage, by bribing, with
a monopoly of worldly honors and emoluments, those who will externally profess
and conform to it; that though indeed these are criminal who do not withstand
such temptation, yet neither are those innocent who lay the bait in their way;
that to suffer the civil magistrate to intrude his powers into the field of
opinion and to restrain the profession or propagation of principles, on
supposition of their ill tendency, is a dangerous fallacy, which at once
destroys all religious liberty, because he being of course judge of that
tendency, will make his opinions the rule of judgment, and approve or condemn
the sentiments of others only as they shall square with or differ from his own;
that it is time enough for the rightful purposes of civil government, for its
officers to interfere when principles break out into overt acts against peace
and good order; and finally, that truth is great and will prevail if left to
herself, that she is the proper and sufficient antagonist to error, and has
nothing to fear from the conflict, unless by human interposition disarmed of
her natural weapons, free argument and debate, errors ceasing to be dangerous
when it is permitted freely to contradict them.

Be it therefore enacted by the General Assembly, That no man shall be
compelled to frequent or support any religious worship, place or ministry
whatsoever, nor shall be enforced, restrained, molested, or burdened in his
body or goods, nor shall otherwise suffer on account of his religious opinions
or belief; but that all men shall be free to profess, and by argument to
maintain, their opinions in matters of religion and that the same shall in no
wise diminish, enlarge, or affect their civil capacities.

And though we well know that this Assembly, elected by the people for the
ordinary purposes of legislation only, have no power to restrain the acts of
succeeding Assemblies, constituted with powers equal to our own, and that
therefore to declare this act irrevocable, would be of (...) effect in law, yet
we are free to declare, and (...) declare, that the rights hereby asserted are
of the natural rights of mankind, and that if any act shall be hereafter passed
to repeal the present or to narrow its operation, such act will be an
infringement of natural right.

THE END.

