THE REASONABLENESS AND IMPORTANCE OF PRACTICAL RELIGION.

A DISCOURSE ON HOSEA XIV. 9. DELIVERED AUGUST 24, 1794, IN THE SOUTH CHURCH In
PORTSMOUTH.

BY SAMUEL HAVEN, D.D. PASTOR OF SAID CHURCH.

NEWBURYPORT: PRINTED AND SOLD BY BLUNT and MARCH, MARKET-SQUARE. MDCCXCIV.

HOSEA. XIV. 9. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things, prudent and
he shall know them; for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk
in them, but the transgressors shall fall therein.
SCARCE any thing is more natural to mankind than a desire of being thought
wise and prudent: we need but little acquaintance with the world to know that
human nature cannot be touched in a more tender point, or feel any thing with
more exquisite sensibility, than reflections on their mental abilities.

But however all may agree in placing high encomiums on wisdom and prudence,
they widely differ both in regard to the standard, by which they are to be
tried, and the measures by which they are to be acquired. They vary in these
respects, much according to the particular moral state and temper of the mind,
or the variety of objects which, at different times, have the ascendancy of the
heart.

Thus while the affections of men are going after their coveteousness, they
vainly imagine wisdom consists in laying, and carrying into successful
execution, plans well adapted to promote their temporal interests and estates.
When they can "join house to house, and lay field to field," and say as the
rich man in the gospel intended to say, "soul take thine case, eat, drink and
be merry, for thou have much goods laid up in store, etc." then they have
gained their point, and will felicitate themselves upon their wisdom: but in
God's account, they are fools. "Thou fool this night thy soul shall be required
of thee."

When the man of pleasure has successfully devised the greatest variety of
objects to please his brutal senses, and regale his tyrant lusts -- when the
unrighteous man can overreach and defraud his neighbor -- when the vain
ambitious creature thirsting after same, and living on the breath of his fellow
worms, can hear the plaudit of thousands flattering his pride, and soothing his
vanity -- how does his breast swell, with self applause, "surely I am the man
and wisdom shall die with me."

But, alas! how few estimate their wisdom by what they have obtained of the
knowledge of God -- by the advances they have made in a saving acquaintance
with the way of salvation by Jesus Christ? There are indeed some who place
wisdom in the mere speculative knowledge of God, and in their being able to
give a clear account of the system of doctrines contained in natural and
revealed religion -- while in the truth of facts they are alienated from the
life of God, through the ignorance there is in them, and the blindness and
hardness of their hearts.

Here then is the test of true wisdom: for none are wise in God's account, but
such as are wise unto salvation. For "the fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom; and a good understanding have all they who do his commandments." Who is
wise then, and he shall understand these things; prudent and he shall know
them? for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them; but
the transgressors shall fall therein.

The words are a most pathetic close of the prophecy of Hosea -- the prophet
intimates, in the strongest manner, the truth and importance of what he had
delivered unto the people in the name of the Lord. He addresses to them an
elegant and forcible exhortation to ponder the words of this prophecy to
transcribe into their lives the moral and religious instruction he had given
them. As though he had said, "who is there among you possessed of true wisdom?
Who is the prudent and discrete man, who knows the importance of religion, and
is making wise provision for the salvation of his immortal soul? He will
understand the doctrines that are contained in this book: he will know the good
and right ways of the Lord here pointed out -- he will walk in them. But the
transgressors, who make a mock at God's word, who defy his omnipotent arm,
disregarding the warnings, invitations and reproofs contained in this book,
shall surely fall into perdition: the very words of life which were designed to
reclaim them, and be the means of their salvation, will eventually increase
their condemnation."

My text is much of the same import with those words of the Prophet Daniel
toward the close of his prophecy, "Many shall be purified and made white and
tried, but the wicked shall do wickedly; and none of the wicked shall
understand; but the wise shall understand."

Now, dear Brethren, as we are favored with the means of grace in an higher
manner than those to whom this prophecy was addressed -- as we have line upon
line, and precept on precept, it is of high importance to enquire what
improvement we have made of them, and what is like to be the important issue.
For while they are to some a savor of life unto life, to others they will be
found at last a savor of death unto death.

This sacred passage, then, as it is not of any private interpretation, may be
profitably improved "for doctrine, for reproof, for correction and instruction
in righteousness."

We shall accordingly attempt to show,

I. What we were to understand by the ways of the Lord, which are all right.

II. How it appears to be an high and important branch of wisdom and prudence
so to understand the ways of the Lord as to walk in them.

III. In what sense such as will not be reformed and made wise by those methods
God is using with them, will be finally ruined and undone -- "But the
transgressors shall fall therein."

We are first to enquire what we are to understand by the ways of the Lord,
which are all right -- "For the ways of the Lord are right," says the Prophet,
"and the just shall walk in them."

Here are two things intimated under the metaphor of ways -- "The ways of the
Lord" -- both of which it is proper we should particularly remark.

I shall first notice the ways of God's providence: these, however the reason
of them may be beyond the reach of mortal apprehension, yet from the nature of
God's moral perfections, and from the word of God, we may be well assured are
all right ways. "Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?" Can infinite
wisdom err, infinite justice do wrong, or the God of love forget to be
gracious? True, indeed, he has his ways in the cloud, and he hides himself in
the thick cloud, so we may often be at a loss to comprehend the particular
designs of his providence; but we know, that "though clouds and thick darkness
are round about him, yet justice and judgment are the habitation of his throne
forever" -- "his works are perfect, and all his ways are judgment."

When the Prophet Jeremiah was about to plead with God concerning his
providence, being stumbled at the prosperity of the wicked, he first expresses
his faith in this foundation principle, God is righteous. -- "Righteous art
thou, O Lord."

Now, the sincere Christian will take notice of these ways of the Lord; he will
hearken unto the voice of divine providence, and walk with God in all these
dispensations: he will acknowledge the wisdom, the equity, the holiness, and
goodness of God in all -- and he will surely endeavor to answer the wise and
gracious hand of God in all his providence, as far as he is able to comprehend
them. He will be humbled -- allured -- excited -- weaned from the world --
taken off from creature dependences -- and brought near to God by all. And
thus, whether he has prosperity or adversity -- both shall work together for
his good. And thus he will walk with God in the ways of his providential
dispensations, most cordially acknowledging they are all right ways.

Let us in the next place remark, that by the ways of the Lord we are to
understand the way of his moral will -- his word -- his worship -- the whole of
religion, which he has in any way revealed unto us and enjoined on us*

This is the scripture sense of the word, and that to which the Prophet paid
particular attention in the language of my text -- for he immediately adds,
"And the just shall walk in them."

Mankind, by their apostasy, have brought darkness upon their understanding,
stubborness into their wills, and rendered all the affections vain and
irregular: We are alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is
in our minds, and the blindness and hardness of our hearts. It is true,
notwithstanding our apostasy, there are some remains of the law of God, some
impressions of Deity -- of his natural and moral perfections delineated on our
hearts or consciences. -- Such had the Gentile world, by which, they being
without any written law, were a law unto themselves: Such still remain on the
hearts of the ungospeled word at this present; yet these impressions, made
merely by the force of unenlightned conscience, have been sound, through a long
series of trial, very ineffectual to reclaim mankind, and bring them to the
love and worship of the one true God, and the path of virtue and holiness. The
infinite wisdom and goodness of God, therefore, saw fit to reveal his mind and
will in a more clear, perfect and effectual manner. -- This revelation we have
in the scriptures of the old and new testament. -- God, at sundry times and
diverse manners, spoke unto the Fathers by the Prophets -- has spoken unto us,
in these last ages of the world, by his Son Jesus Christ, and by the holy
Apostles; so that not only the law of God in the old testament, styled "the
judgments of the Lord" -- the "statutes of the Lord," etc. -- but the gospel
also of Jesus Christ, may be called the ways of the Lord. For, the gospel is an
important part of that revelation by which we are to regulate our lives, and on
which we are to found our choicest hopes.

Here then we may expect to find the ways of God pointed out unto us with
perspicuity and precision; for by this rule we are all at last to be judged:
for God has appointed a day when he will judge even the secrets of men's hearts
according to this word.

It is granted, when the Prophet spoke the words of our text, Christ was not
come in the flesh; and no doubt he had a principle reference to that part of
revelation which God had then made to the world. Yet, if we consider, that
Christ was even then revealed in types, figures and prophecies -- and that the
way of the salvation of sinners has been for substance the same under every
dispensation, we shall find there is no impropriety in considering the words
"ways of the Lord" in the largest sense, comprehending the whole of divine
revelation as we now enjoy it.

Now, my brethren, if we consider the word of God -- the way of divine truth in
which we are to walk, we shall find it infinitely just and right, as it is
reasonable -- as it is consonant and harmonious in itself -- as it is a
transcript of the holy nature and will of God -- as it directs us to the great
end of our being -- and, as it is plain and easily understood so far as is
necessary for practical use.

The ways of religion prescribed in the word of God are right, in as much as
they are every way highly just and reasonable.

Nothing can be more profoundly just and right than religion rightly
understood; it approves itself to the reason and consciences of men with an
irresistible energy; it is therefore often described under the character of
wisdom: "Wisdom has builded her house, etc." the righteous man is the man of
wisdom. "Wisdom's ways," namely, the ways of religion, "are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths peace." The Apostle calls his ministry, a
declaration, and a manifestation of the truth unto the consciences of men. St.
Paul speaks in behalf of himself and other Apostles, when he says, "We have
renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, not
handling the word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth,
commending ourselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God." 2
Corinthians, iv. 2.


What can be more reasonable than that he who made all things should be served
by his creatures? -- That we should live to him who gave us our being? -- That
the Supreme will should be obeyed? -- That infallible truth should be believed?
-- That he who can destroy, should be feared? -- That he who does reward,
should be loved and confided in? -- That absolute justice should vindicate
itself against presumptuous disobedience? -- And perfect goodness extend mercy
to whom it pleases? What can be more reasonable than that we should accept the
offers of mercy made us in the gospel, when the only terms made necessary to
reaping all its advantages are such as conduce essentially to our happiness? --
That, being purchased, not with corruptible things, etc. but with the blood of
Christ, we should live to his glory who thus has redeemed us? -- That we
should imitate the moral examples of him who has redeemed us, and walk as he
walked, who has called us unto holiness and virtue? And who, in the completion
of our happiness, means we should be found to the praise of the glory of his
grace?

But further, the ways of religion made known to us in the word of God, are all
consonant and harmonious: all leading to the same important end, viz. to God
and glory. They are designed to make us partakers of a divine nature? to show
us how we shall be "justified and sanctified, and washed in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and by the spirit of our God."

They are perfectly conformable to the holy nature of God; being a transcript
of all the divine perfections. The word of God containing both his law, and the
gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ makes a wonderful and most glorious display of
Deity. If we consider the method of the sinners salvation through faith in the
gospel and obedience to the Savior's commands, and the various means used to
sanctify us and make us meat for glory, we shall behold the perfections of God
uniting in a bright flame of transcendant glory. God is just, yet the sinner is
justified: God is holy: the law honored: the repenting sinner forgiven: the
ruined creature restored to more than primitive dignity and happiness: a vessel
of wrath fit for destruction, made a vessel of honor, and prepared unto glory.

Again, the ways of the Lord in the sense in which we have been considering
them, are right ways, as they are plain and delightful.

Though there are mysteries in our holy religion, some things hard to be
understood, which "men of perverse minds wrest to their destruction." Yet all
the important branches of doctrinal and practical religion are set before us
with so much perspicuity, that he, who runs may read. There are few, if any,
cases in practice so intricate, but he who studies the word of God with care,
and attends to the language of conscience, may easily decide. The same may be
addressed to most of us, which was once the language of our Lord himself to his
Disciples and followers, "ye know these things; happy are ye if ye do them."
There is no ambiguity in the terms on which eternal salvation is proposed to
our choice. Nor can any thing be plainer than the language in which the
invitations of the gospel are made. Nothing more evident, than the requisitions
of the gospel upon such as believe, are just and reasonable. Or the necessity
there is, that such as name the name of Christ should depart from iniquity."

The motives by which Christians are urged to perform all good works, are
exceeding plain and forcible. "It is a faithful saying, and these things," says
the Apostle, "I will that thou affirm constantly, that they, who have believed
in Christ, be careful to maintain good works." "We should live henceforth not
unto ourselves, but unto him, who died for us and rose again."

Nothing can be expressed in stronger language, than the promises of the gospel
on which the Christian founds his hope of eternal salvation. "He that believes
shall be saved." "The repenting sinner shall not die, he shall surely live,
says the Lord." "If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him." "He
that continues unto the end, the same shall be saved." "This hope we have, as
an anchor to our souls, sure and steadfast, entering into that within the veil,
whither the forerunner is for us entered."

As the most important branches of religion are thus made plain and sure in the
word of God; so they are likewise pleasant, suited to the nature of a rational
and immortal soul; this ought to recommend unto us the right ways of the Lord.

"Great peace have they who love thy law, nothing shall offend them." "In
keeping thy commands there is great reward." "Wisdom's ways are ways of
pleasantness and all her paths peace." Religion teaches us to rejoice in the
Lord -- to rejoice in Christ Jesus -- "to rejoice always." No person most surely
has so much rational ground for rejoicing as the good christian, whose whole
conduct is guided by the word of God, and conformed to the dictates of his
conscience. "This is our rejoicing," said the apostle, "even the testimony of
our own conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not by fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have our conversation in the world." "My
peace I leave with you," said the Savior, "my peace I give unto you, not as
the world gives give I unto you."

IF it be enquired, what are we to understand by walking in these ways -- "the
ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them" -- let it be
remarked in a few words, that by this metaphor we are to comprehend all
practical religion. It imports, that we make the word of God, and the candle of
the Lord in our breasts, the rule of all our conduct. -- We receive the
scriptures, not as the words of men, but, as they are in truth, the words of
the living God. -- We believe the doctrines -- the precepts -- the promises --
and the threatening therein contained. -- As, therefore, by these we have been
convinced, that we are guilty creatures, by our sins, fallen and under the
righteous displeasure of our (...), God -- And as the same word reveals Christ
Jesus unto us, the great propitiatory sacrifice for our sins -- the Lord our
righteousness -- the end of the law for righteousness unto every one who
believes: So we have, in the truth of facts, fled for refuge to him, and laid
hold on this hope set before us -- we have renounced all confidence elsewhere,
and plead our hope in the grace of the gospel, in him who "of God is made unto
us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, redemption" -- and "having thus
received the Lord, we now are walking in him." In fine, we now endeavor to
walk in all the ordinances and commandments of the Lord blameless. -- We
endeavor to live in all good conscience toward God and man -- to live as this
grace of God which has appeared unto all men bringing salvation teaches,
denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, we now live soberly, righteously and
godly, looking for the blessed hope and glorious appearing of the Son of God. I
shall add no more on this plain and important subject of christian duties,
which has often been handed out to you from this desk.

We proceed now to consider,

SECONDLY, How it appears to be an high and important branch of wisdom and
prudence so to understand and know the ways of the Lord as to walk in them.
"Who is wise, and he shall understand these things," if he is truly wise -- if
he has the most essential parts of true wisdom; he will then understand the
nature and importance of that religion which is taught us in the word of God.
Or where is the man of prudence who is laying a good foundation against the
time to come, that he may lay hold on eternal life? Where is the man of
prudence who does not confine his views to the present state of things; but,
convinced that he shall exist beyond the grave, is laboring more for the meat
which endures to eternal life, than for that which perishes? Where are the
wise, the prudent men, who foreseeing the evil coming on an ungodly race of
beings, are hiding themselves -- are seeking a sure asylum in the mercy of God
revealed in the gospel covenant. Such happy souls shall know these things --
shall know the truth, the importance and excellence of religion in a practical
manner. Being taught by the divine spirit, they shall know in the happiest
sense -- they shall find, in the ways of God, the highest satisfaction, and
draw their chief comforts from the word of God -- they shall at the last,
"receive the end of their faith and patience."

Now, what more important branch of wisdom can be named than this? Is the
wisdom of this world to be compared with it? Is any thing temporary and
perishing of comparable excellence or importance with those things which endure
forever? "What is a man profited, though he gain the whole world and loose his
own soul; or what would a wise man give in exchange for his soul?" Shall we
make our boasts of speculative knowledge? Shall we say, we have a full
acquaintance with the doctrines of christianity -- that we are able to give a
good account of the whole system, and defend every branch of the common faith?
Alas! if we have nothing more, all such knowledge will utterly fail us in the
hour of death. Yes, my friends, it will aggravate our condemnation; and our
doom will be like that of the wicked and slothful servant, who knew his
master's will, and did it not; and therefore was deservedly beaten with many
stripes.

But, the excellence of that practical wisdom which leads us to walk in the
ways of the Lord, and make religion the main business of life, will be farther
illustrated if we reflect on the operations of the divine spirit, the great
source of wisdom, in possessing our minds with a powerful transforming sense of
the truth and importance of religion -- the comforts and advantages even in
this life, of practical divine knowledge, or the religion of the heart
exhibited in a holy life, above all which is merely speculative -- the
importance of it at death -- and the close connection it has with eternal life,
by its own nature, transforming the soul into a divine temper; and by the
gracious promise of God Almighty made to us as the disciples of the great
Messiah.

If we consider the operations of the divine spirit in saving illumination,
possessing the mind with a powerful transforming sense of the truth and
importance of religion, we shall see that practical religion is the highest
wisdom.

No knowledge is so important as such as respects our eternal well being, the
happiness of our immortal souls: this is not merely speculative, but practical:
it makes a real change in the mind; and produces real effects in a holy life.
The apostle, therefore, connects them in his prayer for the christians at
Coloss -- "We do not cease to pray for you, and to desire, that you may be
filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding; that you might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing; being
fruitful in every good thing, and increasing in the knowledge of God." When God
by his spirit enlightens our minds in an effectual and saving manner, he sets
before us the beauty, excellence and importance of religion in such a strong
point of light as produces a real change in the mind. He convinces us not only
that we are fallen under a sentence of condemnation by our sins, and so need a
pardon; but that we have lost the moral rectitude of our nature, and so cannot
be happy unless this be restored to us -- that we have destroyed ourselves, and
must become new creatures -- must have new principles and affections -- "must
be renewed in the spirit of our minds; and put (...) new man, which, after God,
is created in knowledge, righteousness and true holiness," or we cannot be
happy. Thus the eyes of the understanding, being enlightened by the divine
spirit in the word of life, we behold the beauty and excellence of religion: We
approve, and heartily acquiesce in the way of life by Jesus Christ; and the
affections of the soul are drawn forth after God. We delight in him: We delight
in his law -- in his word -- in his worship, and desire above all things to
please him.

Thus we are "delivered from the power of darkness, and are translated into the
kingdom of God's dear Son." We have redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of sin. Thus the prejudices, which possess the carnal unsanctified
heart, against God and pure religion, are removed: We see things as they are,
in their proper nature, and just importance unto us; and consequently, we give
an infinite preference to religion, above the things which pertain only to time
and sense. We see that wisdom, or true religion, is the principal thing; and
are brought, with St. Paul, to count all things but dross, that we may win
Christ; that we may be found in him, and have the same mind in us which was
also in him.

Man's original excellence and happiness greatly consisted in his conformity to
God, in a likeness to the moral perfections of Deity -- therefore to recover,
in any good measure, this moral likeness lost by our apostasy -- "to be created
anew in Christ Jesus unto good works, must be man's greatest good, and
consequently the means of obtaining it, our highest wisdom.

But let us reflect a moment on the advantage and comfort derived to us in this
life, of practical knowledge, or real religion's taking possession of the
heart, and producing its happy fruits in a holy life.

What real, what substantial comfort can flow from an unsanctified heart? How
unfit is the nature of man to receive the special consolations of God's spirit,
while there are no principles of real sincere love to God or any of his ways?
"the carnal man," says the apostle, "receives not the things of the spirit of
God; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned." The
carnal mind is enmity to God, and not subject to the law of God, and therefore
it is not in a proper temper to taste the spiritual and divine pleasures of
religion.

Conscience, for a while, may be asleep, and irreligious mortals may flatter
themselves that all is well with them; or, they may have gained the hope of the
hypocrite, which shall perish when God takes away the soul: or they may
rejoice, with the stony ground hearers for a season; but all these are but mere
phantoms of the mind; not like the sound, substantial joy of the christian, who
has the witness within himself, from the divine temper which the Holy Ghost has
wrought in him: This is our rejoicing, says the apostle, the testimony of our
conscience, etc. -- by the grace of God we have had our conversation in the
world. It is the excellency of the religion of the gospel that it affords to
such as are formed on its gracious plan, a source of strength, comfort and
happiness, which the world can neither give nor take away. It teaches us, in
certain circumstances, to glory even in tribulation -- while tribulation aids
the morality of the heart, or any way tends to promote our christian hope, and
while we enjoy the light of God's countenance, it fills the mind with joys
unspeakable. The carnal world may either pity, or despise us, according to
their capricious humors, because we do not entertain the same sentiments with
them concerning the riches, honors, and pleasures of the present state; but we
have bread to eat which they know not of, while, with our divine master, "it is
our meat and drink to do the will of our father in heaven."

Let us add to this the importance of the subject at the hour of death, and we
shall surely be convinced that such as are wise and prudent will make religion
the great business of life; and esteem every thing else of small importance in
comparison with their walking in God's ways.

Surely that is the wisest and best course of living which is most likely to
afford us comfort and satisfaction in its close. When death is commissioned to
do his office, and wrest from us every earthly hope -- when creatures fail us
-- when weeping friends cannot save, nor add one moment to our state of
probation -- then the trying scene is opened before us: if we have our reason
in its proper exercise, the honest hour of death will give a just retrospect of
life, and speak real truth to every heart -- then to be able with St. Paul to
say, "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of glory that fades not
away:" -- to be able to meet death without a fear; triumphing in him who gives
us the victory, even Christ Jesus our Lord -- this, this is to be unspeakably
happy -- to know that "when we are absent from the body, we shall be present
with the Lord." -- that when "our heart and flesh shall fail us, God will be
the strength of our heart and our portion forever;" this is surely to disarm
death of his terrors, and close life in a most desirable manner.

It is granted, this full assurance of hope is not the happy lot of every
christian; yet, since none have the least reason to expect it, unless they are
sincere obedient believers, the argument is conclusive, wholly on the side of
practical christianity. A lively faith in Christ, and a holy life, are the only
instituted means of obtaining comfort in death: We may further add, that
whatever variety there may be in the degrees of comforts and satisfaction which
christians enjoy at the hour of death; yet their future and eternal happiness
is equally secured; and the ways of God shall certainly terminate in
everlasting happiness: "To them, who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek
for glory, honor and immortality, he will give eternal life." "Write blessed
are the dead who die in the Lord, yea, says the spirit -- they rest from their
labors, and their works follow them." "Christ is the author of eternal
salvation, to all such as obey him." "Blessed are they who do his commandments;
for they shall enter through the gates into the city." -- Then will appear in a
most striking light, the wisdom and prudence of all such as have made choice of
God's ways -- have given themselves up to God in Christ, and by his grace have
walked in these right ways of the Lord; for they shall shine forth in the
kingdom of their heavenly father as the brightness of the firmament, and as the
stars forever. O happy, transporting thought!

But we are obliged now, in justice to our subject, and faithfulness to our own
souls, to shift the scene, and consider,

THIRDLY, The folly of all such as will not walk in God's ways: for the very
means which are designed to reform them, and make them happy, will serve to
enhance their misery. "But the transgressors shall fall therein."

Such as are practically resolved to go on forward in their trespasses,
notwithstanding all the admonitions given them in God's word, and the
remonstrances of their consciences -- notwithstanding the awful terrors of his
righteous anger, against sin, and the finally impenitent sinner --
notwithstanding the infinite mercy of God in Christ Jesus, and the most
alluring invitations every where in his blessed gospel addressed to them -- I
say all such shall be made the more miserable by the very means which were
designed to recover and save them. This is indeed a most serious and solemn
truth, it should sink deep into the hearts of all such as are now under the
power of reigning sin -- but solemn as it is, it will be evinced, if we consider

1. That sinners often stumble and fall at the spirituality, and sublimity of
the doctrines of God's word.

There are some things in the divine oracle at which the corrupt hearts of men
are disgusted and apt to be offended -- doctrines not adapted to please their
low and carnal sense -- doctrines so spiritual in their nature and tendency, so
sublime, so incomprehensible to the searches of a depraved mind, as, by no
means, suits the arrogance of vain mortals, who make their own weak
apprehensions the standard of all truth. When our blessed Lord said, "Except a
man be born again he cannot enter into the kingdom of Heaven." Nicodemus, though
a master in Israel, cried out, "How can these things be?" St. Paul, when he
preached the doctrine of the resurrection, was derided by the boasted wisdom of
the Athenians, Acts xvii. 10.
"What does this babbler mean?" Nor are there wanting many unhappy instances of
self-boasted wisdom in the present age -- men who cry up human reason in its
present prejudiced and depraved state as the sole standard of right and wrong
-- they will receive nothing upon the authority of God's word, unless they can
first comprehend all the reasons of it: accordingly, when they find doctrines,
promises, threatenings, commands, etc. which they cannot fully comprehend, they
presently begin to speak in the language beforementioned, "How can these things
be?" "this is impossible" -- and so reject the whole christian system to their
utter confusion. Thus the spiritual and sublime doctrines of the word "become a
stone of stumbling and a rock of offense, even unto them that stumble at the
word being disobedient." But this leads me to observe,

2. Sinners often fall inasmuch as they cannot approve of the purity and
holiness of the divine word, for this directly opposes their carnal wills and
affections. When they hear the great doctrines of sanctification, self-denial,
bearing the cross, great circumspection, and watchfulness preached -- when they
find they must cut off a right hand sin, pluck out a right eye sin -- these are
"hard sayings, who can hear them?" these are contrary to the lusts and
corruptions of a depraved nature, and so they are offended at the word. Thus
the amiable youth in the gospel came to Christ as the great teacher sent from
Heaven -- he came running -- he came and kneeled before him, and said "good
Master what good thing shall I do to inherit eternal life?" -- But when he
found he must, at Christ's command, part with all, and give to the poor, that
instead of great possessions he must bear a cross, he was grieved -- was
offended, going away very sorrowful. This brings me to observe,

3. That the convincing power of the word, as it discovers to sinners their
great sinfulness and danger, is, sometimes, the means of preventing their
attendance on public institutions, and prejudicing them against the word. Thus
it comes to pass, that while the word is a savor of life unto life to such as
diligently attend upon it, and are obedient to the truth, it is a savor of
death unto death to such as reject it -- And transgressors fall therein, as
their condemnation will be greatly increased by their neglect of those means of
grace which they had in their power; but refused to improve. Accordingly, our
blessed Lord has long since taught us their guilty miserable case in such
language as this -- "this is the condemnation, that light is come into the
world, but men love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil."

If the Prophets will "prophecy smooth things;" -- if they will "few pillows
under every arm hole" -- if they will cry "peace when God says there is no
peace." -- If ministers will flatter their people with vain hopes, and not
touch upon any alarming and awakening subject, or prevailing iniquity, sinners
will hear them: But if they seek to please God rather than man -- if they lay
open the danger of man's sinful estate, and come home to the conscience,
presently secure sinners are offended, and the great enemy of souls gains his
point. Precious souls are in danger of enduring the pains of the second death,
when they take offense at the searching nature of the word. I must yet add,

4. Transgressors often fall by the word as they take occasion from the free
mercy and grace of God manifested therein, to encourage themselves in their
sins.

When they hear that God is merciful -- that he is the God of love -- that he
pardons sinners -- that he is ready to forgive; they are in danger of arguing
in this perverse manner; "Surely he will not suffer me to be miserable forever
-- there is no such extreme danger of perishing as ministers pretend." -- They
are ready to slatter themselves, that they shall have peace, though "they walk
in the way of their wicked hearts, and add drunkenness to thirst." Thus they
turn the grace of God into wantonness: But "there is no peace to the wicked
says my God" -- and though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not go
unpunished. Which reminds me of the last thing I have here to observe, viz.

5. Transgressors, or the finally impenitent, will stumble and fall by the word
as they shall be judged by it.

"The word which I have spoken, says Christ, the same shall judge you at the
last day." This is the great rule by which he, to whom all judgment is
committed by the Father, will judge the world which he came to redeem. The much
despised word of God -- the peaceful gospel of Jesus Christ will then break
forth as a fire to devour the adversaries. Heaven and earth shall then pass
away, but his word shall not pass away. And oh! how will the worm which dies
not in the human breast, and the fire which there cannot be quenched, rend the
heart with extreme agonies -- while the unhappy sinner will be obliged to own
that the same word which warned him of his approaching ruin, and invited him to
accept of mercy, will be the rule of his trial, and the means of increasing his
future punishment. O that we all might consider these terrors of the Lord, and
be persuaded.

To close with a few reflections.

1. How much does it concern us to meditate on the ways of God; to approve them
and walk therein.

We have all turned out of the right ways of the Lord by our transgressions,
and have been walking in the ways of the destroyer of souls. If under the power
of reigning sin -- if yet impenitent and disobedient to the heavenly voice
which addresses to us the words of life, we are walking in the broad road that
leads to destruction: this way may seem right to us for the present, but the
end thereof is death. There is a narrow way, the way of true religion, which,
though it may be attended with many difficulties, yet will surely end in
eternal life. This, if duly considered, will approve itself to our reason --
will be found to be right, and just, safe and pleasant. All that are truly wise
and prudent will walk therein -- be approved of God, and made happy forever:
for "the Lord knows the way of the righteous; but the way of the ungodly
shall perish." The highest branch of wisdom is that which has the happiest
influence on our eternal state. While multitudes, therefore, are laying out all
their labors, and bestowing the most careful thoughts on things which are
perishing, and are indeed esteemed wise by the men of the world; let us, my
dear friends, act a wiser part -- choose the path of life, and secure that
better part which shall never be taken from us; and in order hereto, let us
study with the greatest diligence and care the word of God, and attend upon all
the institutions of Heaven: "Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word
of God."

2. Let us pray for the influences of the divine spirit to enlighten our minds
-- to inspire us with true wisdom and prudence -- and deeply impress our hearts
with a sense of the nature and importance of religion in such a manner, that we
may be brought under its practical influence.

"The spirit of God takes of the things of God, and shows them unto us." The
gospel of Jesus Christ, through the enlightening influence of the holy spirit,
will become the wisdom of God, and the power of God to our salvation. The way
in which we may expect his sacred influence is, in the diligent use of all
instituted means -- reading and hearing the word -- fervent persevering prayer.

3. Are any of us so happy as to have made choice of the right ways of the
Lord? Have we been enlightened by the word and spirit of God? Do we
experimentally know the beauty, excellence and importance of the things
contained in the word of God? Let us, with the most profound reverence and
highest gratitude, adore that merciful Being who has favored us with the means
of moral and religious instruction, and the gracious influences of the divine
spirit.

Let us endeavor to walk in the ways of God so circumspectly, and with such
diligent care, that we may stop the mouths of Deists and Infidels, and
recommend the ways of religion to an inspecting world. Let us endeavor to grow
more and more in the divine life; to grow and make speedy advances in our
practical acquaintance with the things of religion: let us daily study to
improve in the knowledge of the divine word, and the heavenly temper which
breathes in it: then, though a vain and profane world should despise us as
fools -- enthusiasts, or madmen, because we carefully walk in these ways of the
Lord; we may rest assured, that the time is not far distant, when nothing will
appear of any comparable importance with true religion, that wisdom which is
from above, teaching us how to be in a good measure happy here, and completely
happy in the next world!

AMEN.
THE following ODES, by the Author of the preceding Discourse, are inserted by
particular desire.
ODE I. On Redeeming Love.
THE subject oh how warm!
It Is love divine to man,
It Is love extending Heavens high arm
To execute the plan.
The amazing plan of grace,
Above the Seraph's ken,
To save by Christ, a ruined race,
And make them blessed again.
Be thou my soul on fire,
With more than Angel's love;
Behold the great Messiah came
To purchase realms above.
For thee, my soul, for thee,
He left Heavens bright abode,
And veiled in humble flesh, he died
Beneath thy guilty load!
Thy load of guilt he bore;
Then broke the chains of death;
And opened wide Heaven's blissful door
For guilty sons of earth.
He intercedes for thee;
His powerful aid is given
To conquer all thy baneful foes,
And make thee meet for Heaven.
Oh bow before his throne,
Adoring muse his praise,
Whose love no language can express,
No human though it can trace.
My muse attempts in vain
To reach Parnassus' top;
Eager she spreads her wings again,
But oh! how soon they drop!
Cease then, my muse, be mute my tongue,
The theme too vast -- too high the song
For thy poor notes, 'till thou shall rise
And join thy choir above the skies.
ODE II. An Ode on the Praise of Angels -- Psalm. ciii. 20.
LET Cherub and let Cherubim
Clap their blessed wings in praise of him,
And all their powers in rapture raise,
While their great object is his praise.
He formed their natures like his own,
And placed their ranks around his throne;
But conscious distance veiled their face,
They bowed, adoring wondrous grace.
Ye firstborn sons of early day,
Sing to his praise -- his will obey,
And while you fly from pole to pole,
And other systems round you roll,
You Will aid his praise -- till all at last,
When ages yet unborn are past,
Center in one -- In one great throng,
In perfect unison their song.
Angels and men their voice shall raise
In sweetest consort to his praise;
The great Messiah then shall shine,
Arrayed in glories all divine.
The head of angels and of men
Uniting all to God again.
ODE III. Waiting for Heaven.
SOME guardian angel kindly stand,
Attend thy maker's high command;
Then swiftly fly to guard me home,
Where sin and sorrow never come.
No angry passions there shall rise;
No prejudice to blind mine eyes;
My restive will shall there submit,
And sweetly lie at Jesus' feet.
No tempter there can ever dart
One baneful arrow near my heart;
Nor fancy's fascinating charms
Draw me from my dear Savior's arms.
No horrid oaths, no words profane
Shall ever wound these ears again:
Nor shall the envious sland'ring tongue
Once move to harm that happy throng.
No liars there to frame deceit;
No reeling drunkards there shall meet;
Nor debauchee's polluted (...)
Shall ever glance that happy sky.
Extortioners, the miser too
Those blissful realms shall never view:
Justice and mercy there embrace:
Their genial influence fills the place.
No briny tear -- no heartfelt sigh
For dying friends can be on high:
The Savior's love wipes all away,
And fills the soul with rapturous day.
The sad reflections of the mind
In retrospect to ill inclined,
Shall wound no more the tortured heart,
But order reign in every part.
The body dead no more complains,
The soul released forever reigns
In realms of peace and holiness,
In perfect joy and endless bliss.
The sleeping dust in seas or ground,
Shall start at the last trumpet's sound,
And spring to life, no more to die,
But join its mate above the sky.
No more corruptible and vile,
But purged from all that can defile,
A glorious body, like that one
The HEAD OF ALL, raised near God's throne.
Hail happy souls! prepared for Heaven,
Press toward the prize which Christ has given:
Your guilt removed -- washed in his blood,
Your sins must now be all subdued.
Wait then, my soul, in hopes to rise
Complete in Christ, thy sacrifice:
Now let the hours fly hasting on:
Adieu to all beneath the sun.
FINIS.

