TWELVE DISCOURSES, DELIVERED CHIEFLY AT THE MEETING HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE CALLED
QUAKERS, IN THE PARK, Southwark.

BY THE LATE THOMAS LETCHWORTH.

SALEM: REPRINTED BY THOMAS C. CUSHING; AND SOLD BY W. CARLTON, AT THE BIBLE
AND HEART, M.DCC.XCIV.

PREFACE.
THESE Discourses were taken in short hand at the time of delivery, by a person
not in the same religious community with the preacher. A few necessary
corrections of grammatical inaccuracies have been since made; and, in some
instances, a more complete citation of the texts adduced. In quotations made
from memory, it must frequently happen that the words are not quite exact. It
sufficiently answered the speaker's purpose if the general import of the
passage was conveyed; and expressions, which thus qualify the citation, are
frequently introduced, and always to be implied.

It is well known that the ministers of the religious society, with whom the
author of these Discourses professed, disclaim all previous study in the
composition of their extemporaneous sermons. It cannot, therefore, be expected
that they should be exact in methodical arrangement, or abound in the
embellishments of modern eloquence. What was not attempted it is no disgrace
not to have attained. It may, however, perhaps, justly be a matter of doubt,
whether that zeal and energy of delivery, which arise from the feelings of the
moment, may not, in their effects on the audience, more than counterbalance the
cool correctness of studied oratory. The Quakers lay down few dogmas, and
seldom enlarge on those mysterious points of theology which have so much
divided the Christian world, and have mostly occasioned contention in
proportion to their obscurity. The doctrine of universal grace, of which a
manifestation, or portion, is given to every man, and by obedience to which he
is enabled to fulfill his duty, and to walk acceptably with his Creator, is the
leading principle of that society, who hold, as the necessary result of it,
that true worship consists in a humble prostration of heart and communion of
spirit with the Father of mercies, and is therefore perfectly consistent with a
state of silence. These points are inculcated in the following pages, perhaps,
to a degree of tautology, for which an extract from one of the Discourses, in
the preacher's own words, may furnish the best excuse.

Though it is probable that what I have sometimes delivered may have been more
or less similar to that which I have aforetime delivered, yet I hope that even
a repetition of doctrines and advices, which we are urged to deliver from a
sense of duty, may not be as water spilt upon a stone, but may have a tendency
(if not to convey any material information to the understanding) to stir up at
least the pure mind by way of remembrance.

The love of fame, taken as a general principle, and including the desire of
being esteemed and approved by one's friends, frequently mingles itself with
our best motives. But, though this passion may, in a public preacher, receive
some gratification from the silent and solemn attention of the hearers, it
would scarcely excite a prudent man to expect any increase of reputation from
the publication of Discourses, of which the subject and arrangement were not
preconceived, and the expressions such as were suggested at the instant. In the
present instance, at least, no imputation of this sort can arise to the author
of these Discourses, who is removed from the scene, and the influence of all
earthly passions. The apology for the present publication rests on the hope
that impressions of a salutary nature may, by this means, be renewed on such
minds as are sincerely desirous of fulfilling the duties of their station, and
of reaching the haven of eternal rest.

A friend of the author has favored us with the following brief account of him.

Thomas Letchworth was born at Woodbridge, in the county of Suffolk, in the
year 1739. His parents were of the people called Quakers, and his father, a
tradesman in that town, was a preacher among them. In that religious society,
the earnings of honest industry are thought to be a mode of maintenance more
consistent with the evangelical qualifications required in a Christian
Minister, and with the influence he ought to possess in his congregation, than
legal stipends or gratuitous contributions, which too frequently occasion
contention in the one instance, or dependence in the other. He received from
his father, who had a numerous family, the common education of a
boarding-school at Hartford, and was afterward put apprentice to a
linen-draper at Epping. In the early part of his life, he was of a consumptive
habit; and this imperfect state of his health probably conspired with a
disposition, naturally reflective and serious, to impress on his mind a strong
sense of the vanity of human desires, and the importance of religious duty.
Before he was twenty years of age, he began his ministerial services, in which
he was particularly desirous to inculcate on the minds of young people a
frequent consideration of their latter end, and of the awful concerns of
futurity. His Discourses were copious, animated, and pathetic; but, perhaps,
not altogether free from a certain inflation of language, to which men of
fervid imaginations, in expressing their first conceptions, are frequently
subject. His services were, however, mostly acceptable, and he spent a
considerable portion of his time in visiting different parts of the country on
a religious account. At this period, he kept a shop in Crispin-street,
Spital-fields, whence he removed to Ampthill, in Bedfordshire, but afterward
returned to London, in which city, or its vicinity, he continued to reside till
near his decease.

He was not much conversant in the learned languages, but his reading in his
native tongue was pretty extensive. History, natural philosophy, the rudiments
of medicine and anatomy, the leading principles of astronomy, and even the
charms of poetry, furnished him with matter of meditation and amusement in his
leisure hours. But his favorite study was the mysterious operations of the
human mind, the passions which actuate it, the nature of its union with the
body, the reasonable hope of its immortality, the principles of identity,
liberty, necessity, and all those branches which constitute the sublime but
obscure science of metaphysics. He was well versed in most of the writers on
these subjects; nor did the different opinions of religious sects, both in his
own and in former periods of history, escape his close examination. The dernier
result of his inquiries may be learned from the following paper, found among
his manuscripts with that very title; and it were to be wished that every
inquiry and controversy concerning such subjects might terminate in the same
humble and liberal manner.

From an honest intention of acting consistently with the relation I bear to
God, my Maker, and to my fellow creatures, I have carefully reviewed most of
the religious sentiments, on those subjects, held by any society of men in the
known world. I have put a period to my researches into the books and opinions
of men, and have concluded to resign myself in future to the guidance of those
sensations which I feel to increase my love to God and to mankind, and to
pursue such measures of conduct in religion and morality, the prosecution of
which gives me the most peace; and to judge no man, neither pretend to exalt my
opinions and practices to judge of the rectitude of other men's by. Let others
do as they will, as for me I will endeavor to seek peace and ensue it. A man
cannot be happy, whatever notions or opinions he may hold, or whatever measures
of conduct he may pursue, unless, in the holding of such opinions, and in being
found in the prosecution of such measures, he feels himself easy and comforted
at heart. Let this rule of my future conduct be termed erroneous, defective, an
illusion, or what not -- it is the best rule of my faith and manners which I
have been able to find after a close inquiry of fifteen years. Glory to God in
the highest, on earth peace, and good will to men, is, and I hope ever will be,
the language of my soul. Amen.

At what time this summary of his researches was written does not appear;
probably some years before his decease. The following extracts from three
letters, written to a friend during his last illness, the two latter a short
time before his death, will show that these sentiments retained their
impression to the last: they will show that he possessed what, in such moments,
it is better to possess than the treasures of the rich or the knowledge of the
learned, a spirit of resignation and peace, and a humble but earnest hope in
the mercies of the Almighty.

Fourteenth of the twelfth month, 1783. I am now better than when thou leftest
me. My little bark sprang a leak some months ago, which gradually gained on the
pump until every effort to save her seemed to be made in vain, and destruction
seemed inevitable. The moment was awful, but not fearful. I felt an entire
resignation to the appointment of our heavenly Father. I have not to tell of
being lifted up to extacy in visions, nor of my fears having been alarmed by
any terrific dreams. To God, my Maker, I looked singly. My dependence was fixed
on him alone. A sober, humbling sense of his presence and providence prevented
fear, and inspired hope.

Eleventh of the ninth month, 1784. I find myself still losing flesh, and
rather weaker, but, in some other respects, rather better. I know not what to
think. Here I am "Safe in the hands of one disposing Power,
"Or in the natal, or the mortal, hour,"
enjoying every gleam of sunshine to the utmost, and bearing, with as much
patience and resignation as possible, the cloudy days and starless nights
sometimes allotted me under the present dispensation.

Twenty-eighth of the tenth month, 1784. This disorder has much reduced my
flesh and my strength; but I am scarcely in any pain; nor am I sensible at
present of any symptom which threatens any. The account I received by thy
letter of our friend ****** affected me much. We seem to be in a similar weak
state, and as it were dissolving apace into the earth whence we originally
sprang; for, dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return: and, whenever we
die, whether soon or late, I hope we shall have an unshaken trust in the common
Father of us all, and resign to the common lot of all flesh with composure and
without regret. Remember me not as a forsaken and miserable man, for I enjoy
even now, and suffer but little, very little, comparatively speaking. I rejoice
in the good providence of God, which is over us all continually for our good,
and is alike gracious to all his creatures in what he gives and what he denies
them. And, in all the dispensations of his wisdom, let us trust in him, our
common Father, Protector, and Friend.

He at length gradually sunk under the slow but irresistible force of a
consumption, and departed on the 7th of the eleventh month (November) 1784, at
the house of a friend at Newbury, in Berkshire. From the foregoing account of
the state of his mind, it is almost needless to add, that he met death with a
becoming and humble fortitude. He was interred, at his own request, in the
Quakers burial-ground at Reading, on the 14th of the month abovementioned; and
his funeral was attended by a great number of his friends, who were desirous of
testifying their esteem for his memory by this last mark of attention.

N. B. The first Discourse in this collection has been incorrectly printed in
Ireland, and attributed to another preacher. It is now printed from a more
correct copy, and restored to the proper owner.



DISCOURSES.
DISCOURSE I.
THERE is a passage of sacred writ which has been revived in my remembrance
during the silence of this meeting; and the train of reflections which it
excited has sealed instruction to my mind, and furnished me with renewed cause
for humiliation and gratitude. The import of it is this: Men and brethren, what
shall we do to be saved?

No person, who seriously believes in the existence of a God, in a future
state, and in the awful doctrine of rewards and punishments, can be indifferent
respecting what may be his lot, when he shall be dispossessed of this frail
tabernacle of clay which he now inhabits, and which is approaching to the
period of its dissolution. It cannot be a matter of indifference to him,
whether he shall finally receive the irrevocable sentence of Go, ye cursed,
into the regions of unspeakable misery; or, Come, ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for the righteous -- enter thou into the joy of
thy Lord, and into thy Master's rest.

This concern has prompted many to inquire what is essentially necessary for
them to believe and practice, in order to render themselves the proper objects
of divine complacence, and furnish them with a well-grounded hope of a happy
and glorious immortality.

The honest and sincere, in every nation under heaven, have formed different
ideas of the requisites of salvation; and they have, of course, pursued as
different measures to accomplish that desirable and blessed end.

It does not appear to be my present business to particularise any of the
various systems of faith which are adopted by any party amongst mankind. It is
not to controvert matters in which sincere men of various denominations most
surely believe; but rather to recommend them to stand open always to
conviction, and to a strict attention to those rules of conduct, which, on an
impartial examination, appear to them most agreeable to the will of Heaven. I
shall therefore address myself to those, in whatever religious society they are
found, whose honest inquiries have not yet been attended with sufficient
conviction -- have not yet led them clearly to perceive what the terms are, on
which their future happiness depends, and who are therefore looking one upon
another, whilst this important question is found at least in their hearts, if
not in their mouths, Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved? An inquiry
of this solemn nature, arising from a proper sensibility of the want of better
instruction, is an indication of that concern and holy anxiety, which will ever
be acceptable to the Father of sure Mercies. He regards such humble inquirers
after truth and peace with him, with gracious condescension; and, if they rely
on the guidance of his Spirit, will finally conduct them to his glorious rest.

I shall not presume arrogantly to dictate to any, respecting matters of so
important a concern as that of the soul's salvation. Every man should exercise
those talents and gifts, with which the Father of Lights has endued him, in a
close and sincere attention to the voice of the internal teacher, and in the
discovery of those truths, both practical and speculative, which have an
immediate relation to the happiness of a being circumstanced as he is. I shall
simply propose those things which, in my view, and from my own experience as an
individual, appear to me worthy of God for their author, and worthy of man's
most serious attention.

It is an indisputable truth that we made not ourselves: It is he that has
made us, said the Psalmist, and not we ourselves, for we are also his
offspring. The matter which forms the universe, the vehicles which the soul
informs, and the more noble intellectual powers and faculties we possess,
derive their being from the eternal Fountain of all power and intelligence,
whom we characterise by the awful names of Jah, Jehovah, and God. It is also
indisputably evident to me, that we were brought into existence with the
benevolent design of our finally sustaining the confluent dignities of glory,
honor, immortality, and eternal life. The Lord Almighty has, in unspeakable
mercy, designed, that, after we have endured a season of probation, a conflict
with our passions, excited by numerous causes, and a fight of afflictions, we
should finally receive a glorious reward, a perpetuity of unmixed felicity, in
the regions of eternity.

But this desirable and excellent end is not to be effected by what is
generally called Fate, the laws of necessity, or the arbitrary will, power, or
decree, of the Author of our existence. God has, in his wisdom, constituted us
free and intelligent beings. He has endued us with faculties and powers capable
of apprehending and practicing those essential duties which he makes the
condition of our final acceptance with him. He offers, but does not impose; he
graciously invites, but does not compel, us to accept of happiness. He shows us
the spiritual Canaan, the land of the saints inheritance, in every generation:
he gives us power to possess, but does not compel us to enter therein. Good and
evil are clearly set before us, but our election is not constrained to either.
The economy of his moral government over rational beings is laid in divine
wisdom and eternal righteousness. The great Sovereign of the universe is no
respecter of persons; for, of one blood has he made all nations that dwell on
the face of the earth. They stand in the same relation to the universal Father,
Shepherd, and Bishop, of souls, who tenderly invites the whole race of mankind
to come unto him that they may finally inherit the joy of his salvation. O
unspeakable mercy! unutterable theme! It is sufficient to awaken the most
glowing sensations of exalted and grateful praise to that God who is the
salvation and glory of the righteous generations, the rock of their strength,
and their everlasting refuge.

To this doctrine the holy apostle bore an ample and explicit testimony: Of a
truth (said he) I perceive that God is no respecter of persons; but, in every
nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted with him.

Thus we find that it is the fear of the Lord, and an obedience to the law of
righteousness, which are the terms alone by which men can be saved. If ye live
after the flesh, ye shall die; but, if ye, through the spirit, mortify the
deeds of the body, ye shall live. This is a proposition of universal
importance; a proposition which relates to every individual in the vast
community of mankind, however circumstanced, whether bond or free, rich or
poor, or in whatever climate they reside.

All this may, indeed, be acknowledged both by those within and without the
audience of my voice, who yet are in doubt what they shall do to be saved with
an everlasting salvation. They want to be informed of the precise ideas that
should be affixed to the conditions contained in the text; although, perhaps,
they readily apprehend that the terms life and death mean future happiness and
misery.

I shall therefore attempt, according to the ability I am endued with at this
season, to give you my thoughts on the important subject under consideration.

To live after the flesh is to live in the gratification of our animal
appetites and passions, beyond the bounds of reason, temperance, and sobriety.
All the works of darkness, which, by the same apostle, are termed deeds of the
body, all pride, wrath, envy, hatred, covetousness, with all the deceivableness
of unrighteousness, are, in other words, living after the flesh. These things
not only tend to the injury of peace and society, and are a bane to that
happiness which is the result of genuine virtue even in this life; not only
introduce numerous errors into the animal and moral system, and aggravate the
infirmities to which these bodies are incident, but render us unfit for those
contemplations, and that supreme felicity, which are adapted to the dignity of
rational and immortal spirits. God, in his wisdom, has made man a little (and
perhaps but a little) lower than the angels. He has endued him with a capacity
for contemplating and adoring him, the source of uncreated excellence and
perfection, and would crown him with superior honor, glory, and happiness, to
what sensual gratifications can ever afford. Let us not then degrade ourselves
beneath that rank we were designed to fill in creation, but remember our
immortal descent, the cause of our being, and its end.

We have, indeed, bodies, and are imprisoned within elements, which excite
within us numerous appetites, affections, and passions; but all these are to be
gratified within certain bounds, in a degree proportioned to our exigences and
necessities, of which the supreme intelligence has implanted a principle within
us to judge.

This principle of intelligence, although called by a variety of names, and
distinguished by various appellations in the various professions amongst men,
is one in nature, and universal amongst mankind. It is the spirit in man that
gives a right understanding: it is the light that (more or less) enlightens
every man: it is the word of God in the heart, and the word of faith which the
apostle preached to the Gentiles: it is the grace that has appeared unto all
men, teaching them to deny all ungodliness and the world's lusts, and to live
righteously, soberly, and godly, in this present world: and, finally, it is the
supreme reason, the law of truth and rectitude, the test of virtue and vice,
which God himself has placed in the hearts of all men; and happy are those who
hear and obey it in all things.

I would not be understood to mean that this principle, of which I am speaking,
is designed to instruct us in all truths which the human mind may, in its own
activity and wisdom, attempt to investigate; or to give us a (...) insight into
those numerous speculative subjects, which have not only unprofitably employed
mankind, and diverted their attention from things more substantial, but which
have perplexed and divided them from generation to generation.

But by the exercise of this pure, holy, heavenly, principle, we may apprehend
those truths which belong to us, and which have an essential relation to the
prime end of our being. Of these truths the Father of Spirits has constituted
man an adequate judge.

This is implied by the question which our Lord himself proposed to a people
misled by the traditions of their fathers, and who had, through the neglect of
this principle, taken for doctrine the commandments of men: Yea, and why, even
of yourselves, judge ye not what is right?

The obligation to all our social, relative, and religious, duties, arises from
the relations we stand in to our fellow creatures and to God, the holy author
of our existence. The general relation, which our fellow creatures stand in to
us, is that of brethren, children of the same universal parent, subject to the
same necessities, and formed for the same unspeakably glorious and happy end.
Hence it is our duty to exercise the amiable virtues of love, forbearance,
kindness, and charity, to all around us; to seek their happiness, and lighten
the weight of human misery, to the utmost of our power.

There are, also, various accidental relations amongst mankind, as master,
servant, father, governor, and numerous others; all which have their
correspondent duties.

The relation we stand in to the great Author of our being is that of children,
which is one and immutable at all times. A life, agreeable to that relation we
stand in to the Lord Almighty, is that of filial fear. Obedience and worship
are our indispensable duty to him; and the rules of justice, charity, and
brotherly kindness, are indispensable obligations on us to the rest of mankind.

Thus far, perhaps, the persons, whom I immediately address at this time, may
concur with me in sentiment: but they, as well as myself, are perhaps conscious
of having failed in numerous instances of discharging their religious duties to
God, and their social duties one to another.

We have all sinned, and fallen short of the glory of God. We have multiplied
our transgressions without number, and our manifold iniquities rife before us
as a thick cloud, obscuring the brightness of that Sun of eternal
Righteousness, which would otherwise illuminate our understandings with its
mavelous lights. Who therefore (says the humiliated, penitent soul) shall
deliver us from the body of this death? Who shall take from us the weight of
our sins, under which we groan incessantly? Who shall deliver us from the wrath
to come? Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved?

The conditions of our redemption, and reconciliation with the gracious Father
of us all, are clearly expressed in the oracles of sacred truth. The
placability of the divine nature is repeatedly asserted. He, with whom dwells
wisdom, justice, righteousness, and strength, is also represented to us in the
glorious, adorable character of a God of mercy, long-suffering, and
never-failing kindness; as a Being ready to blot out our transgressions from
the celestial register, on our sincere repentance, and to remember them no
more. He will restore unto the humble penitent the joy of his salvation: he
will guide him by his counsel, and afterward receive him into glory.

This important and interesting doctrine was typified under the law, spoken of
by the prophets, and gloriously asserted by the Son of God, who is our mediator
with the Father, and the hope of all the righteous generations. In his
character was displayed to mankind, in the most eminent and striking manner,
the provident care, mercy, and goodness, of God toward his whole rational
creation. Like sheep they have gone astray from the universal Shepherd and
Bishop of souls. They have revolted from his government, and widely wandered
from the path of purity and holiness, which is also the path of pleasantness
and peace; that path of moral rectitude and truth, that bright and shining
light, which (like the luminous orb after it arises in our hemisphere) shines
with increasing refulgence and splendour till it arrive at the meridian altitude
of glorious, perfect day. The light, which shines from heaven on the
understandings of men, will lead all those, who pursue its direction, by
degrees of experience, through the wilderness of this world in perfect safety:
it will bring them, when the days of their warfare are accomplished, to the
grand end of their creation -- to that complete fruition of bliss, which is
figuratively represented to us by a city that has foundations, whose builder
and maker is God; a city, whose walls are salvation, and whose gates are
eternal praise; a city, that has no need of the elementary light of the sun,
moon, or stars; for, the Lord God and the Lamb are the light thereof: a city,
where God reigns triumphantly amongst his saints, and is to them an
inexhaustible fountain of joy, light, and felicity, forever. There the weary,
tribulated pilgrim finds an end of all his anxiety and labor; the days of his
mourning are ended, and he receives the reward of his faith and patience, the
fruition of his hopes, even the eternal salvation of his soul.

The important message which Christ, the glorious high priest of the Christian
religion, had in commission from his and our Father, from his and our God, was,
that he compassionated his creatures, encompassed with the distresses that
their sins had brought upon them -- that he willed not their everlasting
separation from him, the source of happiness, but that he was willing they
should be reconciled to him. For this end, he called upon them to repent and be
converted, that their sins might be forgiven them, and that they might finally
enter into his rest.

This was the interesting doctrine which the Savior of the world promulgated:
and happy are those who hear and obey it!

Repent, and be converted, that your sins may be forgiven you. It is not the
assent of the lip, and of the tongue, to the glorious truths of the gospel; it
is not the splendid formality of high profession; it is not crying Lord, Lord!
in the hour of strong conviction; but it is a surrender of the will and
affections, a renovation of the heart, and conformity to the divine image,
which can alone gain us an admittance into the New Jerusalem, the city of God.

If we make an impartial survey of our past lives, review our frequent
revoltings, and compare our conduct with the convictions we have received of
right and wrong, virtue and vice, there is scarcely a soul present but must
feel some degree of remorse, some degree of repentance, for the turpitude of
his morals, and his want of love, obedience, and gratitude, to so gracious a
Father, who has encompassed us with blessings, and preserved us, by his
providence, from the earliest period of our lives to the present hour. On these
solemn reflections we must (I say again) witness some degree of repentance;
but, unhappily for us, the impressions that are made on our minds, on a serious
review of our actions, are soon cancelled, soon effaced, by the influence which
a variety of creaturely objects are suffered to make upon us, and, like the
early dew, they soon pass away: Of the rock that begat them they have been
unmindful. Cleansed, in some degree, as we are, by the waters of contrition, we
again become defiled by a repetition of that iniquity, which, in the moments of
our humiliation, we had determined to renounce and forsake. We are again caught
in the snare of our lusts, and captivated by objects which have a tendency to
alienate our affections from the one adorable Object, the source of our safety
and felicity, the only permanent and supreme good. What is to be done in the
fatal dilemma to which our inconstancy to our virtuous resolutions has reduced
us? Shall we despair of the divine mercy, which we have so often abused; of
that goodness we have so long trifled with? or, fear that our future endeavors
will be vain, and that, for our multiplied transgressions, we shall be made a
desolation forever! God forbid! Let us rather, in the depths of self-abasement,
prostrate our souls at the throne of grace, and humbly implore the continued
mercy of the universal Parent. Let us beg for strength and holy ability to
withstand succeeding temptations, and run the ways of his commandments with
delight.

As a father pitieth his children, so he pitieth those who fear him, and, in
immortal kindness, will bring them to the joy of his salvation. He knows our
frame, and remembereth that we are but dust. Although he hides his face for a
moment, yet with everlasting kindness will he remember Zion; for, her maker is
her husband, the Lord of Hosts is his name. Let us therefore beseech him, in
the fervency of prayer, to send forth help from his holy sanctuary, and
strengthen us to renew and keep our covenants with him to the end of our days.

Let us refrain from the commission of evil, and wait on him in the silence of
all flesh, that the Fountain of light and truth may again enlighten us to see
ourselves as we are seen of him, and inflame our hearts with that celestial
fire which purges away the intellectual filth and dross that prevent the
ascent of the soul Godward, and render it an unfit habitation for his holiness
to dwell in. As our own backslidings have frequently corrected us, and covered
our minds with anxiety, let our future conduct, directed by his grace, atone
for what is past, and, by a conversation ordered aright, let us glorify our
Father who is in heaven.

I feel, at this season, the influence (in degree) of that celestial charity
which breathes through Immanuel to the whole creation of God, and wishes
salvation to every soul that inhabits the earth. In that I entreat you, as a
being subject to the same infirmities, which you sometimes unavailably deplore,
Repent, and be converted. Repentance you have frequently experienced; but too
little, I fear, of that essential conversion which the gospel of Jesus
proposes. It is highly probable that some persons present have seen the
necessity of that renovation of heart, and reformation of manners, intended by
conversion; and yet, urged by the powerful prevalence of their lusts and of
self-love, are seeking, if possible, to find some other remedy for a wounded
conscience than that which the simplicity of the gospel requires as a necessary
prelude to the favor of God. They are inquiring, What shall we do to be saved?
and, like the young man in the gospel, they have been animated with a desire to
be enrolled among the disciples of Jesus, who are called heirs of God, and
coheirs with Christ, of that inheritance which is incorruptible and full of
glory. They have asked counsel of the wonderful Counselor, and addressed him
with the important question, What good thing shall I do that I may inherit
eternal life? yet, when the unchangeable terms of salvation have been proposed;
when they have been told they must part with all their idols, they have gone
away sorrowful: the terms have appeared too hard for them to comply with; and,
like the king who wanted to be cured of his leprosy, and was staggered at the
thought of taking so long a journey as the prophet had directed, are crying
out, Are not Abana and Pharphar, rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters
of Israel? will not their waters cleanse me from my impurity?

Thus, numbers among mankind are striving to elude those measures which the
gospel of Jesus enjoins, and are substituting others in their stead, which are
better adapted to soothe the carnal mind, and prevent that mortification of the
deeds of the body which human nature shrinks from with horror. Man is desirous
to possess the crown of eternal life, but not willing to bear the cross. He
would indeed reign with Christ, but not suffer with him. He would accompany him
to the mount of transfiguration, but not to Golgotha: he would be his attendant
at his glorification, but not in the awful scenes of his humiliation.

Diverse have wandered as from mountain to mountain, and from hill to hill,
seeking for the living in the sepulchers of the dead. They have sometimes
adopted one creed, and sometimes another, -- practiced external ordinances, and
complied with empty forms, addressing themselves frequently to guides as blind
and impotent as themselves, with this awful query, Men and brethren, what shall
we do to be saved?

I say again, repent, and be converted; for this is the only way to find
salvation to your souls. No external ceremonies, no verbal confessions, no
change of opinions merely, can accomplish this repentance and conversion, and
afford you the consequent rewards of a glorious immortality. This important
work of salvation cannot be effected in man's time, will, activity or wisdom;
but is wrought in him by the powerful operation of the Holy Ghost, which is as
a consuming fire to the adversary, to the adverse part of man, to the corrupt
will, which would not that Christ should reign in his kingdom, and that God
should be all in all.

It is the baptism of fire, of which John's was but a type, which,
discriminating the pure from the impure, gathers the wheat into the garner, but
consumes the chaff with unquenchable burnings.

In the world there are many voices which correspond not with the voice of
Christ, the only Shepherd and Bishop of souls, whom we ought to hear and obey
in all things, but which are the voices of those who teach for hire, and divine
for money: who look for their gain from their quarters, and are ready to make
war against conscientious men, who cannot put into their mouths. These have
found it their worldly interest to lead the deluded people from, rather than to
Christ, the glorious high priest, the life and light of men. They have
attempted to render that mysterious which the Holy Ghost has left clear, and to
perplex the understandings of men, with vain metaphysical speculations, without
making them either wiser or better. This class of men, whose God is their
belly, whose glory is their shame, have indeed proved physicians of no value.

Many have inquired of these, What shall we do to be saved? but they not having
experienced the work of salvation in themselves, are incapable to instruct
others in the way that leads to eternal life. Instead of laying the ax to the
root of the corrupt tree, they have only attempted to lop off some of its
branches, and rescind some of its most palpable excrescences. They have been
crying, Peace, peace! when the alarm of danger should have sounded in the ears
of the people. They have prescribed emollients where the most searching
operation was expedient; and, healing the wound of the daughter of Zion
deceitfully, have lulled multitudes into a fatal security, by flattering them
with hopes, which it is to be feared, will end in confusion and disappointment,
and perish forever.

There are others who assume the office of ministers, the purity of whose
intentions charity forbids me to dispute, who, like a man that attempts to
answer a question before he has fully heard it, have too precipitately embarked
in the important work of instructing souls in the great things of salvation.
These are, like Ephraim, a cake not turned; are not yet instructed in the way
of the Lord perfectly, and whilst they are teaching others, had need themselves
to be taught what are the first principles of the oracles of God. The coal from
the holy altar has not yet been applied to their lips, and they have been
ministering, by the law of a carnal commandment, without being endued with the
power of an endless life. They have run on the Lord's errand unsent, and have
not essentially profited the people. They have taken upon them to guide those
who are inquiring What shall we do to be saved? and have led them indeed from
the confines of Egypt, but leave them undirected to the spiritual Moses, to
wander in uncertainty, and to compass a mountain of doubts in the wilderness.

May the Lord Almighty, in his infinite mercy, gather these who are wandering
as sheep without a shepherd, and lead them into the sacred enclosures of his
fold of eternal rest and safety!

May the nations of them that have sat in darkness, be again enlightened by the
glorious breaking forth of the Sun of righteousness in their hearts, that our
Zion may yet become an eternal excellency, and the joy of many generations!

Let it not be thought, by any thing I have said, that I look upon all, who
appear girded with the linen ephod of other Christian societies, either as
impostors, or the deluded votaries of Antichrist. I freely declare I doubt not
but many of them have had a dispensation of the gospel committed to them; and,
although they may be biassed by the prejudice of education, and the traditions
of their fathers, yet the root of the matter seems to be in them. I esteem
these, in whatever society they are found, and in whatever vestments they are
clothed, as my brethren in the fellowship of the everlasting gospel of Christ.
Yet I cannot direct the searcher after truth, who is pensively inquiring What
he shall do to be saved, to the ministry of any man; but would rather recommend
him to the immediate teaching of the word, nigh in the heart, even the spirit
of God. This is the only infallible teacher, and the primary adequate rule of
faith and manners, and will lead those who attend to its dictates, into the
peaceable paths of safety and of truth. Let the earnest humble petition of your
souls be, to the Father of sure mercies, Lead me by thy counsel, and afterward
receive me into glory: let thy rod and thy staff support me, through the
uncertainties of time, to a happy conclusion in thy favor. Ye need not, says
the apostle to the church formerly, that any man teach you, save as this
anointing teaches, which is truth, and no lie. Cease therefore from man, whose
breath is in his nostrils, and whose existence is but as a vapor; for wherein
is he to be accounted of? As a fallible being, he is subject to frequent
deception, and is therefore liable to deceive; but the spirit of God can
neither be deceived, nor will it deceive any soul that submits to its holy
government, and obeys its dictates. In this is our safety and strength, and the
hope of our eternal reward, when our weary pilgrimage shall come to an end. O
ye penitent prodigals, my soul earnestly longs for your restoration to the
mercy and favor of God!

Ye, who are reduced, by your wanderings in the wilderness of this world, to a
state of extreme poverty, to the want of that bread which comes down from the
celestial regions, and which can alone nourish the soul up to eternal life; ye,
who have long been attempting to satisfy the cravings of an immortal spirit,
with the husks and shells of an empty profession of religion, look toward your
Father, from whom you have revolted. Remember, that in his house there is bread
enough, and to spare: there your souls may be richly replenished with enduring
substance. Return, O house of Israel, from your backslidings, and seek the face
of your everlasting Father and Friend! In unspeakable kindness he has declared
that he will be found of those who seek him in sincerity of heart; and that as
many as knock at his gate for an entrance shall be admitted to his presence,
and receive the remission of their sins. O unspeakable condescension!
unutterable love! Though gloriously exalted above the heaven of heavens, and
placed at the summit of all perfection, yet his gracious regard is to the sons
of men, and he is beautifying the place of his feet.

The humble address, which the prodigal made to his father, the return that he
met with and the manner of his reception into favor, are exceedingly
expressive of the becoming penitence of the one, and the mercy and benignity of
the other. I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no longer
worthy to be called thy son; make me therefore as one of thy hired servants.
The injured, neglected parent compassionates his distress, takes the prodigal
in his arms, owns him for his son, orders the fatted calf to be killed, and
rebukes the envy of his elder brother with This my son was dead, but he is
alive again; he was lost, but is found. O the height and depth of the goodness
and mercy of God! Look unto him, ye ends of the earth, and be saved!

Before I conclude, I find it in my heart to address another class in this
meeting: a class who have earnestly sought, and happily found, him of whom
Moses and the prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the Immanuel, which being
interpreted, is God with us. You, who once were scattered as sheep without a
shepherd on the barren mountains and desolate hills of an empty profession, the
great Shepherd of souls has gathered within the sacred enclosures of his fold,
and you are under the peculiar protection of the Lord Almighty. He has plucked
you as brands out of the burning, and redeemed you to himself, with the saving
strength of his right arm. When the blackness of darkness surrounded your
dwellings; when the terror of his judgments encompassed you for disobedience,
by his light you walked through the region and valley of the shadow of death.
Although for a moment he turned his face from you, yet, in everlasting
kindness, has he gathered you from the world to himself. Oh! may you ever
remember his unutterable mercy, and dedicate the remainder of your days to the
honor of his name.

My spirit salutes you, in the endeared affection of the gospel of peace, as
fellow travelers toward the land of eternal rest, and wishes your
establishment in righteousness forever; that you may abide in holy patience the
fiery trial of faith throughout the days of your earthly pilgrimage, and become
as fixed pillars in the celestial building and house of God.

If you steadfastly abide in the word of faith, wherein you have been taught,
neither the malice of men, nor the united powers of darkness, shall be able to
pluck you out of the hands of him who is your judge, your king, your protector,
your father, and everlasting friend. As a garden enclosed has he made you, in
safe dwellings has he appointed your lots, and, in the end of days, he will be
your refuge forever. When this earth shall be wrapped together like a scroll,
and the sun and moon be darkened; when every glorious constellation of the
heavens shall sink into everlasting obscurity, and the elements of this world
shall be dissolved with fervent heat; you will possess a habitation within the
superior regions of a new heaven and a new earth, where the Lord your
righteousness dwells.

Many of the pretended wise, learned, and prudent, of this world, who have
sought to climb up some other way rather than enter by Christ, who is the door
into the sheepfold, may pity you as fools, or ridicule you as enthusiasts; they
may account your life madness, and your end without honor; but they will one
day be astonished at the strangeness of your salvation, when they may see, to
their confusion, that you are finally numbered among the children of God, and
your inheritance is among the saints.

In the world you are to expect tribulations of various kinds, sickness,
disease, and pain: temptations and disappointments invade the breasts of the
most temperate, virtuous, and religious, among men. A cup mixture, more or less
impregnated with the wormwood and the gall, is the lot of humanity, designed
doubtless to effect a valuable purpose by him who afflicts not willingly, nor
without a righteous and benevolent cause, the children of men.

As the heavens are higher than the earth, so are the ways of the Almighty than
our ways, and his thoughts than our thoughts.

We see a little, and but a very little, of the amazing universal plan of his
government over rational and immortal spirits. It lies beyond the reach of the
most exalted created faculties to comprehend his wisdom throughout the
righteous administration of his providence, which is unsearchable. It is our
duty, as frail, dependent, and impotent beings, to meet every dispensation with
that resignation of spirit which incessantly breathes the humble language of
Not my will, O Lord, but thine, be done in all things. Though the times are
gloomy, the outgoings of the morning are of God. He will yet comfort the waste
places of Zion, and build up her desolations. He will make her wilderness as
Eden, and her deserts as the garden of the Lord: joy and gladness shall be
found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of melody. Awake, therefore, and put
on strength, ye who have lien amongst the pots; ye, who have been afflicted,
tossed with tempests, and not comforted; for, the hour of your salvation is
near. Abide in holy patience, and hope to the end. It is our duty, under the
evils which we feel, and which our prudence could not prevent, to implore
divine aid to endure them with patience, rather than to pray that they may be
removed from us; lest, like ignorant children, we should seek to avoid that
potion, from our heavenly Father's hand, which is graciously designed to
remove, or prevent, a greater evil. This is not the place of your rest, but a
state of probation, a painful pilgrimage, a land of pits and of snares, through
which lies a narrow path to the regions of eternal peace. The soul, by reason
of its connection with the body, and while enclosed within the walls of flesh,
cannot extend its views, and employ its faculties, on divine objects without
frequent interruption. But, when the days of its captivity are accomplished it
will be capable of a more glorious expansion in the kingdom of light and
immortality, and possess that joy which is unspeakable and full of glory.
Therefore, in all the calamities to which we are subject in the house of our
pilgrimage, we have a place of refuge to flee to, where safety is alone to be
found. Though, indeed, we must feel in some degree as men, yet we may possess
the patience, resignation, and holy fortitude, of Christians, who are looking
for a better country, a more excellent inheritance, in that city whose
inhabitants have no occasion to complain that they are sick.

Be ye, therefore, steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor shall not be in vain. Be ye, in
your several stations in the church and in the world, as way-marks to the
honest, sincere inquirers, who are asking the way to Zion, and, from a true
sense of their condition, are crying out, What shall we do to be saved! Show
forth, by your example of charity, sobriety, temperance, and holiness of life,
that you are redeemed from the spirit of the world that lies in wickedness. Be
not captivated by its trifling amusements, nor ensnared by its lying vanities;
but retain the fear of God, which will keep the heart clean, and prove a source
of surest consolation when all things else will be unavailing. Let the purity
of your lives demonstrate that you are attentive to things more excellent, and
have placed your affections on things permanent and eternal; things which
essentially relate to the salvation of the soul.

Thus, you will be a means of leading others in the way of truth and
righteousness, and become the consecrated temples of the Holy Ghost. You will
witness an increase of strength, wisdom, and holy stability, from day to day,
and perseverance in the way that is everlasting.

Finally, my brethren, farewell. I commend you to God, the great Shepherd of
Israel, and to the word of his grace, as the only infallible guide to direct
you what ye shall do to be saved. It is able to build you up in the most holy
faith, to direct your feet in the paths of righteousness and peace, and,
finally, to put you in possession of a glorious inheritance, among the saints,
that will never fade away!

DISCOURSE II.
THEN Jesus said to his disciples, a rich man shall hardly enter into the
kingdom of heaven; and again I say unto you, it is easier for a camel to go
through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
God. When his disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed, saying, who
then can be saved? It is no wonder, indeed, that these appeared to them to be
hard sayings, and that they should excite their astonishment, if they
apprehended by them, that the kingdom of heaven was only open to poverty and
wretchedness. It appears, I think, beyond controversy, that notwithstanding the
disciples attended to the doctrine of such an excellent minister, who spoke
with peculiar authority, yet they did not at once comprehend the whole of his
doctrine and works. Their understandings were gradually opened and informed:
they were led on step by step. The work of religion was not with them, as some
people have imagined the work of religion to be, an instantaneous work: they
went on from strength to strength, and from one degree of knowledge to another,
till they had acquired as much as was necessary for them. They were not
instructed in all truths, but in such as respected the duties of their day and
of their station, and which, in the course of their pilgrimage in this world,
filled them with a humble hope and expectation of ultimately entering into one
that is infinitely better, there to partake of the joy of their Lord, and of
that rest from their labors which is prepared for the people of God. Thus, we
find, when they were told that they must eat his flesh, and drink his blood, --
that it was necessary a man should hate his father and mother, his wife, his
children, and even his own life, -- accepting these texts, at first, in a
strict and literal sense, it is no wonder they should think them hard sayings:
hard indeed it would be if it were necessary that the affections, which flow
from consanguinity and affinity, must be totally eradicated, and the malignant
passion of hatred be substituted, in order to render us successful candidates
for an inheritance that is incorruptible and that fades not away.

But it is clear to me, beyond the least doubt, that our Lord designed,
throughout the whole of his ministry, to excite and to strengthen, instead of
weakening, those bands by which society is held together.

He designed to inspire us with the most friendly affections, as the main, or
principal, motive to the discharge of the various social and relative duties:
this appears to me to be comprehended in the second commandment, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thyself. With respect to this particular passage of the
New Testament, it may, perhaps, be profitable, at least to the younger part of
this assembly, whose experience has not yet been much, and whose observations
have been but transient, to advert a little to the occasion of these hard
sayings, which excited the amazement of the disciples.

It seems there was a young man who had heard of the fame of Jesus; who wanted
to be instructed with respect to what measures were necessary for him to adopt
and to pursue in order to inherit everlasting life. Urged by this desire, he
makes an application unto Jesus, addressing him after this manner, Good master,
what good thing shall I do, that I may inherit eternal life? Our Savior
enumerated several of the commandments, to which he replied, and no doubt with
the greatest degree of sincerity, All these have I kept from my youth up, what
lack I yet? It appears that our Lord meant to bring his love and his virtue to
a severe test. One thing, says he, thou lackest; if thou will be perfect, sell
that thou have, and give to the poor; take up thy cross, and follow me, and
thou shall have treasure in heaven. It seems that our Savior struck at his
darling passion, the love of money; for, upon hearing this proposal, it is
evident that he preferred, at that time, retaining his corporeal possessions,
that present temporary good, to the future and remote one of eternal life for,
he went away sorrowful.

Then Jesus said to his disciples, A rich man shall hardly enter into the
kingdom of heaven. It must, indeed, be acknowledged, that, seeing we have
nothing which we have not received, -- that we are not proprietors of the
inheritance which we possess, but tenants only at will; for, the earth is the
Lord's, and the fullness thereof, and the cattle on a thousand hills, -- we
ought to relinquish, to give up, a part, or the whole, of that which is lent
us, when it is the will of the giver to make that requisition: but it is
evident to me, that this particular requisition intends not a general command.
I conceive, that it is not riches, merely as riches, which can prevent our
entrance into the kingdom of heaven. It may be said, with equal truth, that, it
is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a poor man to
enter into the kingdom of heaven, if he have nothing but poverty and
wretchedness to recommend him. It is very evident, from diverse circumstances,
that our Lord's controversy was not with riches, but the spirit of pride, which
too frequently possesses the hearts of the rich; for, we have an account of a
rich, and yet of a good, man, Joseph of Arimathea. From the several accounts of
the evangelists it appears he was an honorable counselor, a rich man, a good,
a just, man, a disciple of Jesus, and one that waited for the kingdom of God,
though it was probable that he was a member of the Sanhedrim.

It seems to me that the rich man, designed in this text, is such a man as is
represented to us in the parable: There was a certain rich man, who was clothed
with purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day: there was also a
certain beggar, that was laid at his gate, full of sores, of whom there can be
no doubt that he was a proper object of human sympathy. He was laid at his gate
full of sores: his requisition was humble, desiring to be fed only with the
crumbs that fell from the rich man's table; moreover, the dogs came and licked
his sores. It came to pass that the beggar died, and that he was carried by the
angels into Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died, and was buried; and he
lifted up his eyes in hell, and saw Lazarus in Abraham's bosom. He cried out in
a sort of agony, Father Abraham, have mercy upon me, and send Lazarus that he
may dip his finger in water to cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this
flame: but Abraham answered, Son, remember, that thou, in thy lifetime,
receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; but now, he is
comforted, and thou art tormented. But we are not to infer from this text,
that, merely his being clothed in purple and fine linen, or faring sumptuously,
was the cause of his consequent misery; or, that it followed of course, having
received the good things of this life, he should suffer the worst of evils in
the next; but it appears he wanted that brotherly sympathy, that friendly
affection, recommended to us in the character of the good Samaritan, which is
not restricted to any peculiar class, but directed to every object of distress.
There was a man, who, traveling from Jerusalem to Jericho, fell among thieves:
he was spoiled, he was wounded. -- The priest passed by, -- he who attended at
the altar of God, he that should have possessed a spirit of universal charity.
The priest passed by, -- the Levite followed his example, untouched with the
feelings of humanity; his heart was contracted, perhaps, by the prejudices of a
party, which he had conceived to be religion. But a Samaritan passed that way:
he looked upon the man with that sympathy and compassion which the love of
Christ inspires toward a brother in distress, incapable of relieving himself,
upon whom many sufferings were brought, and many more expected to follow. He
takes compassion of this poor Jew, pours oil and wine into his wounds, attempts
to alleviate his grief by lessening its cause; and, though he could have no
expectation of compensation, yet it did not restrain him from attempting every
thing in his power for the relief of this indigent person, and his views were
not confined to the present time; he looked forward, and endeavored to provide
for his future well-being, giving a direction unto hit host, I will repay thee.
It was therefore the want of this sympathy, together with the spirit of pride,
which prompted the rich man to pursue the lusts of the flesh, of the eye, and
the pride of life, at the expense of his social and religious duties, which
rendered him highly criminal. This appears clearly to have been designed: the
character of this certain rich man and that of the beggar formed a contrast.
The rich man wanted virtue; the poor man was destitute of food; it is evident,
however, that he was in a humble state. What could he have asked less if he had
asked any thing? The severity of hunger forced him to ask thus much of him, as
he was incapable of helping himself. He desired only the crumbs that fell from
the rich man's table, but he was unnoticed. If he had been of the rich, if
there had been a prospect that the interest, or the pleasure, of the rich man
could have been augmented by relieving him, he would have noticed him as Laban
did Abraham's servant when he saw the bracelets on his sister's hands, Come in,
thou blessed of the Lord, wherefore stand thou without? The door would have
been readily opened to opulence, and titular dignity would have found an easy
access; but the poor beggar lay unnoticed: the inferior species of animals
seemed to feel more sympathy than the rich man, Moreover the dogs came and
licked his sores. I would not be understood, by any thing that I have said, to
attempt an ingenious apology for the rich; but, at the same time, I would
attempt to make that distinction between the poverty of the heart and the
possessions of the hands which the author of the Christian religion designed.
In the course of the providence of Almighty God it so falls out, that the
efforts of the laborious and industrious are not crowned with equal success.
But we are not to conclude that the person, whose barns are filled with plenty,
and whose presses are ready to burst with new wine, is the distinguished
favorite of heaven, any more than that the poor man, who divides his morsel
with his family, and mixes his tears with his bread, is reprobated by heaven.
It is the abuse, and not the use, of riches which the testimony of Christ is
certainly against. The apostle did not enjoin the rich to throw away their
riches, but he exhorts Timothy to charge them who are rich in this world, that
they be not high-minded, that they assume nothing on the score of their
possessions: Charge the rich of this world that they be not high-minded,
neither trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us all
things richly to enjoy. This is what he had in charge, adding, I think, that we
brought nothing with us into the world, and we shall carry nothing out of it.
Naked we came into the world, naked we shall return, be dissolved and mixed
with those elements, from which we originally sprang. I would, therefore,
attempt, at least, that we should individually reflect upon the circumstances
that we are placed in, and that we should receive with gratitude the portion
which, in the general course of God's providence, shall be allotted to us.
Nothing more is required of us than to be good stewards of the manifold grace
of God. We are called stewards; and a time approaches, with unavoidable
certainty, when the Lord of the universe will call us, will summon us hence,
with Give thou an account of thy stewardship, for thou shall be no longer
steward. Let us therefore consider the several talents we have received for the
improvement of our hearts in the Christian life: let us consider the outward
benefits that are bestowed upon us, and let it be the study of our lives to
apply them properly, and to resemble the good Samaritan; that in imitating the
example of the author of the Christian religion, it may be the delight of our
lives to diffuse happiness all around, and to go about doing good. This appears
to be of indispensible obligation. If the rich man had possessed this friendly
disposition, the beggar would not have been neglected at the gates of his
house, the dogs would not have been suffered to lick his sores; he would have
poured into them lenient balm; he would have attempted to bind up his broken
heart, and to wipe away all tears from all faces, to diffuse happiness in as
extensive a manner as his abilities could qualify him to diffuse it, and
therein he would have been the best prepared to join the heavenly society
above, when a period should have been put to his existence upon earth, and his
possessions could no longer avail him. But this was not the circumstance of the
rich man; he wanted bowels of compassion; and, therefore, whatever religious
party he was connected with, whether of the Pharisees or of the Sadducees, he
was not acceptable in the sight of the Searcher of hearts. Let us now reflect a
little on what his feelings must be, -- the feelings of a man that has rolled
along in pomp, that has been clad in purple and fine linen, that has had his
singing men and his singing women, with the sound of the pipe and of the
tabret, to attune his heart to joy, yet destitute of the feelings of humanity
and of worthy sentiments of religion. Death approaches, -- he sees the heavens
passing away as a scroll, and the very foundation of his happiness dissolved. I
cannot better express it than in the language of the holy scriptures: When in
his prosperity, the destroyer came upon him; his purposes were cut off, even
the thoughts of his heart and the desire of his eyes; but his day is turned
into night, his light into darkness; his harp is turned into mourning, and his
organ into the voice of them that weep. He is about to quit this scene of
things without any hope or expectation of entering upon any scene that is
better. He looks back upon a life that has been spent in various species of
dissipation, in the gratification of his sensual appetites, and in the neglect
of every social duty. He now finds himself in a circumstance far beneath the
poor beggar's that lay at his gate. -- Conscience resumes the seat she had
lost, -- wounds that had been healed break out afresh, and bleed anguish. He
looks back, but it gives him no pleasure; the picture excites the most painful
feelings. He looks forward, but he has no hope; his singing men and his singing
women, with the voice of the pipe and the tabret, can no more inspire his soul
with joy. He is about to quit this mortal stage, and to enter into the world of
spirits, but destitute of those moral virtues that would have qualified him to
join the celestial society, and to take a part in the general festivity which
prevails throughout heaven's empire. The rich man lifted up his eyes to heaven
in a state of anguish; he beheld the beggar in Abraham's bosom. We are not to
consider this text literally: this is a parable, not a matter of fact; and a
parable designed to illustrate the moral doctrine of the gospel of Christ. He
reaped the fruit of his doings, that which will inevitably follow a course of
dissipation and a neglect of our proper duties: The recompense of his hands
will be rendered to every man. To those, who obey not the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every
soul of man that does evil: of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile; for,
there is no respect of persons with God: and I wish to God there were less
respect of persons with men. This was the circumstance, as I conceive, of the
rich man. -- Let us now consider what might be the feelings and the hopes of
the poor beggar. Despised of his brethren, unpitied, unrelieved, he lay at the
gates of the rich man; the dogs licked his wounds: -- he importuned charity, --
but he importuned in vain. The rich man's ear was deaf to his prayers. What
consolation could he have in this state! Indeed, his feelings must have been
exquisite. Hunger and thirst are appetites, which, in the extreme, throw the
mind into tumult. His natural feelings were painful, but what were his
prospects! What were his hopes! Though he was poor, he was not forsaken of his
Maker: he could not boast of purple and fine linen, he attended not the tables
of the rich, nor partook of their luxurious banquets, yet he was the offspring
of the eternal Father, who made of one blood all the nations of men who dwell
on all the face of the earth, and has determined the bounds of their
habitation. If the earth was unpropitious to his prayers, still heaven was open
to his cries. The Sovereign of the universe, who regards the crying of the poor
and the supplication of the needy, took compassion on the poor beggar. He was
about to quit his rags, to quit his poverty, and to enter into a state of
everlasting happiness, -- he was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom.
Which of those circumstances was the most desirable? Let us extend our views
beyond the present scene of things: let us anticipate the shock we cannot shun.
Which would you rather sustain, the character of this poor beggar, or the
character of this certain rich man? Would you lose the hopes of the beggar in
order to sustain the dignity of the rich man? This, methinks, is a question
which common sense would not be long in deciding upon; but, such is the
weakness and frailty of our nature, that we approve the right, and yet pursue
the wrong: we do the thing that we would not, and neglect that which we would,
do. The passions of human nature are exceedingly strong, and there is some one
that generally characterises every person; a kind of reigning passion, which,
like Aaron's rod, swallows up all the rest. We are not all pursuing one path of
vanity, for its paths are endless: but we have an aptitude, we have a
promptness, rather to pursue measures that may produce a temporal good, than
those which will produce a spiritual good. The gratification of the present
moment engages our passions. If we were to form an idea by the general practice
of mankind, we seem to forget that we are mortal, and that we must die. Mankind
busy themselves often beside their proper business; and, whilst they are
enlarging the boundaries of their earthly inheritance, are but little
solicitous to obtain a habitation in the new heavens and in the new earth,
wherein righteousness dwells. They prefer present to everlasting good, and
neglect to cultivate those virtues which would make them resemble the Deity,
(if I may be allowed the expression,) expand the faculties of the soul, and
make it more capable of those sublime contemplations which are the employment
of the celestial choir. I wish, therefore, that we might be induced to reflect
on the vanity of human wishes, and on the folly of human pursuits. We have no
continuing city here: perfect felicity is no more to be found in this mutable
state of things, than it was practicable for the Babel-builders to erect an
edifice that should reach the heavens. Many have soared aloft, and built their
nests on high, as upon the cedar of Lebanon, yet they have been brought down.
Death levels all distinctions, and earthly possessions make no difference in
the grave: let us set our affections therefore upon things that are above, and
not on things which are beneath. If our affections be placed upon the superior
good, we shall feel gradually a less attachment to things that are seen; --
less to this world, the fashion whereof is passing away, and we are passing
away with it. Its pleasures are but as a cloud, or a vapor, which will soon
disappear. We are hastening to the place of our destination, let us therefore
run with patience the race that is set before us, imitating the example of the
wise and virtuous of all generations, endeavoring to fulfill the various
obligations that we are under to the Author of our being and one to another; --
to adopt the phrase in the parable, that we may be carried by angels into
Abraham's bosom, and enter into the fullness of that joy, of which we have here
but a foretaste, as of the brook that is by the way.

Perhaps some present, in the hours of their solitude, may reflect, that they
pass unnoticed amidst the throng, while others sustain the plaudit of the
people. Let them consider, that in a few days, there will be an end put to
their anxieties: if they be virtuous, indeed, they are destined for the regions
of glory, immortality, and eternal life -- regions, of which we can at present
form no adequate idea. We see but darkly, as through a glass, -- we explore but
a little of that vast plan of the providential government of the Supreme Being;
yet, in a future state, with faculties better disposed, with minds properly
prepared, it may be a part of our employment to investigate the dispensations
of divine providence, which at present appear exceedingly mysterious; -- to
celebrate, in a future world, the wonderful display of wisdom and power in the
constitution of this, and also the goodness of God in adapting all his
dispensations to all his people, for the accomplishment of their supreme good;
and, from a principle of conviction, to join the heavenly host, in saying,
Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty: just and true are all
thy ways, thou King of saints. I am encouraged to expect this from the saying
of Christ, that what I do, thou know not now, but shall know hereafter;
therefore, let not the poor be disconsolate in their habitations of poverty,
but let them attempt, in their respective stations, to fill up the duties of
their day, and they shall end in peace everlasting. I intend not by what I have
said that I have any person in view who is wanting in charity and benevolence;
by no means: my design is general. I commend that good and virtuous disposition
which has been apparent in many whom I am addressing; and I wish they may
persevere in that which is right, and that they may endeavor to lay up for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come. Riches are attended with
many snares, and so is poverty. That poverty which brings a man to want the
necessaries of life, will require uncommon fortitude and patience to bear.
There are indeed snares in every state. Every state is a state of probation,
and there are temptations excited in our minds which correspond with the state
and circumstances that we are in, and to the several biasses that we possess.
Let us therefore lay aside every weight and burden, and the sin which easily
besets us, and run with patience the race that is set before us, cherishing, in
the first instance, a sincere love of the Supreme Being in the highest degree,
and then the love of our neighbor as ourselves, that we may possess a spirit
of universal benevolence, which will prompt us to do all the good we can to
that family of which the Lord God Almighty is the Father and Head I conceive,
indeed, that religion and virtue allow of degrees in love. There are peculiar
attachments which arise from consanguinity, and also from affinity, which
religion has no controversies with. We read, in the character of our Lord,
that, notwithstanding he possessed a love of all his disciples, and of all the
inhabitants of the earth, yet John seemed to be distinguished: he leaned upon
his bosom, he was the disciple whom Jesus loved; but we are not hence to
conclude that he loved no other; but there was a peculiar attachment to the
disciple whom Jesus loved.

I would recommend, in attempting every step of reformation, and in every good
word and work, that we attend to, and wait for, the influence of the holy
Spirit; that which would sanctify us, that which would gradually inform our
understandings, remove our prejudices and our doubts, inspire us with the most
substantial hopes, and open to us prospects that are the most pleasing; and,
whatever portion of ill may be allotted us in the course of divine providence,
let the virtuous ever bear in remembrance that there is a river, the streams
whereof make glad the heritage of God; and every sincere, devoted soul, of
every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, that fears God and works
righteousness, is part of this heritage, which is replenished with the showers
of immortal goodness, and is as a garden enclosed, notwithstanding the
different circumstances of individuals. The whole of this heritage is enclosed
with walls that are impregnable, -- impregnable against the enemy. They will be
preserved, by the providence of Almighty God, as in a garden that is enclosed,
-- a garden that will be refreshed with the descent of celestial rain, that
will be replenished, and bring forth the acceptable fruits of virtue and
holiness. My soul, says the Psalmist, thirsts for God; yea, for the living
God; and again, As the heart pants for the waterbrooks, so pants my soul
after thee, O God! This is the disposition of the humble soul, who looks upon
the Lord as his superior good, and prefers a communion with him to the increase
of corn, wine, or oil. He will, by every method, endeavor to keep open a
communication with this fountain, -- a fountain that will never be exhausted.
Thanks be to God we have a river: though we may be exposed to many things, to
the darkness and light, the heat and the cold, yet, in the course of our
pilgrimage, there is a river that flows from Hermon's hills, the streams
whereof ever make glad the heritage of God.

Let us attempt to pass along this river that we may be replenished, so shall
we experience that which is spoken of Wisdom, my brook became a river, and my
river became a sea. The good, the virtuous, man; the man that feels the
emotions of filial piety, has recourse to this river. A brook is opened to him
by the way, at which he can satiate his thirst, and renew his strength. He
will, in waiting upon God, mount up as on wings of an eagle; he will walk, and
not be weary; run, and not be faint. Thanks be to God that we have this river,
and I wish we may distinguish this fountain of living water from the broken
cisterns that can hold no water. If this be the case with our hearts, then we
shall find our consolation enlarge, our hopes increase till they are lost in
fruition, and our faith terminate in open vision, in the contemplation of those
truths of which we can at present form but inadequate ideas, when we shall
enter into the joy of our Lord, and be numbered with the wise. They that are
wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to
righteousness, as the stars forever and ever!

THE PRAYER AT THE CONCLUSION OF THE MEETING.
MOST gracious God, inspire our hearts with suitable reverence, that we may
approach thee acceptably, and offer up our prayers to thee in full assurance
that, though heaven is thy throne, and the earth thy footstool, yet thou art
graciously pleased to notice the inhabitants of this lower world, as well as
those who are clothed with the greatest degree of dignity, and are perfectly
happy in a world that is infinitely superior. Impress our hearts with a sense
of thy goodness, upon which we every moment depend. Let it be manifested unto
us, that the dispensing of thy manifold grace should impress us with emotions
of filial piety and gratitude unto thee, who art the source of every thing that
is good. We approach thy altar in the multitude of thy mercies, and look in
confidence toward thee, that, notwithstanding our many infirmities, there is
mercy with thee, that thou may be feared. Grant, we beseech thee, that, by
the operation of thy holy Spirit, thou everlasting Shepherd and Bishop of
souls, multitudes may be gathered out of the wilderness, in which they have
wandered and been lost, within thy fold, to become a part of thy flock, and the
sheep of thy pasture. Be pleased, in mercy, to bring back every sheep that has
strayed unto the fold again, that, as we are thine by creation, we may, at
length, be thine by adoption into a state of sonship, and become heirs of a
spiritual inheritance, the crown immortal, that shall never fade away.

O most righteous and everlasting Father, be pleased, we humbly beseech thee,
to look down upon the various circumstances of thy people; console the poor,
and abate the pride of the rich, that we may by the interposition of thy
spirit, be what thou would have us to be, a humble, dependent people, looking
up unto thee as the source whence all our blessings are derived, and imploring
at thy throne to be instructed to use our talents to the ends and purposes for
which thou have given them, that, whenever thou shall be pleased to summon us
hence, we may have an evidence, a hope, as an anchor that is most sure and
steadfast, that may preserve our souls in tranquillity when the waves of
affliction roar, when the winds of adversity may blow upon us from every
quarter. In the most painful dispensations we may have to pass through, grant
that we may find an asylum in thy name, which has been the tower of defense,
the munition of rocks, to the righteous in all generations.

O Lord, enable us to call successfully upon thy name, that we may be saved
with an everlasting salvation; that, fortified by thy grace, we may endure the
dangers of prosperity, and also the trials of poverty, if they shall be
permitted to attend us; that we may not be elevated too high, nor puffed up to
deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? nor may be ever so cast down and oppressed
in adversity, as to steal, and take thy name in vain, to deny thee, O God; but
that, in every dispensation of thy providence, we may humbly acquiesce with thy
will, and say, Not my will, O Lord, but thine be done.

Grant, we beseech thee, that, under an awful sense of thy attributes, which it
is not in the power of human beings adequately to conceive, nor of the tongues
of angels to express, in the contemplation of thy attributes, our souls;
inflamed with a spirit of pure devotion, may ascend up, and put up our
supplications, to thee, O Lord. We feel a holy awe pervade our souls: in the
contemplation of thy attributes our words are swallowed up: we offer unto thee
the increase of praise, and ascribe unto thee every thing that is excellent,
every thing that is great: to thee belong majesty and dominion, with every
other adorable attribute, now and forevermore. Amen.

DISCOURSE III.
THERE is a part of a psalm, or hymn, composed by a servant of God, which has
been revived, in my remembrance, in this meeting; and I may say, in much
sincerity, it has been the language of my heart: Offer unto God thansgiving.

The design of the author of this psalm was, to excite, both in himself and in
the minds of others, the most fervent emotions of gratitude, thanksgiving, and
praise. Thanksgiving, if it be more than the cold formality of unmeaning words,
is the genuine offspring of gratitude and devotion. It arises from a just sense
of the manifold favors bestowed upon us by the providence of God, who has
liberally supplied his creatures with the provision necessary for them.

The Scriptures speak of the Almighty not only as watching over, and providing
for, the superior class of beings in this world, but as extending his
providential care (to use a comparative mode of speech) to the meanest of his
creatures. Not a sparrow falls without him: he hears the young ravens when
they cry, and he has provided richly for the soul of every living thing. Man,
in a peculiar manner, appears to be distinguished above all other classes of
animal existence by a rational power of reflection. He is capable of ascending
from effect to cause, of observing the concatenation thereof, and of inferring,
from the phenomenon of nature, the existence of a wise, powerful, intelligent,
and good, Being, whom we call God. Hence he becomes an accountable creature:
hence he has a motive to thanksgiving and praise, of which the lower orders of
animals are not capable; for, whatever similarity there may be between the
endowments of inferior animals, and their instinctive powers, and the faculties
of the human species, yet history affords us no instance of the former
betraying the least signs of devotion. Man is made a little, and perhaps but a
little, lower than the angels. He is capable of contemplating the attributes of
the supreme Cause; and who can contemplate the attributes of the divine Being
without feeling the emotions of filial fear and gratitude? But it is
exceedingly to be regretted, that we use not those superior powers, with which
we are endued, to the noblest purposes, for which they were given us. We employ
too little of the short span of time in the investigation of subjects which are
adapted to inspire us with the best affections, and to acquire those virtues
that would dignify our nature: but, instead thereof, we descend from the rank
we should fill, and, with inferior orders of animals, make passion, instead of
right reason, our guide and ruler. Thus we become governed by those sensual
appetites which we should govern. We give away the power received for the
noblest purposes, or make it subservient to our lowest passions; and, like
those animals which are fed by fruit which drops spontaneously from the trees,
some people seem destitute of reflection whence their provision is derived,
seldom look up, seldom, if ever, contemplate the cause, seldom reflect that the
earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof, with the cattle on a thousand
hills, and that we are every moment dependent on his bounty. This is the
unhappy circumstance of too many of the sons and daughters of men.

I apprehend the principal design of all Gospel Ministers is, to excite in the
minds of their hearers such reflections, on beings circumstanced as we are, and
on the relation we bear one to another and to the supreme Cause, as may be
productive of filial piety, prompt us to make our hearts the sacred altar of
the Lord Almighty, and offer unto God thanksgiving and praise.

I fervently wish that all our hearts may be at this season, not only at this
season but at all other times, so impressed with the infinite obligation we are
under to the supreme Being, that thanksgiving might become an habitual frame of
spirit, continued throughout all the occurrences of life, setting the Lord
always before our eyes, that we do not evil, or offend him. Ingratitude, it
seems, actuated the children of Israel. It has been the principal cause, or
source, of all moral evil. Thus the people of the house of Israel received the
favors of heaven without turning their thoughts reverently toward the source
whence they were derived; they ate and drank, and rose up to play.

Instead of being disposed to thanksgiving, they indulged a spirit of levity.
They rioted on the divine bounty, and forgot to give thanks: they wanted,
therefore, a proper motive to the discharge of their several duties; for, when
we are impressed with a proper sense of gratitude for favors received, we are
naturally disposed to search for, or study, the will and pleasure of the person
who conferred on us those favors. We carefully watch for an opportunity to
express our gratitude, not only in being verbally thankful, but are also
studious to avoid every thing that would furnish occasion of offense to our
benefactor; and, on the other hand, are equally studious to render ourselves,
as much as possible, worthy objects of his favorable regard. Thus it is in
social life among men, and similar thereto it is with those minds which are
impressed with a sense of gratitude to the supreme Being. The consideration of
his goodness should lead us to reflect on our own unworthiness; for, we are
indeed unworthy of the least of his mercies, and of his truth; yet he has
favored us with the former and the latter rain, the upper and the nether
springs; with seed-time and with harvest; has filled our barns with plenty, and
has liberally provided for the sustenance of his creatures. Impressed with the
sense which this obligation imposes, the grateful heart would approach his
altar in the multitude of his mercies, and say, What shall we render unto thee
for thy goodness to the children of men?

This is the language of the devoted heart; and, though it might be uttered
only mentally, or not be expressed by any vocal sound, yet the Searcher of
hearts would accept that affection, or devotion of mind. He accepts the
intention of the heart before it is brought forth, or manifested by any
external act, and we shall then have the most powerful motive to hope for the
divine aid. Were our hearts thus impressed, we should embrace every opportunity
of inquiring how we should commend ourselves to his notice, -- how express the
gratitude we feel. We should be induced to manifest it by a discharge of every
religious and of every social duty, by waiting upon and worshipping him, by
offering to him the pure incense of thanksgiving and praise, expressing what we
feel for the favors received, by communicating, in proportion to our
respective measures, to those who stand in need of assistance; and, indeed,
impressed with the emotions of gratitude to God, it will be the chief pleasure
of our lives to go about doing good among men. But of those, who are destitute
of this most worthy principle of gratitude, other joys allure the affections,
other motives than religious and social duties. They are in pursuit of some
favorite sensual object, which, at best, compared with the superior good, is
only an unsubstantial phantom, and pursued at the expense of every thing that
confers real dignity on a rational being, and renders him acceptable to the
Judge of all the earth.

Thus the children of Israel, in proportion as they lost sight of the
providence of the Almighty, and of what he had done for them, became more and
more depraved; insomuch, that they joined some of the surrounding nations in
the performance of idolatrous acts. They seemed to have lost the idea of the
unity of God: they became destitute of a spirit of gratitude. The prophet, in
the name of the Lord, degrades them beneath the condition of the most
contemptible classes of animals: Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth! for,
the Lord has spoken: the ox knows his owner, and the ass his master's crib;
but Israel does not know, my people does not consider. If these animals are not
capable of rational reflection, yet they possess something that bears a
resemblance of gratitude, distinguished by the appellation of instinct. They,
at least, express some notice of those on whom they depend for support: the ox
knows his owner, and the ass his master's crib. This passage sets forth the
great moral depravity of that people; and, in short, the history, which the
holy Scriptures furnish us with respecting the children of Israel, conveys a
charge of peculiar ignorance, obstinacy, and ingratitude: The ox knows his
owner, and the ass his master's crib; but Israel does not know, my people does
not consider. Ah, sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil
doers! In another place, the prophet has shown, that, in departing from what
they should have been, in forsaking the God of their fathers, for want of a
reverent attention to his statutes, they lost the spirit of devotion, and
judgments were inflicted on them by extraordinary causes. They deprived
themselves of the felicity that is infinitely superior to all the
gratifications of sensual appetites. My people have committed two evils; they
have forsaken me, the Fountain of living waters, and have hewn to themselves
cisterns, broken cisterns, which can hold (...) water. Here again they are
indirectly charged with ingratitude. To use the figurative language of the holy
Scriptures, he spread a table for them in the wilderness, conducted them by a
cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night, put them into possession of
vineyards which were not theirs, and of olive-yards which they had not planted,
yet they were ungrateful; they ceased to offer unto God thanksgiving; that is
to say, the species of thanksgiving which is acceptable to the supreme Being.
They made, indeed, many prayers; they spread forth their hands toward the
habitation of his holiness; the services of the tabernacle were punctually
performed; but, with all these, they possessed not a spirit of thanksgiving,
but offered unto God a mere form of words, sentiments in which the heart took
no part, which had not been dictated by a spirit of gratitude. They offered,
therefore, the sacrifice of fools. Such is the weakness of our nature, that we
would persuade ourselves, were it possible, that the Almighty possesses the
vanity and ambition of a creature who is fond of the incense of adulation, and
capable of being deceived by the offerings of flattery, in which the heart is
not interested; but, as he is without the parts, so he is without the passions,
of a creature. No weakness is to be attributed to him, who is perfect and
self-sufficient. He can derive no additional felicity from our thanksgiving: he
can experience no diminution from our withholding him the praise which is due
to his great and excellent name. He has instituted worship, and commanded
thanksgiving, for our sakes, to promote our felicity, and not his own. Can we
suppose, that, approaching him with words composed by way of prayer and
thanksgiving, in which the heart is not interested, can be acceptable to him?
No: and therefore their new moons, the calling of their assemblies, and their
many prayers, were not acceptable incense to the Lord God of Sabbath. They had
committed two evils: they had forsaken him, the Fountain of living waters, and
had hewn unto themselves cisterns, broken cisterns, which could hold no water.
Therein is set forth the great loss that people sustained when they departed in
heart from that attention which they should have paid to the supreme Being
while they were partakers of his favors and mercies; the great loss they
sustained by forsaking the everlasting Fountain of felicity for the mere
sensual pleasures of this life, which are not to be compared with the spiritual
joys that result from a state of real devotion and thanksgiving.

There is no source of temporal pleasure but what may soon terminate.
Disappointment awaits us in every state. Pains, afflictions, diseases, may soon
render us incapable of tasting those pleasures we have long been in the pursuit
of; and, after a tedious chase, in the moment when we bless ourselves with the
expectation of fruition, we grasp the phantom, and find it air. How many
instances have we seen of people, intoxicated with a spirit of ambition and
avarice, who supposed that the accumulation of wealth would render them
perfectly happy; who have proposed to themselves a future period, when they
should sit down at the end of their labors in peace; and have gone on, from
one stage of life to another, led as it were by an ignis-fatuus, to perambulate
the enchanted circle! Disappointment has terminated their pursuits. If we have
not something else to rest our hopes upon than the pleasure which this world
can produce, we shall be like the man who dreamt that he was hungry, and ate;
thirsty, and he drank; but awoke, and beheld his appetites still remained: and
this may perhaps constitute, in part, the misery of a future state, -- the
entering into it with appetites which cannot be gratified.

Having attempted to show the importance of gratitude, and the dismal
consequences that flow from the contrary principle, I will now attempt, at
least, to point out one cause why we feel so little of this virtuous affection;
-- that is, Ambition, the grand enemy of man's felicity. On the wings of
imagination, in an extravagant anticipation of the future, man deprives himself
of the enjoyment which virtue would yield him in the present hour. He labors
for very vanity, and disquiets himself in vain. Perhaps we shall find the very
seeds of ambition sown, as it were, and interwoven, with our very nature and
constitution. There is some species of ambition that takes place in the lowest
as well as in the highest ranks of society. In our present circumstances, let
them be what they may above wanting the necessaries of life, (which is the lot
of but very few, comparatively speaking; and, of this few, the evil have been
brought upon them principally by their own imprudence and intemperance) we
should be content. A few, indeed, have been subjected to want the necessaries
of life by unavoidable events: these are worthy objects of charity, and will
not be neglected by those who can feel for another's woe. But, indeed, such is
the want of sympathy, that some people seldom see an affliction without their
own doors. They live for themselves only, and seem as if they were as destitute
of the love of their neighbor as they are of gratitude to God. But, with
respect to this passion of ambition, against which I would in a peculiar manner
endeavor to guard the minds of youth, resist it early, or it will grow with
your growth, and strengthen with your strength. Guard against the errors of
libertinism, the errors of the spendthrift, and the errors of the miser, that
you may early possess the emotions of gratitude to the Author of your being. If
it be your lot to abound in this world's goods, receive the superabundant
favors with gratitude, and thankfully apply them to the purposes for which
they were given. But, such is the nature of this passion (ambition) that it
prompts us to look up to the classes of mankind a little above us, and not to
the Most High. We look among our neighbors, who have acquired a little more
than we have acquired, and are led as it were imperceptibly toward a state we
can never attain. I have never known, in the course of my observation, a
person, who was not contented in a low state of life, that was ever happier in
a higher; but I have known some who have been happy in a low station, and, when
they have eaten their morsel in quietness, have offered unto God thanksgiving
and praise. Happiness is tendered to all. Be but grateful, and thou shall be
happy; for, gratitude will inspire us with this sentiment, Having food and
raiment, be therewith content.

I make these observations on the subject without premeditation; and, indeed,
the want of order in my delivery of them will be a sufficient proof of it. I
recommend them to your serious consideration, and wish your hearts may be
suitably impressed with the subject. And, though thanksgiving should be our
general mental habit, our hearts should be particularly impressed with it at
particular times. We ought to look up with peculiar thanksgiving to the throne
of grace in the moment of fruition. We have enjoined no peculiar mode, or form,
of prayer or thanksgiving. We have no ceremony by way of grace before and after
meat; but, in dispensing with these forms, we do not dispense with the thing
itself intended by them. We ought to be impressed with filial piety toward our
Almighty Father. We ought to make a solemn pause previous to our partaking of
the divine bounty, and to possess such a spirit of devotion, that we may offer,
at least mentally, unto God thanksgiving and praise.

And, at the close of the day, though we have no form of evening or morning
prayer, yet I would attempt to impress the minds of youth especially, that,
before they close their eyes to sleep, they should review the transactions of
the past day, and see what there is to approve, what to condemn, -- to
contemplate the mercy and the goodness extended to them, that they may offer
unto God thanksgiving for his mercies, and commend themselves to his
protection. Again, in the morning, we ought also to offer up thanksgiving. If
we possess this disposition of mind, we shall not be entangled with the things
of this life, which ensnare, but shall consider ourselves as strangers and
pilgrims on earth, anticipating a better country, a better inheritance, where,
with saints and angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect, in a humble
contemplation of the divine attributes, and of the dispensations of his
providence, and favored with the renewed impression of his goodness, we may,
with purified spirits, approach him in the multitude of his mercies, and offer
unto him thanksgiving and praise!

DISCOURSE IV.
ARISE, and go hence; for, this is not thy rest! We are abundantly instructed
in the holy scriptures respecting the shortness of human life, the brevity of
all terrestrial pleasures, and the vanity of all human pursuits, compared with
the satisfaction which is found in a course of virtue, and the glorious hope
with which it inspires its humble votaries of ultimately possessing an
inheritance which is incorruptible, and fades not away.

It is the worthy purpose, or end, of real religion, to ennoble our nature, to
raise our thoughts and contemplations from carnal to spiritual, from
terrestrial to celestial, objects. Set your affections, says the apostle, on
things above, not on things on the earth. If our affections be solely placed on
things which are beneath, or on the pleasures derived to us from an intercourse
with the objects of sense, our happiness, indeed, will be exceedingly
short-lived and uncertain. Here we have no continuing city: every thing of a
terrestrial nature is mutable. There is not any state or circumstance of life,
however pleasing, that we can have any security will continue long.

A transition, from a state of opulence to a state of poverty, our own
observations have instructed us, has sometimes been made very quick. We cannot
either foresee or prevent those occurrences which may be productive in future
of prosperity or adversity, of pleasure or pain. The fashion of this world,
says the apostle, passes away, and we are indeed passing with it. Short is
the span of human life: short the path we have to tread from the cradle to the
grave, the house appointed for the reception of all living; for, dust thou art,
and to dust thou shall return. Seeing, therefore, we have no continuing city,
let us form the wise resolution of seeking one that is to come; a city which
has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. I have understood by this
passage of scripture, which is figurative, that we are called upon, as rational
creatures, by the voice of divine wisdom, seeing all the pleasures, or
satisfactions, which arise from an intercourse with sensible objects, must
terminate, to endeavor, by the best use or application of those powers, which
Heaven has endued us with, to seek that species of happiness which will be
permanent, and is adapted to the nature of a rational and an immortal spirit.
This is the comment which I have made on this passage of holy writ: and I do
most fervently wish that our minds may be disposed at this season seriously to
reflect on the comparative folly of all sensual indulgences, and on the vanity
of human pursuits; and be animated to seek the superior good, a habitation in
the city of the saints solemnities, a city that has foundations. Look, says
the text, upon Zion, the city of our solemnities, and thine eyes shall see
Jerusalem a quiet habitation; not one of its stakes shall ever be removed, nor
any of its cords be broken: there the glorious Lord is to its inhabitants as a
place of broad rivers and streams. He is the source whence their happiness is
derived; and, as he is immortal, the happiness, derived from an intercourse or
communion with him will consequently be permanent. We are instructed by what
means we are to seek successfully this city that has foundations. We are told,
in the Revelations, in words somewhat of this import, Blessed is he who keeps
the commandments of God: he shall have access to the tree of life, which stands
in the midst of the Paradise of God; shall enter in through the gates into the
city, and become a fellow-citizen with the saints, and of the household of God.
Here we learn, that, if we would possess a habitation in this city, we must
seek it by walking in the commandments. Again, if thou will enter into life,
keep the commandments. There is no other way to become an inhabitant of this
city than by obedience to the sacred commandments of Heaven, which are of
universal obligation. Let us not, therefore, expect to climb up any other way,
or to attain a state of felicity hereafter, by any other mode than obedience
from the heart to the manifestations of the divine will; and, with respect to
the commandments of God, we are also instructed by what means they are to be
ascertained; at least, by individuals for themselves: a manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. It is called light, because it
has a property which is analogous to that element. It illuminates the
understandings of mankind, by instructing them in matters of the greatest
importance, -- matters which respect their final acceptance with the Judge of
the whole earth at the last day.

But, though the light shines, or a manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every man to profit withal, yet there are, comparatively speaking, but few who
attend to its dictates, and pursue that course of virtue which the light of the
gospel of Jesus evidently points out. It is with many as it was with the
multitude when our Lord was personally on earth. Light, says he, is come into
the world, but men love darkness rather than light. He came, a divine messenger
of heaven, to propose the terms of reconciliation to fallen creatures. He came
to enlighten their understandings, to correct the depravity of their hearts, to
purify them, and to make them meet for an inheritance which is incorruptible,
and fades not away. He came to reveal to them the way which leads to this
glorious city; but they turned a deaf ear to the instructions of wisdom; they
would not attend to his counsel, nor be admonished by his reproofs. Light is
come into the world, but men love darkness rather than light. They hate the
light, neither come to the light, lest their deeds should be reproved.

Perhaps, if we review our lives; if we look into the book of conscience, we
shall find something recorded there which bears a resemblance, more or less, to
the circumstance of those people in the days of our Lord's personal appearance
on earth. There is not a being, arrived to years capable of serious reflection,
who has not had some secret convictions for doing wrong; who has not had some
compunction of conscience for having transgressed the laws and statutes of
Heaven. But, as the pointing of the sacred finger leads to things contrary to
the wish of the sensual heart, immersed in pleasures derived from terrestrial
pursuits, we are not disposed to attend to the instruction of the sacred
monitor. We are rather disposed to be flattered in our vices, to be soothed in
our sins, than to have them corrected, and to be led into the just man's path,
which is as the shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day.

There is a circumstance on record concerning an ancient king, which may serve,
perhaps, to illustrate the doctrine which I have in view to assert. He was
about to lead out his army to battle, and was doubtful of the event of his
intended enterprise. He was desirous, if possible, to know what should be the
decision of the day; and, for that purpose, he intended to consult some seer;
but he meant some person who should be capable of flattering his vanity and
wishes. A prophet of the Lord was proposed to him -- one who had never acted
the part of a sycophant, but had spoken the word of the Lord faithfully: -- but
he was not disposed to consult this prophet. That, indeed, which would have
recommended him to every judicious person, was the cause of his refusing to
consult him. He knew he would not attempt to sooth his vanity, prophecy smooth
things, or speak deceit: therefore he determined not to consult him. I hate
him, for he does not prophecy good concerning me, but evil. And thus, with
respect to the divine monitor, the manifestation of the grace of God in the
human heart, which bears a faithful testimony to our consciences; we are not
disposed to attend to its dictates, but we call upon our passions to sooth us,
to flatter us, and to concur with our vain hopes, and, by this means, have
neglected things which are of the greatest importance. We are rather desirous
that we may be indulged in the pursuit of lying vanities, than to have our eyes
effectually opened to see our own nakedness, the depravity of our hearts, and
the way which leads to Zion. I hate him; for he does not speak good concerning
me, but evil. Thus mankind hate the reproofs of the divine light in their own
consciences, because it testifies against their darling passions, and thwarts
them in their pleasing pursuits; intercepts their long-indulged prospects, and
points out to them a road, the pursuit of which would afford them no pleasure
though it leads to Zion. Their thoughts are engrossed by inferior objects; they
have no taste, or relish, for things which are of a spiritual nature, but
would, if it were possible, take up their rest in transient gratifications, and
not be solicitous with respect to the conclusion of the scene, or what shall be
their circumstance, or state, in the world, or life, which is to come.

They hate the light: Why so? Because it manifests their deeds of darkness.
They do not like to take a view of their own hearts. Such is the depravity
thereof, that a view of it is indeed humiliating to the pride of human nature.
They had rather draw a veil over their sins than see them in their proper
colors, as they really are; or pursue such measures of conduct as would
ennoble their nature, rectify their judgments, and open to them prospects far
more inviting than what this world can afford, even the prospect of an
everlasting habitation in the new heaven and the new earth, wherein
righteousness dwells.

But, though I am led to speak after this manner, I have no doubt that there
are many in this audience who have weighed the worth of vanity, and estimated
the insignificancy of all terrestrial things; who have seen that they are not
adapted to satiate the thirst of an immortal spirit. They have contemplated,
and have gathered from their own observations, that every thing is mutable; --
that the finger of Omnipotence has written on the face of universal nature,
They shall perish. They have gathered, I say, from their own observations, that
every thing, included in this system, is mutable; and that, in a short time, a
period will be put to their existence on earth, when their connection with all
sublunary objects will be dissolved for ever. Under such a prospect of the
uncertainty of terrestrial pleasures, they have been animated to seek a city
which has foundations; or, in other words, have been excited, by the purest
motives, to pursue those means which will introduce that happiness into the
soul which is not dependent on any elementary or secondary causes, but on an
union of soul with the Author of its being; and have chosen, if it should be
their lot in the course of the providence of divine wisdom, to suffer rather
affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin, which
are but for a season. I salute these with the salvation of the love of the
gospel of Christ. These are seeking a city which has foundations, whose
builder and maker is God; and their hope will not be as the hope of the
hypocrite, which will perish, but a hope that will terminate in an everlasting
fruition of joys, which eye has not seen, nor has ear heard, nor has it
entered into the heart of man to conceive. Blessed are they who keep the
commandments of God: they will have access to the tree of life, which stands in
the midst of the Paradise of God, and shall enter in through the gates into the
city, -- become fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of God.
For, having been redeemed from the bondage of corruption, they shall enjoy the
glorious liberty of the sons of God; they shall enter into the city of the
saints solemnities, the inhabitants whereof shall never complain that they are
sick. Indeed, it affords the most enlivening species of hope, to them that seek
this city, that, when the clouds shall gather blackness, darkness, and tempest,
-- when the prospect of the future shall be exceedingly gloomy, -- they can
penetrate this gloom, and anticipate an everlasting habitation in purer skies,
in the new heaven and in the new earth, wherein righteousness dwells. I wish,
friends, we may be effectually animated by the consideration of these things:
that, seeing every thing is uncertain, and that we may be deprived of the
choicest of terrestrial blessings in an unexpected hour, let us seek a city
that has foundations, and lay up for ourselves a good foundation against the
time which is to come.

It is, indeed, to be acknowledged, with reverent gratitude and praise, that
many are the blessings we have received in the course of God's providence; and
we ought to receive them in a humble, becoming manner -- in a manner becoming
dependent beings, who have nothing which they have not received, and to use, or
apply, them to the purpose for which they were given. But we are not to rest
satisfied in those enjoyments which are to be derived merely from an
intercourse with terrestrial objects. Arise, and go hence; this is not thy
rest! But there is a rest prepared for the people of God; and that rest is to
be attained by a reverent attention to his commandments. This is the constant
doctrine of the holy Scriptures, both in the old and in the new Testament: let
us, therefore, study the will of Heaven respecting us; and let it be our
constant concern to recommend ourselves to the Author of our being, by
manifesting the love we feel or possess for him, in a reverent attention to his
statutes and his commandments. Were our hearts thus disposed heavenward to
seek the superior good, we should be able to join with the royal Psalmist in
saying, My soul thirsts for God, for the living God! Again, As the heart
pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God! A
contemplation of the divine law, to those who love it, would open source of the
most exalted pleasure, and they would indeed say with the Psalmist, Thy
statutes are my songs in the house of my pilgrimage. Now I understand, by songs
in the text, that they were the chief, or principal, objects of his affections;
that they were inscribed on the tablet of his heart, as well as written on the
posts of his doors. They were the subjects of his meditation when he lay down
and when he rose up.

May it please the Author of all good so to inspire our hearts with a noble
contempt of all sensual indulgences, as that we may pursue those things which
are most excellent; and, seeing the insufficiency of all terrestrial scenes to
communicate to us permanent felicity, we may set our affections on things which
are above, and, by a course of practical virtue and obedience, lay up for
ourselves treasure in heaven, where the moth nor rust cannot corrupt, nor
thieves break through, and steal. Then shall we ultimately attain that rest which
is prepared for the people of God, in which there is fullness of joy!

DISCOURSE V.
THERE is a passage of holy writ which has engaged my serious meditation. You
will find it, on sacred record, in words to this purport:

If thine own heart condemn thee not, then have thou confidence toward God; by
which I have understood, thou have confidence, and a humble expectation of the
divine blessing, and that thou shall be accepted of the Judge of the whole
earth in the day of judgment, the day of final decision.

The apostle also says, But, if thine own heart condemn thee, remember that God
is greater, and knows all things; by which I have understood, that, if we
stand condemned at the tribunal of our own hearts, we shall not be approved of
him, who looks not as man looks, but looks at the heart.

I conceive, however, that this passage is not to be admitted without some
exception; for, it is possible that some people may have digressed so widely
from the paths of truth and virtue, and sunk so deeply into the lowest species
of sensuality, as to have their understandings clouded, and perceive not the
propriety and the excellency of virtue. Their consciences are become seared as
with a hot iron. Reiterated transgression of the divine law renders the heart,
as it were, in some degree, callous, and it loses that delicate moral
sensibility distinguished by the appellation of conscience. On the other hand,
some pious, well-disposed people, afflicted perhaps by some species of natural
disease, have let in, and cherished, groundless fears and apprehensions, have
thought themselves so morally depraved and polluted, that, though some of them
seem to be the best of mankind, we may have observed them to have been brought
to the confines of the horrible pit of despair. These may, I think, be
considered as exceptions to this general rule of the apostle.

Now I conceive the apostle intended to this purport; that, whoever wishes to
receive the best information respecting the duties which he owes to his Maker
and to his fellow creatures, and pursues those means of instruction which he
apprehends will be the most conducive to obtain it, and who conforms his life,
his manners, and his conversation, agreeably to that knowledge which he has
received, as he will not be condemned of his own heart, but have the testimony
of a conscience void of offense toward God and toward man, so he will be
approved of his Maker, and approved of the wise, the discerning, and the good,
of all ranks and denominations of men. On the contrary, the man who wilfully
acts against the sober dictates of his judgment, will of course (unless he
becomes indeed a reprobate) feel the testimony of his own conscience against
him. Perhaps this moral sensibility may not always attend him. In his convivial
hours, -- hours that are set apart for the gratification of merely sensual
appetites, -- hours that are passed in unholy delights, in rioting and
drunkenness, in chambering and wantonness, he may not be susceptible of the
impressions of conscience; yet, in the moments of his recess, when he retires
from the pleasing and delusive scenes of vanity, in the moments of cool
reflection, he will feel the testimony of his own conscience, which may prompt
him to act in a manner similar to that of our great primogenitor, who, in the
calm evening of the day, remembered the transgression of the morn, felt the
reproaches of his own conscience, and attempted to hide himself from the all
penetrating eye of the Lord of the universe. Adam, where art thou? He hid
himself among the trees of the garden; and thus it is with us, or has been,
more or less, with us all. We first transgressed, and then sought to hide our
transgression; for, it is my firm opinion, that, if mankind were as heartily
concerned to reform their evil practices as they are to conceal them, the work
of reformation would soon be more striking and apparent amongst the several
ranks and classes of mankind.

Whoever has the testimony of his conscience against him will have no solid
foundation of hope, or expectation of being approved of him whose laws he has
transgressed, whose statutes he has violated.

I wish, my friends, we might be all suitably impressed with the importance of
this subject. It is of all others the most interesting to us, -- a good
conscience.

But it is exceedingly to be regretted that this species of good, this species
of riches, is too seldom the object of our pursuit. In this world, we are as a
guest that tarrieth but for half an hour. In a short time, those who possess
goodly inheritances must leave them to their children or heirs. Generation
succeeds to generation very quickly. Were we, therefore, to possess all the
riches of this world; were we to be made proprietors of the world itself, under
the anticipation of that solemn period when we shall be about to quit this
terrestrial sphere, what is it that a man would not give in exchange for his
soul! What is it he would not part with, were it in the power of his disposal,
for the testimony of a good conscience, to give him a humble confidence toward
God, that the future state he is just entering upon shall be within the
confines of the general assembly of the just and purified spirits, who, in the
fruition of eternal joy, receive the end of their faith, even the salvation of
their souls!

I beseech you, my friends, in the love of the gospel of Christ, that ye walk
wisely; that ye be circumspect; that ye study, in the first place, your
respective duties; that you be prompted by the purest and worthiest motives to
act agreeably with the information you have received, that so you may possess
this inestimable blessing, a good conscience, or a conscience void of offense
both toward God and toward man.

This is that species of treasure which we are exhorted to lay up for ourselves
in heaven, in bags that wax not old, where the moth and the rust cannot
corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal. This is the species of riches,
and the only species of riches, which the craft and violence of others cannot
wrest from us; for, it is secured beyond the power of plunder: it is secured in
a man's own heart, over which his neighbor can have no control. But, whatever
else he possesses, he may, in the course of divine providence, be stripped of.
He may lose his fair inheritance; It may be translated to the hands of others
by events which human wisdom could not foresee, nor human prudence prevent. He
may be stripped of all his property, and be brought to penury and want; but the
testimony of a good conscience cannot be taken from a man: it must be given
away, -- it must be voluntarily parted with, by a transgression of those
dictates which may be called the law of conscience. Therefore let us lay up for
ourselves a good foundation against the time to come.

But I am aware of an objection which, perhaps, may be made. It is this: the
excellency of a good conscience is universally admitted; but where is the man
who possesses this inestimable treasure? Where is the man who can lay his hand
upon his heart, and say, that it condemns him not? Upon a review of the actions
of his life, and the influencing motives of his conduct, where is the man who
can lay his hand upon his heart, and pronounce himself immaculate?

I believe there is not such a man existing; that is to say, a man that does
not sin, or has not aforetime sinned; for, all have sinned, and fallen short
of the glory of God, and of course have forfeited those glorious privileges
which were possessed by our primogenitors in their paradisical state, before
they transgressed the divine law. We have sinned, and fallen short of the glory
of God; but we are abundantly instructed, both in the old and new testament,
that the Author of our being wills not the death of the sinner, -- that he
wills not the destruction of creatures which he has formed capable of
eternal life* He is not disposed, at all events, to consign them to the realms
of irremediable woe and misery, but has manifested himself toward his
creatures in the character not only of a just, but also of a merciful and
gracious, being; a being who compassionates the infirmities, the weaknesses,
and wanderings, of his creatures, and who has provided a means for the
redemption of mankind from sin, and, of course, from misery: -- that means is
Jesus Christ, the mediator of the new covenant, the high priest of the
Christian dispensation, constituted, not after the law of a carnal commandment,
but after the power of an endless life, who remains a priest forever. It is a
faithful saying, and it is worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came
into the world to save sinners; not to save them in their sins, but to save
them from their sins, to cleanse them from all unrighteousness, to restore unto
his creatures the glorious liberty of the sons of God, and, of consequence, a
good conscience: Wherefore, says the apostle, we trust we have a good
conscience.

This is the great and glorious purpose of the manifestation of the Son of God,
that, notwithstanding we have sinned, and fallen short of his glory; that we
all, as sheep, have gone astray from the sheepfold, and have wandered in the
wilderness of this world, yet, if we confess our sins, God is faithful and just
to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness; by which I
understand, that the office of the mediator is not only to be the means of the
remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God, but that his
office also is to cleanse and sanctify the penitent soul, -- to cleanse it from
all unrighteousness, and, of course, it will have a good conscience, and have
confidence toward God. Now these are general propositions, to which we all
accede. Offers of mercy are held out to us through Jesus Christ our Lord, and
our consciences will most certainly condemn us, unless we attempt to apply
those offers, to apply those healing qualities, unto ourselves. The testimony
of our consciences will stand against us if we neglect this great salvation,
which is offered to us through Jesus Christ our Lord. I beseech you, therefore,
by the mercies of God, (than which there is nothing, perhaps, more likely to
influence the sensible and judicious part of mankind, who open their eyes, and
view the vast extent of the divine empire -- who contemplate the phenomenon of
nature, and the several means that the Author of nature has taken for the
conservation of all the species of his creatures, I beseech you, therefore,
brethren, by the mercies of God,) that you present your bodies a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, which is our reasonable service. But
there is no sacrifice that can be offered upon the altar of God, there is no
prayer whatever which claims the notice of the Lord God of Sabbath, which is
not the offspring of a humble, of a devoted, heart, sensible of its weakness,
sensible of its unworthiness, and of a purity of intention to apply those means
for its redemption, and to pursue those methods, for the future, which shall
receive the testimony of conscience, and the recompense of the just at the last
day.

Let it, then, be the first object of our attention to seek a good conscience.
Let us think every thing else but as dross and as dung. Every acquisition we
may make within the compass of the creation, bears no proportion to the
blessing of a good conscience; for, possessing this, a man has peace at home.
Whatever tumults may arise, whatever winds may blow, whatever afflictions may
surround him, these will but play round his head; they cannot reach his heart;
for, the good man shall he satisfied from himself. He will have a source of
satisfaction in himself, which will dissipate every gloom, -- a satisfaction
the sensual are strangers to. He will look beyond the confines of time, and
expect a habitation in the new heavens and the new earth, wherein righteousness
dwells. Though men should look upon his life to be without use, and his end
without honor, yet he will be approved of God, and the lot of his inheritance
will be with the saints. But, if a man does not possess the testimony of his
own conscience, he cannot be happy in any circumstance of life. Wherever he
goes, his conscience will attend him; and, even in the house of banqueting, he
will sometimes, as it were, see a handwriting on the wall, Thou are weighed in
the balance, and sound wanting. If he come to the greatest honor and
preferment, still he will be like Cain; and, having a bad conscience, may be
doomed to compass the earth without being able to make a happy settlement in
any part of it. He has no peace in himself; he is seeking for that without,
which must be found (if ever it be found) within, him; for, if a man be
completely satisfied, it must be from himself: (it must not, however, be
considered as the effect of his moral conduct, apart from Jesus Christ; it must
proceed from that pure state which is termed, in the sacred writings,
regeneration.) His affections must be translated from creaturely objects to the
Creator. They must be set, not on things beneath, but on things which are
above, and then it will become the object of his pursuit, to lay up treasure in
heaven; and, where the treasure is, there will the heart be also.

But, let it not be imagined, that that is peculiar to an inhabitant above the
stars. Let it not be imagined, that he must ascend to the heights above, to
feel the joys of the community or society of purified spirits; for, the just
upon earth, and the glorified in heaven, participate of the same eternal
Fountain of mercy, goodness and truth: they are replenished at the same
immortal Fountain of mercy and goodness; -- a Fountain, that can never be drawn
dry, -- a Fountain, at which the righteous of all denominations have drank.
They have been refreshed with those streams which intersect this vale of tears;
and, as they have passed along, they have experienced a growth in grace, and in
the saving knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ. They have enjoyed a foretaste of
that species of felicity, which eye has not seen, ear has not heard, nor has
it entered into the heart of man, unregenerate man, to conceive. This is
written for all that shall be joined to the society of the just; not to any
tribe or nation in particular, but to people of all names and tongues that fear
God, and work righteousness, whose hearts condemn them not, who possess the
testimony of a good conscience.

We are told, that the kingdom of heaven is within us; and our Lord,
forewarning his disciples concerning the deceivers of the ensuing times, who
should say, Lo, here is Christ, and lo, there is Christ! cautions them, saying,
go not forth after them: the kingdom of heaven, says he, is within you. And, in
another place, it is defined to be righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost. Then, wherever there is the beauty of righteousness, wherever there is
that moral rectitude which is consonant to the law of God, there is the kingdom
of heaven, -- there is the temple of the Holy Ghost; and, thus sanctified in
the name of the Most High, the vessel bears the inscription of Holiness to the
Lord! The kingdom of heaven is within you. Let us be concerned to experience
that rectitude of heart, that conversion of soul, which will qualify us to
enjoy the incomes of the Holy Spirit, -- that will qualify us to have communion
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.

I commend these observations to your serious consideration, beseeching you, my
friends, let it be the first object of your study to attain and keep a good
conscience. If we are conscious of having sinned, let us implore the
interposition of the divine mercy; let us be prostrate at the footstool of the
throne of divine grace; let us attempt to feel those affections, those
penitential affections, that will prompt us to enter into the temple of the
Most High, in a disposition of mind suitable to the occasion, and similar to
that of the poor publican. We have nothing that we can boast of. Indeed, the
most exalted among men have nothing to boast of in the sight of God. After we
have discharged our obligations, we are unprofitable servants. We are
unprofitable to him, and have nothing to claim upon the score of merit, because
we have done nothing but what was our duty.

Let us, impressed, therefore, with these motives, lay aside every weight, and
the sin which does so easily beset us, and run with patience the race that is
set before us. Let it be the just man's path, to which the eye of our mind may
be allured, and our feet be turned, which is as a shining light, that shines
more and more unto the perfect day. That, as we pass along, and as we grow in
years, we may grow in grace, we may grow in favor with the common Father of us
all: that, when our natural sun may be on the decline, and nearly set, whether
we are in the meridian, or evening of old age, we may have a prospect of
immortality; and, having our sun set in an unclouded horizon, it may be to us
the glorious presage of an eternal fair day.

I commend us to God, and to a humble attention to the manifestation of that
Spirit which he has given to every man to profit withal, and which is adapted
to the proper information of our judgments, to strengthen our virtuous
resolutions, to guide us by its counsels through the wilderness of this world,
and establish us in the realms of glory, where, with saints and angels, and the
spirits of just men made perfect, we may celebrate the praises of the Author of
our being. Thus, if we act wisely, and wish to possess a good conscience, we
shall be translated to that sphere where the wise shall shine as the brightness
of the firmament, and they that turn many unto righteousness, as the stars,
forever and ever!

PRAYER AT THE CONCLUSION OF THE MEETING.
MOST gracious Creator, it is of thine infinite mercy that thou deignest to
hear our prayers, or take the least favorable notice of us; for, we have
all, as lost sheep, gone astray: we have sinned, and forsaken thy statutes, as
our fathers have done. We are, therefore, unworthy of the least of thy mercies
and grace. Yet thou art pleased to encourage us to approach thy sacred altar,
to humble ourselves before thee, and to offer up our supplications unto thee,
the common Father of us all. Though Heaven be thy throne, and earth thy
footstool, yet thou not only hear, but hearkenest, to the voice of the
prayer of thy creatures. The prayer of any, and every, penitent soul penetrates
the heavens, and reaches thee. O most holy and merciful God, impress us, at
this season, we humbly beseech thee, with suitable affections of soul to enter
into thy house of prayer, and lift up our hearts with our hands to the
habitation of thy holiness, sensible, most holy God, of thine infinite purity,
and of that impurity which we have contracted by the transgression of thy law.
We implore the extension of thy mercy, through Jesus Christ, for the remission
of sins that are part, and that thou would be pleased effectually to cleanse
and sanctify us, through the operations of thy holy Spirit, before we shall go
hence, and be no more seen; that, having a hope of immortality, we may be
enabled, by the aid of thy Spirit, to pass the time of our sojourning here in
fear, and, being concerned above all things to retain in our possession the
testimony of a good conscience, we may be accepted of the Judge of the whole
earth at the last day; that, in a solemn view of thy greatness, our souls may
be humbled, that, under the influence of thy holy Spirit, we may offer up to
thee the incense of thanksgiving and praise, ascribing to thee might, majesty,
and glory, dominion, and every other excellent attribute with which thou art
surrounded, now and for evermore. Amen.

DISCOURSE VI.
WITHOUT Faith it is impossible to please God; for, he that comes unto God
must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek
him.

The revival of this passage of holy writ, in my remembrance, has been the
means of exciting and fixing my attention upon the subject of faith.

It cannot, I conceive, have escaped the observation of any person, who is
arrived at years of understanding, and is conversant with the Holy Scriptures,
that the same word faith has diverse acceptations: that, in some places, it
intends not only a belief in the existence of an infinitely wise, powerful, and
intelligent, Being, who is a rewarder of them who diligently seek him; but also
an affiance, or trust, in seasons of adversity and probation, in that Being who
has all power in heaven and earth, whose power is uncontrollable, who does
whatsoever pleases him in the armies of Heaven and amongst the inhabitants of
the earth. -- The word faith is also used to distinguish between the different
dispensations; to point out the glorious dispensation of the Gospel of Christ,
which is called the law of faith, and to contradistinguish it from the Mosaic
dispensation, which is called the law of works; and I conceive, that, wherever
any of the writers of the New Testament speak of the insignificancy of works,
with respect to the rendering a man acceptable to the Author of his being, the
works of the law, or, to use the apostle's expression, the deeds of the law, by
which no flesh living can be justified, are intended. The rituals of the legal
dispensation are not of a nature to be trusted in. Our Savior, in his person,
fulfilled the obligation of that law, and was the end of that law for
righteousness sake. It is therefore written, that he has taken away the
handwriting of ordinances, and nailed them to his cross; which must respect
the rituals of the Musaic dispensation.

Some people, whom I need not uncharitably censure, have, I conceive,
entertained a mistaken notion respecting the nature of that faith which is
effectual, through Christ, to the salvation of the soul. They have apprehended,
that a belief in the existence of the Supreme Being, and a belief in Jesus
Christ, whom God has sent, is of itself sufficient, and, unto whomsoever this
faith is given, they are to be deemed of the number of the chosen few, whom God
predestined from everlasting unto eternal life; and that this faith, apart
from the consideration of works, is sufficient unto salvation: -- but to me it
appears, on the most serious investigation of the Holy Scriptures, that, as
without faith it is impossible to please God, so with faith it is possible to
displease him. This is a proposition which I conceive might be proved from
diverse parts of the New Testament especially; more particularly where we are
told of people, who, after they knew God (it implies that he was manifested
unto them) after they knew God, they glorified him not as God, but became vain
in their imaginations, and their foolish hearts became darkened. They glorified
him not as God, that is, they brought not forth those good fruits, by which, it
is said, that our Father who is in Heaven is glorified; for, herein, says our
Lord, is my heavenly Father glorified, in that ye bring forth much fruit; by
which, undoubtedly, the fruits of the Spirit are intended, joy, peace, love,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, and faith. It is possible that a man may
be convinced with respect to the truth of certain propositions received upon
the authority, the divine authority, of him who proposes them, and yet may act
in direct contradiction to the obligation of those laws. Now we are in diverse
places instructed respecting the essentiality of faith; that it is a lively,
operating principle of the judgment, which has a moral influence upon a man's
actions: not a mere barren, speculative faith, but a faith that works by love
-- To what? To the purifying of the conscience from all dead works, to serve
the living God, not in the oldness of the letter, but in the newness of the
Spirit, and with life; and, lest the primitive Christians should entertain a
mistaken notion of the efficacy of faith in the abstract, and should rest their
hopes of salvation upon their subscription to certain articles of faith, though
those articles be founded upon the basis of immutable truth, the apostle takes
occasion to instruct them that faith without works is dead: Think thou, O
vain man, that faith can save thee? The very devils (says he) believe; the very
devils believe, and they also tremble; for, as the body without the soul is
dead, so faith without works is dead also; and he proposed a test, a test of
saving faith, which is easy and obvious, and ought to be more consulted than it
is by the several classes and societies of religious professors: Show me (says
he) thy faith without thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works,
for, the tree is to be denominated by its fruit: by their fruit you shall know
them. The true believer is distinguished from the practical infidel by his
fruits; he brings forth fruits meet for repentance; he adds, to his faith,
virtue; to virtue, knowledge; to knowledge, temperance; to temperance,
brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity; and, if these things
(says the apostle) be in you, and abound, they shall make you that ye shall
neither be barren nor unfruitful in the saving knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Show me thy faith without thy works; a man may have the clearest
conception of truth without reducing this theory into practice in his own
person. To apprehend the right is one thing; to conform ourselves to the rule
of right, in our lives and in our manners, is another thing; therefore it
seems, to me, beyond the least degree of doubt, that something more than a
speculative belief, or a faith in certain propositions, is necessary to render
us acceptable to the supreme Being, and to qualify us for an inheritance among
the saints in light, to be heirs of God, and coheirs with Christ. And I wish,
as it is a matter of infinite importance to us all, that we, agreeable to the
advice of the apostle to the members of the primitive church, might examine
ourselves whether we are in the faith: Prove your own selves; know ye not
yourselves how that Jesus Christ is in you unless ye be reprobates? Let us not
content ourselves, that we are the descendents of reputed Christian parents,
that we have been made acquainted with the contents of the sacred history of
the old and of the new Testament; let us not rest satisfied merely with a
profession of the Christian religion in theory; but let us also be concerned to
act consistently with the nature and obligation of that holy religion which
Jesus Christ was sent of the Father to promote among the sons and daughters of
men.

The obligations and the Christian duties enjoined in the New Testament are
adapted at once to better our condition in this world, to make us happier in
our short pilgrimage through it, and also to secure to us everlasting felicity
in the world which is to come. Let us not forget that our Lord says, It is not
every one that says, Lord, Lord, that shall enter into the kingdom of heaven;
but be that does the will of my Father, who is in heaven. And again our Lord
instructs us thus; If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments.

By good works, I mean a conformity of the will and of the powers of the mind
to that law or rule of action, which is of God given unto man, to illuminate
his paths in this world, and guide him by his counsel to the participation of
the realms of eternal glory; and as the power of obedience is derived from him,
the Author of all that is excellent and good, as he is the giver of every good
and perfect gift, so that power is given unto us, through Jesus Christ, by
which we are capable of discharging our several obligations. I say, it being
the gift of God, and not inherent in the creature, we ascribe all unto him, who
is the efficient cause of all holiness and virtue in every part of his
vastly-extended empire; for, it is God that works in us to do according to his
own good pleasure, which pleasure is, that we should walk circumspectly, not as
fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, seeing that the days are evil; that we
(to use the language of the apostle) should be careful to maintain good works,
which are good and profitable unto men. I pretend not that they are profitable
unto God, but they are profitable unto men; and godliness (which implies the
obligation of practical duties, as well as steadfastly believing) is profitable
for all things, having the promise of the life that now is, and also of that
which is to come; but I may say, in the language of one formerly on this
subject, with respect to the supreme Being, who is perfect, self-sufficient,
and can receive nothing from his creatures, to whom he has communicated every
thing. If thou be righteous, what give thou him, or what receives he of
thine hand? thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness
may profit the children of men. It is for this purpose, this noble, this
disinterested purpose, that the Almighty has established a law to his
creatures, not for his own profit, but for theirs. Hence it is said, that the
sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath.

In the wisdom and supreme goodness of the Creator, the obligation of Christian
duties, in all circumstances, is adapted to the nature and capacity of his
creatures, to promote righteousness through all the ranks and classes of
society; and, were but our obedience proportionate to our knowledge, did we act
consistently with the dictates of our judgment, and the dictates of our faith,
we might hope to see the revival of that state, when the morning stars sang
together, and the sons of God shouted for joy.

Examine yourselves, whether you are in the faith; for, we are abundantly
instructed, as I have already observed, that the faith that is saving, is
productive of good works; and it is the best and surest test whereby to try
whether a man has a saving or only a speculative faith, as the tree is to be
known by his fruits; for men do not gather grapes of thorns, nor figs of
thistles. Therefore that professor of the Christian religion, the tenor of
whose actions gives the lie to his profession; that professor gives a
manifestation that he has only a traditional religion, a traditional zeal, and
a traditional faith, like the people of the Jews, who expressed a veneration
for the temple of the most high God, and the rituals of the legal dispensation,
and cried, The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the
Lord, are these. But the prophet said, Trust ye not in lying words, saying, the
temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord; but amend your ways and your doings.

Many and glorious are the privileges that are to be enjoyed by the believer,
such a person as I have attempted to describe, who not only believes in the
infinitely supreme and powerful Being; in the manifestation of his Son; in the
history of his life, of his death, of his resurrection, of his ascension into
glory, and in the principles and doctrines which he propagated; but who
manifests that he has a faith that works by love, the tendency of which is to
purify the conscience from dead works, to cleanse it from all unrighteousness,
that the soul of man may become the temple of the Holy Ghost. -- Great and
glorious privileges are to be enjoyed by those few, by those of whatever
religious society, who are partakers of true saving faith; for, it is worthy of
being noted, that the Author of the Christian religion is of no party, but the
friend of all; that his grace, like the rays of the sun, is extended to all,
from sea to sea, and from the rivers unto the ends of the earth; insomuch that
we are told in the Scriptures, that the Gospel is preached in every creature
under heaven; that all have heard, though all have not obeyed.

Those that are true believers, are of that stock and family unto whom it was
said, Fear not, little flock; it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the
kingdom. I am, says our Lord, the resurrection and the life; he that believes
in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and he that lives and believes
on me, shall never die. We must note, on this passage, that here, as well as in
many other places in the New and in the Old Testament, we are not to take the
sense of the Holy Ghost in a merely literal acceptance, because this would be
to admit of a doctrine contrary to the nature of things and contrary to fact.
For instance, the dead are incapable of belief or disbelief, literally
speaking; they are silent in the grave, and therefore are incapable of faith;
it therefore must intend those who are dead in trespasses and sins, aliens to
the commonwealth of Israel, strangers to the promises of the gospel of Christ,
lost and sunk in a sea of sensuality: these are they to whom the voice of the
Son of God is extended, and those that hear may yet live; they may awake unto
righteousness, and sin not. Whosoever therefore believes in me, that is to say,
who receives me in the name of him that sent me, who embraces the doctrine I
preach, who submits to the influence of the Holy Spirit given to them of me
from the Father, those who become obedient to the word that I teach, though he
were dead, yet shall he live; he shall be brought to live a life of
righteousness, he will bring forth the fruit of righteousness, and the work of
righteousness shall be peace, and the effect shall be quietness and assurance
for ever: and he that lives and believes in me, shall never die; this is not
and cannot be true in a literal sense; for we see that death happens to the
righteous and to the wicked, to him that sacrifices as well as to him that
sacrifices not; it must therefore be intended in a spiritual sense, he that
lives and believes in me, shall never die, shall never participate of that
future woe and misery described under the character of the second death; he
shall be redeemed from the bondage of spiritual death, and restored into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God; he shall live a life of righteousness
here, he shall enjoy spiritual communion with the Author of his being, he shall
have fellowship with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ; and, after the
dissolution of this body, he shall be ushered into the realms of eternal life,
he shall be united with the assembly of the just, the church of the firstborn
triumphant in glory.

Examine yourselves, whether you are in the faith. Let not us, as a people, any
more than others, presume upon the profession of a belief in certain Scripture
doctrines, or in the profession of certain articles of faith; but let us always
remember, that, if ever we are capable of sustaining the dignity of saints in
heaven, we must live the life of the just upon the earth; we must pursue the
just man's way, which is as a shining light, which shines more and more unto
the perfect day.

The obligation to practical religion, which I have attempted to impress upon
the minds of this auditory, is yet more strongly enforced, by the Author of the
Christian dispensation, at the close of that most excellent sermon, which he
preached on the mount. After having opened the heavenly treasures of doctrine,
he concludes with saying, If any man hears these savings of mine, and does
them not, he shall be likened to a foolish man, who built his house upon the
sand. This is the case of the merely nominal Christian; he hears, believes,
or assenteth to the doctrines of the Gospel of Christ: If any man hears these
sayings, of mine, and does them not, he shall be likened unto a foolish man,
who built his house upon the sand: and the rain descended, and the floods came,
and the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell, and great was the
fall thereof.

On the contrary, he describes the man who indeed possesses saving faith, the
faith of our Lord Jesus Christ; the man who will receive, at the close of his
labors beneath the sun, the end of his faith, even the everlasting salvation
of his soul: If any man hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will
liken him unto a wise man, who built his house upon a rock: and the rain
descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house,
and it fell not, because it was fixed upon an immutable basis; for it was
founded upon a rock. This man builds upon that rock, against which the gates of
hell can never prevail.

God Almighty grant, that of his infinite mercy and goodness, we may examine
the foundation we are building upon, whether the hopes and expectations we
have, of being saved with an everlasting salvation, be founded upon a
speculative faith, or upon such a belief in the supreme Being, and in his Son,
as may conform us in heart to that law, that rule of action, which the Author
of universal nature has dispensed and given to all the classes of intelligent
beings.

Examine yourselves, whether you are in the faith; prove your own selves; know
ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be
reprobates? The manifestation of the grace of God here intended, is in every
man, and its design is to instruct him in that which is right, and to
strengthen him in the performance of every virtue. This is the purpose of the
manifestation of that grace which brings salvation, and which is given unto
all men, not to a few, to the exclusion of the rest; but, through the infinite
mercy of the supreme Being, it is given to all men, and under all descriptions,
teaching us, that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world, looking for the blessed
hope and the glorious appearing of the great God and of our Savior Jesus
Christ, who has given himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. -- Let
us not therefore neglect our own mercies, by neglecting that salvation which is
offered to us through Jesus Christ our Lord. Let us be serious, let us be
inquisitive, upon a matter of so great importance as that upon which our
happiness in the world of spirits most certainly depends; let us not content
ourselves with the form and show of godliness, while we are destitute of its
life, and of its power and heavenly virtue. May our hearts enter into the
nature and spirit of true Christian faith, that by this means we may have
access to the Father through the Son, and that in these our religious and
solemn assemblies we may possess that faith by which Abel offered to God a more
excellent sacrifice than Cain; with that faith let us draw near to the temple
of the most high; let us approach to that altar to which none that serve the
tabernacle can pretend; let us approach the Author of our being and of all our
mercies, that we may be disposed by him, the preparer of the heart, to receive
the salutary influences of the Holy Ghost, and that we may feel ourselves under
the description of those, mentioned in the Old Testament, who wait upon the
name of the most high: though the youth may faint, and though the young men may
utterly fall, yet they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength,
they shall mount up with wings as eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they
shall walk and (...) dened from that which appeared to be my duty, and which I
have been performing, I trust in the ability that God gives, without any kind
of premeditation, under the influence of that celestial charity, which breathes
glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, and good will toward men; under
that influence, again I would enjoin the exhortation of the apostle: Examine
yourselves, whether you are in the faith; prove your own selves; know ye not
your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be reprobates?

PRAYER AT THE CONCLUSION OF THE MEETING.
MOST gracious God, the father and fountain of all our mercies, look down from
heaven, the habitation of thy holiness, upon us, thy poor unworthy creatures,
and impress us with a just sense of what we are, and also of what thou would
have us to be; that, seeing ourselves as we are seen of thee, we may abhor
ourselves in dust and ashes, and feel all that (...) the objects of thy mercy;
that, on a review of our past lives, we may see, and sincerely repent of, the
transgressions we have committed; and, under the influence of thine Holy
Spirit, we may resolve, in the future steps of our short pilgrimage, to correct
the errors of those that are irrecoverably past. O Lord, enable us to apply the
means of salvation, which thou art granting unto us through Jesus Christ our
Lord, that we may receive in meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save
our souls. O Lord, enlighten our eyes to see, and inspire our hearts to
perform, those things which make for our peace, those duties which thou have
enjoined unto us of indispensable obligation. -- Most gracious father, thou
know the temptations with which we are beset; thou know the weakness of
our natural powers, and the strength of those temptations which assail us. Send
us, therefore, help from thy sanctuary; strengthen us, O Lord, and impart
vigor to every virtuous resolution, that we may be enabled to lay aside every
weight and burden, and the sin that does most easily beset us, and run with
patience the race that is set before us, in humble faith and confidence in
thee, the Creator, the Protector, and the Preserver of men; that, through
whatever scene it may be our lot to pass, we may feel the support of thine
everlasting arm; that, when we pass through the valley of the shadow of death,
we may fear no evil, and, whenever it shall please thee to summon us hence, it
may be to join the general assembly and church of the first born, where, with
saints and angels, and with the spirits of just men made perfect, we may ever
live to praise thy great and excellent name, to ascribe to thee the greatness,
dominion and glory, which belong unto thee, not only now, but henceforth and
for ever more. Amen.

DISCOURSE VII.
AN apostle, writing to one of the primitive churches, addressed them in this
manner, or to this purport: Quench not the Spirit, despise not prophesying;
prove all things, and hold fast that which is good.

The writings both of the Old and the New Testament, abundantly testify, that
God does not only reveal himself unto his rational creatures in the volume of
his works, or the book of nature, in which the attributes, particularly of
power and of intelligence, are eminently displayed, but that he also reveals
himself unto his rational creatures immediately by his Spirit, which I conceive
to be the grand and primary rule or law of action to all ranks and classes of
intelligent creatures, and that all other modes of the manifestation of his
will are secondary, and subservient to the grand design or purpose thereof.

There is a spirit in man (a rational capacity, by which he is eminently
distinguished from the beasts of the field, and the fowls of heaven) and the
inspiration of the Almighty gives him an understanding. It is very observable,
that one of the chosen leaders of the people of Israel, after having solemnly,
by way of commemoration, recounted the signal interpositions of divine Power,
in the emancipation of that people from under the tyranny of Pharaoh, as one
instance of the divine goodness, he says he gave us also his good Spirit to
instruct us. This manifestation of himself by his Spirit, though
extraordinarily dispensed to many of the prophets, was more or less the
privilege of every individual; and we find the royal psalmist frequently
alluding to this principle, and rejoicing therein: The law, says he, of the
Lord is perfect, converting the soul; the testimony of the Lord is sure, making
wise the simple. The law, which he in this place intended, I conceive to be
that law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, which sets us free from the law
of sin and death. -- A manifestation hereof was given even under the former
dispensation of Moses; it was the conductor of that people, it was the source
of their greatest consolation; for, they all drank of that rock that followed
them; and that rock, says the apostle, was Christ. The law of the Lord, says
he, is perfect; by which he could not intend the law of rituals peculiar to
that dispensation, or the sacrificial rites of the Jewish institution; for, the
law, says the apostle, made nothing perfect. Again he instructs us, that it
made not perfect, as appertaining to the conscience: it is not the blood of
bulls or of goats, or the ashes of an heifer, sprinkling the unclean, that
could sanctify to the purifying of the conscience; for, the law made nothing
perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did, which hope is Christ.

That he (to wit, David) intended the primary divine law manifested by the
Spirit of God unto his creatures, is evident from diverse other places. -- I
delight, says he, in the law of the Lord; and again, blessed is the man whose
delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law does meditate day and night;
he shall be as a tree that is planted by the rivers of waters. And, that his
chief felicity depended on an immediate union or communion with the God of
Israel, is very evident from that place, where, under the pressure of his
infirmities, and conscious of the want of superior aid, he breaks forth in this
manner: My soul thirsts for God, yea, for the living God; again, as the heart
pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God.

Many other passages might be produced, from the writings even of the Old
Testament, while the Jewish tabernacle was yet remaining: but it is more, still
more, abundantly testified by our Savior, and by his apostles. The
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. -- This is
that principle of intelligence given us in Jesus Christ, or through Jesus
Christ, our Lord, which the apostle intended, when he said, quench not the
Spirit; which must certainly mean the inward manifestation of the Deity to the
soul, that grace, a measure whereof is given to every man to profit withal; and
that it could not mean any written manifestation of himself, or the Scriptures
(which some have conceived was intended by the Spirit, who allege, that the
Spirit, or the will of God, being revealed unto holy men immediately, was
mediately communicated, through the instrumentality of the Scriptures, to the
rest of mankind) is very evident; for, the canon of the New Testament was not
made up till some hundreds of years after the writing of this Epistle; nor does
it appear, that any epistles or writings of the evangelists were collected or
completed even during the lives of the Apostles. The New Testament, therefore,
as a book, did not exist; but the apostle alludes to something that had been
received, which I take to be the manifestation of the Spirit, that is given to
every man to profit withal.

This principle of intelligence, this manifestation of the divine will, its
effects, its properties, and its influence upon the human soul, is set forth
under various figurative modes of expression. It is sometimes compared unto
fire. As it is the property of fire to purify metal, and separate heterogeneous
matter, so the spirit of God, operating on the soul, will thoroughly purge away
its dross, and take away all its tin; cleanse the soul from all
unrighteousness, and of course, make it a fit habitation of God through the
Spirit -- Is not my word, says the Lord, as a fire? as a fire to consume and
destroy that part in man which is at enmity with that which is good? And
therefore the office of the high priest of this dispensation is set forth,
under the same figurative mode of expression, by him who was the forerunner of
Christ, who was the voice of one crying in the wilderness, prepare ye the way
of the Lord, make his path strait. He baptized the people, as he said, indeed,
with water, unto repentance; but when he speaks of the ministration of Jesus,
which was to succeed his, he says, He, that comes after me, is mightier than
I; whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to loose; he shall baptize you with fire.
Now it cannot be conceived that the material element of fire is intended, which
would destroy men's bodies; for Jesus Christ came not to destroy men's lives,
but to save them. He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire, whose
fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, gather his wheat
into his garner, and the chaff he will burn up with unquenchable fire. This
Scripture I adduce to show that the effects of the Holy Spirit upon the
rational soul, the soul that is depraved by the transgression of the divine
law, and has contracted the defilement of sin, is analogous to the operation of
that element, that is adapted to purify and refine material bodies. Thus it is
said, that a man, sanctified by the influence thereof, shall become as pure as
gold, yea, more pure than the golden wedge of Ophir. This I take to be the one
essential baptism, the baptism of the Holy Ghost, which cleanses men from all
unrighteousness, and which is necessary to constitute us the proper object of
that inheritance which is incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not
away. For, the baptism that now saves is not an elementary baptism; the baptism
which now saves is not the putting away the filth of the flesh, than which
nothing could be more easy for a man to effectuate; but, it is that which gives
the answer of a good conscience toward God, by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ, who has said, I am the resurrection and the life; he, who believes on
me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and he, who lives and believes on
me, shall never die.

Quench not the Spirit. The simile, or figure, is very well maintained; for, as
the property of the Holy Spirit is set forth under the metaphorical language of
fire, so that, which has a tendency to damp its generous ardour, or prevent its
influence, is compared to water. In a moral sense, whatever a man does,
whatever notion he cherishes in his heart of the vicious species, whatever
license he gives to his passions beyond the bounds prescribed by the divine
law, operates as water on a flame; it damps its ardour. And we see that those,
who deviate from the paths of innocence, go on step by step, by little and
little, till they are brought to actions of the most criminal nature,
destructive of their health, destructive of their souls peace, and which afford
them no pleasure, but a fearful looking for of the just judgment of the divine
Being, who will deal with every man according to his works. I say, every
deviation from the path of virtue will have this effect, to quench the spirit.
Let us, therefore, by every possible means, endeavor to cherish this divine
flame; it is a spark sent from heaven, and it is designed to purify us
throughout, to make us vessels holy to the Lord, meet for an inheritance with
the saints in light, and to celebrate the praises of heaven's King forevermore.

Quench not the Spirit. Yield to that monitor, which cautions you against even
the appearance of evil, which is mercifully given unto man to direct him in his
course in this world, and establish him, happily establish him, in the life
that is to come, in the possession of that species of felicity, which eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart, the unconverted
heart, to conceive; but God has revealed it to us, says the apostle, by his
Spirit; for, the Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of God.

Quench not the Spirit. Add, to your faith, virtue; to virtue, knowledge; to
knowledge, temperance; to temperance, brotherly kindness; to brotherly
kindness, charity. Thus cherish the holy flame; yield to the salutary influence
of the Spirit, that quickens to cherish in your breasts every heavenly and
every friendly affection. The duty of a Christian, both with respect to his
Creator and his fellow creature, is set forth to us in the answer which our
Lord gave to one who asked him, which is the greatest commandment? Thou shall
love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength. This is the first and great commandment; and, the tendency of that
Spirit which we have received, if we yield to its influence, would animate our
affections toward that Being on whom we depend, and by whose blessings we are
supported; raise our minds to contemplate the instances of God's power,
righteousness, goodness, and truth, manifested; and enable us to ascend, as
upon the wings of an eagle, in a meditation on the divine attributes; and
inspire us with that species of gratitude which it is not in the power of
language to define.

Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy strength. This is the first and great commandment; and this we
should be instructed to do, if we yielded to the influences of, and did not
quench, the Spirit, which is like a fire to enkindle within us a sacred flame
of devotion, in which we may encompass the altar of the Almighty, in the
multitude of his mercies, and approach acceptably the temple of his holiness.

Despise not prophesying. Now it is to be understood, that the manifestation of
the Spirit does not supersede, or render useless, instrumental means. God has
used both these means; he has spoken unto our fathers by the prophets; he has
spoken to us, in these latter days, by his Son; he has sent his apostles to go
forth, by his authority, in his name, to preach the Gospel, to the poor, to
heal the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captive, the opening of the
prison to them who were bound, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and
the day of vengeance of our God. He appointed some prophets, and some
evangelists, and some pastors and teachers, for the edifying of the body in
that love, by which it is united unto its holy head. Despise not therefore
prophesying.

At the same time that we conceive this manifestation of the Spirit to be the
primary law and rule of our actions, we must by no means despise instrumental
means of instruction. All scripture is given by the inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, to make the man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works, and is able to make us wise unto salvation, through faith which is
of Christ Jesus: we therefore accept the Scriptures as an inestimable blessing;
for in them we have an account of the various dispensations of divine wisdom,
and in which we have the concurrent testimony of the apostles and prophets of
Jesus Christ to this fundamental principle of which we are most firmly
persuaded.

Despise not prophesying. Let us improve, by every means which divine wisdom
lays in the way, that we may be furnished to every good word and work, and
increase in the knowledge of God.

Despise not prophesying; prove all things; hold fast that which is good. I
conceive that the manifestation of the Spirit, given to every man to profit
withal, is proposed to his rational understanding, and supersedes not the use
of those rational powers by which he is distinguished; but it qualifies him to
exercise those powers in the best line, and to the noblest purposes, to assert
the dignity of his nature, and qualify him for those species of employments
which are suited to the nature of an immortal spirit, made a little lower than
the angels. He is to prove all things, and hold fast that which is good. The
Father of lights appeals to the understanding and faculties of men; when he
makes a revelation to his creatures, he mercifully condescends to let himself
down to the faculties they possess; he speaks to them in a language they
understand. Therefore, prove all things; distinguish properly between things
and things in matters of the greatest importance, those which respect our final
acceptance with the Judge of the whole earth. There are none that claim more
our serious attention. They respect not only the welfare of our bodies in this
world, but also the welfare of our souls in that eternity, to the confines of
which we are nearly approaching. Let even man therefore be fully persuaded in
his own mind; for, to him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it
is sin. Let us not be content with being the nominal disciples of Christ, but
let us consider ourselves as capable of judging in those matters that most
nearly concern us; and, if any lack wisdom, let him ask it of him who gives
liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. If he would be
instructed in matters of everlasting importance, let us consult the sacred
oracle, Christ within us, the hope of glory, and who is said to be within every
man, unless he be a reprobate; for, says the apostle, examine yourselves,
whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves; know ye not yourselves, how
that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates?

It seems that our Savior foresaw the divisions that would soon commence among
mankind, and endeavored to guard his disciples against the dogmas of men, and
turn them to something within them, as a sufficient guide and rule of their
actions; for, says he, some will say, lo! here is Christ; and others, lo! there
is Christ; he is to be found among the circle of professors; lo! here is
Christ; others say, lo! there is Christ; but go not forth after them, for the
kingdom of God is within you. And again, we are told, that that, which is to be
known of God, is manifest: -- Where? Shall we consult the many commentators on
the Old and New Testament? Shall we traverse the earth to search into the
opinions and modes of remote antiquity, in order to know what we shall do to be
saved, or in order to know how we shall be accepted of God? No: that, which is
to be known of God, is manifested in man -- within. -- Having made these
observations, I recommend them to your consideration.

Quench not the Spirit; despise not prophesying; prove all things, and hold
fast that which is good. And may we, individually, according to that light and
manifestation of the Spirit, which is given unto us, be faithful to the
revelations communicated to us thereby, so that we may have the testimony of a
good conscience; and, when we have deviated, let us endeavor to possess those
penitential dispositions, that, through Jesus Christ, we may be accepted of
God, and made meet for the realms of glory, where, with the general assembly
and church of the first born, and the spirits of just men made perfect, we may
contemplate the perfections of the divine Being, and may join the celestial
host in the song of Moses, the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb,
saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God almighty; just and true
are thy ways, thou King of saints!

PRAYER AT THE CONCLUSION OF THE MEETING.
MOST gracious Father of all our mercies, unto whom we have access through
Jesus Christ thy son, impress us with a humbling sense of our own unworthiness,
and of thine infinite mercy and goodness, that we may approach thine holy
altar, and humbly implore thee, the Fountain of wisdom and strength, that thou
would be pleased to enlighten our understandings, that we may see ourselves
as we are seen of thee, and may abhor ourselves as in dust and ashes, feeling
all those penitential affections which may render us the objects of thy
forgiveness, through Jesus Chrid our Lord. Be pleased to assist us with the aid
of thy Holy Spirit, that, in the future part of out earthly pilgrimage, we may
be able effectually to correct the errors which we have committed in the first.
That, under the influence of thy grace, we may pass the time of our sojourning
here in fear, and may be strengthened to lay aside every weight, and the sin
which does most easily beset us, and run with patience the race which is set
before us, in hope of attaining the eternal inheritance that fades not away.
Thou most glorious Being, who art the source of strength to the righteous in
all generations, and the tower of their defense; whose bread shall never fail
them, and their waters shall be sure; look down upon us, and send us help out
of thy sanctuary, and strengthen us out of thy Zion, that we may be strong in
the Lord, and in the power of his might, and be able to stand against the force
of all those enemies who would impede our progress to the city of Jerusalem,
the city of the saints solemnities. Be pleased, O Lord, to conduct us by thy
counsel, strengthen us by thy grace, and afterward take us into the realms of
celestial glory; that, when thou shall call us hence, we may enter into those
regions where there is fullness of joy; and where, with the general assembly and
church of the firstborn, whose names are written in heaven, and the spirits of
just men made perfect, we may celebrate thy praise. It is with this view our
souls are prostrate before thee; and we would ascribe to thee glory, majesty,
and dominion, and every other excellent attribute of which thou art worthy,
both now and forevermore. Amen.

DISCOURSE VIII.
WHEN I first entered under this roof, I felt as little disposition to vocal
public service as any in the whole of this congregation could have possessed.
Conscious of my own weakness and my many infirmities, I secretly wished to be
strengthened by him, who is the Minister of the sanctuary and the glorious High
Priest of the Christian Religion; and, indeed, unless we are favored with his
presence, we shall sit as it were in darkness, and in the regions of the shadow
of death. If we feel not the influence of his Holy Spirit, effectually to
quicken us and inspire us with the spirit of devotion, in vain shall we lift up
our hands and offer up the sacrifice of vocal prayer and praise unto him. It
would be well if we had ever in remembrance, that of ourselves we are nothing,
and of ourselves can do nothing, I mean nothing that is essentially good.
Unless in our religious assemblies we are first ministered unto by the chief
Shepherd and Bishop of souls, we cannot possibly minister one to another. This
the apostles very evidently show, particularly where one of them, alluding to
his gospel ministry, says, that we may comfort others with the comfort
wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God. The disciple must first receive of
his Lord, before he can dispense it to his brethren. And it is therefore that
we profess, I say, profess, at least, to meet upon one common bottom, both
ministers and those in a private station, to wait, in all singleness of heart,
upon that Being, who regards the crying of the poor, and the supplications of
the needy; who, in a peculiar manner, will look unto that man who is poor, and
of a contrite spirit, and that trembles at his word. And, though the youth may
faint, and the young men utterly fall, yet those, who wait upon the Lord, shall
renew their strength; they shall mount upwards with wings as eagles; they shall
run, and not be weary; they shall walk, and not faint.

It might perhaps be a little profitable for us to inquire what we are to
understand by the renewing of our strength: they, that wait upon the Lord,
shall renew their strength. I conceive this to be intended purely in a
spiritual sense; for, if natural strength be exhausted by labor or fatigue, it
is to be recovered, in the ordinary course of God's providence, only by rest,
and the application of suitable nutritious food; but those, who wait upon the
Lord, shall renew their strength. Such are the nature and constitution of the
human soul, that, in order to be preserved and live to God, with a holy zeal
for his name, and for his cause, to be endowed with strength virtuously to
resolve, and virtuously to pursue the just man's way, it must be renewed by
food that is of a spiritual nature; that, as bread is a term for natural food,
which is adapted to the support and well-being of our bodies, so this spiritual
food, renewed unto us by the renewings of the Holy Ghost, is that bread which
indeed the world knows not of. The world that lies in wickedness, the
sensualist, has no taste nor relish for that bread which comes down from God
out of heaven, and nourishes the soul up unto eternal life.

Though, in the application which the disciples were instructed to make to the
common Father of us all, outward blessings might be included with spiritual
ones, yet doubtless, as the welfare of the soul is of infinitely more
importance than the health and welfare of the body, in that part of the prayer,
in which we are instructed to say -- Give us this day our daily bread, is
principally intended that spiritual communication with the God of the spirits
of all flesh, which imparts strength and vigor to the soul, animating it with
a spirit of real devotion, that it can ascend above this lower and terrestrial
sphere, -- ascend as upon the wings of an eagle, a bird which is said to
approach the nearest to that glorious natural luminary, the sun, in its
flights. So, that soul, which possesses not only the spirit of real religion,
but also feels its best affections animated toward God, will have this
privilege over the mere professor of religion, that he will ascend as upon the
wings of an eagle, ascend in an awful contemplation of the divine attributes,
in a meditation upon spiritual subjects, in a strain of holy and fervent
devotion; he will ascend the mount of the Lord's holiness, encompass his altar
in the multitude of his mercies, and lift up his heart with his hands to that
Being who inhabits the heavens.

Impressed with the importance of these truths, which we, as a religious
society, peculiarly profess, let us, friends, not come to these meetings merely
with an expectation of receiving benefit, edification or comfort one from
another. Let us not look one upon another with, Men and brethren, what shall we
do to be saved? or, who shall show us any good? But, sensible of our own
respective wants, and impressed with a just idea of the solemnity of that
business which we are professedly met about, let us, in the nothingness of
self, in the silence of all flesh, reverently wait upon the Minister of the
sanctuary; and to him let us look with all singleness of heart, and say, Lord
lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us, thus, possessing that
affection of mind which is analogous to the affection of corporeal hunger, as
persons sensible of our wants, and also where those wants can be effectually
supplied, we shall become the objects of that most desirable blessing, blessed
are those who hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled.
It seems to me, beyond the least degree of doubt, that the royal psalmist felt
this spiritual hunger; he felt this sense of want, and the need that he stood
in of a supply from the divine presence, when he speaks to this purport: As the
heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God; and
again, My soul thirsts for God, yea, for the living God. This passage of the
royal psalmist seems to convey an idea to me of the soul which feels the weight
of its own infirmities, the pressure and the importunity of surrounding
temptations; closely pressed, hunted as it were, pursued by its enemies, as the
heart, when its strength is nearly exhausted, and almost ready to faint and drop
with thirst, to whom nothing could be more precious than a spring of water:
therefore, as the hunted heart pants after the water brooks, so that soul,
which is sensible of its infirmities, and feels the pressure of surrounding
temptations, longs after that immortal spring of goodness, where it may be
refreshed and strengthened, and escape from its enemies, to pursue its course
successfully, and ultimately to finish it with joy.

I wish we were more and more impressed with a just sense of what we are, that
the pride of human nature were more effectually humbled; that we might look up
to him who is the source of all that is excellent and good, and to use the
language of the holy penman, feel after the Lord, if happily we might find him.
And he, whom the fervent soul is in search after, is not afar off; he, whom
thou longest for, will suddenly come unto his temple; but, who shall abide the
day of his coming? who shall stand when he appears? When the soul is thus
favored with a spiritual communion, and intellectual sense of the supreme
Being, it is then that every thing that is exalted becomes abased; the
loftiness of man is brought down; he sees himself as a worm, and no man; as
unworthy the least of his mercies and truth; and therefore, in this view of
himself and of the supreme Being, he will break forth, in the language of Job,
I have heard of thee, by the hearing of the ear; -- so far the speculatist may
go, so far the theorist may collect a system of faith; but, he not only heard
of him by the hearing of the ear, but, says he, now mine eye sees thee. He had
formed just notions of the supreme Being; he was enlightened to have just ideas
of himself, I have heard of thee, says he, by the hearing of the ear, but now
mine eye sees thee; wherefore I repent and abhor myself in dust and ashes.
This is that humbling sense which we all of us should possess of ourselves, if,
in the sense which our Savior intended, we were favored to see God: Blessed
(says he) are the pure in heart, for they shall see God; which certainly must
be intended in a peculiar and spiritual sense, for he is not the object of our
senses. To be sure, in one respect, it may be said, the pure and the impure see
God; They have a sensible demonstration of his being in the works of creation,
and of the attributes of power, wisdom and goodness; but they have not that
animating, that intellectual, vision, which is the blessing of the pure in
heart: Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Let none be so
weak as to imagine this to be understood in the fullest sense of the word; for,
in the supreme Being we live, and move, and have our being; he comprehends all
things, and is comprehended by nothing. If thou ascend up to heaven, he is
there; if thou go down to the depth of the sea, he is there. The darkness and
the light are both alike to him; he is infinite in all his attributes; he is
omnipresent; he pervadeth every part of his vast extended empire; there are no
bounds to Omnipotence; he remains the same, from generation to generation; with
him, the perfect King, there is no variableness, neither any shadow of turning.
When we contemplate with propriety, the attributes of this Being, through the
sanctification of the Spirit, then we experience what it is to have a pure
heart, a heart possessing purity of intention, whose faculties and powers are
placed on a pure object, and all under the influence of the Holy Spirit, and
under the government of those laws which the infinitely-wise Legislator has
adapted to promote the happiness of all his creatures, and to prepare them for
the glory and the dignity that is the peculiar privilege of the pure in heart;
the enjoyment of that pure state of being, which we see now but darkly, through
a glass, where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest;
where the society of the just are employed in contemplating the attributes of
the eternal King, and join in the solemn song of Moses, the servant of God, and
of the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, O Lord God Almighty;
just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints!

PRAYER AT THE CONCLUSION OF THE MEETING.
MOST gracious God, as of ourselves we can do nothing, be pleased, we humbly
beseech thee, to look down from the heavens, the habitation of thy holiness,
favorably upon us at this season. Do thou lift up the light of thy glorious
countenance upon us, that in thy light, O Lord, we may see light, and that our
understandings may be effectually informed respecting those things which belong
to our peace and to thy glory; that our understandings may not only be
enlightened to see, but also our hearts strengthened and animated to engage in
the work of righteousness, which is peace, and the effect of it quietness and
assurance forever.

O most merciful Father, look down upon us, vile, unworthy creatures; inflame
our hearts with a sense of gratitude to thee, the Author and Fountain of every
good and perfect gift, of all those blessings which we have received, and have
so much misapplied, in the course of our short pilgrimage; that, under a just
sense of thy majesty, of thy mercy and goodness, and of our own weakness, we
may be induced to approach thy holy altar, and put up our supplications unto
thee, that thou would be pleased to send us health out of thy sanctuary, and
strengthen us as out of Zion.

Thou, that have been a rock and a place of refuge for the righteous in all
generations, look down, we beseech thee, upon those that are under the pressure
of any species of affliction and probation, those whose hearts are right
toward thee, who are going to Mount Zion, and have had their feet directed
thither. Oh! be pleased to afford these the aid of thy Spirit in the moments of
human weakness, and in their solemn adverse season. Lift up the light of thy
countenance upon them. O Lord, preserve us all in the course of our pilgrimage
through this vale of tears; guide us, by the light of thy counsel, and
afterward receive us into the realms of celestial glory, where, having been
previously effectually purged, sanctified, and justified, in and through thy
Son, our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, we may join the heavenly society, and
forever be with the saints and angels, and spirits of just men made perfect, to
laud and praise thy great and excellent name; to whom, for all thy mercies, be
the dominion, thanksgiving, blessing, and praise, not only now, but henceforth
and forevermore. Amen.

DISCOURSE IX.
THIS do, and thou shall live. These words of our Lord revived in my
remembrance at this meeting, and I have been led to advert to the occasion of
their being delivered. It is, I think, written in one of the evangelists:
Behold, a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted him, saying, Master, what shall
I do to inherit everlasting life? It is written, that he meant to tempt him; it
follows, of course, that his motive, in proposing this question, was not of the
best kind; that it was not with a view of gaining information, but, if
possible, to ensnare him, and take an occasion against him. But, our Lord, upon
this as well as upon every other occasion, manifested that wisdom which he
possessed above all other men, that wisdom which directed all that he did, and
all that he said; he spoke as never man spoke; he spoke with peculiar
authority, and not as the scribes. Instead of making an immediate and direct
answer to this question, he previously proposed one to him. What, says he, is
written in the law? how read thou? To which the lawyer replied, Thou shall
love the Lord, thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thyself. To which
Jesus said, Thou have answered right; this do, and thou shall live. It seems
to me, that this lawyer might apprehend, as some others did, who had a
prejudice against Jesus, and the worthy cause which he promoted upon the earth,
that he came to destroy the law and the prophets, and to preach another law
essentially different from that which had been delivered to them, or that he
dispensed with the obligation of that, which, by way of distinction, is called
the moral law. But our Savior evinced that he came not to destroy the law, but
to fulfill it; he told them, that heaven and earth should sooner pass away than
one jot or tittle of the law should fail. Now the law which our Savior
intended, when he says, What is written in the law? How read thou? could not
be any part of the New Testament, because none of that had been written; he
therefore intended that law of commandments which is of universal and
indispensable obligation, and is immutable: Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with
all thy mind; and thy neighbor as thyself. Now we are instructed that love is
the fulfilling of the law; but in what sense is it the fulfilling of the law?
Why, whoever possesses the love of God, will be induced, by the best motives,
to study his will, and to discharge the obligation of his several religious
duties to him. If he loves his neighbor, he will be induced to desire his
welfare upon all occasions. He will seek the interest and good of his
neighbor; he will not only be just, but merciful, kind and loving. And this
definition perfectly agrees with that passage, where it is said, Love works
no ill to his neighbbour.

Now I conceive that there is no other way for us to obtain that most desirable
object of being accepted of our Creator, who is the Judge of the whole earth,
than to observe those sacred commandments on which hang all the law and the
prophets. And it seems to me, that there is much more of the love of God, and
the love of our neighbor assumed, or professed, than is really possessed at
heart by mankind. The pride, the haughtiness, the irreverence, with which they
appear in the presence of the omniscient Being, bespeak that they possess not
the love of him in their hearts. Ambition, avarice, and the various species of
vanity which have invaded the several classes of mankind, bespeak that they are
void of the love of the God of heaven and of the whole earth. They, who rise up
early, and go to bed late, in order to add house to house, and barn to barn,
and bag to bag, and land to land, till there is nothing left for the poor of
the earth; who improve every opportunity to monopolize as much as possible the
blessings of heaven, and whose thirst seems inexhaustible; who are prompted by
avarice, which is a passion that increases with the increase of years, and
increases with the increase of riches; manifest that the love of God is not in
them: for, the apostle says, If any man love the world, the love of the Father
is not in him; by which I understand, if a man is possessed of an inordinate
love of the things of this world; if they so take hold of his affections, and
engross his attention, as to steal from him that awe of God which ever ought to
pervade his soul; if it prevents his attention to the statutes and the
commandments of heaven, and prevents his walking humbly and reverently through
this short scene of his pilgrimage; it is, and may be justly called, that kind
of love of the world which excludes the love of the supreme Being.

But, while it is so little, I fear, possessed at heart, much is professed by
all the several denominations of religion; however they may differ with respect
to speculative tenets, certain rituals, and modes of devotion, and articles of
faith, they all profess to love God, all acknowledge the obligation of that and
of the subsequent commandment; but it is to be feared that we often treat the
supreme Being in a manner similar to that which we use one toward another.
Among manknd, there are great and specious pretenses of friendship, when
perhaps there is but little really possessed at heart; and indeed some, under
the semblance of love and friendship, have only waited for an opportunity to
stab the reputation, or injure their neighbor in his property or person, with
security from the lash of the law. There are, who have made this profession as
a cloak of maliciousness; and, while they have said, art thou in health,
brother? have had a dagger concealed beneath the black disguise. Now we are
abundantly instructed, that, though we may, and too frequently do, deceive one
another, and pass off base metal for sterling coin, yet it is impossible we
should deceive that awful Being with whom we have to do; he sees not as man
sees; he looks beyond the veil of every covering; he beholds the latent
recesses of the human heart. Let us therefore not be deceived, for God is not
mocked; that which every man sows, that shall he reap; if he sows unto the
flesh, he shall of the flesh reap corruption; but, if he sows unto the spirit,
of the spirit he shall reap life everlasting.

In vain shall we call upon the name of the Lord, in vain shall we sacrifice
upon his altar, in vain shall we make many prayers, and spread our hands
toward the habitation of his holiness, unless we possess the love of him in
the highest; and which, whoever possesses, he will manifest in the various
branches of life, his conversation, and commerce among mankind. He will
conscientiously discharge his religious, his social, his relative, duties; and,
in the sphere of his movement, he will manifest the love of God by keeping his
commandments. If ye love me (says our Lord) keep my commandments; and, if we
would really become objects of his complacency, if we would be loved and
honored of that Being who made us for the purpose of his own glory, let us
attend to the solemn injunction of the author of the Christian religion: Keep
you therefore my commandments and abide in my love, even as I have kept my
Father's commandments and abide in his love.

Let us not therefore apprehend, that any articles of faith, that any rituals
of devotion, or any form of prayer that can possibly be uttered, can be a
substitute for this affection of heart toward God, and which the consideration
of his attributes will the most powerfully engage us to possess. We have
nothing that we have not received; he, the ancient of days, is the sole
proprietor of the universe, the Lord of hosts; he is one, and his name is one.
We, the inhabitants of his footstool, are but tenants at will. The earth is the
Lord's, and the fullness thereof, and the cattle of a thousand hills are his.
And seeing we possess nothing but what we have derived from him, that all the
blessings which we have received are owing to his bounty and goodness, we ought
not to boast as if we had not received them, but with all humility acknowledge
his manifold goodness, and to offer unto him the sacrifice of an undivided
heart. It is the language of wisdom to the sons of men, My son give me thy
heart. Our best affections will be engaged; then, indeed, we shall possess the
very spirit of devotion; for, whoever possesses not the love of God possesses
not the spirit of devotion; his hands may be lifted up toward the habitation
of his holiness, but his heart lies grovelling on the earth; he is worshipping
the gods of this world, silver and gold, and therefore the lifting up of his
hands, and the verbal oblation of his mouth, will not be acceptable incense
upon that sacred altar, whereof those who serve the tabernacle have no right to
partake.

I wish that we might improve such seasons as this in a particular manner, to
contemplate the divine attributes, to reflect and think upon his name, to
recollect the instances of his goodness, of his power, and of his wisdom, that
so we may feel our affections more and more set upon things that are above,
less and less upon things which are beneath, which are but of a transitory
nature, and which perish with the using. This was the injunction of the
apostle: Set your affection on things above, and not on things on the earth.
This indeed is to be spiritually minded, as it is written, to be carnally
minded is death, but to be spiritually minded is life and peace.

If we were really concerned to possess this love of God, it would not only
manifest itself in the various branches of our religious duty, but also those
of a social and relative kind. I think we are somewhere told, that, for a man
to see his fellow creature in distress, and shut up his bowels against him, how
dwells the love of God in him? And the apostle reasons very aptly: If, says
he, we love not our brother, whom we have seen, how shall we love God, whom we
have not seen, who is not an object of sense, who is inapproachable? No man
has seen him, nor can see him; and, as we are incapable of rendering any thing
unto God, who is absolutely perfect, it seems that he accepts of the good
offices we do for one another as if they had been done unto him, and he was
capable of being benefited by them. This is illustrated by our Lord with
respect to those who had neglected him: I was an-hungered, and ye fed me not;
naked, and ye clothed me not; sick and in prison, and ye visited me not; to
which they made this reply: When saw we thee an-hungered, or naked, or sick, or
in prison, and did not minister unto thee? -- Inasmuch, says he, as ye did it
not to one of the least of these my brethren, ye did it not unto me; and again,
to those who received him, it is said, I was an-hungered, and ye fed me; naked,
and ye clothed me, or words to the same import; I was sick and in prison, and
ye visited me. Now these possessed that modesty which is peculiar to good men;
they answered: When saw we thee an-hungered, or naked, or sick, or in prison,
and ministered unto thee? -- Inasmuch, says he, as ye have done it to one of
the least of these little ones, you have done it to me. -- Who are these little
ones? I conceive that we are all, by creation, God's little ones; he stands in
the relation of a father to all ranks and classes of human beings; he of one
blood has made all nations to dwell on all the face of the earth, and has
determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation; and,
as he has made them of one blood, so he looks upon them with an everlasting
love, which discriminates not the persons of men; for, he is no respecter of
persons; but, in every nation, he, that fears God and works righteousness,
is accepted of him. And, that the little ones, in this place, intended not any
peculiar class, to me is very evident; because, we are under an obligation to
do good to the unrighteous as well as the righteous, to the unjust as well as
the just; not only to be loving to our friends, but to love our enemies, to do
good to all; to put up our prayers, not for this or that peculiar class of
persons, but to address our prayers for the vast community of creatures: -- I
exhort, says the apostle, that prayers and supplications be made for all men;
for kings, and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. We are to pray for the righteous,
that they may be confirmed in their ways; -- for the wicked, that they may be
reformed. We are to pray not only for our friends; for, if we love them that
love us, what do we more than others? It is natural to have an affection for
them who have an affection for us; but we must go farther than this, we must
love them that hate us, and pray for them that persecute us. If we possess this
spirit of mind, if love prevails to all, then we shall ever have occasion, as
our Lord said, rather to rejoice than to be sorrowful if we shall be maltreated
by those whose interest we have endeavored to promote: -- Blessed are ye (says
our Lord) when men shall say all manner of evil against you, falsely, for my
sake; rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven. Now I
wish that this affection of love, the love of God and of our neighbor, were
more really felt at heart than it appears to be.

The love of our neighbor means not, in the common acceptance of the term,
the people whose local habitation is near ours, and who lend us some
assistance, as we are instructed in the case of the Samaritan and the poor Jew,
when it was asked our Lord, who is my neighbor? It seemed good sometimes to
him to answer the questions proposed to him by a parable. It was peculiar to
those times and that part of the world; and, so frequent was it, that it is
laid of our Lord, that without a parable spoke he not unto them. A certain man,
says he, went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, who
stripped him, and wounded him, and departed leaving him half dead. Here was an
object for Christian benevolence to exercise itself upon; here was an instance
in which the love of our neighbor should have been exercised; but it seems
that those, who ought to have possessed the greatest share of friendly
affections, those who waited upon the service of the altar, wanted this
affection. The Priest passed by, the Levite followed his example; those, who
ought to have been the first to set an example of mercy, loving kindness, and
charity, possessed not that affection, which would engage us, by every means in
our power, to relieve the distressed, and wipe away the tears of the afflicted.
In short, so much stress is laid upon the possession of this affection, and
exercising it in charity and kindness one toward another, that it is said to
be the religion which is pure and undefiled, not a religion of speculation and
theory: Pure religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is this: to
visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep ourselves
unspotted from the world.

The Priest passed by; the Levite also passed by. At length, it seems, a
Samaritan came that way; and, though there had long subsisted an enmity between
the Jews and the Samaritans, yet he possessed so much of the love of God and
his neighbor, that it overcame the prejudice of his education; though the
object that claimed this attention was a Jew, he took compassion on him in this
state, and did not, as we often do to one another, pour in a mixture of
wormwood and gall, to aggravate the wounds, rather than the oil of love, to
alleviate and assuage them. He poured in oil and wine; and not only so, but he
looked forwards, and provided for his future subsistence; he sent him to an
inn, and, when he departed, directed the host to take care of him, saying,
Whatsoever thou spendest, when I come again, I will repay thee.

This is set forth as an example to us, which we should by all means attempt to
imitate. We should be divested of every species of prejudice, and endeavor to
have our hearts more enlarged in the love of God; and, the more we are enlarged
in the love of God, the more shall we possess the love of our neighbor, and
more promote the interest of the vast community of mankind, and be more
disposed to imitate the example of the Savior of mankind among the poor and
despised, who was, on that account, in reproach, called the friend of publicans
and sinners. We should exercise our gifts for the promotion of righteousness on
the earth, to prevent every calamity, and promote the interest of society. It
should be the study of our lives, and our delight, to go about doing good. I am
thankful I possess that spirit of charity that forgets all the distinctions of
names, of rank, and of dignity. As men are stripped of these distinctions, and
remember that they stand in the relation of children to the Father of mankind,
so will their love and benevolence be; if we possessed this affection, we
should endeavor to promote concord among the several ranks of society.

I wish we may see the restoration of those primeval days, when the morning
stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy. -- God is love;
that is a term which is most aptly applied, and most gloriously illustrates the
attributes of the supreme Being. We are the offspring of his benevolence; it
was to communicate happiness, it was from the source of his infinite
benevolence, that he created us, and endued us with capacities of partaking of
the happiness of immortality. He has called us to keep his statutes, that we
may possess a species of happiness inconceivable to us at present, and which,
in its duration, will run parallel with the endless ages of eternity.

Seeing we have received every thing we possess from him, let us be prostrate
at his footstool; let us, in all the emotions of filial piety, approach his
altar, in the multitude of his mercies, and lift up our hands to the habitation
of his holiness; -- not only our hands, but also our hearts. Lift up your hands
and hearts to God, I think the Psalmist says, who inhabits the heavens. These
will be seasons of solemnity. We shall enter into the closets of our hearts,
and shut the door; we shall be lifted up, as on the wings of an eagle, in the
contemplation of his attributes, agreeable to the declaration of the prophet,
who spoke in the name of the Lord: Though the youth may faint, and the young
men utterly fall, yet they who wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength;
they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary;
they shall walk, and not faint. In holy fervor of spirit, we shall be able to
enter into that within the veil, and in the depth of humiliation we shall
worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness. Thus shall we be qualified to join
the celestial song: Glory to God in the highest; on earth, peace; and good will
toward men.

Under the sense of these things, the manifestation of his presence, and a
participation of that food which is of a spiritual nature, the bread that
comes down from God out of heaven, we shall be qualified to approach him, not
in a formal manner, but the language of our hearts will be:

Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come; thy
will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us, this day, our daily bread;
and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us;
and, lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil; for, thine is the
kingdom, and the power, and the glory, forever and ever. Amen.

PRAYER AT THE CONCLUSION OF THE MEETING.
MOST gracious God, inspire us more and more with suitable affections toward
thee, that we may find access to thy presence, and offer up the acceptable
incense of thanksgiving and of praise. O thou omniscient Being, who know us
altogether as we are, grant, we beseech thee, that, under the influence of the
light of the Gospel of thy Son, we may see ourselves as we are seen of thee;
that, in the depth of reverence, we may abhor ourselves in dust and ashes; that
the remembrance of our past transgressions, which have loudly bespoken our
ingratitude to thee, thou most adorable Being, may be blotted out; and that we
may feel that contrition of soul, which becomes every penitent who is the
proper object of thy mercy. O let the consideration of thine attributes and of
our own unworthiness humble us yet more and more in thy presence; that,
possessed with a filial fear of thee, we may in future be more circumspect in
our goings; and that we may seek, and be able to discriminate, the just man's
way, and to walk in it, whch, as the bright and shining light, shines more and
more unto the perfect day. O grant that we may be more and more enamoured with
the love of virtue; that we may more and more prefer the narrow and the strait
gate, which leads to life, rather than the broad way of sensual indulgence,
that leads to the gates of death, and ultimately will involve such as persevere
therein in the pit of perdition.

O most adorable Jesus, increase our faith and love, and increase the friendly
affections of our souls one toward another, that we may be disposed, instead
of burdening others, to bear each other's burdens; instead of casting about to
ensnare and deceive, we may look upon our neighbor's interest as our own; that
we may promote the interest of righteousness in the world; that, under the
influence of the Holy Spirit, through grace, we may walk before thee so, in
this world, as to have an ample hope of being received into the assembly of the
just, in the life to come.

O thou, who art the preserver of men, influence us more and more, by thy
Spirit, that we may lay aside every weight and every burden, and the sin which
does so easily beset us; and run with patience the race which is set before us;
and so to run, as that we may obtain the crown immortal, that shall never fade
away. While we are sojourners in this world, and in the land of the shadow of
death, open to us the brighter prospect of a fairer day; that whatsoever may be
our lot in this pilgrimage, whether persecution or distress, we may have an
interest in thy Son, as a hope firm and steadfast, as an anchor in this
tempestuous ocean. Grant that, when the days of our pilgrimage are concluded,
we may receive the end of our faith, even the salvation of our souls, where the
righteous shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and as the stars,
forever and ever.

O thou most righteous Being, in a sense of thy goodness, we would approach thy
altar, and ascribe to thee might, majesty, and dominion, with every other
excellent and adorable attribute, now, henceforth, and forevermore. Amen.

DISCOURSE X.
UNDER an apprehension of duty, I have frequently labored among you, in word
and doctrine, for a series of years. What effect it has had on those who have
heard me, I cannot presume to determine; if I were, indeed, to judge by
appearances, I should conclude the obvious effects to be but little. But, there
is a matter on which I am fully competent to determine: my motives have been of
the best kind, the love of God, and the love of my fellow creatures; that love
which works no ill, but would by all possible methods promote the essential
interest of its neighbors; and, having from time to time discharged what I
apprehended to be my religious duty, I have therein found great peace. This, to
myself, at least, has been the effect of my public labors; and though it is
probable, that what I have sometimes delivered, may have been more or less
similar to that which I have aforetime delivered, yet I hope, that even a
repetition of doctrines and advices, which we are urged to deliver, from a
sense of duty, may not be as water spilt upon a stone, but may have a tendency
(if not to convey any material information to the understanding) to stir up at
least the pure mind, by way of remembrance.

We have heard much; we have had line upon line, and precept upon precept; and
there have been sent among us, who, as good scribes, out of their treasury,
have brought forth things new and old. But, the essential important doctrines,
which respect in particular our practical duties, make, it is to be feared, but
a slight impression on the minds of men, even upon those who are very fond of
hearing, and have perhaps much to say concerning the mysteries of faith; who,
whilst they lay much stress upon speculative opinions, have possessed too
little of that real Christian love and zeal, which manifests itself by a
conduct consistent with the commandments of the Author of the Christian
dispensation. We want to be stirred up, to be excited to do that, which we want
not to be instructed it is our duty to do. But, if there be any, in this
auditory, whose understandings may have been bewildered in a long and tedious
pursuit of speculative notions; or who have attempted, though but with little
success, to investigate abstruse points, and to comprehend mysteries which the
wisdom of the Holy Ghost may see meet to conceal from the foolishness of men
(the prying curiosity of the creature, who is more apt to inquire than to obey)
if there be any such, who are yet unsatisfied with regard to those grand and
essential points, upon which their acceptance with the common Father of the
human race depends; if there be any who are under the pressure of manifold sins
and transgressions, are in doubt with respect to those means which are
necessary to be pursued, in order that their transgressions may be forgiven of
God, and that they may be accepted of him; if there be any, who, in the anguish
of their souls, have their hands upon their loins, with What shall I do to be
saved? it seems to me to be my duty to state them a case, nearly perhaps as we
have it represented in the holy Scriptures, respecting one, formerly, who
proposed a question of this sort.

How shall I come before the Lord? or wherewithal shall I bow myself before the
most high God? Shall I come before him with burnt offerings and calves of a
year old? shall I present him with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shall I give
him my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my
soul? Now it seems to me, beyond all controversy, that by coming before the
Lord, bowing before the most high God, was meant, the bowing before him, or
coming before him, acceptably. What shall I do to recommend myself to the
divine notice, to have the load of my sins taken off? my transgressions
cancelled from the book of his remembrance? In answer to this, he was shown
that that which God required of man, as essential to his acceptance with him,
was easily to be apprehended, and within the compass of his power to perform;
that is to say, of man, favored with the manifestation of the Spirit of God,
and strengthened by his grace.

He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?
Here our essential duties are summed up under three heads, which indeed
comprehend much -- The first is justice. A man must be morally just before he
can be religiously good; whereas we oft-times see the divine order perverted,
and that men are more zealous to be connected with parties, and more zealous
for the interest of a sect, than to maintain even the character of common
honesty.

Do justly. -- Now the obligation of justice is void of any kind of perplexity.
We no sooner reflect upon the relation man stands in to man, but the propriety
of justice is clear. We are without excuse, if we neglect to do justice; and
though this perhaps may come under the appellation of what is called a moral
duty, let us not think meanly of moral duties; for, notwithstanding the variety
of speculative doctrines published here and there, and curious distinctions
made upon points of religion, what is the state of moral justice among us? Let
us look abroad among mankind; shall we not have cause to apprehend, of many,
that their wits are employed, and time laid out, in planning schemes to take
advantage of their neighbors? in laying a foundation to raise themselves on
the spoils of others? to make themselves rich, and thereby fall into many
foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in sin and perdition? It seems to be
the study of a great part of mankind, to outwit and deceive the other;
instances of notorious breaches of justice strike us on every hand, and every
where, and which people are the more prompted to commit, from a desire of a
luxurious and pompous mode of life, which is too generally prevalent among
mankind. The disease of luxury is almost epidemical; -- through all classes,
there seems to be an emulation to excel, and many burst in the attempt.

I am concerned at heart, friends, to revive in your remembrance the obligation
of justice. We must be just and righteous before we shall be good; and it seems
that our Lord laid a peculiar stress on what are called moral doctrines, that
of justice, and that of mercy; insomuch that he says, If ye forgive not men
their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses; and again
he says (which is worthy of note it is called the golden rule; it is a law, a
general law, of action, worthy of the Most High to give, and of his Son to
promulgate among the inhabitants of the earth) Whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them. Here is the essence of all the best
human laws or statutes that ever were composed in the world. All human laws, so
far as they are consistent with propriety, are founded in, and consistent with,
this general law, which comprehends all relations and connections among
mankind: -- Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to
them, If we would wish to appear with honesty to our neighbors, let us act in
the manner we would wish them to act to us. If we would wish them not to take
advantage of us, let us not take advantage of them. As, in a time of distress,
we would wish to have the sympathy of our neighbors, and the hand of relief
extended to us, let us not forget the needy in the time of our prosperity, but
do to them as we would they should do to us. If we wish, being in danger, to be
apprised of that danger, that we might not fall into destruction, let us warn
and admonish others. There is a mutual dependence runs through society, and it
is our duty to advertise one another in hours of peril; and where we can do no
positive good, we should endeavor to prevent all possible evil. These are
duties which we want not so much to be convinced of, as to be effectually
incited to perform. But such is the weakness of human nature, that people are
more fond of taking up with subscriptions to articles of faith, and of
attendance to ordinances, and wish to get rid of their sins in that way, and
herein show a great zeal; but that falls short of the rectitude which the
gospel enjoins, and is the end of the law, and the end of the coming of Christ,
and of offering himself a sacrifice for sin to produce order and righteousness
among all ranks of men. This was one of the ends of his coming; and however
specious our professions may be, however deeply we may enter into the mysteries
of the kingdom of heaven, yet if we possess not the spirit of charity, and
motives to ust ice and benevolence, what is it? If I speak, says the apostle,
with the tongues of men and angels, and have not charity, I am become as
sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal; and though I have the gift of prophecy,
and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, and though I have all faith,
so that I could remove mountains; and have not charity, I am nothing. By
charity, I conceive, is not meant a gust of passion that would prompt a man
occasionally to do a good act, but a settled principle of goodness and
benevolence, that would prompt a man to general justice, and not to be just
only, but also good. If I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have
not charity, it will profit me nothing; if I have all faith, and understand all
mysteries, yet, says he, if I have not charity, it profits me nothing; to
show, that, in order to our actions being denominated good, they must proceed
from a good motive and principle. He shows that the semblance of charity is
nothing; If I give my body to be burned, and my goods to the poor, and have not
charity, it profits me nothing. Therefore, let us endeavor to be really that
we seem to be. Let us not content ourselves with the semblance of holiness and
charity, but let us hold the mystery of the faith, in a pure conscience: for it
is possible people may conceive right notions of things, and yet, for want of
receiving them as a principle influencing their actions, they may hold the
truth, but hold it in unrighteousness; but he, who holds the mystery of faith
as he ought to hold it, holds it in a pure conscience.

Our Savior, in his ministry, was gentle in his address, and persuasive in his
language. When he addressed the publicans and sinners, he found more openness
to receive the gospel among this rank of people, than those who had the form of
godliness, but denied the power thereof; insomuch, that it became a proverb,
that he was the friend of publicans and sinners; for which conduct he gave this
essential reason, that he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance. Where the carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered together.
Among these people there was a disposition to receive him; and among other
things which the messengers of John were required to testify that they had
seen, was, that the poor had the gospel preached to them. How did this friend
of publicans and sinners, who spoke with so much gentleness, behave when he
came to address the superior characters, in all the pomp of their sanctity, who
made broad the phylacteries, who were zealous for the written and oral
traditions of their fathers? O ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the
damnation of hell! Ye are like whited sepulchers, which, indeed, appear
beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones. And he takes
occasion to instruct his followers: Unless, says he, your righteousness exceed
the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Now, what was the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees? It seems they appeared more than a little zealous for the rituals of
the Mosaic dispensation, were punctual to the time of prayer, specious in their
address to the Majesty of heaven, and performed all the service of the Jewish
tabernacle; but, though they possessed the righteousness of the law, they were
strangers to moral righteousness. Ye pay tithe of mint, and annise, and cummin,
says he, but what have you neglected to do? Ye have omitted the weightier
matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and truth: these ought ye to have done,
and not to leave the other undone: by which, he does not reprehend them for
their performance of the rituals of that dispensation, which were obligatory
until the sacrifice of Christ, yet he shows the superiority of moral and
practical truths, mercy and judgment. These ought ye to have done; and,
therefore, in point of order, when the prophet answers the question proposed to
him, the first is, do justice; which I conceive not only comprehends the
obligation we owe to one another, but the obligation we owe to the Supreme
Being. While I am zealous to plead for the obligation of justice among men, and
the discharge of the duties of social relations, I would by no means forget
that there is a justice due to the glorious Father of all we possess. He has
made us, not we ourselves; we are his offspring; he has communicated to us a
variety of temporal and spiritual blessings, and we ought, in point of
gratitude, in point of justice, to make a proper application of those
blessings, to render to him the duty that arises from the relation that we
stand in to him as his children, the offspring of the everlasting Father; and,
therefore, he calls upon us, my son, give me thy heart. He would not require
that of us which is not in point of justice our duty to comply with: give me
thy heart; give me the best of thy affections; manifest thy love to me by
keeping my commandments, as a good steward; for, we are all, all ranks and
classes of beings are, stewards of the manifold grace of God; and it is
required of stewards that they be found faithful. The time is approaching, when
it will be said, give an account of thy stewardship; for, thou may be no
longer steward. Let us, therefore, ask ourselves this question, -- what have we
received? what improved? and what misapplied? and then ask, what owe thou to
my Lord? The debt is immense. We have received much: our improvements have been
little; but wherewith shall we come before the Most High? In what way will the
Father of mercies be propitious to us? Let us first confess our faults; let us
not cover our sins, or seek to hide them; for, he that hides his sins shall not
prosper: let us acknowledge our sins; let us encompass his altar in the
multitude of his mercies; let us possess the penitential affection of the poor
publican, while the Pharisee could boast of his fasting twice in a week, giving
alms of all he possessed, and not being as other men, even as the poor
publican. Notwithstanding these pompous words, he was not accepted. The poor
publican had nothing to plead, no merit to recommend him; and, therefore, under
the contemplation of the infinite Majesty he was about to approach, he had not
courage to lift up his hands toward the habitation of his holiness; but,
sighing, said, Lord, be merciful to me, a sinner! If we possess these
penitential affections, we shall become the objects of that mercy which our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ exemplified in his ministry, in his character, in
his crucifixion, in his resurrection, and ascension into glory. It is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the
world to save sinners; and we have all sinned, and fallen short of the glory of
God: we have done the things we ought not to have done, and left undone the
things we ought to have done. And, such is the mavelous condescension of him
who inhabits eternity, that he sent forth his Son, not with a message of
unrelenting vengeance, not to assign to fallen spirits a habitation in those
realms where the worm shall never die, and the fire shall never be quenched,
but with the glorious and interesting message, that whosoever forsakes his sins
shall be forgiven of his Father who is in heaven, and whosoever frames his life
and manners, in consequence of it, with this penetential affection, he shall
possess that inheritance which is unspeakably glorious; his sins shall be
cancelled from the book of the divine remembrance, and shall not stand against
him in the judgment of the last day. If we confess our sins, God is merciful
and just to forgive us our sins. I distinguish between the forgiveness of sins
and the conversion of our souls. The forgiveness of sins is purely owing to the
the mediation and intercession of Jesus Christ; but the work of conversion
requires and calls upon the object to be a co-worker with the influence of
grace to purify the soul, and turn its feet into the just man's path, which is
as the shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day.
Therefore, says our Lord, my Father works, and I work: work ye also.

He came to his own, and his own received him not; but, to as many as received
him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to as many as
believed on his name. Therefore, we experience the remission of sins through
the forbearance of God; but the work of sanctification is not yet completed;
the office of the Mediator is not only to procure for us the remission of sins
past, but it is to correct those vices in our very souls which the gospel-axe
is laid to the root of, the corrupt tree in us, the root of our corrupt
affections; and, till this has effectually done its office, we shall not be
cleansed from all unrighteousness. God Almighty grant, of his infinite mercy,
that we may not be content under any specious pretenses of religion, but that
we may seek to attain that purity of heart without which we cannot enter the
habitation of those glorious regions, where nothing that defiles, or that
works abomination, or makes a lie, can enter. It is the pure in heart who
shall see God: it is those that have been reformed from the errors of their
ways, and whose affections are raised from earth to heaven, from natural to
spiritual objects; these are of the number of the Lord's redeemed, who, when
the time of their conflict shall be ended on earth, shall stand upon Mount Sion
to celebrate the praises of the great King forever and ever! I feel my heart
enlarged with the love of the gospel, with the benevolent spirit which ushered
the Savior into the world: Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, and
good will to men.

We all stand in the relation of brethren to one another. We all stand in the
relation of children to the universal Parent. We are his by creation. The Lord
grant we may be his by adoption: that we may be sealed by him to the day of
complete redemption: that we may be cleansed from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit: that we may be influenced by the most pure motives to conduct
ourselves by his commandments here, and have a well-grounded hope of living
with him hereafter! I commend us to the protection of our Almighty Father; and,
finally, wish us to retain, in our remembrance, these important articles, that
they may be written, as with the point of a diamond, upon the tablet of our
hearts. He has showed thee, O man, what is good! Consult the sacred oracles;
thou will be instructed in that which thou art to know, qualified to perform
that which thou art to do, be enlarged in thy best faculties and powers to
enter into those regions where the inhabitants shall not say I am sick; for,
the people who dwell therein are forgiven their iniquity.

I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build us
up in the most holy faith, and to give us an inheritance among all them who are
sanctified. He has shown unto thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord
requires of thee; to do justice, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy
God. Add, to your faith, virtue; to virtue, knowledge; to knowledge,
temperance; to temperance, patience; to patience, godliness; to godliness,
brotherly kindness; and, to brotherly-kindness, charity: and, if these things
be in you, and abound among you, they shall make you that you shall be neither
barren, nor unfruitful, in the saving knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ!

DISCOURSE XI.
IT is appointed unto men once to die. This is one of those propositions which
no man is so weak as to deny. But the sacred penman proceeds farther, -- and,
after death, comes the judgment. This, also, is a proposition which is of
course admitted, in terms, by every one who professes to be a Christian, or a
disciple of Christ; and, indeed, this proposition is of the most awful and
affecting nature. We must all stand before the judgment seat of Christ, and
receive a recompense of reward according as our works have been. A Judge, who
is infallible, who will not deceive, nor can possibly be deceived; he takes
cognizance not only of our outward actions, but he penetrates the very thoughts
and intents of all our hearts; and seeing that he will not condemn the
innocent, nor acquit the guilty, -- on this reflection, methinks, it would be
well for us, as it were, to lay our hands upon our hearts, and ask ourselves
this question, -- What manner of creatures ought we to be? The Author of our
being is a God of infinite purity and holiness; nothing can be united unto him,
no being admitted to dwell in his presence (in which there is fullness of joy)
who is in a state of impurity: there, nothing that works an abomination, or
that loves and makes a lie, can have an entrance: for, it is positively
asserted by the highest authority, that, without holiness, no man shall see the
Lord. On the contrary, it is declared, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God: that they shall have that union and communion with him, on which
the happiness of all ranks and classes of intelligent beings most certainly
depends. But there is another proposition that it will be well for us also
seriously to consider, If any man say that he has no sin, or that he has not
sinned, (as some have rendered this passage) he deceives himself, and the
truth is not in him. We have all, says the prophet, as sheep gone astray, --
strayed from the paths of the just into the wilderness of this world. We have
all sinned: we have all fallen short of the glory of God. In this state,
therefore, whatever vain expectations any may entertain, they are not fit
subjects of the kingdom of heaven: they are under the power and government of
the prince of the power of the air, which rules in the hearts of the children
of disobedience. Those, therefore, who are in this state, have no ground of
hope of being admitted into the kingdom of the just; there is no communion
between light and darkness there is no fellowship between Christ and Belial;
and, indeed, our Lord positively asserts, If ye die in your sins, where I go ye
shall not come; therefore, tho he came (the messenger from the Father was the
Son of God, the eternal Word) with the glad tidings of the gospel to all the
inhabitants of the earth, yet his coming became effectual only to those who
received him. I came, says he, to my own, but my own received me not; but, to
as many as received met gave 1 power to become the Sons of God; as much as to
say, Be ye not deceived, and imagine, that, in consequence of my coming, you
are to be saved in your sins, or to have a license from heaven to indulge your
appetites. No: the purpose of my coming is not to save you in, but to save you
from, your sins; and it is a saying that is worthy of all acceptance, that
Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. The scriptures propose to us,
and in a very explicit and comprehensive manner, what we must be before we can
be accepted of his Father, who is in heaven. Repent, says he, and be converted,
that your sins may be forgiven you: so that it seems that we must, in the first
instance, repent of those sins which we have committed. We must really feel
those penitential affections of soul that would prompt us, if possible, to undo
all the evil actions we have done; that would humble us most effectually under
a sense of our ingratitude to the Author of our being, and that would prompt
us, in the depth of our humiliation, to say, a Savior, or I die; a Redeemer,
or I perish! We must not only repent of our sins past, but we must also be
converted; not repent of those that are past, and still pursue a course of
iniquity, but we must turn from unrighteousness to righteousness; our
affections must no longer be set upon things that are upon the earth, but upon
things that are above; we must be no longer carnally, but spiritually, minded;
for, under the most specious profession, to be carnally minded, is death, but
to be spiritually minded, is life and peace; and, such is the infinite mercy
and goodness of God, through Jesus Christ, toward us, that he wills not the
death of sinners, that is, to see the eternal misery or infelicity of a sinner,
but rather that all should return, should repent, and live a life of
righteousness here, and, of course, be glorified with him hereafter, in the
kingdom of the just; and the terms which he proposes, are worthy of the Supreme
Being to give, and would become us to accept, with all penitence of soul, and
gratitude of heart. If, says he, ye confess your sins, God is merciful; he is
just to forgive us our sins; -- not only to forgive the sins that are past,
but, by the operation of his grace, to sanctify us throughout, to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness; and, of course, if we
become cleansed from all unrighteousness, we shall be made meet for a
habitation in the kingdom of heaven. Let us therefore be awakened to
righteousness; awakened to righteousness from the nature of the dispensation we
are under, that leads into every kind of purity and holiness, that so we may
repent, and also be converted; converted at heart, and experience redemption
through his blood, which was shed for the sins of all mankind.

If we were thus to contemplate the nature of the gospel dispensation, we,
indeed, should become circumspect, we should be serious, we should be
inquisitive; and this prayer would become, as it were, habitual: Create in me a
clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me; for, as it is the heart
that is the object of conversion, by the power of an endless life, so it is the
seat of sin. It is there the prince of darkness has usurped dominion; and he,
being cast out, or the old man with his deeds put off, the peaceable kingdom of
Immanuel is substituted; that kingdom which cannot be removed. If this became
the serious engagement of our hearts, we should not only be induced to profess
the Christian faith, but also to exemplify the love of its Author, of our
Father who is in heaven, by observing those commandments which are of universal
obligation, and obedience to which is the rock, which is immutable, against
which the gates of hell shall never prevail. It is not merely holding forth the
truths of the gospel that will render us acceptable; these may be held forth in
theory, and yet held in unrighteousness, and will never avail us in the solemn
season of the great day. Let us therefore advert to the close of that most
excellent sermon preached upon the mount. After many practical doctrines
concerning the kingdom of heaven had been opened to the hearers, on Lord took
occasion to distinguish between the mere hearer of the word, the formal
professor, and one that was a true disciple. If any man hear my words, and do
them not, I will liken him unto a foolish man, who built his house upon the
sand; and the rains descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew; and the
house fell, and great was the fall thereof. So will it be with the hope of the
hypocrite, for it shall perish. The hope of the hypocrite may buoy him up in
the season of prosperity; but in the season of adversity, it will fail him.
When the rains shall descend, and the winds of adversity blow, he will not be
able to stand the shock. When he passes through the valley of the shadow of
death, this hope will be like the lamps of the foolish virgins. If any man hear
these sayings of mine, and does them, -- (from which I infer they are
practicable, and might be done, the contrary position implying the most daring
reflection on the attributes of the divine being: -- Does he command us to make
brick without straw? command us to do that which we have no power to perform?
Far be it from the Father of mankind:) If any man hear these sayings of mine,
and does them, I will liken him unto a wise man who built his house upon a
rock; and, when the rains descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew,
it fell not, because (not of any intrinsic merit of his own, but because) it
was founded upon a rock, the revelation of Jesus Christ, the foundation of the
apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone,
disallowed indeed of men, who would wish to build a specious edifice on an
unstable foundation, who follow lying vanities in opposition to every thing
suited to an immortal spirit.

Let us, my friends, on this occasion (a solemn occasion it is to me; we have
before us the remains of a friend, taken off in the midst of her days, taken
from the society of the living; but nothing has happened to her that is
uncommon: in the midst of life we are all in death, we have no dependence on
tomorrow) -- let us, I say, improve the present opportunity. Some, indeed,
fall off as fruit which drops when it is come to full age; but others are, as
it were, cut off with a noxious blast by the hand of him whose ways are all in
wisdom. It is ours, therefore, to submit; and, seeing death is not assigned to
any particular age, as the arrows thereof enter into the habitations of the
rich, as well as the cottages of the poor; it separates the father from his
children, the husband from his wife, the nearest and dearest connections in
life; let us, seeing we have no continuing city here, seek one above, whose
foundations are laid in Zion, and are immutable as the throne of God.

I feel my heart enlarged, I trust, in the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whose love constrains me to address you, my fellow-pilgrims, in this way. Let
not the strong man glory in his strength, the rich man in his riches, nor the
wise man in his wisdom; but if any man glories, let him glory in this, that his
Redeemer stands in the relation to him of one that is full of mercy and truth.
Let him glory in me, that I am the Lord, who exercise loving kindness, judgment
and righteousness in the earth: let us be solicitous that we may be accepted of
the Father of the human race, when we shall have done with these transitory
things. Every thing around us will serve to instruct an attentive mind. It is
an awful truth, Man that is born of a woman, is of few days, and full of
trouble: he comes up like a flower, and is cut down: like a shadow he flees,
and continues not. With respect to many within the audience of my voice, the
houses you possess were not long since possessed by your ancestors; they are
gone; your children will soon have the same to say of you.

Let us therefore improve the present opportunity, according to that measure of
grace, which we have received, that we may be sanctified in body, soul and
spirit; that we may have nothing to fear from that stroke which we cannot
possibly shun; then, to us, to live will be Christ, and to die will be gain.
Let us so conduct ourselves in this world, that when the end of the world shall
come upon us, (for with respect to individuals, their dissolution is the end of
the world with them) we may not be surprised. Let us, before we go hence to be
seen no more of men, endeavor to lay up a good foundation against the time to
come; and then, when it shall please the great Disposer of all things to send
the message, whether in the early part of life, or in more advanced age, there
will be hope in the death of the righteous. Their hope is full of immortality.

I commend these observations to you, and I commend you to God, and to the word
of his grace, which is able to build you up, and give you an inheritance among
all them who are sanctified by faith in the name of Jesus Christ.

PRAYER AT THE CONCLUSION OF THE MEETING.
MOST gracious God, impress all our hearts at this season, we humbly beseech
thee, with a suitable solemnity to approach thy awful presence; that, inspired
by the spirit of grace, we may make an offering that shall be acceptable with
thee. We have, indeed, abundant cause to acknowledge that we have not the least
degree of merit to plead. Whatever any of us possess, that is good, is of thee,
from thee, and through the operation of thy grace. Be pleased yet more and more
to impress us in a manner similar to the poor publican; that, under a sense of
our own unworthiness, we may call upon thy great and excellent name, with Lord,
be merciful to me, a sinner! That, through effectual humiliation, and penitence
of soul, thou may be pleased to cancel our transgressions from the book of
thy remembrance, be merciful to our unrighteousness, and our iniquities
remember no more: that, by the sanctifying influences of thy Spirit, our hearts
may be also converted unto thee, that we may be cleansed from all
unrighteousness, and enabled by thy grace to steer our course in future, in the
just man's path, which, as the bright and shining light, shines more and more
unto the perfect day: that we may pass the time of our sojourning here in fear,
and may conclude our short pilgrimage in thy favor having a well grounded hope
that we shall be accepted of thee, and admitted into the general assembly of
the just, the Church of the first born, who are already triumphant in glory. O
let us more and more feel the prevalence of the love of thy Son, and that it
may be shed abroad more and more in our hearts, and circulate more and more
among one another: that we may put away all malice and wrath, and love one
another with a love unfeigned in Christ: and O merciful Father, endue us more
and more with that spirit of charity that thinks no evil, that is not easily
provoked, that extends not to our friends only, but also to our enemies, that
we may lead one another to the beautiful mountain, the mountain of thy
holiness, where the lion and the lamb shall lie down together, and a little
child shall lead them: that the kingdoms of the earth may become the kingdoms
of the Lord, and of thy Son: that thy name may be great among all the tribes of
the Gentiles, from the rising of the sun, to the fetting of the same: that, O
everlasting Father, thy creatures may be saved of thee with an everlasting
salvation, bring thy sons and daughters from afar, to sit down in thy kingdom
with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and praise and laud thy excellent name, who art
worthy to receive the kingdom, power and glory, both now and forevermore. Amen.

DISCOURSE XII.
OF a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but he that fears
him, and works righteousness, is accepted of him. I presume that most of you
are acquainted with the particular cause of this declaration. -- that an
eminent apostle of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ seemed to have been of the
opinion, that the gospel message was not to extend unto the Gentiles. This was,
perhaps, founded upon Jewish prejudice; and we are instructed, in this
instance, of the power of prejudice to stop the ears, and blind the eyes, of a
wise man. The most worthy and most exalted characters have, more or less,
manifested in their conduct the power of prejudice -- the prejudice of
education; and, indeed, the wrong impressions, which mankind receive in their
minority, generally are lasting, or with difficulty erased. They seem to be
like characters which are cut out upon a tree, which grow wider, and frequently
deeper, in proportion to the growth of the tree. Thus many prejudices, which
mankind have received at an early time of life, are such, that they have not
been capable of clearly distinguishing one object from another. They, as it
were, grow with their growth, and are strengthened with their strength. I
conceive these are those secret faults which the Psalmist intended when he
said, Who can understand his errors? Cleanse thou me from secret faults. It
seems that an extraordinary dispensation of divine providence effectually
removed this prejudice from the mind of the holy apostle. He was favored with
a vision, in which he saw, as it were, a sheet let down from heaven, containing
various species of animals; and he was commanded to arise, to slay, and to eat;
but he endeavored to excuse himself by saying, that he had not eaten any thing
that is common or unclean; upon which he was taught not to call that common or
unclean which God had cleansed. The man to whom he was sent was a man of a
sincere heart; his heart was right toward God; to him the glad tidings of the
gospel were published, though he was a heathen. The mercy of God, through Jesus
Christ, makes not that distinction, personal distinction, between the human
species which the law of Moses made among the inferior animals, some of which
were forbidden as unclean. The apostle saw the design of this vision, and there
is no doubt that he felt his heart enlarged in a manner which, till then, he
had been a stranger to. He now saw that the light of the gospel was freely to
be preached to all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people. He saw that Immanuel
was a light to enlighten the Gentiles as well as to be the glory of the people
of Israel. I have set him to be a light to the Gentiles, to be for salvation
unto the ends of the earth; not within the narrow circle of any party of human
beings, not within the limits of any spot upon the face of the globe, but to be
for salvation to the very ends of the earth. He, in the enlargement of his
heart, breaks forth in this manner, Of a truth, says he, I perceive. From which
I infer that he had seen, as it were, darkly through a glass; for, though,
perhaps, friendly admonitions may not effectually remove our prejudices, yet,
sometimes at least, they are conducive to this end. We begin to suspect we err,
and a man who begins to suspect he errs is in the way to understand his errors;
whereas the obstinate may be compared to a man who shuts his eyes, and, of
course, will not be enabled to discriminate objects even at noonday; but the
man, who begins to suspect that he errs, or that he may err, begins to open the
door of his heart to conviction, and the apostle seemed to have had some
glimmering of this glorious truth; but now the scales of prejudice fell from
his eyes: his mental sight was clear. Of a truth, says he, I perceive that God
is no respecter of persons, but he that fears God, and works righteousness,
is accepted of him; and, I must confess, though it very unexpectedly appears to
be my duty to confess it now, that, of all those doctrines which I conceive to
be errors, of all those things which I conceive are not agreeable either to
reason, to the nature of things, or to the Scriptures of truth, there is not
one which to me is so palpable as the doctrine of partial election and
reprobation; that is to say, that God, by virtue of his sovereignty, did, of
his own good will and pleasure, create a certain number of intelligent beings,
not only foreseeing that they would sin, and be lastingly miserable, but for
that very purpose; that their misery is in consequence of his eternal decree;
that the other part, whether few or more, are ordained to everlasting life; not
in consideration of any merit which they possess (for, it is acknowledged that
the elect possess no more merit than the reprobate; that the righteousness with
which they are clothed is the righteousness of Christ; that they are saved by
virtue of the propitiatory sacrifice of the Son of God; that, by nature, they
are black, they are vile, as the reprobate, but that they are comely with
grace, as they stand related to Christ Jesus, who is the head of his Church;)
not in consideration therefore of any thing they can merit, but of God's
sovereign pleasure. But I would wish every one present seriously to consider
whether a greater reflection could be cast upon the divine attributes, unless
it were to say that he created all mankind to be eternally miserable. That God,
the Father of the spirits of all flesh, to whom we are indebted for our
existence, and who of his pleasure did create us, should do it with a view of
making us, or any part of his creatures, everlastingly miserable, is such an
idea that I confess shocks me. I say it shocks me. Shall not the Judge of all
the earth do right? He is not only a God of justice, but he is a God of
goodness; but how can this be reconciled with goodness, that a being should
purposely bring others into being in order to make them miserable? It is
repugnant to every idea that I can form of the Deity. It is a disposition,
indeed, that appears to me to bespeak the nature of a tyrant, the nature of
that being who is said to go about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may
devour; but this, as well as other erroneous doctrines, is said to be founded
upon the Scriptures. Thus the Scriptures are made to contradict themselves, the
literal sense is adopted where that sense coincides with the preconceived
opinion; but, where the literal sense accords not with that opinion, it is
tortured a thousand ways to express what the Holy Ghost never intended, --
whatever the parties wish it to speak. Thus passage, obviously figurative, have
been considered as literal; and others, appearing plain, even to common sense,
to experience, to our common feelings, and to the nature of things, such have
been rendered mysterious by various comments, in which truth has been obscured
by the multitude of words without knowledge. But, I conceive, if we consider
the holy Scriptures, from the first chapter of Genesis to the last in
Revelations; if we are capable of laying aside our prejudices; we shall see
that they do assert the unity of God, his self-sufficiency, his omnipotence,
his omniscience. The universality of his love to his creatures is the scope and
tendency of the sacred pages, and that the motive of all the dispensations of
his providence to mankind. His views (if I may use that expression of the
Ancient of days) terminated not upon himself, who is incapable of an accession
of happiness, neither upon the misery of his creatures, to which he could have
no motive, but they terminated in the creature who is capable of immortality
and eternal life. The Supreme Being I conceive to be the only perfectly
disinterested being in the universe; perhaps a parent for instance (if the
comparison may at all be allowed) a wise, an affectionate parent, may bear some
humble resemblance of the universal Father. He is often set forth to us under
the endearing character of our Father: as a Father pitieth his children, so the
Lord pitieth them that fear him. He knows our frame, he remembers that we are
but dust; but the parent who possesses the most delicate parental feelings,
discovers the utmost solicitude for the happiness of his offspring, and will
find his happiness intimately connected therewith. Such is the nature of that
affection, strangthened by moral ties, that a parent and his offspring may be
said to be connected by so many fibers of the heart: his happiness is bound up
in his offspring: he must rejoice when they rejoice, and suffer when they are
afflicted. In alleviating their afflictions, he alleviates his own: in
promoting the happiness of his children, he promotes his own felicity; but,
respecting the divine Being, the analogy will not strictly hold. Thy
righteousness, as the text says, may profit the son of man, and thy wickedness
may hurt a man as thou art. The observance of the laws of virtue, of
righteousness and truth, would promote the essential interests of society. It
would produce that harmony throughout all the classes of social life, in which
the greatest degree of happiness is to be experienced. Vice, on the contrary,
is not only prejudicial to the interests of the individual, but its evil
influence extends, far and wide, within the circumference of society.
Therefore, our righteousness may profit men as we are, our wickedness may hurt
the children of men, but our righteousness cannot profit him who is perfect,
absolutely perfect, absolutely good, self-sufficient, the same yesterday, to
day, and forever, with whom there is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning. It is not the united supplications of all the souls within the limits
of his vastly extended empire that can add to his essential glory, that can add
to his felicity; neither is it the neglect of the worship of all ranks and
orders of intelligent creatures that can diminish his glory, that can decrease
his felicity; therefore, his motive, in creating and communicating good to his
creatures, must be a motive perfectly disinterested: it is love without the
least species of alloy. God's love was the adorable motive of his making beings
capable of contemplating his attributes, and of that felicity which is derived
from him: this was the glorious motive (if I may be indulged to speak of the
divine Being by attributing to him motives) that induced him to create the
various orders and classes of intelligent beings, in this and every other
sphere, from the seraph above, that attends upon the sacred throne, to the
lowest link in the scale of rational, intelligent creatures. And, in thus
contemplating the Deity, I find the best affections of my heart excited toward
him, my parent, in a sense infinitely superior to that natural relation which
subsists among the human species and creatures: and, under this character, are
we instructed to approach the Supreme Being, Our Father, which art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name; in which there is something that strikes me with peculiar
force, that individuals, when they approach the sacred altar of the Lord
Almighty, and prefer their petitions to him who sees in secret, are not to
consider themselves as detached from society; they are not to implore the
blessing for themselves alone. It is not my Father, but our Father, which art
in heaven, hallowed be thy name; by which we are instructed, that God is no
respecter of persons, that we all stand in the same relation to him, who is the
God and Father of the spirits of all flesh. Remember that the Scripture
declares, that he is good to all. Can he be good to them, whom, by an eternal,
irrevocable decree, he has consigned to everlasting misery? But God is good to
all; therefore he has not predestined to everlasting misery the creature he
has formed, which would be, in the most obvious sense of the words, to be a
respecter of persons, and must arise from a motive of partiality. We are
instructed to respect no man's person; but this doctrine supposes that the
divine Being respects persons himself.

Various are those passages of Scripture which might be educed, that bear a
plain and obvious meaning, in opposition to this doctrine. And, though there
may be some figurative passages of a doubtful tendency, in which the apostle
assumes a borrowed style in his way of arguing with the Jews, yet I can never
agree to explain plain passages by bold figures. We are abundantly instructed
that he wills not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be turned,
and live: that he should repent, and be saved with an everlasting salvation. We
are also instructed, that, to them who seek for glory, honor, and immortality,
God will render eternal life; but, unto them who obey not the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, tribulation and anguish, indignation and wrath, upon every
soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile; for,
there is no respect of persons with God.

Let us, therefore, impressed with what I conceive are worthy notions of the
Supreme Being, walk worthy of the vocation wherewith we have been called. The
power of the gospel of Jesus is gone forth from sea to sea, from the rivers to
the ends of the earth. The call of infinite mercy and goodness is extended to
people of all names and all nations, to bring them into a state of moral
rectitude, to qualify them for the society of the wise and worthy upon earth,
and for the everlasting communion of the spirits of the just made perfect in
heaven: for this end is the gospel preached to every creature under heaven. I
wish that it may be remembered with the solemnity with which it ought to be
remembered, that it is not any system of faith, it is not any profession of the
purity of the gospel of Jesus Christ our Lord, it is not the acknowledgement of
his mission, it is not a speaking most honorably of his adorable character, of
his ministry, of his crucifixion, of his resurrection, and ascension into
glory, nor of the propitiatory sacrifice which he made for the whole world,
that can render us acceptable to the Father of spirits: the ground of our
acceptance with God is upon the same universal principle of righteousness
delivered by God in his remonstrance with Cain: Why art thou wroth, and why is
thy countenance fallen? If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and, if
thou do not well, sin lies at the door. He was overcome by the power of,
perhaps, one of the basest passions the humam heart is capable of. He was
excited to destroy his brother, because he found that his offering was
accepted, that he had tokens of the divine approbation. He was excited to slay
him. The passion of envy excited him to shed human blood on the earth. With
this Cain, this murderer, the Author of the universe deigns to expostulate in a
very familiar manner: Why is thy countenance fallen? If thou do well, shall
not thou be accepted? but, if thou do not well, sin lies at the door: so
that, though, with respect to external profession, and the external mode of
offering their sacrifices, they might be alike, yet, as the state of the heart
of one was wicked, and productive of wicked actions, he was not accepted with
his gift at the sacred altar; whereas, righteous Abel, who not only lifted up
his hands to the habitation of God's holiness, and conformed to the outward
sacrifice, but was justly impressed with a sense of his duty, became the object
of the divine complacency: because thou have loved righteousness, and hated
iniquity, therefore God, even thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows. Though this, perhaps, may have a peculiar relation,
as some have considered it, to the Messiah, yet it seems also to have a
relation to a discrimination among creatures, -- because thou have loved
righteousness; therefore, -- it is not in consequence of a specious profession,
not because of an irrevocable decree, -- but, because thou have loved
righteousness, and hated iniquity, therefore God, even thy God, has anointed
the with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. Oh! that there may be a proper
emulation in us to excel in doing well. Cease, therefore, to do evil, learn to
do well. As doing evil was the means of bringing down judgments upon the people
of the Jews, so they were instructed how to avert the divine wrath, and render
themselves acceptable to the Father of the universe: not by an attendance to
the rituals of that dispensation, -- Bring no more vain oblations: incense is
an abomination unto me, says the Lord: your new moons and your appointed
feasts my soul hates: but they were instructed what to do: Wash ye, make you
clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do
evil; learn to do well; seek judgment; relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless, plead for the widow. Here is a catalogue of excellent moral duties,
here is an explanation of what it is to do well. He has showed thee, O man,
what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to
love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Now, says he, come, and let us
reason together: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as
snow: though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. If ye be willing
and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land. Let us therefore conform
ourselves to the terms by which we are to be accepted. Of a truth I perceive
that God is no respecter of persons; but, in every nation, he that fears him
and works righteousness is accepted of him. Let us therefore cherish in our
breasts, in the first instance, the emotions of filial fear, which is
distinguished from that slavish passion of which man is the object. Such a fear
is evidently to be distinguished from that affection we have to the Ancient of
days. I compare that to the fear which an affectionate child has of its parent,
which springs from love; which, indeed, is the best and most worthy motive of
our duties: we, therefore, fear not the Almighty Being, merely because he is
armed with an untroulable power, and able to consign us to eternal woe, who
rides upon a cherub, and the clouds are the dust of his feet, and does
whatsoever he pleases: -- we fear him not only because of the attributes of
power, but of goodness, the adorable attributes of goodness, mercy and truth.
He has dealt with us not in a way of rigid justice, but according to the
compassion of a father. He has bowed the heavens, and manifested himself among
his creatures: for, he so loved the world, that he sent his only begotten Son
into the world, that whomsoever believes in him, might not perish, but have
everlasting life; therefore, let him be the object of our fear; and this fear,
many excellent things are spoken as to its effects, by way of prevention. It is
a fountain of life, to preserve from the snare of death: the fear of the Lord
keeps the heart clean; therefore, blessed is the man that fears always. And
indeed, it is the first part of the everlasting gospel that was preached by an
angel flying in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach
unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and
tongue, and people, saying, with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him;
for, the hour of his judgment is come; and worship him that made heaven and
earth and the sea, and the fountains of waters: fear ye him! This principle of
filial fear will incline our ears to an attention to his law, and we shall be
meditators therein day and night; and shall not only be hearers of the word,
but doers of it. Under the influence of this fear, we shall work the work of
righteousness, the fruit of which is peace and assurance forever.

If we observe this rule of right, if we conform ourselves to him, we shall be
united to the Author of our being in an union that is indissoluble and firm as
the everlasting hills. Keep my commandments (says Christ to his disciples) and
abide in my love, even as I have kept my Father's commandments, and abide in
his love. Blessed is the man that keeps the commandments of God: he shall have
access to the tree of life, and enter through the gates into the city, become a
citizen with the saints, and of the household of God. God grant, of his
infinite mercy and goodness, that, when the days of our pilgrimage shall be
ended, we may have an admission into the assembly of just and pure spirits, to
contemplate the attributes of the I AM: that we may sing the song of Moses, the
servant of God, and the song of the lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy
works, Lord God Almighty: just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints!

PRAYER AT THE CONCLUSION OF THE MEETING.
MOST gracious God, and Father of all, we beseech thee, manifest thy presence,
that, impressed with the emotions of filial fear, we may approach thy holy
altar with becoming reverence, pour forth our souls unto thee, and offer thee a
sacrifice of thanksgiving and praise: that the contemplation of thy name may
impress our hearts with peculiar solemnity. Thou, who stand in the adorable
relation to us of a father, thy goodness has been extended to us from season
to season, from the first moment of our existence to the present moment. It is
of thy bounty that we are supplied with all those blessings which we have
received. Inspire us, we beseech thee, with the highest sense of thy merciful
goodness, that, O most gracious Father, though heaven be thy throne, and the
earth be thy footstool, continue, we beseech thee, to look down upon us with
favor, and regard the low estate of thy creatures. Sound an awakening alarm in
the ears of the ignorant, those who are reclined upon the beds of ease, who
live in forgetfulness of thee, and of the obligations they are under to thee. O
Grant that these may awake to righteousness, that they sin not; that, under an
awful sense of thy goodness, we may approach thy altar at this season, and
offer to thee, thanksgiving and praise, ascribing to thee glory, might, majesty
and dominion, and every other excellent attribute and perfection, of which thou
art worthy, not only now, but also henceforth and forevermore. Amen.

THE END.

