A DISCOURSE DELIVERED JULY 17, 1794 IN THE AFRICAN CHURCH OF THE CITY OF
PHILADELPHIA, ON THE OCCASION OF OPENING THE SAID CHURCH, AND HOLDING PUBLIC
WORSHIP IN IT THE FIRST TIME, BY SAMUEL MAGAW, D. D. RECTOR OF ST. PAUL'S.

DIVINE SERVICE, INTRODUCED WITH SELECT SCRIPTURE PASSAGES AND A SPECIAL
PRAYER, AND THEN PROCEEDING IN ITS USUAL OFFICES, HAVING BEEN PERFORMED BY
JAMES ABERCROMBIE, A.M. SECOND ASSISTANT MINISTER OF CHRIST-CHURCH AND ST.
PETER'S.

"ETHIOPIA SHALL SOON STRETCH OUT HER HANDS UNTO GOD." PHILADELPHIA: Printed by
WILLIAM W. WOODWARD, in CHESNUT-STREET, NO. 41, FRANKLIN'S HEAD.

TO THE Trustees The Trustees are, William Gray, Absalom Jones, William White,
William Gardner, William Welcher, and Henry Stewart.
and Congregation OF THE AFRICAN CHURCH, PHILADELPHIA:
Brethren,
"GRACE BE TO YOU, AND PEACE FROM GOD OUR FATHER, AND FROM THE LORD JESUS
CHRIST" --

We could not, ourselves, have devised any words equally expressive, with the
above, of a sincere Pastoral affection for you: and in the Spirit which they
breathe, we make this DEDICATION.

You will recollect those Holy Offices which you joined in, upon an important
day; and the instruction which you listened to, before many Witnesses. The
venerable Clergy of almost every denomination, and a number of other very
respectable Citizens were present.


SAMUEL MAGAW, JAMES ABERCROMBIE.


TO THE PUBLIC.
THE occasion on which the following Discourse was delivered, ought not to be
deemed too inconsiderable for any farther notice. The opening of an African
Church, in America; and, perhaps, the first, is a remarkable event in the
progress of Christian knowledge. At the request, therefore, of the People
expressly concerned, and with the countenance of several most respectable
characters, who wish well to them, the Author of this Discourse, assents now to
its proceeding from the press. It was prepared in unavoidable haste, and under
such peculiar circumstances of failure of health at the time, that it could not
have been undertaken at all, or even tolerably executed, when undertaken, had
it not been for Dr. Rush's distinguished attentions, and his most valuable
hints, of which the Preacher was fortunate in availing himself.

The familiarity of the Style, and plainness in the manner of address, it is to
be presumed, require no apology.

ORDER OF THE SERVICE IN THE DESK.
1. INTRODUCTORY SENTENCES.

THE Lord is in his holy Temple; let all the earth keep silence before him."

HAB. 2.20. "Thus says the Lord; the Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my
Footstool: where is the house that ye build unto me; and where is the place of
my rest?"

ISAIAH 66.1. "From the rising of the sun, even unto the going down of the
same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every place incense
shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering: for my name shall be great
among the Heathen, faith the Lord of Hosts."

MAL. 1.11. 2. THE EXHORTATION.

3. THE GENERAL CONFESSION.

4. THE FOLLOWING PRAYER.

O Lord, our heavenly Father, almighty and everlasting God; Creator, Preserver,
and Governor of the Universe; regard, we beseech thee, the prayers and praises
we this day offer unto thy divine Majesty, in the place which we are now
assembled in, to dedicate unto thee. Dwell in this house, we pray thee; accept
and sanctify it, as an holy Temple, devoted to thy service, and to the
maintenance of thy true religion and virtue.

We know, O Lord, that thou dwell not in Temples made with hands, so as to
be circumscribed by them, as thou have created the boundless expanse of Heaven
for thy Throne, and the Earth outstretched immense for thy Footstool; but,
whose Glory neither the boundless expanse of Heaven, which is thy Throne -- nor
the Earth outstretched immense, which is thy Footstool -- nor even the Heaven
of Heavens -- are able to contain. Yet, though thy divine nature be thus
unlimited, vouchsafe, we beseech thee, to be more especially present in this
Sanctuary, by thy grace and heavenly benediction; that, as often as two or
three are gathered together here in thy name, thou may be in the midst of
them, to hear and to fulfill their petitions: so that this house may be for ever
sacred to the worship of thee the only true God; where the Gospel of thy
blessed son, our savior Jesus Christ, may be faithfully preached, and the
Sacraments of his institution rightly and duly administered -- that Gospel,
which is "the power of God unto salvation to as many as believe" -- those holy
Sacraments, which, being worthily received, are able to "nourish us unto
eternal life."

And do thou, O merciful God, who before all Temples, preferest a pure and
upright heart; enlighten, preserve, convert us. "May thy Priests," here
ministering before thee, "be clothed with righteousness, and may thy Saints,"
uttering their responses, "sing with joyfulness." Pour out upon the whole
Congregation a spirit of Piety and universal Charity; of that Piety which is
servent, yet humble -- of that* "Charity, which is the very bond of
perfectness, the end of the commandment, and which proceeds out of a pure
heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned." May they ever possess a lively
remembrance of the mercy thou have vouchsafed unto them, in being graciously
pleased to call them out of the darkness of Paganism, and the bondage of
ignorance and error, into the clear light of Gospel Revelation, and "the
glorious liberty of the children of God." May their understandings be evermore
illuminated by that heavenly light, and may they ever "stand fast in that
liberty wherewith Christ has made them free." May they so diligently learn the
precepts of thy blessed son, and so constantly follow his good example, that,
having faithfully worshipped thee in thy church upon earth, they may, when the
present period of their probation shall be accomplished, be admitted to the
general assembly and church of the firstborn in thy heavenly kingdom, where
with Angels and Archangels, and all the innumerable Hosts of Heaven, they may
laud and magnify thy glorious name, through the endless ages of eternity.

Hear us, O Lord, we humbly beseech thee, for the sake of thine only son Jesus
Christ, our Mediator and Redeemer, to whom, with the Father and the holy Ghost,
be all honor and glory, world without end. Amen.

5. THE MORNING PRAYER CONTINUED.

6. PROPER PSALMS, 15.84.85.122.

7. LESSONS. 1. ZACHARIAH, 8 chap. 2. COLOSSIANS, 3 chap.


8. REMAINDER OF THE MORNING SERVICE.

9. PART OF THE COMMUNION SERVICE.

10. THE COLLECT -- As for the first Sunday in Advent.

EPISTLE -- ROMANS 13.8.

GOSPEL -- ACTS 11 to 27 verse.

(Then followed the Sermon.)
A DISCOURSE, etc.
ISAIAH ix, 2. THE PEOPLE THAT WALKED IN DARKNESS HAVE SEEN A GREAT LIGHT.


AS I passed by, soon after the walls of this Building were carried up, -- and
beheld the Marble on the Eastern Front, inscribed with these words, my
attention was exceedingly attracted by them; for I was struck with the
propriety of such a choice. And, I know of none more suitable to direct our
thoughts on the present interesting occasion. They relate to the Gentiles; and,
this day, they have their accomplishment here.

Blessed God! who are these that gather themselves together? They come to thee!
They come, (...) by light, and to the brightness of its rising. The sons of
strangers do build up thy walls -- Their children's children shall minister
unto thee. -- In thy wrath did thou smite them, but in thy favor have thou
had mercy on them.

The style of holy Scripture is often figurative; and notices are taken from
familiar objects, and circumstances generally known, in common life, in order
to convey spiritual conceptions with the greater clearness, and to render their
impression the stronger and more abiding. This is remarkably seen in the
writings of the sublime Isaiah. We have an instance of it before us, in the
Text, -- where the words Darkness, and Light, which, literally, denote
qualities universally understood, as they respect worldly things, are applied
to certain qualities and conditions relative to spiritual things.

-- "The people that walked in Darkness" -- is the Prophet's expression; --
"The people" who lived in blindness and error, have seen a great light, -- the
light of the truth -- the light of the glorious gospel of Jesus Christ.

With some variation, how strongly is the same thought represented in the close
of the verse -- "they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them
has the light shined." --

-- Yes; of all darkness, that of the Soul is most dark: and of all who wander
-- the wanderers from the path of life, are most forlorn, and to be pitied. --
Of course, Divine illumination, the light from God, is, of all things, the most
precious.

You are a people who have "walked in Darkness."

You who walked in darkness, have been favored with a change of that
condition; you have been brought to see Light: And

That Light is a glorious one -- a great Light.

From these considerations, do clearly flow certain Duties, which eminently
claim your observance.

I. YOU are a People who "have walked in darkness."

1. In being brought up as Pagans, or Heathen, unacquainted with Divine
Revelation, and the covenant of grace, in your own country. This is meant of
the general state of the black people, or Africans.


Your fathers, and some, perhaps, of you now present, did, near the shores of
Senegal and Gambia, on this or the other ill-fated range, or coast, of Africa,
-- may be in Benin, Congo or Angola, -- ignorant of "God that made the world,
and all things therein," -- bow down in adoration before stocks, stones,
beasts, and the vilest creeping things, -- pray to the hollow winds; or,
dancing in wild circles, mutter to Devils; -- or, in affrighted gaze, yell to
the pale moon, to save you! -- And it is known, that proportioned to the
degrees of darkness, in the aforementioned respects, -- especially the "gross
darkness" covering the people, -- must, of course, be the corrupt state of
their manners.

2. You have "walked in darkness," as being slaves in this country -- for
slavery, and darkness, or ignorance, go hand in hand.

Can a poor African, dragged in fetters from his native land, -- and here,
driven and tormented under the lashes of cruelty, be any thing else than dark,
dark! Can a people, kept back from knowledge, expressly for this reason -- lest
it should unfit them for being beasts of burden, -- can they be any other than
dark?

To the credit of humanity, in this part of America, and several other parts,
such treatment has been held in abhorrence. It is unknown, except in
narratives from abroad.

Still, at the very best, slavery is an hard allotment. It sinks the mind, no
less than the body: it weakens its capacity: destroys all principle; corrupts
its feelings; prevents it from either discerning, or choosing aright in any
thing. Yes -- and in the proportion that it exists any where, it has its effect
in vitiating the general manners.

PENNSYLVANIA! -- thou have considered this: Thou have mitigated its ills, in
the first instance, and in the most proper manner which the evil would admit
of, art pursuing the plans for its entire abolition.

3. You "have walked in darkness," as sinners. In this respect, all mankind are
upon a footing -- they all walk in darkness. The term is fitly chosen indeed,
to express the state of man. He has lost sight of his chief end, and of the
means to attain it. He mistakes his supreme good. He wanders in crooked paths.
He exposes himself continually to dangers. He falls into innumerable vices and
corruptions -- and no wonder -- for he walks in darkness.

This darkness may be considered in a twofold view, -- as external and
internal. The external darkness includes that state of things in the world,
which is opposed to the knowledge of God, and true religion; those
circumstances severally, or taken together, which the evil one makes use of, as
a medium, through which, to carry on his own foul business. It comprehends all
those erroneous systems of religion which prevailed among the different
nations, before the appearing of the Messiah, Jesus Christ; and all the schemes
or systems, whatever may be their names, that have been substituted for his
religion, since.

The internal darkness is seated in man's mind. It is an immoral disposition of
the heart; a corrupt state of the affections. It is THE ENMITY AGAINST GOD,
spoken of by St. Paul. It is that aching, wrathful abyss (if I may so express
it) void and without form -- till the spirit of God "moves upon the face of
it," and says, "Let there be light." --

The depraved condition of the soul, being the dreadful effect of man's fall,
you find set forth in holy scripture, by no expression so frequent, as that of
"Darkness." And, what is very observable -- this internal darkness always
implies that extreme evil, Unbelief -- a distrust in the Almighty, and his
declarations: and, in relation to the redemption offered to the world -- it is
a refusal to accept thereof, or to comply with its gracious terms.

II. In the next place, let us observe, agreeably to our text, that a "People
that walked in darkness," external, and internal, "have seen a great light." --
They have perceived by the eye of their understanding -- they have discovered
-- they have become acquainted with, that which will guide them to liberty and
happiness.

By this "great light," is meant the knowledge of true religion -- the
instruction contained in the gospel of Jesus Christ; -- "the light of the glory
of God in the face" of his beloved Son, -- who is himself called "the light of
men;" "the true light which lights every man that comes into the world."
Verily, under the circumstances in which his world lay by reason of sin; and,
in the expectations of deliverance through the grace and virtue of a messenger
sent from GOD, who is the eternal essential light; there could not be a more
proper word summarily to characterize that divine messenger, than LIGHT. Well
therefore, may the beautiful metaphor be used, as it often is, to designate or
express his influence. This is called light, as opposed to darkness. It dispels
darkness. It irradiates the external and internal hemisphere of the mind. It is
that spiritual medium of sight, by which we see spiritually. It shows God to be
what he is. Our altars need no more to have this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN
GOD. It reveals his name, his nature, his perfections. --

It shows man, as a creature, and a sinner. It shows him in a very different
view from what he is disposed to consider himself, by the light of his own
reason. It discovers to him his littleness, his dependence on a superior, his
depravity, -- and withal, his utter inability to save himself. Particularly,
does it open the way of salvation; setting forth, in a manner most comfortable,
most easy to be understood by people of all capacities -- high, or low, -- that
"God may be just, and yet the justifier of him who believes in Jesus." It
shows, that grace is the true spring of holiness: that divine pardon produces
divine peace; and this peace to be inseparable from purity and virtue. It
shows, moreover, all the social and relative duties; and points out the
connection of each of them with the glory of God, and with general and
individual happiness. Yes, my brethren, -- and to complete the whole, it opens
the divine abodes of existence in the world to come. It carries your hopes
steadfast and sure, to the morning of that bright day, in the which, the
redeemed ones shall put on immortality, -- shall all meet one another, and meet
the Lord; -- when dignity and excellence that cannot now be uttered, shall be
theirs for ever.

III. It is called a great light. Let us enquire into the reasons of this
epithet. It is great, both with respect to its object, its origin, and its
circumstances.

1. Its object: Here indeed, there is not one only; but many: and in the like
multiplied view, may the origin be contemplated, together with the other
particulars.

In regard to the first, -- I shall try a moment to direct your attention to
the principal of all -- It is a great light, because it manifests to the world,
the Great Being. The knowledge of God, or the religious impression of an
intelligent, almighty Cause of all things, -- "the rewarder of them that
diligently seek him," is as essential to human happiness, as the breath we
draw, is now to human life. Man may exist without knowing God: but existence
merely is not happiness. A sensibility on our part, of the relation we stand in
to the infinitely great and good Creator, and of the duty flowing from that
relation, -- it is this that gives man his dignified place in the arrangement
of the universe. Yet, it is too certain, to be disputed, that such knowledge or
sensibility might, through human degeneracy and weakness, in a great measure,
or altogether become lost. -- It actually did so -- What was the state of the
world, in this respect, before the revelation of gospel light? What has been
its state ever since, in places where that light has not reached? or in minds
which refuse its friendly aid, under all the circumstances that appreciate and
recommend it? One cannot give a more express, and at the same time, a more full
answer to the above, than in these few scriptural words, "Having no hope, and
without God." --

The great light I am speaking of, immediately tends to the removing from human
minds, that obscurity which covered them, with regard to that infinite Being.
It is light that does make manifest. And it is this great light that has
revealed or manifested God -- not in the mysteries of his nature; but, as far
as by us, he may be known; a Being great and good, -- in whom the most entire
confidence may be reposed; a Being who orders and governs universally, and
in the most perfect manner; a Being who is the standard of excellence; and who
is still the compassionate benefactor of man though fallen; a Being who is
reconciling the world unto himself; who is establishing an intercourse between
earth and heaven; bestowing forgiveness through a Mediator; and opening all the
springs of righteousness and consolation. Here there arises in view

Another object of this light, enhancing its exalted nature and qualities; I
mean the great salvation by the gospel of Jesus Christ; a salvation from sin
and death, into holiness and life eternal: for, wherever its gracious influence
is experienced -- there peace is established; the dominion of satan is
overturned, and a new dominion fixed in the soul -- the reign of God; new
principles are implanted -- the principles of light and love; a new life
communicated -- the life of heaven.

This sketch must suffice at present --

Other particulars, numerous and important, might here be brought forward, as
objects of the great light before us: but as the principal ones contemplated
just now, do virtually include or refer to all the rest; I forthwith pass on

2. To the greatness of this light, in respect of its origin or sources.

It is great,

(1.) Because it comes from the Great Being, "the Father of Lights," the Author
and Creator of all things. He "who commanded light to shine out of darkness,"
in the beginning, -- has now "shined into our hearts, to give us" this light.

(2.) Because it was conveyed to the word, by the great Immanuel, the Son of
God, "the brightness of the Father's glory, and the express delineation of his
person;" of whom it was predicted, that "he should be great." -- It was
conveyed by him, whose immense dignity, and divine attributes, attested and
announced in the clearest manner, must give it value. It was conveyed by him,
who was THE WORD, and in the beginning, "with God;" -- "who has a name above
every name;" of whom it is said, as "the first begotten," "and let all the
angels of God worship him;" and "thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever" --
upon whose shoulder is "the government," as Mediator -- the WONDERFUL, -- the
Counselor, the Mighty God The Mighty Lord, or Heir of all things -- Lord over
all.
, the Everlasting Father The Father of the perpetual age to come, the age of
the Gospel.
, the Prince of Peace -- "able and willing to save unto the uttermost:" I
repeat it, -- This light, this "Wisdom, which is from above," conveyed by Him,
must be great.

(3.) It is great, because it is communicated by the agency of the Holy Spirit,
whose power is great to overcome all resistances from earth and hell; whose
office it is, to "reprove the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment;"
-- the spirit who led the disciple Peter, to make the memorable confession
which his Lord entitles THIS ROCK, "on which he will build his church, -- and
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it;" -- the spirit, through whose
divine irradiations, the ancient prophets, and all the men of God from the
beginning, saw, and foretold the several periods of the Messiah's kingdom; --
its dawn, its commencement, its gradual unfolding, and the unutterable glory in
which it is to issue; -- the Spirit, whose guidance and inspiration were given
in a manner still more extraordinary, unto the Apostles -- leading them unto
all truth: bringing to their remembrance all that their Master had taught them;
enduing them with miraculous powers; accompanying their preaching with
irresistible energy and demonstration; instructing them how to answer and
refute their adversaries; supporting them and their pious followers against the
spirit and malice of the world; qualifying them severally to fulfill the great
purposes of the ministry; and abiding with all the faithful servants of Christ,
ministers and people, to the end of the world: the Spirit who is the author at
first, and the promoter ever afterward, of all saving impressions, gracious
influences, and heavenly virtues in the human mind; -- the inspirer of the
gifts of faith, of purity, of love, of consolation: -- Through his agency and
operation, is this light communicated.

3. I said it is great, in relation to the circumstances appertaining to it:
and this is the third head, with which the consideration of the greatness of
this light, supplies me.

(1) It is great, because it has endured a great while -- from the fall of
man, to the present day. It is as old as the creation. With its early rays it
comforted and refreshed the patriarchs. Increasing gradually, it was a guide to
the prophets. From one age to another, down to the "fullness of the time," it
taught the good and just, to "live by faith." It was reflected back in hope and
consolation, from every type and ordinance of the law. It encircled every
altar. It interpreted every sacrifice. It enabled the members of the church of
God, to look through each emblem and shadow, to the substance. In a word, -- it
may be traced in a distinguishable stream, up to the beginning of time: it will
extend down to the end of time; and it will shine more and more "unto the
perfect day."

(2.) It is great, because it shall illuminate the whole world. Yes, "from the
rising of the sun, unto the going down of the same," it will cause the name of
the Messiah to be "great among the heathen." In a more eminent degree than we
can have any just conception of, at present,

"One tide of glory, one unclouded blaze" -- shall cover the earth. --

Innumerable passages of Scripture prove the future universal prevalence of
this light: meanwhile, the happiest comparisons, and most expressive charming
prospects are made use of often, to represent its excellency and increasing
brightness.

I refer you, particularly to the Book of Psalms; -- to the Prophets, Isaiah,
Zechariah, and Malachi; -- to the books of the holy Gospel, expressly so named;
-- to the epistles of St. Paul, -- and the revelation of St. John: the
substance of their report, is, That by the prevailing and expanding of this
light, the "Dominion" of Christ, shall be from sea, even to sea; and from the
rivers, even to the ends of the earth Psalm. 7^.
: That every where, the walls of his church shall be called "salvation, and its
gates praise Isa. 60.
:" That "in every place, incense shall be offered to his name, and a pure
offering Mal 1.
:" That "the wildernesses and solitary places shall be universally made glad;
and the deserts shall blossom as the rose Isa. 35.1.
; -- The mountains exult, -- the vales be filled with melody; -- the trees of
every forest break forth into singing Chapter 44.
: -- the eyes of the blind be opened, and the ears of the deaf unstopped Chapter
29. Chapter 35.
:" -- That "the fullness of the Gentiles shall come; for the same Lord over all,
is rich unto all that call upon him Romans 11.
;" That "the ransomed of the Lord, shall return, and come to Zion with Songs,
and everlasting joy upon their heads Isa. 3^.
;" That "a great multitude" -- countless by men; "of all nations, and kindreds,
and people, and tongues, shall stand before the throne, and before the Lamb,
clothed in white robes, and palms in their hands Rev. 7.
." --

(3.) Lastly, it is great, because, as it will shine on, with unceasing luster,
until the end of time; so it will shine hereafter, in the glory which it
produces, throughout all eternity.

From the words thus opened and explained, there clearly arise certain duties,
which you are expressly concerned in. Allow me, with affectionate plainness to
state and recommend them.

1. The first is, Gratitude to God, for having directed, in his own wise
Providence, that you should come from a land of Pagan darkness, to a land of
Gospel light; from a state, afterward, of slavery, to a state of liberty; and
now, from guilt and sinfulness, to this state of salvation, through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

As for those who brought you, or your fathers, from your own country, -- one
may say of them, with a little variation, -- because of the different
circumstances -- as Joseph said to his brethren, "But as for you, ye thought
evil against us; but God meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this
day, to save much people alive."

I am aware, that your condition, or cases severally, may differ a good deal,
one from the other. I will specify an instance, and consider it with you, a
moment; not losing sight of the gratitude just mentioned. -- As the greater
number of you are free; so, there may be others of you yet in bondage: these
nevertheless, have received mercies enough to thank God for. His dispensations
are unquestionably wise and proper. Whatever he permits, will turn to the real
profit of such as do resign themselves to his good pleasure. Your present
situation does not hinder you from being Christ's freemen. Your present
situation gives you some advantages above what others have: yes, and very
possibly, above what your Masters have, -- in that your humbleness of mind,
your patience, faithfulness, and trust only in God, will add to the greatness
of your future happiness.

2. The next duty is gratitude to your earthly benefactors, who planned your
emancipation from slavery.

There are certain evils, which, when once they have obtained footing, and
become epidemick, as it were, are scarcely seen as evils: no wonder then if
they be slow and difficult to remove: so it has been with slavery. A few
humane, considerate persons, at an early period of our settlement in this
country, -- yes, in Pennsylvania particularly, were moved by the Divine Spirit,
to open light upon this darkness. Their Testimony was treated as visionary for
a while; but, in time, it gained upon the judgment and consciences of men.

Here, you will recollect the names of LAY, of WOOLMAN, -- and above all,
ANTHONY BENEZET; -- whose labors were unwearied in your behalf; whose works of
benevolence and love, have followed them to the regions of peace and
blessedness beyond the grave.

There are also living characters not a few, in this city, and throughout the
United States, heartily engaged in the same business of humanity. Behold, how
intent they are to do your people good!

You owe much likewise, to those persons who planned schools for the
instruction of your children. This instruction is as the door introducing the
young people to the great light. Knowledge is the best foundation for integrity
and usefulness: and it is the element and life of Freedom.

You owe much to the "Pennsylvania Society for promoting the abolition of
slavery, and the relief of free negroes unlawfully held in bondage." The memory
of Franklin here rises before you. He was its President. With the like views in
which it originated, may it persevere -- till its work be completed.

But especially, do you owe a large debt of gratitude to the citizens of
Philadelphia, who assisted you by donations and loans, in the building of this
handsome, spacious, and very convenient church Dimensions -- 60 feet, by 40 --
height proportional.
. You thought that to have an house of your own to assemble in for public
worship, was, in consideration of your increased numbers, now desirable and
expedient. In the same view have your patrons and friends regarded the matter,
and countenanced your proceedings. And, as with brotherly kindness and
complacency, they leave it to yourselves to fix upon, or adopt such system,
order, and mode of worship as may be most agreeable to you; so have they found
a perfect freedom in helping you to prepare a place, where that system, order,
and mode may peacefully reside, and operate.

On the pleasing ground marked out above, I could go farther, -- indulging your
feelings, -- and my own, by particularly mentioning some characters in this
place, preeminent for generous actions, wherever they have opportunity; and who
truly have been so, with regard to you: -- But we are restrained in that
satisfaction. There is, however, what will be infinitely more acceptable to
them; namely, to see that their acts of kindness do good.

Most favorably assisted, the pious labor of your hands has prospered thus
far; and you are now happily assembled, for the first time, within these walls;
-- we offering our congratulations; and cheerfully uniting with you to worship
the God of All.

3. Another duty, is compassionate love to your brethren, who are yet in
darkness, or bondage, in other parts of the world. Be tenderly affectioned
toward their condition. Pray publicly, and privately, that "the Lord may hear
your voice, and look upon their affliction, and their labor, and their
oppression." --

O mighty God! Thou do encourage us in this thing. For, notwithstanding the
confusion of nations, and the corruption and madness of human passions; --
there is some prospect that the general cause of justice and of freedom, and of
peace on earth, will at last prevail!

4. Humility is the next duty. -- Remember your former condition. Pride was not
made for man, in any, even the highest stations in life; much less for persons
who have just emerged from the lowest. It is said, there is a great deal of
this among your people, already; and that it is increasing extremely fast. I
wish this might be no more than a surmise: and then, that even the surmise
itself might be dropped; for your friends meet with discouragements on this
head. Will you, my brethren, guard against pride? Will you reflect on the
nature of the evil itself; the offenses that come by it; and other unhappy
consequences!

It was a custom among the Jews, as you find recorded by Moses, in the book of
Deuteronomy, chapter 26.5 -- when the Priest received the Basket of first fruits
from them; -- for each person to declare, in the house and presence of the
Lord, -- the history of the mean and wretched origin of his family: "A Syrian
ready to perish, was my father."

In like manner, when you are tempted to cherish the least pride, in your
freedom -- in dress -- in your favorable reception among your fellow-citizens,
-- and even in this stately building; -- or in any of your civil, as well as
religious privileges; -- then check yourselves, by confessing privately and
publicly, that "a slave ready to perish was my father:" Or, if all cannot say
this; you may unite in expressions still more humbling, and say "A sinner -- a
fallen man -- a rebel against God -- an heir of wrath; and, until redeemed, a
child of hell, was my father."

5. Circumspection in your conduct and intercourse with the world, is another
duty that you are especially concerned in. "See that ye walk circumspectly; not
as fools, but as wife." Remember, that you have enemies, as well as friends;
that you will be narrowly watched; and that less allowance will be made for
your failings, than for those of other people. This circumspection will be the
more necessary, as you have became a religious society. --

Peaceableness among yourselves, and with all men, is indispensable to a fair
character; as also truth in your dealings, in your words, and in your inner
man; diligence in providing things honest: temperance and sobriety; an
obliging, friendly, meek conversation. --

Here a particular thought occurs to me, which is not to be suppressed: With
regard to those of you who are not free, -- you must not be cast down, nor
discontented. It is a dispensation of Providence, as I hinted already, to which
you should submit in quietness, for conscience sake: and in so doing, you shall
certainly meet with good. I give you St. Paul's advice, adapted exactly to your
situation* "Let as many servants as are under the yoke, count their own masters
worthy of all honor; that the name of God, and his doctrine be not blasphemed
1 Timothy vi.1.
*"

To proceed: You have built an house for the public worship of God; and this
day, solemnly dedicated it unto him. --

O may the Lord our God accept of the dedication! Let him not leave this
people, nor forsake them: "Hear thou in heaven, their prayers and their
supplications, and maintain their cause!"

Come then ye people, highly favored! Your house is Holiness unto the Lord!
Let none who ever worship in it, dishonor it at any time, or in any way. You
have here, in the most public manner named the name of Christ, and told us, You
"have seen his star in the east, and are come to worship him;" -- depart then,
-- depart from all -- yea, even from the shadow of iniquity.

It is not a small matter, to have even heard of the true God. It is still a
greater to have been taught his pure religion: But, together with the above, --
for you to be encouraged, in the course of events, to build a temple to that
God, wherein his name may be adored, -- this is indeed an honor bestowed upon
you. Here then, be assured, -- is a period in your progress and profession,
which will prove very remarkable: For, according as your conduct henceforth,
turns out well or ill; your example will be a praise in the view of all around
you, -- or a reproach. Yes, this very house -- or rather, the conversation of
those belonging to it, "is set for the fall, or rising again of many" -- of the
people of your color. On the right improvement of your present advantages,
depends, perhaps, the fate of your brethren in bondage, in every part of the
world. Strengthen the hands of your friends every where by your pure and
unexceptionable conduct. This will be to "let your light shine," in favor of
the multitudes yet covered with darkness. This will be encouraging the
deliverance of those who are bound.

A contrary behavior will certainly increase their darkness, and tend only to
rivet still closer their chains. It may render the yet existing reproach of our
country perpetual.

To conclude; -- Strive to escape from the darkness of sin. O let it not be
"your condemnation, that light is come into the world, and that you have chosen
darkness rather than light, because your deeds are evil." With your own eyes,
behold the great light that has been described; and walk ye in it. Prize beyond
all things the instructive, renovating grace of the gospel. Reflect on the
considerations now offered for that purpose. Attend, I beseech you, to the
admonitions of your own consciences; to the calls of Providence; to the word of
the Lord; to the teachings of the Divine Spirit; to the terrors of neglecting
so great a salvation; to the hopes, and the joys of obtaining it; -- to the
sure prospects of glory, honor, and immortality in the life to come.

Thus have we asked, O great God! for the counsel, and light, and Blessing
which we need. Thus have we opened these doors, for thy sacred worship, and to
thine honor. Thus, with thy permission, have I spoken to this people, whom we
take by the hand as Brethren in Christ Jesus. -- Who can doubt, but thou will,
look down from Heaven, and cast upon us the bright beams of thy mercy!

MY RESPECTED AUDIENCE,

What if now, before we part, some free will offering should be made, in favor
of this dedicated house -- Prayers never come up more acceptably before God,
for a memorial, than when united with alms: And I am inclined to believe, that
there are very few occasions, if any, on which such an union could, with more
propriety than the present, take place.

Under some difficulties, though highly favored, -- after considerable delay,
and apprehensions, at times, of much greater; -- it has pleased Providence to
permit this goodly building to be brought on to its present state. There is
more must be done to it yet, you see, ere it will be quite safe and convenient
to assemble in: and very probably, notwithstanding the economy of the managers
or trustees, a share of the past account, is yet unpaid.

The people of the congregation may by easy contributions from time to time,
help themselves in this laudable business. Yes: and it may be reasonably
expected, that each of you now present, -- I speak to those of the congregation
-- will, this day, give something for that purpose. And, for your
encouragement, these respectable citizens, a number of your benefactors, --
your Fellow Christians also -- will cheerfully go on to encourage and assist
you.

Will you then -- (I address myself to such benefactors) will you allow me to
solicit a present contribution, in the generous view intimated above! and then
-- we shall depart with satisfaction.

To press this matter much, is totally unnecessary: For, it has ever appeared
to me a trait in the Philadelphia character, that the citizens looked not for
pressing solicitations to do beneficent actions; but for opportunities. "And
God is not unrighteous, that he will forget your works, and labor that
proceeds of love."

THE END.

