SPEECH, TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES,
DELIVERED JANUARY 14, 1794, By JAMES MADISON, OF VIRGINIA, IN SUPPORT OF HIS
PROPOSITIONS FOR THE PROMOTION OF THE COMMERCE of the UNITED STATES, AND IN
REPLY TO WILLIAM SMITH, OF SOUTH CAROLINA.

NEW-YORK-PRINTED AT GREENLEAF's PRESS. -- 1794 --

SPEECH OF MR. MADISON, IN CONGRESS, JANUARY 14, 1794.
HE began by observing, that he had expected, from what was intimated
yesterday, the sequel of what was then said against the resolutions before the
committee; but as there was a silence in that quarter, and no other member has
risen on either side of the question, he himself would request the attention of
the committee.

It had been much pressed, that in the discussion of this subject, it should be
viewed in its commercial relations only. He was perfectly willing to meet every
object that could be urged on that ground: But as he conceived it impossible to
do full justice to the interests of the United States, without taking some
collateral considerations into view; he should be obliged, in the course of his
remarks, to point at the political disposition and conduct of some of the
nations of Europe toward this country.

The propositions immediately before the committee, turned on the question,
whether any thing ought to be done at this time, in the way of commercial
regulations, toward vindicating and advancing our national interests. Perhaps
it might be made a question with some, whether, in any case, legislative
regulations of commerce were consistent with its nature and prosperity.

He professed himself to be a friend (...) the theory which gives to indust^^
s^ee co^rse, under the (...) of individual (...) the guidan^^ (...) individual
sagacity. He was persuaded, that it would be happy for all nations, if the
barriers erected by prejudice, by avarice, and by despotism, were broken down,
and a free intercourse established among them. Yet to this, as to all other
general rules, there might be exceptions: And the rule itself required, what
did not exist, that it should be general.

To illustrate this observation, he referred to the navigation act of Great
Britain, which, not being counterbalanced by any similar acts on the part of
rival nations, had secured to Great Britain no less than eleven-twelfths of the
shipping and seamen employed in her trade. It is stated, that in 1660, when the
British act passed, the foreign tonnage was to the British as one to four: In
1700, less than one to six: In 1725, as one to nineteen: In 1750, as one to
twelve: In 1774, nearly the same. At the commencement of the period, the
tonnage was but 95,266 tons: At the end of it, 1,136,162.

As another illustration, he mentioned the case where two countries happened to
be in such a relation to each other, that the one, by discouraging the
manufactures of the other, might not only invigorate its own, but transplant
the manufacturers themselves. Here the gain would be a clear one; and the
effect evidently consistent with the principle of the theory.

To allow trade to regulate itself, is not, therefore, to be admitted as a
maxim universally sound. Our own experience has taught us, that, in certain
cases, it is the same thing with allowing one nation to regulate it for
another. Were the United States, in fact, in commercial intercourse with one
nation only, and to oppose no restrictions whatever to a system of foreign
restrictions, they would, of necessity, be deprived of all share in the
carriage, although their vessels might be able to do it cheapest; as well as of
the only resources for defense on that side, where they must always be most
(...). A small burden only in foreign ports on (...) vessels, and a perfect
equality of foreign (...) in our own po^^^ would gradually banish the latter
altogether.

This subject, as had been remarked on a former occasion, was not a novel one:
It was co-eval with our political birth, and has at all times exercised the
thoughts of reflecting citizens. As early as the year succeeding the peace, the
effect of the foreign policy, which began to be felt in our trade and
navigation, excited universal attention and inquietude. The first effort
thought of, was an application of Congress to the states for a grant of power,
for a limited time, to regulate our foreign commerce; with a view, to control
the influence of unfavorable regulations in some cases, and to conciliate an
extension of favorable ones in others. From some circumstances then incident to
our situation, and particularly from a radical vice in the then political
system of the United States, the experiment did not take effect.

The states next endeavored to effect their purpose by separate, but
concurrent, regulations. Massachusetts opened a correspondence with Virginia
and other states, in order to bring about the plan. Here again the effort was
abortive.

Out of this experience, grew the measures which terminated in the
establishment of a government competent to the regulation of our commercial
interests, and the vindication of our commercial rights.

As these were the first objects of the people in the steps taken for
establishing the present government, they were universally expected to be among
the first fruits of its operation. In this expectation, the public were
disappointed. An attempt was made in different forms, and received the repeated
sanction of this, branch of the legislature, but they expired in the senate:
Not, indeed, as was alleged, from a dislike to the attempt altogether but the
modifications given to it. It has not appeared, however, that it was ever
renewed in a different form in that house; and for some time it has been
allowed to sleep in both.

If the reasons which originally prevailed against measures such as those now
proposed, had weight in them, they can no longer furnish a pretext for
opposition.

When the subject was discussed in the first Congress at New York, it was said,
that we ought to try the effect of a generous policy toward Great Britain;
that we ought to give time for negociating a treaty of commerce; that we ought
to await the close of negociations for explaining and executing the treaty of
peace. We have now waited a term of more than four years. The treaty of peace
remains unexecuted on her part; though all pretext for delay has been removed
by the steps taken on ours. No treaty of commerce is either in train, or in
prospect. Instead of relaxations in former articles complained of, we suffer
new and aggravated violations of our rights.

In the view which he took of the subject, he called the attention of the
committee particularly to the subject of navigation, of manufactures, and of
the discrimination proposed in the motion, between some nations and others.

On the subject of navigation, he observed, that we were prohibited by the
British laws from carrying to Great Britain the produce of other countries from
their ports, or our own produce from the ports of other countries, or the
produce of other countries from our own ports; or to send our own produce from
our own or other ports in the vessels of other countries. This last restriction
was, he observed, felt by the United States at the present moment. It was,
indeed, the practice of Great Britain sometimes to relax her navigation act so
far, in time of war, as to permit to neutral vessels a circuitous carriage; but
as yet the act was in full force against the use of them for transporting the
produce of the United States.

On the other hand, the laws of the United States allowed Great Britain to
bring into their ports, any thing she might please, from her own or from other
ports; and in her own or in other vessels.

In the trade between the United States and the British West Indies, the
vessels of the former were under an absolute prohibition; whilst British
vessels in that trade enjoyed all the privileges granted to other, even the
most favored nations in their trade with us. The inequality in this case was
the more striking, as it was evident, that the West Indies were dependant on
the United States for the supplies essential to them, and that the
circumstances which secured to the United States this advantage, enabled their
vessels to transport the supplies on far better terms than could be done by
British vessels.

To illustrate the policy requisite in our commercial intercourse with other
nations, he presented a comparative view of the American and foreign tonnage
employed in the respective branches of it, from which it appeared, that the
foreign stood to the American as follows: Spain, 1 to 5 Portugal, 1 to 6 The
United Netherlands, 1 to 15 Denmark, 1 to 12 Russia, France, 1 to 5 Great
Britain, 5 to ^

It results from these facts, that in proportion as the trade might be
diminished with Great Britain, and increased with other nations, would be the
probable increase of the American tonnage. It appeared, for example, that as
the trade might pass from British channels into those of France, it would
augment our tonnage at the rate of ten to one.

The above calculation, he said, had been made out on the documents of 1790,
and on the amount of the tonnage entered in the several ports. A document,
stating the amounts of the actual tonnage in the American trade, had been just
reported to that house. If this, which was liable to some remarks that might
hereafter be made, was to be substituted, it afforded another calculation,
diminishing the excess in favor of Great Britain, but augmenting it in favor of
the United States in most of the other instances.

According to this calculation, the foreign to the American tonnage might be
stated as follows: Spain, 1 to 16 Portugal, 1 to 17 United Netherlands, 1 to 26
Denmark, 1 to 15 Russia, 1 to 14 France, 1 to between 4 and 5 Great Britain,
nearly as 3 to 1

Such a disproportion, taking even the reduced one, in the navigation with
Great Britain, was the more mortifying, when the nature and amount of our
exports are considered. Our exports are not only for the most part, either
immediately necessaries of life, or ultimately as necessaries to manufactures,
necessaries of employment and life to manufacturers, and must thence command a
sure market wherever they are received at all: But the peculiar bulkiness of
them furnishes (...) advantage over the exports of every other country; and
particularly over those of Great Britain. If such (...) advantage belonged to
that nation, the policy which governs her navigation laws, would probably have
given the exclusive carriage to her own ^^ttoms. It is equally in our power, if
so selfish a principle should be forced upon us, to secure to our bottoms the
same monopoly; leaving to other nations with which we trade, the like exclusive
carriage of their exports. The regulation would, to be sure be mutually
inconvenient; and, by forcing the vessels of each party to return empty from
foreign markets, be so far a tax on the intercourse. -- This effect, however,
did not disprove the power in general which the character of our exports gave
us, over the carriage of them, nor lessen the argument drawn from it. Examine
it in relation to Great Britain. The bulk of her exports to us, compared with
that of ours to her, is as nothing. An inconsiderable quantity of shipping
would suffice for hers, whilst ours can load about 222,000 tons: Including the
articles she exports from the West Indies to this country, they bear no
proportion to ours. Yet in the entire trade between the United States and the
British dominions, her tonnage is to that of the United States as 156,000,
employing 9360 seamen, to 66,000, employing 3690 seamen. Were a rigid exertion
of our right to take place, it would extend our tonnage to 222,000, and leave
to Great Britain employment for much less than the actual share now enjoyed by
the United States. It could not be wished to push matters to this extremity. It
showed, however, the very ^^qual and unfavorable footing on which the carrying
(...) the great resource of our safety and respectability, was placed by
foreign regulations, and the reasonableness of peaceable attempts to meliorate
it. We might at least, in availing ourselves of the merit of our exports,
contend for such regulations as would reverse the proportion, and give the
United States the 156,000 tonnage, and 9360 seamen, instead of the 66,000
tonnage and 3690 seamen.

He here adverted to the discount of ten of ten per cent. on the duties paid by
goods imported in American bottoms; remarking, thai it was not founded on the
true policy of encouraging our shipping. It was not the imports, but exports,
that regulated the quantity of tonnage. -- What was imported in American
vessls, which would otherwise return empty, was, no doubt, a benefit to the
American merchant, but could slightly only, if at all, increase the mass of our
tonnage. The way to effect this, was to secure exportations to American bottoms.

Proceeding to the subject of manufactures, he observed, that it presented no
compensations for the inequalities in the principles and effects of the
navigation system.

We consume British manufactures to double the amount of what Britain takes
from us; and quadruple the amount of what she actually consumes.

We take every thing after it has undergone all the profitable labor that can
be bestowed on it: She receives in return, raw materials, the food of her
industry.

We send necessaries te her: She sends superfluities to us.

We admit every thing she pleased to send us, whether of her own or alien
production. She refuses not only our manufactures, but the articles we wish
most to send her; our wheat and flour, our fish, and our salted provisions.
These constitute our best staples for exportation, as her manufactures
constitute hers.

It appeared by an authentic document he had examined, that of the manufactured
articles imported in 1790, amounting to 15,295,638 dollars, 97 cents. we
received from and through Great Britain, 13,965,464 dollars, 95 cents.

During the same year, the manufactures imported from France, the next great
commercial country, and consuming more of our produce than Great Britain,
amounted to no more than 155,136 dolars, and 63 cents.

To give a fuller view of our foreign commerce, he stated the balances with the
several nations of Europe and their dominions, as follow: Dollars. Spain,
1,670,797 in favor of U. States. Portugal, 1,687,699 do. United Netherlands,
^91,118 do. Sweden, 32,965 do. Denmark, 126,949 against the U. States. France,
2,630,387 in favor of U. States. Great Britain, 5,922,012 against the U. States.

This ^normous balance to Great Britain is on the exports to her. On her
conjumption, the balance is still greater, amounting to nine or ten millions;
to which again is to be added, her profits on the re-exports in a manufactured
and raw state.

It might be said, that an unfavorable balance was no proof of an unfovarable
trade; that the only important balance was the ultimate one on our aggregate
commerce.

(...) there was much truth in this general doctrine, was admitted; at the same
time it was equally certain, that there were exceptions to it, some of which
were con^ei^ed to be applicable to the ^s;ituation of the United States.

But whether the doctrine was just or not, as applied to the United States, it
was well known, that the reasoning and practice of other countries were
governed by a ^^on^ary doctrine. In all of them, an unfavorable balance, to be
paid in specie, was considered as an evil. Great Britain, in particular, had
always stulied to pre^^^t as much as she could. What, then, may be the ^ffect
on the policy of a nation with which we have the most friendly and beneficial
relations, when it sees the balance of trade with us not only so much against
her but all the sp^cie that pays it, flowing immediately into the lap of her
greatest rival, if not her most inverate enemy.

As to the diserimination proposed between nations having, and not having,
commercial treaties with us, the principle was embraced by the laws of most, if
not all, the states, while the regulation of trade was in their hands.

It had the repeated sanction of votes in the house of representatives, during
the session of the present government at New York.

It has been practiced by other nations, and in a late instance against the
United States.

It tends to procure beneficial treaties from those who refuse them, by making
them the price of enjoying an equality with other nations in our commerce.

It tends, as a conciliatory preference, to procure better treaties from those
who have not refused them.

It was a prudent consideration, in dispensing commercial advantages, to favor
rather those whose friendship and support may be expected in case of necessity,
than those whose disposition wore a contrary aspect. -- He did not wish to
enter at present, nor at all, if unnecessary, into a display of the unfriendly
features which marked the policy of Great Britain toward the United States, He
should be content to lay aside, at least for the present, the subject of the
Indians, the Algerines, the spoliations, etc. but he could not forbear
remarking generally, that if that, or any other nation, were known to bear us a
settled ill will, nothing could be more impolitic, than to foster resources
which would be more likely to be turned against us, than exerted in our favor.

It had been admitted by the gentleman who spoke yesterday (Mr. Smith, of
South Carolina) to be a misfortune, that our trade should be so far engrossed
by any one nation, as it is in the hands of Great Britain. But the gentleman
added nothing to alleviate the misfortune, when he advised us to make no
efforts for putting an end to it. The evils resulting from such a state of
things, were as serious as they were numerous. To say nothing of sudden
derangements from the caprice with which sovereigns might be seized, there were
casualties which might not be avoidable. A general bankruptcy, which was a
possible event, in a nation with which we were so connected, would reverberate
upon us with a most dreadful shock. A partial bankruptcy had actually and
lately taken place; and was severely felt in our commerce. War is a common
event particularly to Great Britain, and involves us in the embarrassments it
brings on her commerce, whilst o^^s is so disproportionately interwoven with
it, Add, the influence that may be conveyed into the public councils by a
nation directing the course of our trade by her capital, and holding so great a
share in our pec^iniary institutions; and the effect that may sinally, ensue on
our taste, our manners, and our form of government itself.

If the question be asked, what might be the consequence of counter-efforts,
and whether this attempt to vindicate our public interests would not produce
them? His answer was, that he did not in the least apprehend such a
consequence, as well because the measure afforded no pretext, being short of
what was already done by Great Britain in her commercial system, as because she
would be the greatest sufferer from a stagnation of the trade, between thtwo
countries it we should force on such a crisis.

Her merchants would feel it. Her navigation would feel it. Her manufacturers
would feel it. Her West Indies would be ruined by it. Her revenue would deeply
feel it. And her government would feel it through every nerve of its operations.
We ^^o should suffer in some respect, but in a less degree; and, if the virtue
and temper of our fellow citizens were not mistaken, the experiment would find
in them a far greater readi^^s to bear it. It was clear to him, therefore, that
if Great Britain should, contrary to all the rules of probability, stop the
commerce between the two countries, the issue would be a complete triumph to
the United States.

He dwelt particularly on the dependence of British manufacturers on the market
of the United States. He referred to a paper in Anderson's history of commerce,
which states the amount of British manufactures at L 51,310,000 sterling, and
the number of souls employed in, and supported by them, at 5,250,000.
Suppposing the United states to consume two and a half millions of British
manufactures, which is a moderate estimate, the loss of their market would
deprive of subsistence 250,000 souls. Add 50,000 who depend for employment on
our raw materials. Here are 300,000 souls, who live by our custom. Let them be
driven to poverty and despair by acts of their own government, and what would
be the consequence? Most problably an acquisition of so many useful citizens to
the United States, which form the natural asylum against the distresses of
Europe. But whether they should remain in discontent and wretchedness in their
own country, or seek their fortunes in another, the evil would be felt by the
British government as equally great, and be avoided with equal caution.

It might be regarded be observed, as a general rule, that where one nation
consumed the necessaries of life produced by another, the consuming nation was
dependant on the producing o^^^. On the other hand, where the cosumption
consisted of superflukies, the producing nation was dependant on the consuming
one. The United States were in the fortunate situation of enjoying both these
advantages over Great Britain. They supply a part of her dominions with the
necessaries of life. They consume superfluities which give bread to her people
in another part. Great Britain therefore is under a double dependence on the
commerce of the United States. She depends on them for what she herself
consumes: she depends on them for what they consume.

In proportion as a nation manufactures luxuries must be its disadvantage in
contests of every sort with its customers. The reason is obvious. What is
luxury to the consumer is a necessary to the manufacturer. By changing a
fashion, or disappointing a fancy only, bread may be taken from the mouths of
thousands whose industry is devoted to the gratifications of artificial wants.

He mentioned the case of a petition from a great body of buckle makers
presented a few years ago to the prince of Wales, complaining of the use of
strings instead of buckles in the shoes, and supplicating his royal highness as
giving the law to fashions, to save them from want and misery, by discontinuing
the new one. It was not, he observed, the prince who petitioned the
manufacturers to continue to make the buckles, but the manufacturers who
petitioned their customer to buy them. The relation was similar between the
American customers and the British manufacturers. And if a law were to pass for
putting a stop to the life of their superfluities, or a stop were otherwise to
be put to it, it would quickly be seen from which the distress and suplications
would flow.

Suppose that Great Britain received from us alone the whole of the necessaries
she consumes; and that our market alone took off the luxuries with which she
paid for them. Here the dependence would be complete; and we might impose
whatever terms we please on the exchange. This to be sure is not absolutely,
(...) but in proportion as it is the case, her depe^^^ (...) on us.

The West Indies however are a^ example o^ complete dependence. They cannot
subsist without our food. They cannot flourish without our lumber, and our use
of their ruin. On the other hand we depend o^ them for not a single necessary,
and can supply ourselves with their luxuries from other sources. Sugar is (...)
oniy article about which there was ever a question, and he was authorized to
say, that there was not at the most, one sixth of our consumption supplied from
the British Islands.

In time of war or famine the dependenee of the West Indies is felt in all its
energy. It is sometimes such as to appeal to our humanity as well as our
interest for relief. At this moment, the governor of Jamaica is making
proclamation of their distre^^^ li^^er therefore there was a case where one
country could dictate to another the re^ula^ions of trade between them, it is
the case of the United States, and the British West Indies. And yet the
gentleman from South Carolina (Mr. Smith) had considered it as a fa^or that we
were allowed to send our provisions in British bottomsand in these only, to the
West Indies. The favor reduced to plain language in the mouth of their
planters, would run thus: -- We will agree to buy your provisions rather than
starve, and let you have our rum, which we can sell no whereelse; but we
reserve out of this indulgence a monopoly of the carriage to British vessels.

With regard to revenue, the British resources were extremely exhausted in
comparison with those of the United States.

The people of Great Britain were taxed at the rate of 40s. a head: the people
of the United States at not more than 6s. a head: less than one-sixth of the
British tax.

As the price of labor which pays the tax is double in the United States, to
what it is in Great Britain, the burden on American citizens is less than
one-twelfth of the burden on British subjects.

It is true indeed that Britain alone does not bear the whole burden. She
levies indirect taxes on her West Indies and on her East Indies; and derives
from an acquiesence in her monopolizing regulations, an imperceptible tribute
from the whole commercial world.

Still however the difference of burden in the two countries is immense.

Britain has moreover great arrears of unfunded debts. She is threatened with
defects in her revenue even at this time. She is engaged in an expensive war.
And she raises the supplies for it on the most expensive terms.

Add to the whole that her population is stationary if not diminishing, whilst
that of the United States is in a course of increase beyond example.

Should it still be asked whether the impost might not be affected and how a
deficiency could be supplied ^ he thought sufficient answers might be given.

He took for granted that the articles subjected to the additional duties would
continue to come according to the demand for them: And believed if the duties
were prudently adjusted, the increase of the duties would balance the decrease
of importation.

Our country is able to import, and probably will import, in proportion to our
exports. Our exports amount, say to, twenty millions of dollars. If we import
less from one country we shall import more from another. If we import less of
some things we shall import more of other things: and according to our imports
will be our revenue.

Suppose Great Britain to make the rash and improbable experiment of
prohibiting all commerce with the United States: She does not consume more than
one-fourth of our exports; and we derive perhaps nearly half our revenue from
the productions of other countries. In this point of view we should at the
worst have three-fourths of our exports to pay for our reduced imports; and
consequently a balance of about five millions of specie flowing into our
country. The faculty which this would give to operations of revenue, together
with the consideration that the labor employed on one fourth of our ordinary
exports, would be employed for internal purposes, might assure us that a
judicious government would easily be able to provide the means of supplying the
deficiency of impost.

But it was superfluous to enter into calculations of this sort. He recurred to
the utter improbability that such a contingency should happen. He was fully
persuaded, that the resolutions, if agreed to, would not impair the revenue.

It is objected, that Spain and Portugal, who are good customers to us, and the
latter particularly friendly, having no commercial treaty with us, will come
within the operation of the resolutions.

Several answers mabe given to this objection.

I. They do not manufacture the articles in question so as to be sensibly
affected. 2. They employ but little tonnage in our trade: Spain 2,689 tons
only; Portugal 2,340 tons only: They are supposed to be little anxious to
increase the foreign branches of their carrying trade, being content with the
internal trade carried on with their own dominions. As they have no navigation
act within the purview of the resolutions, they would not be exposed to the
retaliating clauses on that subject. 3. If friendly, they can be admitted to
treaty on eqitable conditions whenever they please. 4. They can easily be
excepted, if thought expedient, either by a general proviso that the
resolutions shall not extend to nations having no navigation act such as is
therein described; or by providing that they shall not extend to countries
south of Cape-Finisterre, a distinction familiar to the British statute-book.
It is said that Great Britain treats the United States as wll as she treats
other nations, and therefore they ought to be satisfied.

If other nations were willing to bear unequal regulations, or unable to
vindicate their rights, it was no example for us.

But is it true that the same degree of reciprocity subsists between the United
States and Great Britain, as between Great Britain and other countries? He did
not admit this to be the case. Where treaties existed, they stipulated in many
instances, mutual and equal conditions of intercourse. He gave an example in
the treaty of Methuen, in which the admission of Britis^ woolens by Portugal
was balanced by the admission of Portugal wine, by Great Britain. The treaty
with France of late date, was another example, where a variety of reciprocal
privileges and countervailing duties, were minutely provided for. Where no
treaties existed or where they were silent, there were often legal regulations
reciprocating the regulations of Great Britain. He referred to the laws of
Sweden and Denmark on the subject of manufactures a^ instances.

It is said Great Britain treats us as well as other nations treat us. What
nation he asked, had such a navigation act? What nation besides, excludes us
from a circuitous trade? What nation excludes us from carrying our own
commodities in our own bottoms, where the carriage is allowed to her bottoms?

It is said, that at least Great Britain treats us s well as we are treated by
France, who will be favored by the resolutions. This point was particularly
labored yesterday, by the gentleman from South Carolina (Mr. Smith) who made a
comparison of those two countries the principal basis of the discussion. As
they were in fact the two countries which stood in the most important relations
to the United States, the subject required a pretty accurate view of their
respective dispositions, regulations, and intercourse with this country.

On the subject of the dispositions of France and Great Britain toward the
United States, the gentleman (Mr. Smith) was of a very different opinion, Mr.
Madison observed, from that expressed in the message of the President. The
message informed the house, that France had generally manifested a friendly
disposition toward the United States, had granted advantages to their
commerce, and had actually made overtures for placing it permanently on a
better footing. While the language of the communications, with respect to
Great Britain, sufficiently proves that there was no room for compliments of a
like kind to that nation.

He meant to show, however, from a particular review, in what light the two
nations stood to us; and for that purpose should submit to the committee
comparative statement, as the gentleman had done, of their commercial policy
toward us. He premised, however, that he could not follow the example of
recurring to a period antecedent to the French revolution for evidence in
relation to France. Mr. Smith seemed to think, that the order of things
subsequent to that period, could not be regarded as a settled order. He
(Mr.Madison) on the contrary, considered it as the only settled order. He hoped
and believed, that the revolution was not a fugitive thing, as some might wish,
but that it was irreversibly established; and that the new republic would
flourish for ever on the ruins of the ancient monarchy. He should not, however,
he said, reject from his enquiry, what was done previous to the date of the
republic in favor of the United States, because it could not be reasonably
supposed that the disposition of the nation would be less favorable now, than
it was under the former government.

He then proceeded to a view of the footing on which the commerce stood with
the British and French dominions.

Wheat and Flour. In France free, that is to say (under a duty of one-eighth
per cent. as a custom-house regulation, merely for ascertaining the quantity
imported. -- This remark is to be applied to several other articles, which will
be mentioned as free.

In Great Britain wheat and flour are prohibited, until the price is up at 6s3
sterling a bushel; which as to the United States, may be deemed a perpetual
prohibition.

In the French West Indies, these articles are also free; and as he at first
stated, by a general law which had been suspended from time to time; but being
told that he was mistaken, the articles being prohibited by a general law, and
free only by suspensions, he said, that although his documents gave him other
information, he should leave the fact for further examination; adding, however,
that it was not essential, as the actual practice and disposition of France on
this subject were chiefly to be regarded.

In the British West Indies these articles were free, but in British bottoms
only.

Rice. In France free. In Britain under a duty of 7s4 sterling the hundred. In
the French island under a duty of one per cent. In the British, free in British
bottoms.

Salted Fish. In France under a duty of 8 livres the kental. In Britain
prohibited. In French islands admitted under some discouragements, which did
not however prevent a great consumption. In the British islands prohibited.

Salted Beef. In France under a duty of 5 livres a kental. In Britain
prohibited. -- In French islands under a duty of 1 per cent. and 3 livres a
kental. In British islands prohibited.

Salted Park. In France, under a duty of 5 livres a kental in some ports;
prohibited in others. In Britain under a prohibitory duty of 44s9 a kental. In
the British and French islands prohibited.

Indigo. In France under a duty of 5 livres a kental. In Britain ^re^. In the
British and French islands prohibited.

W^^le Oil. In France under a duty of 7 livres 10 ^ols^ ^arrel of (...). In
Britain under a duty of (...) 18^3 a (...) West Indies prohibited.

Ta^^ Pitc^^ and Tarpen^ine. In France under a (...) ^ner (...). In Britain,
under duties, t^^ and pitch (...) per barrel, turpe^tine 2s3 per 100lb.

(...) is off a footing pretty similar in the two (...). So (...) wood, pot and
pearl ash and flaxsced.

India^ Corn, Wood, Live Animals (except horses and ^^les, which (...) in the
French islands pay a duty (...) ^ per cent. In the British they are free, in
British bottom^^ pro^^t^ted in American bottoms.

Ships. In France, (...) to be naturalized. In Britain prohibited.

If proceeded to state the comparative amount of our exports and imports in
(...) commerce with the two nations, and the balances on them as before shown.
He noticed particularly the excess of the exports to the French West Indies
which amounted to 3,284,656 dollars, over those to the British, which amounted
to 2,357,583: Observing the importance of that market, and the more especially
as it supplies the article of molasses, the only raw material imported into the
United States, and otherwise so much valued as an article of consumption. He
adverted also to the superior proportion of American tonnage in the trade with
the French dominions, as had also been before shown.

From this review, he (...) the committee to infer the ^ue policy of the United
States with regard to their commerce, in its t^^ (...) considerable branches.
He thought it clear, that (...) every view it was incumbent ^n the United
States (...) the connection and intercourse with the French nation. As a market
for our produce, their vast (...), and their use of our articles of (...), were
peculiarl^ precious to our agricultu^^. They could do better without our trade
tha^ (...) they showed more disposition to (...) that was by no means to be
disregarded, they were (...) only considerable power on the face of the earth,
sincerely friendly to the republican form of government established in this
country.

Of all the objections which Mr. Madison had heard suggested against the
resolutions, the most extravagant and chimerical was the idea of a war with
Great Britain in consequence of them. He was at a loss to say whether such an
objection were a greater insult to the character of that nation or to the
understanding of America. At the utmost the propositions go only to a
reciprocity. They do not in fact go so far. On what imaginable pretext then can
Great Britain make was upon us. If we were no longer colonies, but independent
states, we surely can do what all independent sta^es do, regulate our trade as
may soit our own interests. -- And Great Britain can have the least right of
any nation to complain of it, because it is her own example which we follow. If
war therefore should be made on us it would only prove a fixed predetermination
to make it. And in that case pretexts more plausible than any commercial
regulations could easily be found or framed for the purpose.

The next ground on which he examined the subject was it is operation among the
several parts of the union. It was admitted and regretted, that the immediate
benefits and burdens would not be equally distributed among all the states.
More than a due share of the former would flow to the northern division: More
than a due share of the latter would fall on the southern. -- This was
unavoidably produced by the unequal advances made in manufactures and
navigation; and it was an inconvenience that had necessarily taken place in a
variety of other instances. It would be found, however, on a fair attention to
the subject, that the inequality would be less than at first appeared.

With respect to manufactures, the southern states were at least equally
interested in encouraging and distributing a competition for our market, among
different nations of Europe, instead of being so much in the hands of a single
one.

The duty on the siner articles imported would fall on those most able to bear
it; and would be pretty equally diffused through the union.

The duty on the coarser articles would be saved in proportion to the progress
made in manufactures among ourselves; and he was able to say, with great
pleasure, that those carried on, not in public factories, but in the household
or family way, which he regarded as the most important way, were nearly, if not
quite as far advanced in the southern country as in the middle and northern.
Virginia was proceeding with great spirit in this branch of industry.
North Carolina he understood was doing the same; and there was no reason why
the more southern states would not avail themselves of the resource, especially
as they enjoyed superior advantages in the article of cotton, a primary
material for the business.

The exports would not be materially affected, unless Great Britain should,
contrary to all probability, renounce the benefits of the trade in them, and
expose her West India island to the danger of famine; and in that Case, the
inconveniences would not be local, but general.

Even in the article of tonnage, the inequality at present, though
considerable, was not so great as he had imagined, before he examined the real
state of it. It appeared, from the official reports lately made on that
subject, that the states south of Pennsylvania (which has about her due share)
have within one-third of their due quota. Georgia has more than her share.
South Carolina nearly her share. North Carolina has three-eighths below her
share. Virginia has about half her share. Maryland has more than her share.
Delaware less than her share.

This computation is not, perhaps, very accurate, because it is founded on the
relative population of the states. It should rather have reference to the value
and volume of the produce exported from the several states: But as several of
them carry on their trade through their neighbors, this rule of calculation
would, in fact, be more uncertain than the other.

Whatever be the rule, Virginia, he remarked, was the state that appeared most
deficient; her exports, both in value and bulk, being in full proportion to her
population, and her tonnage being more short of that, than could be said of any
state. He had every reason, notwithstanding, to believe, that the great body of
the people of Virginia would cheerfully concur in any temporary sacrifices that
might be necessary to vindicate our public rights, and our commercial interests.

It was a consideration that ought to have great weight with the southern
states, that a home market for their naval ^^ores would be extended by every
measure favoring our own navigation; and that they must soon begin themselves
to turn to effect their natural advantages for ship-building. Having the
materials on the spot, they would not be long in imitating their northern
brethren. North Carolina was singularly favored in this particular. There was
not a single article used in the various component parts of a ship, which she
did not po^^ess, or could not raise within herself.

The capacity of the United States, to provide w^^^ celerity for the
transportation of her produce, was strongly attested by what they had effected
before the revo^tion. In the marine of the British empire, whilst the United
States were part of it, the American built ships were to the British built as
23 to 40. New England furnished about three-fifths of the formar.

In two points of view, the southern (...) were peculiarly interested in
promoting our navigation.

First -- As they are, in some respects, the weaker part of the union, and have
most wealth exposed on the sea, they have most need of that protection which
results from extensive marine resources. The existence of these will either
prevent attack, or can readily be turned into the means of repelling it.

Secondly -- As they have so much valuable and bulky produce to carry to
market, it is their interest to possess a conveyance for it, that may be as
little affected as possible by the contingencies and wars of other nations; and
particularly of Great Britain, a nation which is so frequently at war, and
which has so disproportionate a share in our carrying trade. This subject, he
said, had been placed in so striking a view by the Secretary of State, in a
former report on the fisheries, that he should rely on the patience of the
committee in reading the observations and calculations to which he alluded. He
here read the following note at the end of that report;

"That the encouragement of our carrying business is interesting, not only to
the carrying stat^^, but in a high degree also to the others, will result from
the following facts:

The whole exports of the United States may be stated at 25,000,000 Dollers.

Great Britain carries two-fi^^hs of these in value, that is to say, 10,000,000
Dollers.

Freight and insurance on this in times of peace, are about twenty-two and one
half percent. 2,250,000 Dollers.

The same charges in war are very various, according to the circumstances of
the war; we may say, however, fifty-five per cent. 5,500,000 Dollers.

The difference between peace and war, freight and insurance, then is annually,
3,250,000 Dollers.

Taxed on our agriculture by British wars, during their continuance, and our
dependence on British bottoms.

Of the last one hundred years, Great Britain has had *forty-two years of war,
and fifty-eight of peace, which is three of war to every four of peace, nearly.

Y. M. 1989. May. Y. M. Peace. 4 8 1697. sept. 8 4 War. 1702. May. 6 4 1712.
August. 10 3 1718. Dec. 5 8 1721. June. 2 6 1727. March. 12 4 1727. May. 0 2
1739. Oct^. 7 0 1748. May. 8 7 1755. June. 15 7 1762. Nov. 7 5 1778. June. 6 2
1763. March. 4 9 1789. May. 57 9 42

In every term of seven years, then, we pay three times three million two
hundred and fifty thousand dollars, or nine million seven hundred and fifty
thousand, which, averaged on the years of peace and war, are annually and
constantly one million three hundred and ninety-two thousand eight hundred and
fifty-seven more than we should, if we could raise our own shipping to be
competent to the carriage of all our productions. Besides this, many of our
bulky articles, not bearing a war freight, cannot be exported, if exposed, to
that, so that their total loss is to be added to that before estimated.

This was a demonstration of the interest the United States had, particularly
the southern states, in obtaining an independent transportation for their
commodities; and the effect of the present war to which Britain as a party. In
depriving them of the ordinary foreign resource, is bringing the evidence home
to their feelings (...) present moment.

I had been asked what ground there was for concluding, that Great Britain
would be led by the measures proposed, to change her policy toward the United
states. He thought we had the best ground for relying on such an effect.

It is well known, that when she apprehended such measures would be taken, she
manifested a readiness to admit a greater reciprocity into the commerce between
the two countries. A bill for the purpose was brought into the house of commons
by the present minister, Mr. Pit, and would probably have passed into a law,
if hopes had not sprung up that they should be able to maintain their exclusive
system. Knox, an under secretary, appears from a collection of papers published
by him, to have been the chief advisers in the cabinet, as Lord Sheffield was
the great champion before the public, of this experiment. It was founded
according to both these w^^^^sses, on a belief -- 1st. That Nova Scotia and
Canada, would soon be able to feed the West Indies, and thereby make them
independent of supplies from the united States. -- 2dly. That the general
government^ was so feeble that it could not exec^^^^ plan of retaliating
restriction -- and, 3dly. That local interests and prejudices predominated so
much among the states, that they would never even agree in making an attempt.

It is now thoroughly understood and admitted by the most biassed judges, that
the British continental colonies cannot supply the islands: that as well as the
islands, they depend frequently for essential supplies on the United States.
This calculation therefore has failed Great Britain.

The next has been completely destroyed by the change of our former frail
confederacy, into a government which is found to be adequate to all its
national objeds. -- This hope has therefore in like manner failed.

The only remaining hope that can induce Great Britain to persevere in the plan
of conduct she has adopted toward the United States, lies in the supposed
difficulty of reconciling their different interests and local prejudicies. The
present occasion will decide whether this hope also shall be withdrawn from
her; or whether she is to be inspired with fresh confidence in pursuing her own
interests without a due respect either for our interests or for our rights

He could not but view the present as perhaps the final chance of combining the
opinions and interests of the several quarters of the Union in some proper and
adequate plan. If at a moment when so many occurrences conspire to unite the
public councils; when the public mind is so well disposed to second all
equitable and peaceable means of doing justice to our country; and when our
commerce is so critically important to the vital resources of Great Britain, it
should be found that nothing can be done, he could foresee no circumstances
under which success was to be expected. To reject the propositions therefore,
whilst nothing better was substituted, must convey the most unfavorable
impressions of our national character, and rivet the fetters on our commerce,
as well as prolong other causes which had produced such injurious consequences
to our country. He would not permit himself to apprehend that such would be the
event of the deliberations of the committee.

As it appeared, he said, that most of the objections against the proposed
Resolutions, had been made by those who meant to combat them, and that a
question would soon be called for; it might perhaps be expected that he should
review those objections, and assign the reasons which induced him to continue
in the opinion he at first entertained. He wished it not to be understood, that
he meant to examine every particular argument, which in the course of so
extensive a discussion, had been opposed to the measure. The committee must
have perceived, that some of them had been of a nature not to merit an answer;
and that others had sufficiently answered themselves. He should extend his
observations to such topics only as might be thought to need explanation, and
to have an influence on the question.

Previous, however, to this general survey of the ground which had been
traveled over he should so far presume on the patience of the committee, as to
recur to the original opposition made by the member from South Carolina (Mr.
Smith) and to take notice of some particulars in what had been urged by him,
which were left unanswered at the time.

The gentleman had thought proper to introduce his discourse with a very
unmerited attack on the late Secretary of State, and to mingle with it a
variety of criticisms on the facts and opinions stated in his report, on the
subject under consideration. The spirit and manner in which the attack had been
made, and which could not have escaped the attention of the committee. would be
left in that silence which may best express the sentiment they must have
inspired. He should indeed have thought it less necessary to take further
notice than he had already done, of the matter of the gentleman's remarks, if
attempts had not been made, particularly by a friend of the gentleman (Mr.
Ames) to give a weight to his statements and inferences, which it would be
shown they did not merit: and if the task did not afford an opportunity of
eludicating some particular points relied on, by the opponents of the
resolutions.

It was made a charge against the secretary of State, that he takes no notice
of the higher duty imposed by Great Britain on other foreign tobacco, than is
imposed on American (the former being 3s6 ster. a pound, the latter 1s3) whilst
he takes care to mention the high duty imposed on the American; although the
discrimination is in favor of the United States, and is against Portugal, a
country in particular connection with Great Britain; and although the high duty
of 1s3 is immaterial to the United States, being paid by the consumer of the
Tobacco in Great Britain.

It was unfortunate for the gentleman that this charge is fallacious in every
member of it.

1. The discrimination is not in favor of the United States, either in its
intention, or in its operation; not in its intention because it was made in
reference to this country, when it was a part of the British Empire, and not in
reference to us as Independent States; not in its operation, because if the
discrimination were abolished, it would bring no rival of our tobacco into the
British market. This is proved by the fact, that in other markets, as that of
France, where no such discrimination exists, the American tobacco is without a
rival. It was well known that this and the other apparent favors to this
country, were a remnant of the Old Colonial code, which having become a dead
letter in the Statute book, had not yet been struck out of it. 2. If the
discrimination had no effect in favor of the United States, it could not for
the same reason, be a prejudice to Portugal. If it were necessary and proper to
go into the enquiry, more direct proofs could be given on this point. 3. High
duties do affect the United States which produce the article, though paid by
the British consumers. They have a double effect: They lessen the quantity
called for; and by lessening the competition, they lessen also the price. This
was a truth that could need no comment.
It was to be remarked however, that the zeal of the gentleman on this subject,
was such, that it had led him to extend the fallacy of his reasoning to rice,
the staple article of his own State. This article pays a duty of 7s4 ster. per
hundred weight, but like the duty on tobacco, being paid by the consumer, was
said to be of little concern to us.

Call the price of rice 10s sterling: the duty is 7s4. The whole class of
people then, in Great Britain, between the class who cannot afford to eat rice
at the price of 10s. and the class who are willing to eat it at 17s4 are
prohibited the consumption by the duty. Was this a circumstance of no concern
to the rice planters? The gentleman should have been reminded of his error by
his own arguments.

As an apology for the duty imposed in Great Britain, he tells us it was meant
to prevent the use of rice as a Substitute, for the bread-stuffs produced by
Great Britain herself. Without the preventing duty then, rice would have been
Substituted in place of wheat, in the opinion of the British Parliament, and
the demand for it, in the British market, so far increased.

As a merit in the British West India regulations over those of France, it was
stated by the gentleman, that rice in the West Indies is a common food; that in
the British, the importation of it is free; in the French, subject to a duty,
though an inconsiderable one. In Britain then, where there is a high duty, rice
is not an article of common food; in the islands where there is no duty, it is
a common food; and the advantage of the British West India market to us over
the French, is, that the duty in the latter favors cheaper Substitutes.

Another proof of the disposition of Great Britain to favor the United States
in the West India market, is the prohibition of all foreign rice but the
American. -- The same remark may be repeated here, which was applied to the
dis^^^mination in favor of our tobacco. It is an old colony regulation that has
no effect whatever. What other foreign rice could be brought to the
West Indies? Is it the East India rice? that is prohibited by its distance. Is
it the rice of Portugal? that is prohibited by the laws of Portugal, and
probably also by the lower price of the Carolina rice.

The inference which the gentleman had drawn from the comparative regulations
of Great Britain and France on the subject of rice was so curious that it was
worth a moment's attention.

The facts, Mr. Madison observed, stood thus. In France the duty is 1-3 per
cent. In Great Britain 7s4 sterling a hundred. In the French islands the duty
is 1 per cent. In the British free with a prohibition of other foreign rice.

As the duty of 1 per cent. is scarcely sensible, and the prohibition, as
shown, is merely nominal, the inequality in the islands may be regarded as too
immaterial to affect the comparison.

Passing to the two parent states, the duty in France is 1-8 per cent. -- The
duty in Great Britain, 50 or 60 per cent.

Here then is nearly an equality in one part, and a difference of 50 or 60 per
cent. in the other part of the two dominions; and yet the gentleman could say,
it was not easy to pronounce, whether the article of rice stands on a better
footing in the system of the one, than in the system of the other.

Another charge against the secretary of state is, that his report calls the
discriminating duties in Great Britain in favor of American wood, small,
whereas they are considerable, and in several instances high.

Mr. Madison said he had not found leisure to trace this branch of our exports
into all the details necessary to decide in what degree the duties were small
or considerable, and in what proportion the several dutied articles went to
Great Britain. He observed in general that the greater part of our woods were
exported to the West Indies, not to Great Britain. That in the shipwoods at
least the Ba^^ic nations were not rivals to the United States. It was known
that Sweden and Denmark were so deficien^^ in Out that their public navies were
supplied from Germany, and that the ship timbers of Russia were transported a
thousand or twelve hundred miles from her interior dominions. The Fir, of which
the Swedish and Danish merchant ships were built, does not last more than seven
or eight years, and could not therefore be a rival to the durable woods of the
United States.

He observed also that lumber, and particularly the ship woods of the country,
were so precious and so sure of being in demand, that they never could fear a
rival, or need a foreign bounty. This was an article very different from such
as were an annual product of the earth, and as could be raised wherever the
climate and soil permitted according to the occasional demand. The forests that
were to supply the ship yards were the growth of centuries, and where once
destroyed, as they generally are in Europe, are rarely replaced at all, and
never can become the rival to America, which enjoys them as the spontaneous
gift of nature.

To enhance the merit of the British regulations, the gentleman had told us,
that wood was subject to a duty of 1 per cent. in the French Islands, and in
the British free, with a prohibition of other foreign wood. This was of little
consequence. The duty was a trifle, and falling on a necessary article to be
got no where else, probably was paid by the French islariders. And the
prohibition was ideal, the American wood being the only resource for the
British market.

The article of Fish, was admitted by the gentleman himself to be more favored
by the French than the British system, though he admits it with reluctance and
diminishes the difference as much as possible. The case however is so clear,
and the facts so palpable, that they speak for themselves. Under the French
regulations, this important article of our commerce is subject to duties only,
in Europe and the West Indies. Under the British, it is under prohibition in
both. The amount of the whole export is 382,237 quintals of dry, and 57,424
barrels of pickled fish. Of this the French consumption, is 252,171, quintals
and 45,164 barrels; that is, nearly 2-3ds of the dry, and 4-5ths of the pickled
fish.

Here Mr. Madison, proceeding to the subject of whale oil, called the attention
of the committee particularly to the representation and language of Mr. Smith
as to the conduct of France, in inviting the fishermen of Nantucket to remove
and settle at Dunkirk. Mr. Smith, he said, had not only undervalued the
monopoly of the French market granted to the United States, but had, by a
mutilated quotation of a report of the secretary of state on the fisheries,
changed the true aspect of the attempt to draw away the Nantueket fishermen.
The fact was, that although the conduct of France was very different from what
was to have been wished, as well as from what was contemplated by the marquis
la Fayette, who had patrionized the interest of fishermen, yet that the project
of tempting them to emigrate had originated in Great Britain, and was a counter
project on the part of France. How the gentleman happened to omit the
antecedent attempt of Great Britain, and thereby exaggerate that of France, Mr.
Madison did not undertake to explain: but it was the more extraordinary, as the
whole account of the transaction was contained in the same page of the report,
nay, in the same paragraph, from which the gentleman had extracted his
information.

Here he read the passage in that report and produced the British statute,
inviting the whale fishermen, by an offer of certain privileges, to emigrate to
Great Britain.

A further charge against the secretary of state is that in his statement of
the tonnage of the United States employed in the trade with the French and
British dominions; he founds it, not on the actual number of ships, but on the
number of entries. This charge was as singular as it was uncandid.

The report stated the fact, that the American tonnage entering our ports from
the several nations with which the United States traded, was so and so; and in
this statement, it pursued the official returns made on the subject. What more
was to be required?

In giving the fact, the Secretary imposed on no one, In cause he stated the
tonnage to be entry tonnage, as it really was.

He followed the best guide that existed, an official return from the proper
offices.

No return of the actual tonnage, as distinguished from the entry tonnage, had
at the time, ever been made from any office, or called for by any act, of
Congress.

The first return ever made in the latter form, was called for since the
Resolutions on the table were proposed.

These considerations might have restrained the gentleman from this unwarranted
attack on the accuracy of the Report.

But he ought at least to have been sure, that whilst he was charging the
secretary with following an erroneous guide, he was himself following one that
was not erroneous. The examination of this point involved facts which merited
the particular attention of the committee.

The statement of the entry tonnage of the United States in foreign trade for
1792, lately called for and reported, is 415,331 tons. The statement of the
actual tonnage for the same year is 239,394 tons.

On comparing these two quantities, it was evident that both could not be
right. If the entry tonnage was no more than was stated, it was inconceivable
that the actual tonnage cauld be as much as was stated. It would allow the
vessels in the European and West India trades together, but some what more than
one voyage and a third a year. It could never be supposed, that this
corresponded with the fact. How then was the inconsistency in the two
statements to be explained? Mr. Madison said, as he did not know by what rule
the actual tonnage was made up, he would form no conjecture on the subject. He
hoped, and wished that some gentleman more conversant with it, would solve the
phenomenon. He did not call on the gentleman from South Carolina, because he
most of all, must be puzzled to account for it; having stated that our vessels
in the trade to Europe make two voyages, and in the West India trade four
voyages a year.

Besides the evidence contained in this comparison of the aggregate tonnage in
the two different forms, in which it had been reported, the existence of error
some where, and probably in the account of the actual tonnage, resulted from a
comparative view of our exports to the British dominions, for the two years of
1790 and 1792, and of the whole tonnage American and British employed in
conveying them.

In the former year, the exports were 9,363,416 dollars. In the latter,
8,269,495 dollars: the excess for 1790, 1,093,921 dollars.

The entry tonnage, British and American, for 1790, was 273,580 tons.

The British entry tonnage, for 1792, was 206,384 tons. The actual American
tonnage, for 1792, was, according to the official statement, 66,582 tons:
which, turned into entry tonnage, according to the proportion of the whole
actual, to the whole entry tonnage for that year, makes the American entry
tonnage, in the trade to Great Britain, about 95,000 tons. Adding this to the
British entry tonnage of 206,384 tons, the British and American together, for
1792, amounts to 301,384 tons; which exceeds the tonnage of 1790 no less than
27,804 tons.

According to this calculation, which embraces the actual tonnage as stated to
the house, there would be 27,804 tons more, employed in transporting 1,093,921
dollars less: making our tonnage to increase in that proportion as the
employment of it decreased.

There was a possibility, Mr. Madison observed, that the course of trade in the
two years might be such, that more of the vessels employed in the exportations
to Great Britain might be entered in 1790 as coming from some other country,
than in 1792; but as there was no known circumstance which authorized this
solution, and as it seemed demonstrable in general, that error existed
somewhere in the statements, and most probably in those of the actual tonnage,
he concluded, that it ought to be referred to that source; and, consequently,
that the guide followed by the Secretary of State, to wit. the entry tonnage,
the only one he had to follow, was not more inaccurate, than the actual tonnage
would have been, which guided the member from South Carolina.

Another position of the secretary of state on which a charge is founded is,
"that the greater part of what Great Britain receives from the United States is
re-exported." This position, Mr. Madison reminded the committee, related to
Great Britain, without comprehending the West India islands; which formed a
distinct branch in the secretary's report. How far it was liable to the
exceptions taken against it, would appear from an examination of facts.

To obviate criticisms, Mr. Madison said he would take for the basis of his
calculations, the statement given in detail by the gentleman himself, of the
exports for 1790 to the French and British dominions; which though not extended
to every item, approached so near to a full view of the trade, as to be
adequate to the purpose.

In the statement the exports to Great Britain stand at 6,651,429 dollars: from
which must be subtracted, for the comparison, the amount of the several
re-ex-portations as far as they can be liquidated.

Tobacco. It appears from an official document, that the tobacco exported to
Great Britain in 1791, was 67,286 hogsheads. A return for another year states
the quantity to be 52,505 hogsheads. It appeared from the revenue returns of
Great Britain, that the consumption of this article amounted to 9,600
hogsheads. The proportion re-exported might then be reasonably set down at
four-fifths of the quantity imported.

Rice. To obtain the proportion of rice re-exported, we may take the medium
quantity imported for three years immediately preceding the revolution, which,
according to a table in Anderson's History of Commerce, was 486,543 cwt. By
another table for the same period, the medium quantity exported was 349, 653
cwt. The difference marks the consumption, and is 136,890 cwt. The quantity
exported to Great Britain from the United States in 1792, was 58,978 barrels,
equal to 294,890 cwt. Comparing the quantity consumed with this quantity, it
appears that more than half, though less than two-thirds, is re-exported --
call the re-exportation one-half only of the present import^tion.

Indigo. According to a statement in Anderson, the medium importations into
Great Britain, for three years immediately preceding the revolution, were
about thrice the mediun quantity exported. Call the proportion re-exported now,
however, one-fifth only, which is probably below the fact.

From these proportions, and the data furnished by the gentleman's own
statement, results the following justification of the report of the Secretary
on the point. Dollars Exports to Great Britain - - 6,651,429 Tobacco 2,754,493
dolls. Consumed 1-5th, 550,898 dolls. Re-exported. 2,203,595 Rice 773,852
Consumed 1-2, 386,926 Re-exported, 386,926 Indigo, 473,830 Consumed 4-5 379,064
Re-exported, 94,766 Wheat and flour, perhaps the whole re-exported: and more
was carried to Great Britain in the two succeeding years tho the aggregate
exports thither were less than in the year here taken: say however, that
onefourth was consumed and let the amount stand, according to the gentleman's
statement, at 1,087,840 Consumed 1-4, 271,960 Re-exported, 815,880 3,501,067

Here, then, it appears, that their exportations of the four articles alone, of
Tobacco, Rice, Indigo, and Wheat, are greater than the whole consumption in
Great Britain, of the articles imported from the United States, although the
most uafavorable year has been taken, for the enquiry; and, consequently, that
the position of the Secretary of State, was well founded.

If it were necessary to investigate the full amount of re-exportations,
several articles might have been added to the list, such as Whale Oil, Ginseng,
Flax-Seed, etc.

Nor would it be unfair, perhaps, to include the primitive value of the
articles, re-exported in the new forms givtn to them by art, A great proportion
of what is sent from the United States to Great Britain, in a rude state, is
worked into articles of merchanize, and exported in the course of trade. Take
for example, the two articles of Pot and Pearl Ashes, and Indigo.

The amount of the export of the former to Great Britain, is stated at 747,078
dollars; of which, if no part is re-exported in its unaltered state, the whole
enters into British manufactures. Supposing one-third of these particular
manufactures, to be exported, which appears to be nearly the general
proportion, the value of Pot and Pearl Ashes re-exported, is 249,026 dollars.
The Indigo used in Great Britain has appeared to be 379,064 dollars, one-third
of which re exported as an ingredient in manufactures, is 126,354 2-3 dollars
-- Tnese two items alone amount to 375,280 2-3 dollars; and with many others,
might be added to the mass of re-exportatios. But they are stated rather to
throw light on the general character of our trade with GreatBritain, than to be
relied on in the present case, which has been sufficiently elucidated by
moredirect and simple views of it.

Mr. Madison proceeded to apply the calculations he had made, to the question
discussed by Mr. Smith, in relation to the comparative importance of the French
and British markets to the productions of the U.S.

By deducting the 3,501,067 dollars, re-exported, from the 6,651,429 dollars,
imported into Great Britain, he reduced her actual consumption to 3,150,360
dollars, to which adding the 1,805,744 exported to the West India market, the
whole British consumption stands at no more than 4,956,106 dollars. On
camparing this with the exports to the French dominions (which re-export none
of any consequence) to wit, 4,424,336, the subject took a very different aspect
from that which had been given to it.

But there was, Mr. Madison observed, a circumstance of the utmost importance
to a fair view of this question, which had been wholly overlooked by the
gentleman from S. Ca^^lina, and which cut up his calculations by the roots. The
re-exportations from Great Britain were not only to be subtracted from the
consumption of Great Britain but in a great degree being made to France, were
to be added to the value of her market to the agriculture and commerce of the
United States.

The re-exportation from Great Britain to France, could not be accurately fixed
by any documents to be had here. In general, they were known to be great. He
would, he said, confine himself to the two articles of Tobacco and Flour, of
which he estimated the amounts as follow:

The Tobacco exported from the United States, appears to be about 100,000
hogsheads. It is valued in the return of our exports at 4,349,567 dollars. It
is known that France consumes about 1-4 of the whole quantity exported, that
is, 1,087,392 dollars. It appears, by the return of our exports, that the
direct exports of this article to France, stands at 384,642 dollars. The
indiract supplies then to France, not appearing in the returns of our exports,
and to be added to them, is 702,750 dollars.

Of the Flour and Grain sent to Great Britain, allowing, as above stated, 1-4
to have been there consumed, which is probably beyond the truth, the
re-exportation amounted to 815,880 dollars. It is well understood, that France
was the market where these articles were finally consumed. The account may now
be stated. dollars To the French Market, directly exported for consumption,
4,424,336 Tobacco indirectly exported for do. 702,705 Wheat and Flour
indirectly exported for do. 815,880 Total of French consumption, 5,942,921
Total of British do. 4,956,106 Excess of French consumption, 986,815

Thus it appears, without taking into the account the other articles
re-exported to France, that the market of that country for our exports, was
worth to the United States nearly a million more than the market of
Great Britain -- and yet the gentleman from South Carolina had represented the
British markets as exceeding the French in the annual amount of between three
and four millions; and had pronounced, without hesitation, that Great Britain
in reference to our productions, was a more important customer than France,
almost in the ratio of two to one.

Mr. Madison returning to the Secretary's report said, he hoped after what had
been shown, it would be needless to trouble the committee with further remarks
on the subject. In dismissing it however, he could not do justice to his own
impressions, without declaring his entire confidence, that the report would be
regarded by all discerning and unprejudiced judges, as one of the many
monuments which its Author had left behind him, of the zeal, the talents, and
the pat^^otism with which he had discharged the duties of his station; and that
he had carried with him into retirement, a purity, both in his public and
private name, which nothing that could be said within or without the walis of
Congress, could tarnish.

Having gone through the particular observations into which he had been led by
the attack made on the report of the Secretary of State before the committee,
he should proceed, to a more general view of what had been urged by the
opponents of the resolutions he had introduced.

Among other things it had been alleged in the latter stages of the debate,
that the friends of the resolutions, had involved themselves in inconsistency,
by shifting the ground of argument from commercial to political considerations.
In answer to this charge, he remarked, that if in any instance of his public
life he was free from the charge of inconsistency, it was on the subject of
vindicating our national interest, against the policy of Great Britain toward
us; that in all the public stations with which he had been honored since thp
peace and on every occasion which had occurred, his conduct had been marked by
an adherence to this principle: that the resolutions he had last proposed were
founded on this principle: that if in the first arguments supporting them, he
had dwelt chiefly on commercial topics, it would be recollected that he kept
the door open for political ones, if the turn of the discussion should require
them: that he had forborne to enlarge on the political sides of the question,
because he thought it defensible on commercial grounds, and was willing to meet
it on those grounds, because he did not wish to mingle, unnecessarily,
irritating ideas in the discussion, and because he had supposed that every
thing relating to the treaty of peace the Indians, the Algerines, the
spolistions, etc. were sufficiently imprinted on every mind, and would have all
the effects they ought to have, without being particularly enforced.

Whilst he could thus repel the charge of inconsistency brought against
himself; it must be evident, he thought, how much room there was for retor^ing
the charge. In the early stages of the discussion, there seemed but one
sentiment as to the conduct of Great Britain, at least in a political view: the
difference turned on the question, whether we could or ought to counteract her
conduct, In the latter stages of the discussion, palliations if not
justifications had been multiplied and labored; not only with respect to her
commercial policy, but with respect to the detention of the posts, the Indians,
the A^gerines, and even the spoliations of our neutral commerce; on the
unlawfulness of which our executive had grounded the remonstrance and demand of
indemnification lying on the table.

In addition to this, he stated the inconsistency between those who maintained
and those who rejected the theory of leaving commerce perfectly free; the
inconsistency of rejecting this theory, and yet refusing to meet restrictions
one side with restrictions on the other; the inconsistency of condemning a
commercial discrimination between nations, as contrary to the wise example of
Great Britain, and, claiming for Great Britain the credit of making such
discriminations in favor of the United States: The inconsistency of predicting,
that the measure would destroy the revenue, and insisting, that the dutied
articles would continue to be imported from the same source, through more
expensive channels: The inconsistency of exclaiming against topics and remarks
which may awaken the passions, and endeavoring themselves to alarm our fears;
of exhorting the committee to consult its judgment alone, and substituting for
argument continued addresses to the imagination.

Particular pains, he remarked, had been taken to exhibit a picture of our
national prosperity, which might flatter our wishes, and forbid experiments. It
was readily admitted, he said, that there were many features in the face of our
affairs, which were proper themes of mutual congratulation, whether compared
with the situation of other countries, or with our own, under other
circumstances. And it gave him much pleasure to add, that the degree of
prosperity we enjoyed, though not to be exclusively credited to the change of
our federal government, or to particular measures under it, according to the
exaggerations of some, was yet so far, and so evidently the fruit of that
change, as to do honor to the people of America in adopting it. He mentioned
two innovations making part of the constitution, which must alone have had a
powerful effect in meliorating the condition of this country, to wit: The
prohibition of paper money or other violations of contracts, and the abolition
of incoherent and rival regulations of trade, among the several states. But
notwithstanding the flourishing state of our affairs, when viewed under certain
aspects, it was equally certain that there were others, which suggested very
different reflections.

He then went into a review of the actual state of our commerce, particularly
in ralation to Great Britain; and of the several injuries of another sort,
which that nation had superadded to her commercial restrictions.

He repeated what he had formerly maintained, that there was more of
reciprocity in the footing of commerce between Great Britain and other
countries, and between other countries and the United States, than between
Great Britain and the United States. To prove the first point he remarked, that
in some instances Great Britain had treaties with other countries which defined
and stipulated reciprocal privileges; in other instances, her restrictions were
counter-vailed by laws imposing restrictions on her. To prove the second point,
he remarked, that no other nation with which the United States carried on
commerce, had a navigation act similar to that of Great Britain.

With respect to the intercourse between the United States and Great Britain,
there was, he insisted, a want of reciprocity throughout, that must strike the
most superficial observer.

In the article of navigation this had been sufficiently pointed out, and being
admitted on all sides, need not be repeated.

In the trade between the two countries, our best staples, wheat and flour,
fish and oil, salted provisions, which amount to considerably more than
one-third of our exports, were shut out of her markets; whilst all her best
staples, her woolens, her cottons, her manufactures of the metals, of leather,
and of silk, were admitted on moderate duties, and enjoyed in a manner a
monopoly of our market.

In the articles of superfluity mutually admitted, there was nothing to
compensate the inequality in other cases. Our tobacco paid a tax of four or
five hundred per cent. our (...) fifty or sixty per cent and our (...) of of
every sort would not be admitted if we were ever so able to send them. On the
other hand, her superfluities were received under duties, which in general did
not exceed from seven and an half to fifteen per cent.

In the West India trade, besides the exclusion of our vessels, whilst her own
were left free, there were a number of our productions which were not admitted
into the market there, whilst our laws refused nothing that was brought to the
market here.

He next turned, his attention to the injuries and losses we suffered in other
respects.

As he had not possessed himself of the evidence, he should, he said, leave it
to those who had, to show how far the Indians were or were not spurred on to
war against us, by the agents or partisans of Great Britain. It was a
sufficient ground of complaint, that the posts were wrongfully detained; that
the detention had a baneful influence on the sentiments and conduct of the
Indians; and that the supplies for their warfare, were derived from a trade,
authorized by the British government, and protected by the posts which of right
were ours, and ought to be used for our defense. He combined this proceeding of
Great Britain, with the lawless seizure of our vessels under her instructions
of the 8th of June last, observing, that whilst on one side, she violated the
laws of nations, by carrying on a trade in contraband articles with those at
war with us; she was on another side, violating the laws of nations, by
intercepting our trade with those at war with her, in articles not contraband.

The Indian war he observed, cost us annually a sum, exceeding by one million,
the sum that would probably be sufficient for the defense of our frontiers, if
the posts were in our hands. The fur trade depending on the posts might, he
thought, be fairly valued at two hundred thousand dollars more.

The Algerine depredations appeared to have proceeded from the ^^^ps taken in
pursuance of the views of the British government. If they were not immedietely
pointed against us, it must have been known that our (...) would be the v^^lim.
The evil therefore may at least be charged to an unfriendly disregard of our
interests, if not to a positive hostility to them. The pecuniary amount of this
evil, cannot be rated at less than the expense of the armament proposed as a
remedy. -- This is stated at six hundred thousand dollars for the outsit; and
he did not expect that the annual expense would average much less; to which may
be added, at a very low computation, for insurance remaining after the
armament, two hundred thousand dollars.

The spoliations committed on our neutral commerce by Great Britain, must be of
considerable, though very uncertain amount; and the consequential detriment to
our trade in general from these interruptions and dangers, of a very great,
though equally uncertain amount. In order to bring both within a safe estimate,
he said he would state the former at the limited sum of one hundred and fifty
thousand dollars, and the latter at no more than four hundred thousand dollars.

In addition to the foregoing estimates he said there was another item, which
though of a different character, fell under a comprehensive view of our
situation; and being reducible to an amount tolerably definite, ought to find a
place here. He referred to the statement before quoted from a reoprt of the
Secretary of State, which showed that the loss to the United States from a
dependence on British bottoms for the carriage of their produce was no less
annually, in time of war, than three million two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars, and in war and peace everaged, no less than one million three hundred
ninety-two thousand eight hundred fifty-seven dollars. Allowing about one third
of this carriage for the reasonable share of Great Britain (and for reasons
formerly derived from the character of our exp^orts this was a full share) the
annnal loss from the dependence might be called about one million of dollars.

These calculations he recapitulated thus: Dollars. Indian war 1,000,000 Fur
trade 200,000 Algerine depredations 600,000 Insurance not reduced by the naval
armament 200,000 British spoliations 150,000 Consequential detriment to our
trade 400,000 Dependence on British bottoms 1,000,000 dols. 3,550,000

From this view of things, it was impossible to deny, that however prosperous
the United States might be in some respects, they were in others laboring under
violations of their rights and interests, which demanded the serious attention
of the legislature. Besides the unreciprocal footing of their commerce, and the
indignities offered them, it was seen that they were burdened with an enormous
extra expense, and involved in unjust losses, amounting to more than three and
an half millions of dollars a year; a tax nearly equal to the heavy one they
had been obliged to impose on themselves.

Having taken this view of our situation, he proceeded to consider how far a
remedy was comprised in the resolutions before the committee, by tracing the
probable operation of them, it passed into a law. [In this stage of his
observations, the hour of adjournment being nearly arrived, he sat down, with
an intimation that the subject would be renewed.]

Resuming the train of his observations, he proceeded to explain the remedial
operations of his propositions.

First. -- They will make the British nation sensible, that we can, by just and
pacific means, inflict consequences which will make it her interest, to pay a
just regard to our rights and interests.

To enforce this tendency, he enlarged on the ideas he had formerly expressed
in relation to the dependence of Great Britain on the commerce of the United
States and the obvious and essential dependence of the British-West-Indies, on
the supplies of the United States.

On the latter subject, he entered into a particular reply to the member from
Massachusetts (Mr. Ames) who had argued, that the British regulation of the
trade between the United States and the West Indies, was conformable to the
pinciples of the Colony system as established by the commercial nations of
Europe, and could not therefore be reasonably complained of. 2. That the
West Indies could obtain supplies from other quarters, and did not therefore
depend on the United States; nay, that there was danger, by forcing these
supplies into other channels, of our losing that branch of trade altogether. 3.
That the trade would hardly employ more than a dozen brigs, and was therefore
not worth contending for.

In answer to the first argument of Mr. Ames, Mr. Madison undertook to show,
that Great Britain had not pursued, but violated the principles of the colony
system. The true spirit of this system, he said, was to confine the trade
between the parent country and the colony, to their own vessels, and to allow
as little trade as possible, between the colony and foreign countries; out when
a trade with a foreign country became necessary to the colony, to allow the
foreign vessels the same carrying privileges allowed to their own. Colonies, he
said, were to be considered as parts of a common empire. The trade between one
part and another, as between London and Kingston in Jamaica, was to be
considered equally an internal trade with the coasting trade between London and
Liverpool, or the trade between different ports of the United States: and
might, if deemed expedient, be equally restrained to domestic bottoms. But when
a trade was opened between a colony and a foreign country, the case was
changed: the foreign country became a party, and had a reciprocal claim to the
use of its bottoms, as much in the trade with the colony, as with any other
part of the empire to which the colony belonged. In support of this doctrine.
Mr. Madison referred to the example of every nation in Europe, except that of
Great Britain, which had American colonies. Denmark, Sweden, the United
Netherlands, France, Spain and Portugal, had their colonies, as well as
Great Britain; and some of them rigorously attached to the principles of the
colony system: yet not a single one of these nations had refused, whenever, a
trade was permitted at all between the colonies and another country, to make
the carriage common to the vessels of both the parties. Great Britain alone had
attempted a monopoly in such cases for her own vessels. Her example therefore
was an innovation on the colony system, as well as an infraction of the rights
of reciprocity.

In answer to the 2d position of Mr. Ames, he denied that permanent supplies of
provisions and lumber could be derived from any other part of the world than
the United States: not from the northern parts of Europe, which either did not
produce, or were too remote to send them: not from the southern parts of
Europe, which depended themselves on the northern parts and on America: not
from Great Britain, which imported bread, for her own use, amounting one year
with another according to the report of the committee of the privy council, to
the sum of near three hundred thousand pounds sterling, and was certainly not
an exporter of lumber: not from Ireland, which could not pretend to rival the
United States in any article but that of salt provisions; and this was so much
dearer that a prohibition alone of ours, could gain a market for hers. The
gentleman had relied on the capacity of Ireland to extend her cultivation of
wheat, so as to spare supplies of this article also. Such a revolution in her
interior state was not very probable. But he ought at least to have remembered,
that as the pasture lands of Ireland should be turned into wheat fields, her
export of beef would decrease, in proportion as the might be enabled to export
bread.

It was a waste of time, Mr. Madison said, to disprove by minute enquiries, the
possibility of supplying the British West Indies from the old continent, on
terms that would not be worse than abandoning them altogether. The truth was,
that the gentleman (Mr. Ames) had, in this particular, gone beyond the most
^^uguine advocates of the British policy, Mr. Knox and Lord Sheffield
themselves, who limited their ultimate hopes of supporting the West Indies
without the aid of the United States, to the remaining possessions of
Great Britain on this continent. He would proceed, he said, to show what
foundation there was for the opinion of these gentlemen, and the gentleman from
Massachusetts, in favor of this resource. -- And he was able to give the most
full and decisive evidence in the case, by recurring to an authentic document
of our own, from which it appeared, that the continental colonies of
Great Britain, instead of being able to furnish the West India colonies, were
themselves dependant for the very articles wanted there, on the supplies of the
United States.

In the official statement of our exports for the year as late as 1791, most of
the articles sent to the British continental colonies were of a sort and an
amount so directly to the point, that he hoped the committee would excuse him
for repeating them in detail. He stated them as follows: Bread Stuffs and Roots.
Wheat 3,15 bushels. Rye, 2,201 Barley, 32 Indian Corn, 80,734 Oats, 314 Buck
Wheat, 26 Peace and Beans, 1,418 Rice, 84 tierces. Flour, 27,197 barrels.
Ship-stuff, 2,515 Rye-Meal, 1,774 Indian Meal, 2,396 Buck-Wheat, do 353 Bread,
29,290 Crackers, 364 Kegs. Potatoes, 20 bushels. Onion, 525 Meats, etc.
Beef, 284 barrels. Pork, 351 Bacon, 881 lbs. Fresh Pork, 29,334 -- Beef,
92,269 Mutton, 561 carcases. Tongues, 30 barrels. Butter, 33 firkins. La^d,
5,720 lbs. Cheese, 1,826 Live Stock.
Horned Cattle, 312 Horses, 39 Sheep, 1,517 Hogs, 178 Poultry, 361 dozen Wood.
Shingles, 43,000 Staves and Heading 128,000 Handspikes, 2 Hoops, ^00^ Laths,
3,000 Blocks, 100 Oar-rafters, 857 Trunnels, 1,500 Oak-Planks and Boards,
14,267 Pine, do. 27,000 Maple and beach do. 7,500

The total of the exports, including a few articles under other heads, amounted
to two hundred seventy thousand two hundred fifty and nine dollars.

Here then, it is seen, that not only in the bread stuffs and meats of every
sort, but in the articles of lumber and live stock, for which, by universal
acknowlegement, the West Indies must depend either on the United States, or the
British Continental colonies; the latter are so far from being a rival to us,
or a reso^^e to the West Indies, that they continue at this day, to supply
their own deficiencies from our market.

Mr. Madison said, that he should not have employed so much of the time of the
committee on this head, if the gentleman (Mr. Ames) had not attempted to revive
the arguments with respect to Canada and Nova Scotia, which had misled
Great Britain in her political calculations and her present views. He had heard
the language of the gentleman on this subject, with astonishment. That Mr.
Knox, and lord She ^held, British subjects, viewing the prospect with British
eyes, at the distance of three thousand miles, in the year 178^ when little
enquiry and no experiment could assist th^^, should have run into the error,
was perhaps not so mavelous. But, that an enlightened Citizen of America,
seeing with American eyes, living in the neighborhood, as it were, of the
scene, in a state whose wharves afford proofs of the daily dependence of the
British Continental colonies for the necessaries of life, on the market of the
United States, should in the year 1994 (...) the opinion that those colonies
could supply (...) is after a trial of nine years had probably forced the
^^hors of the opinion, Knox and Sheffield themselves, to abandon it, could not
be heard without some surprise; and must be considered at least as the fullest
proof, that the gentleman had not given sufficient attention to the present
subject, to claim that weight which was in general due to his observations.

Mr. Madison said he was not less surprised at the 2d position of the gentleman
from Massachusetts, viz. that the West India trade could be carried on by a
dozen brigs; and consequently, was not an object worth our pursuit. The plain
answer to this argument was, to state the fact, that the shipping entered in
one year from, the British West Indies, was not a dozen brigs, but 107,759 tons.

Besides the immediate importance of this auxilliary resource for our
navigation, he remarked, that there were two consideration which enhanced the
value of the object: one, that as the West India articles could be brought
cheaper in American vessels they would come cheaper to American consumers; the
other, that as our supplies would at the same time be carried cheaper to the
West Indies, the people there could afford to consume the more of them.

It had been urged, that the proposed restrictions on the trade with
Great Britain would produce clamors here as well as there, and that Congress
might be obliged recede, before the British Government would be under the
necessity of doing so. To this Mr. Madison replied, that he was under no such
apprehension. He thought more favorably of the good sense as well as virtue of
his follow citizens. On the side of Great Britain it had been shown there would
be the greatest distress, and the least ability to bear it. The people there
were not accustomed, like the people of the United States, to self denying
regulations. They would not have the same confidence in the justice of their
cause. And it was particularly worthy of remark, that (...) people of
Great Britain would be disheartened, and the government alarmed, by reflecting,
that their losses from the shifting of commerce into other channels, and not
only of their manufactures, but manufacturers, to other places, would be
permanent and irretrievable; where^s on our side, they would be temporary
sacrifices for durable and valuable acquisitions.

Secondly -- The resolutions would have the effe^^ of increasing our marine,
and thereby at once cheapening and securing the carriage of our productions,
and providing for our safety. These advantages having been already sufficiently
explained, need not, he said, be again. developed.

It had been remarked by a member from Massachusetts (Mr. Ames) that if as
stated by a report of Mr. Jefferson, Great Britain was so often at war, her
wars, by depriving us of her shipping, would soon have the wished effect, of
replacing it with American shipping. This reasoning Mr. Madison said, supposed
what was contrary to prudence and probability. What merchants would build
ships, which a peace, always more or less in prospect, would throw out of
employment; unless it were for special purposes, where the momentary gain might
outweigh the eventual sacrifice.

It had been said that our tonnage was proved by the official returns to be
increasing with an unexampled rapidity. To this Mr. Madison answered, That the
increase ought not to be compared with other examples, but with our own natural
faculties, and reasonable expectations -- that the increase of our population
required an annual increase of at least five per cent; that an assumption by
foreigners of American names, had probably increased the apparent quan^i^y of
our shiping; that the war, or preparations for i^, ^y withdrawing foreign
shipping, had probably also had some little temporary effect; that the
principal cause of the increase, was the extention of our trade with the French
dominions, which some members seemed so little inclined to secure and foster,
by measures which appeared to him best fitted for the purpose.

He reminded the committee of an argument, which had, on former occasions, been
much pressed by several mercantile members, for encouraging our own navigation;
to wit: that American vessels, from a spirit of enterprise and a unison between
private and public interests, would explore new fields of commerce, and new
markets for our produce, which foreign carriers would leave unattempted. The
trade to China, opened by American vessels, had been often ascribed to this
cause. Mr. Madison said, the argument seemed to be countenanced also, by the
present state of our Mediterranean trade; which had since our independence,
been confined by the Barbary corsairs to foreign bottoms. Previous to the
revolution, when American vessels could be the carries, the trade was very
considerable. Since the exclusion of our vessels, though the carriage of our
produce is safe in British, and several other foreign vessels, yet this branch
of trade had withered as much as most others have grown. In 1790, the exports
cleared for the Mediterreanean, were but 21,726 doliars; and in the year
following, the imports no more than 11,522 doliars.

Thirdly. Another effect incident to the proposed measure, would be an
additional encouragement to domestic manufactures.

A gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. Dexter) had said, he could read no such
tendency in the propositions. Mr. Madison thought it impossible to read the
propositions with attention, and not perceive, that they must have the like
tendency with the other means, by which manufactures had been promoted. If the
duties already laid, were calculated to produce this effect, an increase of
those duties in any instance, must have a tendency to increase the effect. In
answer to the objection, that a change in the policy of Great Britain, might
put an end to the additional duties, and ensnare those who should proceed under
the influence of them, he remarked, 1. That the same might be said in some
degree of the regulations now in force. A treaty with Great Britain might
stipulate changes which would affect our manufacturers. But as there was a just
confidence, that the interests of this class of citizens would in this case be
attended to by the government; it might be expected, that equal attention would
be paid to them, in any other case. 2. The progress of things in this country,
and the probable accession of foreign manufacturers, might be relied on to
support whatever undertaking shall have once got a footing.

Fourthly. The proposed resolutions would favor an advantageous competition and
distribution of our trade, among the manufacturing nations of Furope. At
present, it may he said to be monopolized by one; so great is the disproportion
of its manufactures which come to our market. That this is an evil, has been
admitted, and cannot be doubted. It exposes us to the greatest and most sudden
embarrassments from the caprice, the passions, the mistaken calculations of
interest, the bankruptics, and the wars of a single foreign country. Many of
these embarrassments are felt at the present moment. If it were possible to
liquidate them into a pecuniary statement, it would be found that, in a
permanent view of our interest, there would be ^conomy in making very
considerable temporary sacrifices, for the purpose of dividing our custom among
a number of competitors. It was not true, that Great Britain alone can supply
the manufactures we want. France, the United Netherlands, and several other
nations, are capable of supplying us with a variety of articles, as well as the
nations from which they now come; and, if invited to our markets by prudent
encouragements in the first instance, will soon learn to fashion their
manufactures to the wants and tastes of this country. The policy of favoring
particular branches of trade, even at some expense, in order to guard against
the evil of depending on a single one, was examplisied by the conduct of
Great Britain herself. Although he viewed her discriminations generally,
respecting us, in the light he had explained; yet, he thought it possible, that
in the instance of naval stores and ship-timbers, it might be her intention to
foster a rivalship in a more distant quarter, in order to provide against a
casual privation of the supplies of a nearer quarter. These articles are as
essential to the marine of Great Britain, as her marine is essential to her
greatness. Were she to have no resource but in the Baltic, a war with the
Baltic powers might be fatal to her. It may be wise in her, therefore, to keep
open the A^^^rican resource, even at the price of a tax on herself. In this
case, she must quarrel with both the Baltic powers and the United States at the
same time, before the supplies will be cut off.

A member from Massachusetts (Mr. Dexter) had not, Mr. Madison said, been very
consistent in his reasoning on the subject. He had contended against all
attempts to excite a beneficial competition, on the idea that no competition
could be beneficial which would not spring up of itself; and yet he had warned
us against the danger, that Great Britain, by exciting a competition against
the United States, in those parts of Europe, which most resemble the infant
situation of our country, might establish new sources from which supplies would
afterward spontaneously flow to her, without being ever again wanted from the
United States. The same remark was applicable to the reasoning of the other
gentlemen who had represented the danger of exciting a permanent rivalship for
the West India market, in favor of Canada and Nova Scotia.

Fifthly. The plan of the resolutions tended to concilliate nations in treaty,
or disposed to be in treaty with us, into arrangements still more favorably to
our commerce. This argument had peculiar weight in relation to France. It had
been said, that Great Britain was our best customer. The fact, he said, was
that we were her best customer; but that France was our best customer. We
consume more of British manufactures than any other nation in the world
consumes. France consumes more of our productions, than any other nations
consumes. -- He referred to the statement he had before offered for proof of
this. Her consumption was also of the most, valuable kind; and, under favorable
regulations, would be a very growing one. It consisted of wheat and flour, salt
provisions, and fish; articles which were not admitted by Great Britain; and
which, without the market of France, would, glut every other. Of our fish she
consumed five eigths of the whole exportation. Her use of our live animals was
another important consideration. It amounted, in the list of our exports, to
352, 795 dollars, for the year 1791. In the same year, the British demand
amounted to no more than 62, 415 dollars. The superior proportion of navigation
we enjoyed in the French channels of intercourse had already been shown. In
examining the policy of cultivating and securing the French market, he said it
ought not to be forgotten, that the profits and revenue arising from the rum
distilleries, depended on an article obtained almost, if not altogether, from
the French dominions alone; and which was the only raw material of any
consequence imported into the United States. It was paid for also, as had been
much urged on other occasions by members on the opposite side, in the worst
fish, which could find a vent in no other part of the world. The molasses
imported into the United States in one year, amounted to upwards of seven
millions of gallons, more than one half of which went into the state of
Massachusetts. He took notice also of the article of sugar, as rendered of
great importance by our habits and our finances; and of which more than one
half was supplied by the French West Indies. Out of 17, 142, 723 lbs. imported,
9, 321, 829 lbs. were received from that source. The residue came from the
Danish, Dutch, and British dominions, in the following proportions, to wit:
Danish, 2, 833, 016 lbs. Dutch 2, 707, 231 lbs. British 2, 280, 647 lbs. That
statement was taken from the imports of 1790, the only year he had been able to
examine on this point.

It had been said, Why grant privileges before a mutual grant should be secured
by positive stipulation? Why throw away, by a legal regulation, what ought to
be the price of treaty ^^^le answered, that the legal regulations threw nothing
away, as it was always revocable: that in the present instance, it was only
meeting the legal regulations of which France had set the example: that instead
of being a bar to treaty, such a course of proceeding, more than any other,
would smooth the way to it, by explaining the objects, and establishing a
confidence, on both sides -- that it would be happy, if in all cases, where
treaties are in view, this open and conciliatory process, could take the place
of that reserve and mysterious negotiation, with which the parties approach
each other. Were Great Britain desirous of forming amicable arrangements by
treaty, he asked what readier or more prudent step could she have taken for the
purpose, than to have followed the example set her, by holding out in her laws,
the spirit in which she was willing to meet us in negotiation?

Having gone through these explanations, Mr. Madison entered into a view of the
principal objections to the resolutions proposed.

1. It was said they would diminish the revenue, and endanger the funds.

With respect to the public debt, his general ideas had been expressed by
several who had spoken before him. He acknowledged that he had disliked and
opposed the modification given to it; but after it had received the sanction of
law, he had entertained no other wish on the subject, than that the debt might
be honorably discharged as fast as the circumstances of the country would
permit. This he was well satisfied was the prevailing sentiment of the great
body of the people. He did not believe, that there was a single state in the
union, or any considerable part of a single state, that did not acquiesce
(where they did not approve) in the provisions which had been made in behalf of
the public croditors. At the same time, he was equally sure, that it never was
either meant by Congress, or understood by the public, that in mortagaging the
impost for their security, it was t^ be an hos^age to foreign countries for our
unqualified acquiescence in their unequal laws, and to be worn, as long as the
debt should continue, as a badge of national humiliation. The nature of the
obligation could certainly import no more in favor of the creditors, than that
the fund appropriated should be applied, as far as requisite, to their use;
unless equivalent funds should be substituted; nor more against the public,
than that all deficiencies in the funds should be made up, whether arising
without, or in consequence of, a change in the laws. If it should happen, then,
that in consequence of any measure, dictated by the general good, the impost
should become inadequate to its object, all that could be exacted by the public
creditors, would be some other provision that would supply the defalcation; and
it ought not to be doubted, that the people at large, whose good was pursued,
would readily support whatever other provision might become indispensible. He
had made these remarks, however, with reference to an event, which he did not
by any means admit to be probable. The more he had revolved the subject, the
more clearly it appeared to him, that a very operative addition might be made
to the duties on the enumerate articles, without endangering the aggregate
product of the importations. And he entirely concurred in opinion with those
who had observed, that the greatest injury which could be done to the class of
citizens holding the public paper, was to represent their interests as more to
(...) regarded than any national considerations whatever; and to oppose to the
latter, even the most imaginary contingences to the former.

2. It was objected, that the operation of the resolutions would be more
favorable, in some instances, to nations in treaty than was merited; and more
unfavorable, in others, to nations not in treaty, than was politic.

In answer to this abjection, he observed, that Sweden and Prussia, two of the
nations in commercial treaty, had but little intercourse with us; would be in
^^w. respect but little affected; and, besides, the treaties with them were
limited to a short term, the greatest part of which had clas^^ (...).

France and the United Netherlands, the two other nations to (...), ^ould not
reasonably be grudged the advantage (...) might derive from treaties, for which
we had (...) go received a valuable consideration in their assistance toward
the establishment of our independence.

As to the nations not in treaty --

Denmark would not be affected. She had no navigation act, within the
description of the resolutions; and could not feel the duties on manufactures.
The whole of the imports from Denmark amounted in the year 1791 to 9,957
dollars only. Her islands also, with which the trade is carried on in our
vessels, depend for their subsistence on our market.

Russia has little or no shipping in our trade, and it would not be effected if
she had; as she has no such navigation act. Her unwrought iron may come as
before. Duck and sheeting are the only two manufactures on which the
resolutions would sensibly operate; and with respect to these, as will
presently be observed, it would be easy to make special exceptions.

The Hanse Towns, having no navigation act, would not be affected in that
respect. Linens are the only articles falling within the proposed enumeration;
and might, if thought requisite, be easily excepted.

Spain, has little shipping in our trade; has no nagigation act, such as is to
be reciprocated; and would not be sensibly touched by the duties on
manufactures. She also needs our exports, and will be influenced by that
consideration.

It had been asked, why Spain, against whom we had complaints as well as
against Great Britain, ought not to be equally an object of our regulations? He
said that such a question could be best answered when the communications from
the President relating to Spain, should be taken up.

Portugal, like Spain, will not be affected in her na^igation; nor sensibly, if
at all, in the article of manu^^ctures; and is, more than Spain, supplied with
necessaries (...) our market. According to Zimmerman, Portugal does not raise
within herself, more bread than will feed her three months in the year. It is
certain that she depends much on external resources, and that occasions are
frequent when she can find them no where else than in the United States.

Mr. Madison said, he considered these explanations as a sufficient answer to
the objection. He would add, however, that there were other answers, some of
which had been before hinted, that would afford an option of modes for the
exemption of nations not in treaty.

Besides the opportunity which such nations have of removing all difficulties,
by meeting us in liberal treaties, they may be provided for; either by limiting
every part of the measure to nations having a navigation act: Or by limiting it
to nations within a geographical description; a practice familiar to the
British code: Or by naming the nations to be excepted; a practice also familar
to Great Britain: Or by naming the particular articles, to be excepted; a
practice no less familiar to that nation.

By some or other of these modifications the committee could be at no loss to
accommodate the plan, to their own sense of propriety, and the public good.

Here Mr. Madison took occasion to remark, that much of the argument against
the resolutions, had proceeded from an inattention to their import, and would
be answered by a simple explanation of them.

The first resolution, which was immediately the subject of debate, decided
nothing with respect to a discrimination between different nations. It declared
only, in general, that the situation of the United States required something to
be done, in the way of commercial restrictions and duties. And yet it had been
combated by many members, as if a vote in favor of it would involve all the
enbarrassing preferences which their fancies could suggest.

The succeeding resolutions on the subject of additional duties on
manufactures, and of a variation of the tontage duties, were founded on a
discrimination between nations in treaty, and nations not in treaty; but
admitted, as he had observed, of whatever modifications or exceptions, might be
judged equitable orpolitic. The proposed reduction of the tonnage of vessels in
treaty, had been suggested by the complaint made by France of the existing
tonnage on her vessels, as exceeding the burden imposed by her on ours, as well
as an unkind return for the commercial benefits of which the United States were
partaking under her laws. At present the tonnage imposed by us, on all foreign
vessels was the same. This would not seem to be right on any principle, unless
the tonnage imposed on our vessels, by all foreign nations, was the same, which
was not to be presumed. Whether the change he had proposed, would be an
amendment of the existing law, was a point to be examined. It was certainly a
part of the plan which he did not regard as the most essential.

With respect to the resolutions reciprocating navigation laws, it was evident,
he said, that these had no reference to the question, whether a nation were in
a treaty or not. They would operate equally, wherever there might be the same
departure from the principle of reciprocity. If they should bear on one nation
particularly, it would be because they ought to do so.

3. It had been much insisted, that trade ought to be free to find its proper
channels, under the conduct of merchant^; that the merchantile opinion was the
best guide, in the case now depending; and that that opinion was against the
Resolutions.

(...) ans^er to this objection, he said, it was obvious to (...), that in the
very terms of the proposition, trade ought to be free, before it could find its
proper channel. It was not free at present, it could not, therefore, find the
channels in which it would most advantageously flow. The dykes must be broken
down before the waters could pursue their natural course. Who would pretend,
that the trade with the British West Indies, or even with Great Britain
herself, was carried on under the present restrictions, as it would go on of
itself, if unsette^^ed from restrictions on her part, as it is on (...). Who
would pretend, that the supplies to the West Indies, for example, would not
flow (...) in American bottoms, if they flowed freely? Who would pretend that
our wheat, our flour, our fish, etc. would not find their way to the British
market, if the cha^els to it were open for them.

It seemed to have been forgotten, that the principle of this objection struck
at every regulation in fever of manufactures, as much, or even more, than at
regulations on the subject of commerce. It required the every species of
business ought to be left to the sagacity and interest of those carrying it on;
without any interference whatever, of the public authority, He was himself, in
general, a friend to this theory: but there were a variety of exceptions to it,
arising out of particular situations; as must be admitted by all who would
mingle practical with theoretic views; and as has been already decided by a
number of our laws.

With respect to the mercantile opinion, he was disposed to pay all due
attention to it. The mercantile class of citizens was certainly an enlightened
and ^^ respectable one. Their information ought always to be received with
respect, and their interest protected with care. But it did not follow that
their opinion, even on questions of trade, ought to be consulted as an oracle,
by those who were equally bound to watch over the interests of every class or
citizens, and over the joint concerns of the whole. There were considerations
of different kinds which suggested caution on this subject.

However intelligent and constant the merchant might be, in directing his
operations, for commercial purposes, he might not be equally in the habit of
combining with these, the various other national objects which the Legislature
might be bound to consult.

The interest of the mercantile class may happen to differ from that of another
class; and possibly both may differ from that of the whole community. For
example; it is, generally speaking, the interest of the merchant to import and
export every thing: the interests of manufacturers to lessen imports in order
to raise the price of domestic fabrics, and to check exports, where they might
enhance the price of raw materials. In this case it would be as imp^oper to
allow the one to judge for the other, as to allow either to judge for the whole.

It may be the interest of the merchant, under particular circumstances, to
consine the trade to its established channels; when the national interest would
require those channels to be changed or enlarged. The best writers on political
economy have observed, that the regulations most ^nfriendly to the national
wealth of Great Britain, have owed their birth to mercantile counsels. It is
well known, that in France, the greatest opposition to that liberal policy
which was as favorable to the true interrest of that country as of this,
proceeded from the interest which merchants had, in keeping the trade in its
former course.

If, in any country, the mercantile opinion ought not to be im^^^citly
followed, there were the strongest reasons why it ought not, in this. The body
of merchants who carry on the American commerce, is well known to be composed
of so great a proportion of individuals who are either British subjects, or
trading on British capital, or enjoying the profits of British consignments,
that the mercantile opinion here, might not be an American opinion; nay, it
might be the opinion of the very country of which, in the present instance at
least, we ought not to take counsel. What the genuine American mercantile
opinion would be, if it could be collected apart from the general one, Mr.
Madison said he did not undertake positively to decide. His belief was, that it
would be in favor of the resolutions.

It could scarcely be necessary, he said, to add, that his remarks were not
meant to be, as they were not in fact, the least reflection on any part of the
mercantile order among us. They only suppose, what in political reasonings
ought always to be supposed, that the prejudices of birth and personal
interests will be a bias on the judgment.

4. It had been an objection to the resolutions, that they might deprive us of
the aid of British capital and credit, which were necessary to the prosecution
of our commerce.

Mr. Madison did not admit, either that the effect would happen, or that it
would be runious to our commerce.

Unless Great Britain should, of her own choice, put a stop to the commercial
intercourse with us, which, for reasons before given, would be so much more
hurtful to hersels than to this country, that it never could be presumed; the
resolutions would operate only by abridging some of our importations, and by
varying the channels of others. Her capital, as far as requisite here, might
continue to be employed here.

On the general question concerning our dependence on British capital and
credit, he observed, that it could not be denied that more use was made of them
at present, than was either necessary or beneficial. Credit, when extended to
consumers, as was the case throughout the southern states, was extremely
injurious; as had been well explained by a member of Virgima (Mr. Nichols) and
as he himself had equally witnessed, When confined to merchants, it might,
within certain limits, be an advantage; but it was not only his own opinion,
but that of better judges, that the credit given to our merchants, was, at
present, excessive and injurious.

In order to form a very, precise judgment on this subject, it would be
necessary, he said, to calculate the amount of our own capital, and its
proportion to the amount of our trade. This was a thing, he supposed, which
could not well be done. If he had concurred in the doctrine, of which so much
had been heard, both within and without doors, that a sunded debt and banks of
discount, were equivalent to active capital, he should have a ready answer to
the difficulty. The paper of the two kinds in the United States, cannot amount
to less (...) one hundred millions of dollars; whilst the amount of our exports
or our imports, does not exceed one fourth of that capital.

It is true, a part of both the public and the bank stocks, is in foreign
hands; but with the most ample deductions on that account, the ^^adu^, if
operating in any considerable degree as active capital, would be a competent
resource.

As he did not however view the doctrine in the particular light in which it
had been painted; it would be more to his purpose, to observe, that there was
certainly in this country a real mercantile capital to a very respectable
amount -- that this was fast increasing with our increasing population and
wealth -- that if the foreign capital of one country should be withdrawn, the
vacancy would probably, by degrees, be occupied by that of other foreign
nations; that if it should happen otherwise, there was reason to believe, that
a restriction of our use of foreign credit, would be rather salutary than
disadvantageous; that in fine, as long as we had twenty millions of dollars
worth of produce, wanted by other nations, and were willing take for it, twenty
millions worth of what they wished to part with, he was under no apprehension
that the means of effectuating an exchange, would not be found. Both merchants
and capital would quickly be generated by such a state of things, if they did
not previously exist.

5. It had been observed by several members, in allusion to the alleged
proportion of British manufactures consumed by us to the entire mass of her
manufactures, that Great Britain would never part with her navigation act, in
order to avoid a loss of four per cent, in the demand for her manufactures.

To this objection he answered, that the comparison ought to be of our
consumption, not with the entire mass of her manufactures, but with the part
entering into her foreign trade; and then the loss would not be four per cent,
but, at least twenty per cent; that this would not be the only loss she would
sustain, if she should be unwise enough to stop the intercourse between the
United States and her dominions; that it had been already shown, that when, she
apprehended a restrictive system on our part, she was willing to prevent it, by
relaxing her restrictive system; that in times of war, when an adherence to
that system would distress her, she frequently suspends her navigation act;
that at this moment it is suspended in relation to the West Indies; that there
could be little doubt if the temporary necessity were likely to be made
permanent by firm and judicious measures on our part, that the remedy, for it
would be made permanent also.

6. It was objected that the present was an improper time for such resolutions.

The principal reason given for this was, that the negotiation between the
secretary of state and the British minister here, was still depending. To show
that this reason was unsound, Mr. Madison went into an historical view of what
had passed in reference to commercial arrangements. Heread the message of the
President to the House of Representatives, on the 14th of February, 1791,
acquainting them, that steps had been taken to ascertain the dispositions of
the British court on the subject, and that there was no ground for favorable
expectations. He stated that in consequence of this communication, a committee
was appointed, who reported that foreign vessels ought not to be allowed to
bring into the United States any articles not of the produce or manufacture of
the country to which they belong, and that an additional duty of twelve and an
half^^eents ought to be laid on all distilled spirits, the production of any
country or place from which vessel of the United States were not permitted to
bring them; that it being very near the end of the session, when this report
was made; it was referred to the secretary of state, with an instruction to
report to the next session an account of the foreign commercial regulations
affecting the United States, with his opinion, etc. that at the next session; a
letter was received from that officer, intimating that in the actual state of
circumstances, the report would not be given in; unless called for by the
House; that at the present session, the report now before the committee, was
given in, without being called for; and was therefore a proof, that the
circumstances which had caused the delay, had vanished, and that at present
there was nothing in train, according to the opinion of the secretary of state,
which ought to restrain the Legislature from proceeding in the business.

In answer to suggestions, that the British minister had in the correspondence
with the secretary of Stat^^ lately communicated by the President, manifested a
favorable disposition, which had not been improved -- Mr. Madison recu^red to
the passages which related to this point, He read from the first letter of Mr.
Jefferson to Mr. Hammond, dated Nov. 29, 1791, a paragraph requesting Mr.
Hammond "To say, whether he was authorized to conclude, or to negociate
arrangements with us, which may fix the commerce between the two countries on
principles of reciprocal advantage?" To this request, Mr.Hammond, on the 30th
of Nov. 1791, answered, "That the king was sincerely disposed to promote and
facilitate the commercial intercourse between the two countries, and that he
was authorized to communicate to this government, his majesty's readiness to
enter into a negotiation for establishing that intercourse upon principles of
reciprocal benefit. On Dec. 6, he wrote to Mr. Jefferson in order to prevent
misapprehension, that although he was not yet empowered to CONCLUDE any
definitive arrangement with respect to the commercial intercourse, he still
meant it to be understood, that he was fully authorized, to ENTER into a
negoication for that purpose, etc. The reply of Mr. Jefferson on the 13th of
Dec. informed Mr. Hammond, that he had laid letters before the President, and
was ready to receive a communication of his full powers, for entering into the
negociaion, etc. This was followed on the next day by a letter from Mr.
Hammond, stating, That he had no special commission, to CONCLUDE any definitive
arrangement upon the subject of commercial intercourse -- but that he conceived
himself fully competent to enter into negotiation, and the discussion of
principles that might be the basis of such definitive arrangement -- and that
this opinion of his competency was founded on the instructions which were to
regulate his personal conduct, and the general plenipotentiary character in
which he had been sent and received.

This letter, Mr. Madison observed, closed the correspondence on the subject of
commercial arrangements, being justly considered by the executive as a final
proof, that the powers of Mr. Hammond were incompetent, and irrelative to the
object; and that it would be improper to open a formal negotiation with him,
under them. His instructions might be a rule and a warrant to himself, but not
being even exhibited, could be no evidence of his authority, to the executive.
And his plenipotentiary commission in the ordinary form, could never be
understood as relating to the special objects he proposed to discuss. According
to the usage of nations, a special commission is, in such cases, always
furnished and required. Mr. Madison was persuaded, that no sovereign in Europe
would listen for a moment to such a claim as that of Mr. Hammond, and that the
British court would have been offended at such an one from an American
minister. He thought therefore, that the executive had equally consulted
dignity and prudence, in silently dropping the subject in the manner they did,
until Mr. Hammond should receive and produce adequate powers in the accustomed
form; as might reasonably be expected, if his court was duly disposed to meet
the United States, in an amicable arrangement of commerce by treaty.

That the construction put by Mr. Hammond on his powers, was inadmissible,
appeared to Mr. Madison to result from the construction itself. Either the
general Plenipotentiary commission was to be taken in the technical and limited
sense in which it is applied to the ordinary diplomatic objects of a stationary
public minister; or in a literal sense, without regard to such limitation. In
the former sense, it clearly does not extend to negociations for a treaty. In
the latter sense it would extend to the conclusion of a treaty, and not merely
to negotiation, as Mr. Hammond explains and limits it.

Mr. Madison adverted next to the state of the correspondence relating to the
treaty of peace. It appeared, he observed, that as long ago as the 29th of May,
1792, the Secretary of State had addressed to Mr. Hammond, a full explanation
of our rights and demands, under that treaty -- that on the 2d of June, Mr.
Hammond informed the Secretary, that he should transmit it without delay for
the consideration of his court; and accordingly did forward it in the course of
a few days; that on the 13th Nov. 1793, previous to the present meeting of
Congress, Mr. Hammond was desired by the Secretary, in pursuance of a charge
from the President, to let him know whether an answer could yet be given to the
letter of May 29, 1792. Mr. Hammond replied, that it could not, but that he was
confident the delay was to be ascribed to the continuance of the cause alluded
to in a former answer to a similar request.

The cause alluded to, was the interesting posture of things in Europe, which
it was said, had diverted the attention of the British government to objects of
a more pressing nature; and this consideration had been urged by several
members, as an apology for the silence observed toward the United States. Mr.
Madison thought very differently. The interval between the receipt of the
letter written by the Secretary in May, 1792, and the accession of
Great Britain to the war against France, had been sufficient for the purpose of
preparing and sending the proper instructions to Mr. Hammond. Mr. Madison
added, that the prospect of being engaged in new controversies of a more
serious kind, instead of justifying an inattention to an existing one, ought to
have quickened the efforts for a previous settlement of the latter. This is the
course dictated by prudence, to nations as well as to individuals; and where a
right disposition concurs, it is the natural course.

It had been mentioned as a further reason against the commercial propositions,
at this time, that they might draw upon us the resentments of the Combined
powers. Mr. Madison could see no ground for such an apprehension. The Combined
powers were pretty fully occupied with France; they could have no pretext for
concerning themselves with us, in a case where we did not concern ourselves
with them; and there was the less room for imagining that the combination could
misconstrue the measure into an offense against them, as two of the parties,
Prussia and the United Netherlands, were in treaty with the United States, and
are favored by the propositions.

7. It was finally contended, that admitting our situation to be such as had
been described, the mode proposed was an objectionable one.

Mr. Madison said he had no predilections for the mode that could prevent his
giving a ready preference to a better, if a better should be offered. And
unless it should be said, that the Legislature ought to adjourn without doing
any thing for the public relief, he thought it incumbent on those who object to
one proposition to substitute another that would be less objectionable. By this
he meant a proposition not merely better in itself, but one that would probably
be thought so, both withen and without doors; and be more likely to coincide
with the sentiments of every part of the union, as well as to conciliate a
majority of voices in the public councils.

The first question, he said, was whether any thing ought to be done. If this
be decided in the affirmative, as he presumed to be the sense of the majority
of the committee; and if war was not in contemplation as of course was taken
for granted; the next question could only lie between negotiation, and
commercial regulation. Negocition it had been shown was in no train, or
prospect, that could justify reliance on it. Commercial regulations alone
remained. They would be pacific in their operation. They were the means best
suited to the remper of our constituents. And he sincerely belived, that, if
judiciously framed, they would be more likely to answer the reasonable purposes
of the community, then any others that could be proposed.


