Infernal Conference: OR, DIALOGUES OF DEVILS.

BY THE LISTENER.

IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. I.

LONDON, PRINTED: PHILADELPHIA, REPRINTED: And Sold by STEWART and COCHRAN,
No. 34, South Second-street. M,DCC,XCIV.

THE INTRODUCTION.
NOTHING can be more various and opposite than the opinions of mankind,
respecting the influence and agency of in^ernal spirits. Some continually throw
the blame of their vices upon the poor Devil; -- take their word for it, and
they are on all occa^ions the innocent dupes to his subtilty and malice: they
represent him as the prime agent in all their complicated scenes of wickedness;
and would fain persuade us, that so far from being the objects of our just
av^rsion, they deserve all our commiseration and pity. From su^^representations
one would be tempted to think, that if malicious and busy devils ^id but stay
in their own country, mankind would be as harmless as lambs, and every species
of wickedness be soon banished from our then agreeable world.

Others there be who fall into the opposite extreme, and with all their power
endeavor to clear the Devil of the ^^anders thrown upon him; whether he has
retained them as his advocates I pretend not to say: but they tell you that he
has no hand in all the wickedness committed under the sun; that it is
impossible he should have any influence on the minds and manners of men. Nay,
some go farther still, even doubt of his very existence, and are confident that
all their wickedness arises from another quarter.

My mind, I must confess, was long agitated between these widely different
opinions: now I verged toward the one, now toward the (...) extreme; and for
a long time continued in such p^inful suspense, that I would have given a world
to have been satisfied in a matter of such vast importance in human life. But
at length I obtained a full and most convincing discovery of this very
intricate affair; and let who will deny it, I am perfectly satisfied that,
however justly the guilt of men may be charged on their own corruptions,
infernal spirits do exist, and are fully employed in forwarding their wicked
designs and purposes. Yea, I have learned so much of the art and address of
diabolical spirits in this matter, that as I shall, I trust, avail myself much
of the very singular discovery, so, from a principle of benevolence to mankind,
I think myself fully justified without further apology, in communicating it to
the public.

Know then, that not far from my humble cot, there is a widely extended, most
tremendous and gloomy VALE, first formed, as is supposed, by some dreadful
earthquake, or some other remarkable convulsion in nature. The confines of this
valley, on the outside, are every where nearly level with the surface of the
ground, but the precipice within is to the last degree horrible, insomuch that
few have had fort^^^de enough to approach it. The ancient bards very justly
called it HORRIDA VALLYS, and we from them, the Vale of Horrors. This horrid
vale has long been supposed, by the credulous vulgar, to be the haunt of
infernal spirits; and some people imagine that it is the only place on earth
where they freely converse about the dark designs of their mal-adminisiration.

My curiosity continually prompting me, at last conquered my native timidity,
and I resolved, if possible, to find an entrance into this unfrequented,
unknown, and dreadful place.

But many months, I may say some years, were spent in this fruitless search,
and I despaired of success. At length, however, having entered a very large and
unfrequented wood, one side of which led to the very edge of the precipice; as
I walked a few ^urlongs down a gradual descent, gloomy beyond whatever I had
seen before, I came to a huge rock, all overgrown with ivy and moss. It had the
appearance of an ancient ruin, somewhat in the form of a pyramid; the bottom
occupied a considerable space, and the spiral top was hardly concealed by the
highest branches of the tall and aged oaks which surrounded it. Near the
ground, by chance, I discovered an opening almost ch^aked up with baleful
hemloc and night^ hade. At first I thought that this could be no other than the
cave of some ancient Druid; but approaching it, and having with much to^l
cleared away the noxious weeds, I found, what I had long sought for, an
entrance into the dreadful ca^ity.

Here my resolution almost failed me, and I was at the point of relinquishing
the long projected enterprise. At length I recollected myself a little, and
resolved to descend into the place, though, as I thought, not much less
horrible than hell. The passage, a little within the entrance, led downwards,
almost in a perpendicular direction; but its straitness, and the natural
uneveness of the rocks that formed it, rendered my descent more practicable and
safe than I at first expected. Down, however, I went, fathoms I know not how
many, ere I found myself at the bottom, and from an easy opening entered the
gloomy vale.

Looking up, I saw rocks upon rocks projecting over my timo^ous head; and I
perceived myself to be within the most hideous enclosure that sure ever mortal
eyes beh^ld. The vale being solitary and gloomy as death itself, I said in my
heart, surely if damned spirits are permitted to visit the earth, this must be
their rendezvous, and two to one I shall see some of them. I therefore observed
carefully my retreat; and by several marks on the rocks which formed it, I
hoped that, on any emergency, I might be directed to the entrance of the cave,
by which alone I could return to the society of mortals.

I soon ^ound that my precautions were far from being unnecessary; for I saw,
by the feeble light which glimmered in the place, a form most frightful making
directly toward me. My heart bounced in my (...) with ^error, and swift as a
hare pressed by sanguine hounds, I ran to my little sanctuary. No sooner had I
entered it, but the fiend stalked up to the very door of it. The hair of my
head stood upright, the blood run down my back as cold as Greenland ice, and I
looked upon myself as a dead man; having often heard of miserable wretches
being torn in pieces by the talons of merciless infernals. But as the hideous
form attempted not to penetrate into the cave nor seemed at all conscious of my
being there, I recovered myself a little, and reviewed it with less
apprehension of danger. At length, he espied another of his clan, to whom he
called, and with whom he held the following dialogue, which made such an
impression on my mind, that I afterward recollected the most part of it, and
here present it to the worthy reader. The name of this devil, as I afterward
understood, was AVARO, and that of the other, FASTOSUS.

DIALOGUES OF DEVILS.
DIALOGUE I. Between FASTOSUS and AVARO.
AVARO. SO HO! Fastosus, whither so fast this time of the morning? Be not in
such a hurry, but let a kindred Devil exchange a few words with you. Pray, how
do you do, uncle?


FASTOSUS. Hah! my nephew Avaro -- I little thought of finding you in the vale
at present. But I am glad to see you. Pray, how do you do?


AVAR. I thank you, Sir, I am pretty well, only tired with much exercise. But
pray, where were you going in such a hurry? When I called to you, you seemed to
outfly the wind!


FAST. Indeed, Avaro, I should not be willing to discover my concerns to every
enquirer; but I condescend to make free with you, on account of our near
kindred; and knowing you to be a true son of Beelzebub, I can trust you with any
secret. As for my present hurry, the occasion of it is this: The right
honorable Madame de la Cocquette having an inclination to a suit, of some
fashion never before invented, was thrown into a violent fever, through the
dullness of the mantua makers, who could devise no cut suitable to the lady
ship's desire. Finding her life to be in danger unless she was gratified, I was
last night dispatched to Hell to procure a new pattern from the best artists
there; and having got it, I was going post to France, to assist my lady's
mantua-maker in cutting and finishing it: which done, I suppose I shall have a
trip to London, to accommodate the countess of Prudeland with a suit against
the next court-day.


AVAR. What! the courtly Fastosus become mantua-maker! I should never have
thought of such an employment, for my part. You have now descended low indeed,
uncle!


FAST. Indeed, Avaro, your ignorance almost provokes me to be angry with you.
But you need not be so much surprised at my concerns with the mantua-makers;
for ^ assure you, that I am so much admired for my skill in dress, by both
sexes of the human race, that there is scarcely a suit of clothes made either
for man or woman, without my direction. Nor shall you find a peruke-maker hardy
enough to venture a wig on the block, ere he has had my opinion of it. In short
cousin, there is very little done, and in dress, there is nothing done, in high
life or low, but I have a hand in it.


AVAR. If I have offended, my honored uncle, I humbly beg your pardon; I
assure you, I said nothing out of disrespect to you: we all know that your
spirit is princely, your monarchy great, and your dominion very extensive. But
indeed I never thought of your being conversant with tailors, barbers and
mantua makers.


FAST. Nay, nephew, I am not angry. Nevertheless, you ought to revere me as
your elder and better, and not take upon you to call in question the truth of
what I say. As for the barbers, (...) are a set of transformists established
wholly by my dexterity; and but for my sovereignty over man, these
transformations had never been introduced. Now the transforming trade goes on
so successfully, that there is reason to hope very many will be at last
transformed into the likeness and nature of our sable fraternity.


AVAR. Pray, uncle, be not angry with me, if I don't speak altogether as you
would have me, for you know I never had any inclination to learning or
politeness; and I cannot help expressing my wonder at some things you say.
Besides, I am amazed to see you look so thin; why you look like a skeleton!
What have you been doing, or where have you been? By your looks, you might have
traveled barefooted to the Holy Land, or crept on your hands and feet to
Medina, and wept forty days by the tomb of our dear friend Mahomet. You have
not been on pilgrimage, sure!


FAST. I thought, from what I had said, you might have known that I have not
been on pilgrimage very lately; though I assure you, I have often traveled to
Jerusalem and to Mecca as a guide to those holy pilgrims. There is not one of
all the bare-legged travelers who will stir their foot from home, till their
good friend Fastosus is equipped in palmerian habiliments, to press forward in
the van as their protector. Nor are these pilgrims my only vassals, for the
superstitious of all denominations have with one consent devoted themselves to
me.


AVAR. Well, but uncle, I am sure they worship me with sincere regard, as well
as they do you; and I either attend them in person, or pour my influences upon
every one of them, in all their religious journies to Jerusalem, Mecca, or
elsewhere.


FAST. It may be so, Avaro; but their prostitution to covetousness hinders not
their devotion to pride: for I have conducted many of this fraternity to the
supposed sepulcher of Jesus of Nazareth, who in their own opinion were made so
holy thereby, that when they returned to their native country, they thought the
earth itself unworthy to bear the pressure of a foot, which had trod the
threshold of the adored sepulcher. These religious adven^^res (especially if
they obtain some precious relics, of which there are great^store in Palestine)
generally list them so far above their fellow creatures, that thenceforward
they can hold no intercourse with the common people, lest their supposed
spotless garments should be polluted with worldly filthiness. Nor is it
uncommon for these fantastical devotees to imagine, that by their journies to
Judea they have gained considerably above the price of heaven. So that when
they come to die, they have holiness sufficient for themselves, and a handsome
legacy to bequeath, as an h^^-out to some poor brother who loves home better
than the Holy Land.


AVAR. Ay, Fastosus, but then you may thank my brother Falax and me for your
Jerusalem journies: none of them would have been instituted but through
falsehood, deceit, and covetousness. And I really think that we did excellent
service to the great Beelzebub and the sublime port of Hell, in impesing that
cheat upon mankind. Though by the way, one would wonder that the reasonable
mind should be so easy deceived, seeing there is nothing in any of these
pilgrimages that has so much as the appearance of religion.

Often have I laughed in my sleeve, to see the foolish pilgrims, with holy awe
and profound reverence, approach a log of rotten wood, fully believing it to be
part of the cross on which Immanuel was crucified. Oh! how have I seen them
congratulate themselves on their supposed happiness, if by any means they had
procured a diminutive chip of an old go^e-p^st; from the hand of a venerable
priest, with his holy word upon it, that it was part of the cross! And to speak
the truth, which you know I am not very fond of, these reverend gentlemen have
words and wood equally plenty; for when one log is sold off, they immediately
replace it with another; so that this market will not stop for want of
merchandise whilst there is a tree left in the forest of Lebanon. I would not
on any account, that the world should know that traffic in relics is all a
cheat, by the help whereof my dear children the Jerusalem priests get more
money for chips of rotten wood, than the greatest merchant in Norway gets for
his masts, and yards, etc.


FAST. By what you say, and I own it to be right, cousin, you and I must share
the persons and divide the spoil betwixt us on the day of reckoning. You and
cousin Falax have laid the snare very craftily, and I by my haughty influences,
drive the fools to it. Good Avaro, your game would not go well without my
assistance; and while you and I continue to play into each others hand, we can
readily bring the two fools to meet each deceiving and being deceived. I mean,
we can bring the covetous fool and the credulous fool together. The credulous
deceives the covetous fool with his money, and the covetous deceives the
credulous with his rotten wood. Dear Avaro, our work goes forward apace, and we
shall have them both at last.


AVAR. No doubt of it, Fastosus; for both the covetous and over credulous are
ours by common consent. Our game could not well go better than it does at
present, for all ranks and degrees of people are subjected to our potent sway.
No doubt but you have heard of that noble piece of architecture called the
Triple-Crown, which I and my brother Falax made for our very worthy friend and
steadfast ally the POPE of ROME.


FAST. Heard of it? surely I have; was not I the principal person concerned in
the work? But Avaro, you have an ugly way of denying people the due honors of
their labor. But for me, His holiness would never have thought of such an
invention. And as I had the principal hand in it, I ever, that the best
mathematician in hell could not have invented a more excellent piece. I have
thought, ever since, that the artful Falax acted his part with as much
dexterity in the formation of that capital ornament, as when he and we assisted
our venerable friend, Mahomet in composing the Alcoran, But the chief beauty of
it was, to see our hoaty friend the Pope, with greater confidence than if he
had been oue of ourselves, exalt his papal chair above all that is called God.
So that now, in the sense of the ^^omish impostor, saving and damning depend no
longer on the justice and mercy of the Eternal, but upon the will and pleasure
of him who fills the infallible chair.

Were we any thing but Devils, whose hatred to Truth is implacable, it would
have grieved us to see how she sighed and sobbed, as if her heart would break,
when the Impostor assumed the character of infallibility. She knocked with
violence at the gates of the bishop's palace; but there was no admission for
her there. -- She begged and prayed that the inferior ranks of the reverend
clergy would receive her; but not one of them would suffer her to come under
their roof; so that the poor heaven born lady swooned in the streets, and there
was none to assist her. Her eyes became as fountains of briny tears, trickling
down her radiant cheeks; her locks were dishevelled, and her apparel hung
dangling around her. In this mournful plight she went through all the streets
of the mystic Babylon, uttering her lamentation in every public place, and in
every concourse of the people. But as in former times she had piped to men's,
and none of the worshippers of the Beast would dance; so now she mourned to
them, but none of them would lament. She stretched forth her hands all the day
long, but none of them would attend to to her; the venerable pope, father of
the world, having published a decree, that none of them should suffer her under
their roof, nor administer the least comfort to her in her calamity, under pain
of the Rack, the Gibbet, the Wheel, or Fire and Faggot. Yea more, -- when his
Holiness (...) the importunity of Divine truth, and perceived that the would be
a perpetual thorn in his side, if not timely and wisely prevented by forcing
her out of the world, clad himself in Vulcanian armor, sought for her in every
corner of Babylon; when he met with her, launched his fatal spear with papal
force against her, that wounding her so deeply, she fainted and sell to the
ground, and no doubt had died if she had not been immortal. When the most holy
bishop had thus deprest her, he cried out in devilish triumph, " I am the
successor of Peter. The Vicar of Christ. The pillar of Truth, the Porter of
Heaven, and the Supreme head of the church." At which words, Truth entirely
disappeared and to this da^ has not been suffered to set one foot within the
limits of the papacy.


AVAR. It was a noble enterprise; nothing could exceed it. I am persuaded, that
the man who was in-dwelt by our brother Legion, and resided among the tombs,
was never capable of coming so near to us Devils in cruelty, deceit, and
falsehood, as that same venerable man, his infallible holiness, has upon every
occasion.


FAST Indeed, Avaro, Legion, though a many-viced devil, is but a fool when
compared to his Holiness; but it is highly necessary that he should be well
qualified in devilism, seeing he is appointed Belzebub's great vicegerent in
the Christian world.


AVAR. Great are the abilities requisite to such a station; and his holiness
possesses them liberally. Did you ever hear, Fastosus, the manner in which our
Italian success was received by Beelzebub the great, and his infernal nobility?


FAST. I suppose I have; but I have so many things to think of, that at present
it has escaped my memory: therefore if you remember it, I shall be obliged to
you for the recital.


AVAR. With all my heart; I assure you it is well worth your hearing, for
thereby it appeared that hi^ infernal majesty had the deepest sense of our
services and conceived the strongest hope of the increase of his kingdom from
the alliance formed betwixt the sublime Port of Hell, and the apostolic chair
at Rome.

As soon as swift-winged Fame arrived at the gate, known by the name of
Earth-Gate, she knocked violently, as you know is customary with her upon any
emergent occasion; our friend Cerberus, the porter, no sooner saw that it was
Fame but he immediately sent a messenger to court, to inform his majesty and
peers, that the ambassadress Fame was arrived. In shorter time th^^ (...) a
lie, Hell was all in a^ uproar, every (...) with expectation of some important
new^ from our ^^ends on earth. Fifty of the nobility were dispatched from
court, to congratulate Fame on her arrival, and to conduct her in state to the
court-end of the city. The mighty Beelzebub ascended the flaming throne, to
receive the ambassadress with imperial grandeur; and as soon as arrived she was
introduced to his sublime presence by ^^ucifer, prime minister of state, and in
full court related all that had passed concerning the change at Rome in the
system of religion: which desirable news was received with all the
demonstrations of joy damned spirits are capable of. Fame having finished her
relation, the mighty prince, who sat on the stupendous throne, arrayed in all
the majesty becoming his elevated station, lifted his warlike arm, waved the
imperial scepter for audience, and thus addressed his courtiers, his eyes
blazing as burning furnaces, while he spoke.

"My lords, my brethren in sovereignty and sharers of my glory, from the just
sense I have of your steady attachment to my interest and government, as has
always appeared from your unwearied study as far as possible to destroy the
creatures of our arch-enemy, whom, constrained, we call the Almighty; and
promoting to the utmost our common interest among mankind. From such
considerations, I cannot forbear congratulating your highnesses on the happy
turn our affairs on the earth have taken, by the indefatigable pains and
vigilant endeavors of our worthy friends and genuine descendants, Fastosus,
Avaro, Falax, etc. etc. as appears by the report you have just now heard from
the month of our swift-winged ambassadress, Fame. By the industry of those
worthy spirits, worms of the earth are wrought up to such a degree of pride and
self concrit, as to undertake enterprises that we, who are of angelic race,
(...) not accomplish; yea, even to assume prerogatives which never once came
into our minds. My noble lords, there is reason to believe that this revolution
will prove a leading step toward a very plentiful harvest. I signify it
therefore as my will and pleasure, that your highnesses take special care that
the lodgings at the court-end of the city are kept in due repair, as henceforth
we may expect at every term, numerous shoals of popish priests of all ranks, to
take up their residence with us; and you may be sure they will take it very
ill, if they are not accommodated according to their quality.

"I think, my lords, it is worthy of observation, that all the missionaries we
ever dispatched among the heathens, could not prevail with poor pagan priests
to aspire to that degree of impiety which the pope has now assumed. I hope, my
lords, that Truth and Holiness are in a fair way of being banished (...) the
face of the earth; for I am persuaded, that (...) universal father, his
cardinals, legates and bishops, will ex^^^ all their influence to promote our
interest in the suppression of our enemies." Having said this, a flaming billow
rolled over the imperial seat, and so sturmed the good old prince, the (...)
^ould speak no more for a season.


FAST. All (...) ^^ings I well remember, now you have mentioned (...) But I
want to know what you have got in that leather ba^^. You are not become nailer,
sure?


AVAR. This bag, sir, contains a thousand pounds, which a certain attorney, a
dear child of mine, wants to have deposited in some place of security, as he
has not at present an opportunity of putting it out to generate, an increasing
faculty with which all his other (...) is endued. This fame gentleman is a
person of great worth, ready to assist the rich and great, provided always that
his good deeds are handsomely rewarded. But so cautions and prudent is he, that
he utterly abhors parting with even so small a pittance as a guinea, to relieve
a poor distressed tradesman; and indeed for this very sufficient reason that he
cannot, in such a case, obtain land-security for his money; so that if the poor
man is ever so honest and industrious, he must even reconcile his thoughts to a
dungeon, or seek relief from another quarter; for our worthy lawyer would part
with no money to deliver him from it. His present fear is, lest any of his poor
neighbors, knowing that he has plenty of money by him, should, by their
pressing solicitations, over-persuade him to part with a little to help them in
their distresses; for he, like many other honest men, is determined to keep
what he has got, if one half of the parish should die for want of bread.


FAST. By your description of the worthy lawyer, I may expect his children as
my pupils after his decease. I warrant me, Avaro, before their father is half
consumed by the worms, I shall have them bowing and cringing to me as their
god. I have remarked for some thousands of years, that when the parents have
worshipped the god Avaro, by giving themselves up to covetousness, for the most
part, after their decease, the children have made choice of me and my cousin
Profanity for their patrons. Surely, if covetous parents knew, what courses
their children would follow when their heads are laid low in the grave, and
their souls still lower in Hell, they would quarrel with their god Avaro, or
die with grief on the prospect.


AVAR. Aye, uncle, but there is not one of my numerous disciples who knows me
by my proper name: and I am by far too subtle for them to find out the cheat.
My English vassals, for instance, commonly worship me under the false names of
industry or frugality, prudence or laudable care; but there is not one of them
who can be prevailed with to believe himself a worshipper of the devil Avaro,
which is, you know, my true and proper name.


FAST. Nothing equals our success; for you damn the parents by covetousness,
and we damn the children by pride and profanity. Good Avaro, we have them hip
and thigh; it is but a sew of all the mundane race that we lose; and those also
we should have, if they were not forcibly taken from us: but this is one
comfort, that if we must have the mortification of seeing any of the human race
get safe to heaven, we have also the pleasure of disturbing and distracting
their minds on their journey; and many of them we bring to the stake or gibbe^,
under the direction of our good friend ^rudelis, who presides over those hells
upon earth known by the name of the holy inquisitions.


AVAR. Hells, did you say? Right, hells ind^ed! One holy inquisitor goes beyond
an hundred of our fraternity in the art of cruelty, which you know is the first
of the learned sciences at Rome. Such wonderful inventions for torturing, one
would have thought could never have been contrived What ingen^ity does the rack
display! How excellently formed for exquisite torture! What an apt resemblance
of the insernal furnace is the dry-pan! A contrivance worthy the most skilful
among the Belzebubian artists* But their watery torment, the gag and pitcher, is
what raises the^ most in my esteem. Almost every block head bath some notion of
a hell of fire; but it is peculiar to the skill of an holy inquisitor to
contrive a hell of water. In this, Fastosus, we must all knock under to them,
for indeed they are our betters. And to enhance their merit, their torments are
inflicted upon the unhappy wretches who fall into their hands, under a show of
the greatest sanctity toward God, and pity to the unhappy victim of their
cruelty. And so very strict^y do they and their assisting familiars observe the
rules of inviolable secrecy, that the world can never know the hundredth part
of their villainy.


FAST. Secrecy is indispensably necessary to a people so much devoted to our
interest as the worthy inquisitors and the rest of the Romish clergy are. Were
it known to the world what methods they take to aggrandize themselves, and
support the papal hierarchy, the cheat would be discovered, the fabric would
fall to the ground, the craft by which they have their wealth would soon be at
an end, and their reverences be brought into contempt

Certainly the great Beelzebub will deal gratefully with the holy father at
Rome, and his cardinals, inquisitors, and bishops, when they arrive in Hell*
For my own part, I steadfastly believe that if our good friends the popes and
inquisitors are not served below their quality they will be put in possession
of the seats on the right hand of his majesty's throne, as our friend Mahomet
and his musties were in those on the left. And when their extraordinary merit
is considered, our infernal nobility will have no need to grumble at their
advancement; for nothing less can be d^emed adequate to their uncommon merit
and usefulness in confirming our dominion over mankind. And so fervently have
they our interest at heart, that it would be very extraordinary indeed, if any
of them should be lost, and fall short of our dreary abode.


AVAR. The basest ingratitude to use them otherwise, Fastosus. For my own part,
I shall always give place to a pope or inquisitor, and I think it is the duty
of all our fable fraternity so to do; for when their inferior species is
considered it will appear that they not only vie with, but even exceed the most
dextrous among us in many things.


FAST I am thinking, Avaro, of the easy station you have got, in comparison of
mine: you are concerned but with a few, I am concerned with every one. You
chiefly serve the higher ranks of people, but I am hackneyed night and day by
all sorts of men from his holiness the pope to the hermit in his cell, from the
queen on the throne to Bridget the farmer's maid. But was it not that find my
account in it and by that means am adored as a divinity, my princely mind would
never submit to such consta^^ drudgery.


AVAR. Good Fastosus, I speak it with reverence, but you are exceedingly
mistaken in my business* I assure you it inereaseth every day upon my hands and
requires very constant application, (...) much, that for these twelve years I
have not had time (...) close my eyes for one refreshing nap. Ah (...)! I am
concerned with, and for many; and with none more than with the sons of the
mysti^ Whore. This old bawd, with the scarlet gown, has many children, who
swarm as locusts along the face of many European countries and eat up the good
of the land before them. And there is not one amongst them who knows how to
spend a day without my company. When I would gladly lay me down for a little
rest, one or other of them conjures me up to enquire after pay for this funeral
mass, that dispensation, or ^other pardon, For, you may know, that with them
there is nothing to be done without ready cash; for they never give credit.


FAST. That old proverb, "Money answers all things," seems well adapted to
the tenets of your disciples, Avaro.


AVAR. Wonderfully adapted, sir! very wonderfully adapted; for money forwards
their devotion vastly, and helps them strangely on in their way to heaven. Dear
children of mine I own them to be! for, notwithstanding their pretended love to
devotion and the souls of their fellow creatures; if a poor man traveling from
earth to heaven, should happen to be arrested by any of the officers of
purgatory, (who make it their business to way lay travelers) and be turned
over to the tormentors; if such a man has not lest a fufficient sum for
purgatorial masses, and no well-disposed lay-person is found to supply the
d^ficient assets of the prisoner, he may lie, if it be possible, till he is
burned to tinder, ere any parson of the convent will put one hand to help him
out of those dreary flames. But on the other hand if a sufficient sum is left
for masses to be said to the lady of Loretto, St Dominic. St Dennis, or any
other eloquent saint, all the parsons will apply as cheerfully as young
dromedaries, and put their shoulders to the work like so many bulls in a yoke
till they have cleared him of his prison. You may always be sure that with
them, according to a well known proverb, "It is money that makes the mare to
go."


FAST. I pray you. Avaro, where does this same purgatory stand? I have often
heard of it, but (...) with it, either in this or the other world,
notwithstanding I have sought it with care.


AVAR. You have sought for it in the wrong place uncle; you should have
ransacked the brains of the pope and his clergy; for there, and no where else,
the chimera is to be foond. It is only a scheme to get money, that I contrived
for them; and hitherto it has answered our highest expectations; for by this
craft the parsons have great emolument.


FAST. This I do know, that nothing is more attractive of the attention of
their reverences than brilliant gold; for the sake of which, systems the most
absurd are imposed upon mankind, with the sanction of priestly authority
indeed, it is presumed that these holy men will authorited nothing but what is
lucrative. O the wonderful trade of priesteraf^! indeed, Avaro, I begin to
think you a devil of good abilities, and an honor to the race of ^elzebub.


AVAR. I am highly obliged to you for your good opinion, sir; and assure you,
that were you acquainted with the system of our government, I should go near to
river myself in your esteem; an honor which I much desire, and in order to
which I shall relate a certain affair which wonderfully displays the genius of
priestera^^, and gives the most just idea of the doctrine of purgatory.


FAST. shall be glad to hear it another time, cousin; but for the present I
must be gone, to forward my lady's robes; for the mantua-maker dare not touch
them before my arrival at Paris. Ex^c^y four hours hence, I shall give you the
meeting


AVAR I shall think of the appointment, uncle. Success to your enterprise.


DIALOGUE II. FASTOSUS and AVARO.
BEING acquainted with the appointment, I chose to wait for their coming, but
was so alarmed at what I had heard and seen, that I lurked close in my retreat,
not daring to attempt any discoveries. At the time appointed I perceived them
walking up the valley; and as they drew near,

FASTOSUS said, Yes, Avaro, I assure you there was great joy in the court of
Versailles on account of my arrival, and that both among the French and English
ladies: the latter of whom are the humble servile imitators of the former;
which tends so to chagrine some, and give pleasure to others of them; that by
this means contentions run very high among the French ladies. One part
complains of the English as no more than the apes of the French; these are they
who would monopolize all the finery to themselves; therefore their censure of
the English ladies is not to be regarded; the others boast of their
superiority, and are not a little proud of their dominion over the fair
Anglicans; who, they suppose, dare not attempt to introduce so much as the
pattern of a head-dress, till it has had the approbation of the French* But to
drop this for the present, Avaro I shall be glad to hear the story you
mentioned before we parted

AVAR. It was this, sir, There was a gentleman in Provence, a steady member of
the holy Roman eatholic church, who died lately, and as soon as dead, his pious
relations made his death known to their reverences the priests, in order to
procure their good offices in behalf of their departed friend, whose soul, it
was upon no ill ground feared, was hardly while enough for heaven, and would
therefore be obliged to call at Purgatory, for an effectual cleansing, are be
could proceed further on his journey. The veneraHe priests no sooner heard of
the gentleman's death, than they prudently began to consult the good of the
church, and what means appeared to them the most likely to feather their own
nest; as this must needs be done, either by the li^e or death of the laity.
This being their sole intent, it was unanimously agreed to refer themselves to
my direction, and an interview in the apartments of the principal was
requested. Being at that time in the neighbouthood I immediately granted their
petition, and presented myself among them, in the principal's chamber; a place
very familiar to me. The reverend old father was no sooner aware of my arrival,
than he arose from his seat, fell prostrate before me, to do me humble
greeting, withal expressing the most grateful sense of my care and
condescension, in coming so soon to their assistance.

Humble salutation past, the principal addressed me in the following learned
manner: "Worshipful Prudence," for that is the name I am known by among them,
"we have an affair of great importance to lay before you; and with the
profoundest humility will we thank you for your advice."


FAST. Nay, Avaro if you talk any thing about that same humility, I Will not stay
a moment longer, for I have the nature of it.


AVAR. You need not be offended, sir, for the gentlemen in question have as
little of that as your heart could wish for. It is not the nature but the mere
name of humility which serves the purposes of priestcraft: and which he and
his brethren so much admired. And you know, sir, that the name without the
nature of humility is nothing but pride in disguife.


FAST. Well, I am glad they have no more of it for that humility is a fellow
whom I abhor; but I ^hank my stars it is very seldom that I meet with him;
however, when he and I do meet, we as naturally quarrel as the elephant and the
rhinoceros


AVAR. I assured them of my assistance, and the old parson went on with his
story; "Oh! thou pry ^^governing spirit, said he, thou must know, that about
eleven of the clock, last night, a neighboring gentleman went out of this into
the other world, leaving behind him an estate, upwards of ten thousand pounds
per annum, devolving to an only son, and to this convent has left no more than
four score crowns, for the salutary work of delivering his poor soul from the
dreadful flames of purgatory. I do not know, indeed, but our great lady, whom
we serve, might be satisfied with half the sum; but we thy serzants are not so
easily pleased. It is our pious desire to procure as much of the young man's
estate, as by any means we can, for our own private use; as none of us can tell
what we may want before we die. Besides, we do not know but so large an estate
devolving anincumbered upon him, may be the means of ruining the soul and body
of the inexperienced youth. Now, we, as the holy guardians of his salvation,
think it needssary, for the good of his soul, to cut off as much as we can of
the fuel of his lusts: well knowing how dangerous riches are to the laity.
Thus, great patron, I have revealed the pious intent of our venerable
brotherhood; and, lovely spirit, if thou can by thy advice serve us in this
matter, we entreat thee to do it; for our eyes are to thee, and our hearts are
open to receive thy instructions.


FAST. Who could have thought, Avaro, of any of your disciples being disposed
to such exalted piety? However, it was piety of the true Romish stamp, greatly
admired by the venerable clergy.


AVAR. Well, said!, most reverend father, let not your pious mind be afflicted
about the young gentleman's soul. Let you and your worthy brethren observe my
instructions, and I shall undertake to put you in possession of the greatest
part of his estate; which, as you justly observe, will greatly redound to the
fasety of his soul.

Be sure that you bury the old gentleman with as much s^^^ing forrow and
devotion as might be expected from a well paid parson; yea, with as much
feigned courtesy to the heir, as if the deceased had left you five hundred
pounds. Then be sure to say mass for him to your lady, St. Dominic, St.
Francis, or to the saint of your convent, as soon as possible. That being done
let a skilful messenger from your reverences wait on the son and heir, to tell
him that, alas! his poor father is got much dee^er into purgatory than was
expected, on account of some sins he had concealed from his confessor: which
sins, because they are hidden, will take a great deal of burning unless
expiated in time, by frequent masses* Tell him that you are not certain, but
you hope, about two hundred crowns, laid out in masses to some favorite,
loquacious faint, may go near to procure his deliverance. This news will
probably so surprise the youth, that the messenger will receive the money, and
his hearty prayers into the bargain: for if he is a good churchman, it will not
be easy to pers^^de him that your reverences only aim at picking his pockets.

Having received the money, you must take care not to go any more to the young
gentleman, till the time that all the masses might have been said; then go to
him again, and tell him that by servent application, you have at last got his
father's soul within a few yards of the surface of the flames, that you cannot
possibly restore him an inch farther till more masses are said for him; and
that you think an hundred crown's worth more may, in all probability clear him:
this being received, take care not to visit him too soon, but wait till another
quantity of mass might have been said. At a proper time, go to him again,
expatiate much upon the piety of your brethren tell him, that by their
endeavors, his father was quite discharged from the court of Purgatory, and
was ju^^ going to be turned out at the heaven-end of the town, when it
happened, most unluckily, that there came up the soul of a woman, whom he had
debauched in his lifetime; that this malicious woman had brought an action
against him, the bill was found, and the poor old gentleman condemned to
fiercer burnings than before, which may last for many years, unless a speedy
supply of money is granted to procure friends in heaven to intercede for his
release. This scheme will procure you double the former sums: you know, father,
hidden sins take a great deal of burning.

Six or eight months afterward, go to the young gentleman again, and tell him
that you laid out his last money to the best advantage, that with it you
procured half a dozen of the best orator's in heaven, to plead his father's
cause; who, by their fervent supplications, had at last prevailed; that the old
gentleman was delivered from his torments, and was led in triumph to the gates,
to be dispatched immediately for glory. But, as his unlucky stars would have
it, just as the porter opened the gate, there came up the soul of a mendicant
friar whom the old gentleman had in his life time unhappily beat, and now
openly accused him of this almost unpardonable crime: on which account he was
remanded back to more exquisite torments than ever. Tell the young gentleman
that this unhappy accident caused such grief to the brethren, that there is
hardly any one of them able to say Ave-Maria; and that some of them intend, as
soon as their strength will admit, to go to Jerusalem, to try if by any means
they can procure his deliverance at the holy cross or sepulcher.

You know very well, reverend father, in what tender and pious strain to tell
your story; and to make it penetrate the deeper, you can shed a few crocodile
tears over it: if you manage wisely, you may in this case, sell your tears at
more than a crown each. Be sure thus always to find out some impediment or
other to the old man's release; you may bring him often to the gates, but if
once you let him go through, all your hopes are over from this quarter. Care
should also be taken to inform the young heir of the tremendous curses the pope
has denounced against those impious children, who enjoy their wealth and ease,
whilst they suffer their poor unhappy parents to lie roasting in purgatory,
rather than pay the priests for delivering them.


FAST. Aye, Avaro! But what if the young gentleman should have sense enough to
see through the villainy of the parsons, and courage enough to refuse the
money? How then, cousin?


AVAR. That was what I was going to tell you, sir, for, continued I, i^, sir,
young '^quire great purse should have sagacity enough to see through your
scheme, and deny you the money, let one of your most devout brethren assume the
ghost, from night to night haunt his dwelling, and in an articulate manne^,
utter, in^^he name of the father deceased, the most dreadful curses against his
undutiful son, who possesses a large estate in peace and pleasure, whilst his
poor father lies broiling in the flames of purgatory. By these means you may
procure either all, or most of the estate to yourselves.


FAST. An excelient scheme! and from what I have known of those reverend
worthies, exactly suited to their taste and principles.


AVAR. It was so, as you shall hear, for I had no sooner finished, but the aged
father, who was not likely to live to say many more masses, arose, and with
^ears in his eyes, thanked me a thousand times for my cordial advice:
protesting that nothing could be better adapted to the end proposed, or more
agreeable to the principles both of him and his brothren: assuring me that they
would follow my directions as invariably as Saturn does his orbit.


FAST. By this account of the Romish priests it appears that they are at no
loss for merchandise. Purgatorial fire, holy water, masses, dispensations,
pardons, etc. are commodities which do not require a very large capital, and
yet are attended with considerable prones. The great parsons, over and above
the tithe (...) the lands, have very advantageous craft by this means: but
between you and me, cousin, it is all the merchandise of the scarlet strumpet.


AVAR. It would be dangerous to our interest if the world should know the
truth. Then our great vicegerent would be worshipped as a god no more; the
wondrous beast which ascended out of the sea of ignorance and error would be
torn limb from limb, and his carcass be given to the hawks and ravens.


FAST. So then I find that you are a papist as well as me. I myself have large
concerns among the clergy, and with none more than his holiness the pope, the
great parson at Rome, the parson of the parsons. This universal parson, though
he pretends to be descended from Peter my enemy, has conceived such a good
opinion of my abilities, (...) will not make a decree, nor publish a bull, till
I have put the finishing hand to it. You know, cousin, that I am none of those
who are backward in showing their opinion, but readily dictate to all who refer
themselves to my direction. As to his holiness, notwithstanding he is the
father of the whole church, he is my humble servant; and, as I said before,
consults me upon all occasions. The advice that I give, in general, is, that by
all means he take care to keep up his authority over the consciences and
liberties of mankind: and the same advice I give to the clergy in general;
hence every parson attempts to reign within his own district, despotic and
supreme over the consciences of the people, who are obliged under pain of
damnation to honor him as the plenipotentiary of heaven, and the arbitrary
distributer of blessings and curses. I advise his holiness at all events, to
support his infallibility beyond the scriptures of truth, and his supremacy
above the laws of God or man. This same advice I whisper in the ear of my
clergy in general, who, to a man, agree that the scriptures shall not pass with
toleration, unless it is dressed in the garb of their interpretations; as such,
and only as such, it is imposed on their parishoners. The good old vicar never
contradicts any thing I say, notwithstanding he knows at the same time, his
pretensions to be a cheat; but to the utmost of his power follows the
directions of his adored Fastosus; and never did mortal man show more implicit
obedience to the monarch of darkness.


AVAR. So then the papists worship his holiness the pope, and he worships the
devil Fastosus. Is not this the system of the popish divinity in a few words,
uncle?


FAST. It is so; and a system adhered to by many who are called protestants:
for with such love to wealth and honor have you and I inspired them, that
although as reasonable beings they must know that the Almighty ruler will bring
their ways into impartial scrutiny, and judge them for their salacious guide:
yet for the sake of worldly riches (...) honor, at all events they resolutely
follow our directions.


AVAR. Aye, sir, that is the heaven of the priests: they both seek and have
their reward. The fat of the land is in their possession, and they are honored
as the directors of conscience. And yet they are the successors of the
apostles, who had neither silver nor gold; and yet they are the ministers of
Jesus, who would not receive honors from men. And yet they are the most humble
creatures that ever lived; and yet it is death to contradict them.


FAST. Having made sure of the mighty father of the world, his holiness of
Rome, to join issue with us in promoting our interest among men; I have an
excellent device to insure all the other ranks of his dependent clergy to our
interest likewise. The patriarchs and cardinals are sure to prove loyal to the
pope, and of consequence to us, from a hope which I have inspired every one of
them with, of one day ascending the papal throne himself. The loyalty of the
archbishops is insured by the hope of a cardinal's hat, and their right
reverences the bishops, are sure to remain inoffensive animals, in hope of
attaining, in some future period, the archi-episcopal dignity. The same device
runs through all the other ranks of the clergy, and thereby they are all
rendered my humble servants. By these things it appears that we are likely to
have a very plentiful harvest.


AVAR. Doubt it not, Fastosus. Belzebub's regions will be well provided with
gentlemen in holy orders, who are so dextrous in managing the cheat, that it is
carried on, unperceived by their adorers. -- Look ye, Fastosus! who comes? It Is
Crudelis! Where do you think that deformed spirit can be going now?


FAST. He is on the scent of blood, I warrant him. By his nature, he might have
been got by a panther, and nursed by a mountain bear.


AVAR. Let us call him, sir, perhaps we may learn some news of him. So, ho!
Crudelis, what not a word with you?


CRUD. Hah, gentlemen! are you here? I did not think of meeting with you, my
dear friends and fellow destroyers. How do you do, Fastosus? and how do you,
Avaro?


BOTH. We are pretty well, cousin; only jaded a little with constant
application to business. But pray, Crudelis, how have you been employed of late?


CRUD. Employed, do you say? never fear me. I have not been idle, I assure you.
Do you suppose that I can pick up no game in Britain in this golden-age? If you
do, you are greatly mistaken. It is true that some of the late kings of England
have been my avowed enemies, and as far as in them lay have expelled me the
kingdom. But be they as vigilant as they will, I find opportunity of breaking
through the fences which they have reared against me: when you may be sure if I
cannot get great, I pick up small game; of which I can only give you a very
small specimen at present. In one place I persuaded an ambitious child to
poison, or otherwise kill, an old cumbersome parent, who will not die without
violent measures. I prevail with a rogue to dispatch his woman, and her brat,
to preserve his own reputation and estate. In a third, I stir up an ambitious
servant to kill and plunder his master; and frequently I can prevail with one
gentleman to kill another in a duel, on some punctilio of false honor. And
sometimes, I persuade the despairing wretch to lay hands on himself, destroy
his own miserable life, and by doing so enter upon another infinitely more
miserable. Then I take to my heels, and am followed with a hue and cry all over
the nation. But thank you, I am two swift for them all: I never give them time
to say, "Cradelis is here." But they often say, "these are the tricks of that
horrid devil, Crudelis."

Yesterday I was attending a duel, which I myself stirred up, (as I suppose you
know that all duels are of my instigation) so it was here, I persuaded the
gentlemen combatants to fight with sword and pistol, hoping that both would
have fallen in the action. But though my design was good, as ill luck would
have it, it miscarried, and only one of them bit the ground; however, I am not
without hope that the other will be hanged for the murder, and if so, then I
have my design. I assure you, gentlemen, I use my utmost endeavors to throng
the nether regions. O my brother destroyers! I could tell you such stories as
would make you bless yourselves, and adore the prince Crudelis. These are but
trifling things, thrown in to whet your appetite against the next opportunity.
Then you shall hear. But for this time I must be going. Adien, gentry, for I
smell blood at a distance.


FAST. It Is amazing what power this deformed fiend has obtained over mankind:
what ill, so very different from the principles of humanity, that he has by
his barbarous insinuations introduced. What is very surprising, he has made
mankind more cruel to one another, than we infernal spirits are among
ourselves. He stirs them up to destroy and devour one another; but we are never
known to quarrel among ourselves, nor to make war upon our own race: be that
the part of foolish man; we devils are masters of better policy. This very
Crudelis himself, sanguine as he is to devour blinded mortals, lays aside all
his voracity when he joins our black assembly, and is as tame a devil as any of
us. Well may you and I destroy with success, when such a deformed lump of hell
as Crudelis, is made welcome among them.


AVAR. But with your leave, sir, as Crudelis is gone, let us resume our
discourse. I remember before he interrupted us, you briefly hinted that you
were somewhat addicted to religion, and that you are a papist too. I was never
wont to consider you as a religious devil, much less did I think that you
assumed to yourself any of those distinctions, which divide the professedly
Christian world. I thought formerly that, the great Fastosus had dwelt only in
king's courts, with people of soft raiment, and occasionally waited on the
nobility and gentry, at their country-seats. What the devil, Fastosus, a papist
too?


FAST. In reality, Avaro, (to make use of a human phrase) your ignorance is
enough to provoke the very devil. Do not you know yet, that if I were not Jack
of all trades and religions, I could never maintain my sway over men as I do. I
have very great concern in religions matters, I assure you, and that among more
denominations than some people like to hear of. Sometimes I am among the Pagans
worshipped a^ an arch-flamin, and president of all their religious orders. Very
frequently I have the honor of filling the papal chair, then I am adored under
the venerable names of Pious, Innocent, Benedict, etc. accounted the universal
pastor, head of the church, and father of the whole world. Occasionally, I sit
as judge in the ho^y inquisitive tribunal, where Concupiscentia and I are
adored as divinities. Now I am an holy mussulman, and styled, his reverence
mufti Muly Alab. Then, before you are aware, I am shut up in a cloister with
the nuns and friars, whom I make more proud of their pretended chastity than a
thousand saints of their real graces; on such occasions, I am known by the name
of the venerable matron Humility. It happens also, that I am obliged to
metamorphose myself into a capuchine, or a Palmerian friar, and in that show of
self denial I beg my bread from door to door; by these means I teach the
fantastical devotees to be more proud of their awkard form, and voluntary
humility, than a wise carl would be of all his landgraviate. Anon, I change my
station, and find myself an abbot of a convent, where my depending priests and
brethren worship me under the name of the holy father. Then, very soon after
you will find me attending the worthy confessor in his visitation, when to be
sure I persuade his self-conceited reverence that he is well nigh as pure as
the most holy mother pope Joan, a fortunate lady, who a few centuries ago
became head of the church, and mother of the whole world. The hermit, in his
cell, on the mountains of Ararat, frequently offers his adorations to me, and
for my part, in return for his obsequiousness, I am in no wise sparing of my
exalting influence. I persuade the world-abdicating wretch that, his solitary
residence in that holy asylum, far more than merits a mansion in heaven, and at
his peril that he stir not one foot from thence, to go down into an ungodly
world: the mountain top, or a cell in the desert, being the best place
imaginable in which to merit everlasting glory. The worthy hermit admits my
doctrine to be true, his favorite passion is gratified, and he obeys
implicitly my directions.


AVAR. Then his eremitical reverence never questions the goodness of his heart,
I perceive, He knows not that he carries a spring of iniquity within himself,
even to the desert, or the mountain's top.


FAST. No, no, he fears no evil from within. If he gets to a distance remote
enough from the rest of mankind, he can repose the greatest confidence in his
own heart; and thereby proclaim his folly to all the world. I assure him that,
if he will remain during his life in his cell, when he comes to die he will
have holiness sufficient for himself; and a large redundancy, by which he may
help some poor friend out of purgatory.


AVAR. Hey day! how different was Paul's doctrine from yours and the hermits,
Fastosus! He asserted that by the works of the law no flesh living should be
justified; but you and he believe that by the works of the law a man may be
more than justified. Yea, that by observing of things no where commanded in the
law, such as forsaking society, counting beads, and mumbling prayers, he may,
not only justify himself, but help another to justification.


FAST. Ay, Avaro, the hermit believes so, but for my part I believe no such
thing. I know better, though I thus delude him. But to pass on with my story, I
can tell you, I have a good deal of employment among your disciples, cousin,
and with them I work wonders of compelled generosity. I meet with many who
never had the heart to perform one virtuous, benevolent action whilst health
continued; who, when they perceive that they must come to a reckoning in the
other world, are very assiduous to have their accounts balanced aforehand. I
persuade them to leave a massy sum to this hospital, to the other parish, or to
certain meeting houses. When I thus direct the will of devotees, one leaves
gold enough to build a chapel for our lady, a second does the like for St.
Peter, and a third for St. Dominic. But in general they are most fond of saints
of their own rearing, the greatest part of whom are now made constellations in
the nether sky, and courtiers to the prince Beelzebub. Ask you me, Avaro, what
end the testator has in those pious legacies? I tell you, by this time he sees
the manner in which he got and kept his money, has not the least endency to
save him from destruction; and he knows but one way to avert the impending
judgment, that is to leave his so and so gotten money for the good of the
church, and that, he is told, never fails to sanctify every measure taken to
procure it. Some of those deluded testators are not without hope that, in some
future period, their names will be enrolled in the pope's bible; and their
shrines adored in the Christian pantheon, at Rome, where all the gods of the
papal hierarchy are enshriued.


AVAR. Good Fastosus. I really think that if the papists would act in
character, they would dedicate their temples to St. Judas, St. Demas, St.
Demetrins, St. Alexander the copper-smith, etc. for they are the genuine
offspring of those celebrated heroes.


FAST. Their very descendants, cousin. You and I who know what we see, can
discern no essential difference between the holy Roman Catholic religion, and
that of the ancient pagans. It was the most excellent device imaginable to
introduce paganism under the specious show of orthodox and infallible
Christianity. And I can tell you, there is no essential difference between the
popish religion and that of some sects of very staunch protestants: but those
things we must keep to ourselves, for I would not for ever so much our people
should know that the popish religion is diabolical.


AVAR. I should be glad to hear it made out, uncle, how the religion of some
protestants is much the same with that of the papists: this being well cleared
up will yield me great pleasure.


FAST. I can clear it up, Avaro; and shall, at a time convenient, but not now:
I must go and put the finishing hand to my lady's robes. Tomorrow I shall meet
you here. ^dieu.


AVAR. Well, seeing my uncle is gone, I Will go and hide the lawyer's money in a
place of safety, and return to some business which I promised to transact for
my worthy children.


DIALOGUE III. INFIDELIS and IMPIATOR.
THE way being clear by the departure of Fastosus and Avaro, I came out of my
lurking place, in order to make what discoveries I could in the valley, which I
now knew to be a rendezvous for those evil spirits, who so dreadfully have
enslaved mankind. I had not gone far, before my alarmed imagination transformed
every thing I saw into a devil; the croaking of the raven was as dreadful as
the voice of an hobgoblin; and the shrieking of the owl as terrible as the
roaring of Appollyon. Every distant bush seemed to bear the aspect of some
devouring fiend; so powerful was the influence of my imagination. Curiosity,
however, had still the ascendancy over my fears; and I wandered from place to
place, seeking for something new. At length, I saw at some distance, a tall
gigantic form, slowly moving toward me: a form nearly as huge as the steeple
of St. Cuthbert's church, at Dulmensis. Every time he contracted his extensive
chest, he darkened the air with the breath which issued from his expanded
nostrils, as pillars of ^^oak from the chimney of a fire engine; smaller
streams of the same darkening vapor came curling forth from his armpits, and
every other pore of his skin, so that wherever he came he blackened the air
around him.

Now thought I, my life is not worth twopence, if yonder demon lay hold on me:
therefore I ran with (...) speed to the clift of the rock, where I had lurked
so secure before; and having taken sanctuary in the subterraneout cell, I
gathered so much courage as to peep out, that I might learn what was become of
the terrible monster, I saw that he was got almost at the door of my cave.
Frightened I was you may be sure, nevertheless I comforted myself with the
thoughts, that such a tremenduous bulk could not enter my nar^^w retreat. He
said to himself (his voice as he spoke resembling hollow thunder) "I thought I
had seen the honorable Fastosus and the careful Avaro walking here just now;
but I might be mistaken; or if they have been here, they are gone on our great
father's business, no doubt. Well, seeing it is so, I will take a turn or two
in the Vale, and then return to my business again."

Notwithstanding all the terror of my mind, I was eager to know what he was,
and how he came hither; but durst not discover myself lest he should prove a
devil of the canibal kind, which if he should, I thought that he would scarce
make one mouthful of my diminutive carcass. But when he mentioned going to
business again, I queried whether he might not be one of Vulcan's smiths, come
out of the forge to take a refreshing walk; then I recollected, and asked
myself, "If he is one of the cyclops, how came he to be acquainted with the
devils Fastosus and Avaro!" I continued in this dreadful suspense for some
time, till at last seeing one of his companions, he entered into discourse with
him. I found that his name was INFIDELIS, and that of the other, IMPIATOR.

INFID. IMPIATOR, my child, how do you do! I am glad to meet my son in the Vale
of Horrors, in so lucky an hour.


IMP. Hah, my worshipful farther, INFIDELIS! Am I so happy as to meet with you
here? my venerable fire, how do you do?


INFID. I thank you, son, v^ry well; notwithstanding my great age, and hurry of
business, I do not find the least decay in my constitution, but rather seem to
grow stronger; and indeed there is a prediction on record, that I shall be
strongest at the last.

What pleasure does it give me, my dear Impiator, to hear that you are so
successful in ensuaring the minds, and corrupting the morals of mankind,
throughout every nation of the world. If what I hear of you be true, you
approve yourself a right chip of the old block. I rejoice that some of all
ranks and degrees of people are so subjected to your sway. I am told that many,
even of the professors of religion, fondly caress you, my son.


IMP. Indeed sir, it must not be denied that my kingdom is in a growing
condition, all over the world. I think I was hardly ever so much, and never
more caressed than I am now. Even in pagan nations heretofore remarkable for
uprightness and temperance, I have introduced the fashionable vices of the
Christian world: so that an Indian will drink and swear even with an
Englishman; and lie and cheat as fast as a Gaul or an Hollander. Greatly am I
beholden to a certain company for instructing the eastern world in the learned
arts of violence, rapine and murder: not to dwell however on the conversion of
the pagans to the vices of nominal Christians; much improvement has been made
even in Christendom itself, of which take the following instances out of many
that might be given.

It is not a vast number of years since your son Impiator was held in perfect
disdain in Scotland; but now I have, chosen many legions of the Caledonians for
myself: I think I ought rather to say, that being quite tired of the service of
sobriety, a prince of another family, they made choice of me for their ruler.
But you know, father, that I am no scholar, therefore improprieties in my
speech are not at all to be wondered at. However, I have reduced the Scotch to
such a veneration for my once hated person, that they have cordially embraced
the ornamental vices of the English nation; such as Sabbath-breaking, whoring,
drunkenness, swearing, gambling, etc. but whether they will be as s^ceessful in
obtaining pensions from the government after they have gambled away their
estates, is not so easy to determine. The conquest of the Scotch, sir, is the
more agreeable to (...) because, as I said, there was a time, when those vices
(...) ^ardly so much as known in that country; now, who but Profanity in all
their towns? nor am I without my worshippers in the country, even among their
Presbyterian parsons themselves.


INFID. Glad Am I that my lovely child has subdued the stubborn Scotch. For I
well know that the Presbyterians there, resisted your influence long after I
had erected my standard in the land, yea, after multitudes flocked to it, and
swore alleg^ance to the great Infidelis. But how my son have thou so happily
accomplished this change.


IMP. Really, fir, I obtained help from a quarter whence there was not the
greatest reason to expect it. I mean from the parsons, the spiritual guides of
the people. It happened thus: the parsons of the kirk quarrelled among
themselves, and divided into two parties. One of which forsook their mother
kirk, and very solemnly delivered up the other party to the devil; on the other
hand the reverend gentlemen who abode in the kirk, in the like spirit of
devotion, delivered up the schismatics, parson and people to Beelzebub.
Beelzebub, who you know is never backward in receiving a gift of this kind,
finding that all the Presbyterians in Scotland were thus in full tale made over
to him, laid his hands upon as many of them as he could conveniently reach, and
made such use of them as greatly assisted my operations. Little was now to be
heard in the palpit except railing, scolding, calling ill names, and tossing
anathemas, from one party to the other: thus while they went on bandying
curses, we went on persuading the people that religion is a farce, and that
true happiness consists in present gratification; and this doctrine readily
affecting the heart and senses, was eagerly received, and my government
established.


INFID. It was a favorable juncture indeed; and I have often remarked, that if
there was any turn of religious affairs much in our favor, for the most part,
we have parsons to thank for their assistance (...) it, many instances of this
might be given. But I pray (...) my son, did thou ever hear of my original,
and the nature of my government.


IMP. No, not I, indeed. You know, sir, I was born with evident signs of
stupidity, and therefore could never read; and to tell you the truth, all my
cares are in the present tense, without enquiring into either originals or
terminations.


INFID. All this! know, my child. But as we are secure from mortal auditors,
being in Horrida Vallis: if you can spare a little time, I will give you some
account of my rise and progress, perhaps it may have a happy tendency to
promote your destructive designs, and so strengthen the pillars of the elevated
throne of great Profanity. What I relate, you may depend upon for truth; for
although we seldom speak any thing but lies to mankind, one devil may well
enough depend upon the word of another.


IMP. Yes, that we may, sir, and I presume if mankind were to hear what passes
at our private conferences, they would not continue long so fond of our service
as they are at present. As to your story, sir, I am ready to hear it, pernaps,
as you say, I may profit by it.


INFID. Well then, my son, you will observe that I am of a very great age, well
nigh as old as this world, which you see is worn quite threadbare, and will in
a little time be folded up as an old garment of no use. As to my original, I
can tell you that I am well descended; of royal lineage, I assure you. Great
Beelzebub himself begat me, and my sister Ignorantia, on Eve, the mother of all
living on earth. When I came to years of maturity, he gave me Ignorantia my
fellow twin to wise; and by her I had you, with your worthy brethren, Avaro,
Falax, Crudelis, and your sisters Perfidia, Concupiscentia, etc. At the same
time my elder brother Fastosus, who had Inscientia, a lady of remarkable
beauty, given him to wife, begot on her Ambitiosus, Contumax, Discordans, and
their sisters Malevolentia, Iracundia, and a large train of excellent worthies,
famous in the annals of the nether regions,

As soon as I was born I stood up like a st^pendous wall, betwixt the creator
and the creature, so that blessings of a spiritual kind, could not descend from
God to man, nor could obedience ascend from man to God. One of the first things
I did was to maim their moral powers, and accomplish an union betwixt them and
my great father Belz^bub; such an union I did establish, as nothing natural
shall ever be able to dissolve.


IMP. Hah, my sire, you began very early indeed. You spent little idle time in
your infancy; and proved very successful in your first enterprise too!


INFID. I have no reason to complain for want of success, I assure you. But you
shall hear. The very moment I was brought forth, the great Beelzebub gazed upon
me with all the admiration of a father infernal; and said that I was the
loveliest babe his eyes ever behold, Multitudes of his sable menials, flocking
together, were likewise astonished at my beauties; such majestic grace
displayed itself in my countenance, though then but an infant, that all agreed
"I was father's own child." Moreover, such were their hopes of my usefulness,
that great Beelzebub, and his peers, did what they could, sparing neither pains
nor expense to have me transported to hell, to be nursed up at the infernal
court: believing that my presence would greatly alleviate their distress, and
prevent their trembling on the thoughts of futurity. But my constitution being
altogether earthly, it was found by experience that the infernal air was too
hot for me, and that I could not live within the confines of the damned. Earth,
my child, only earth is my habitation. Here I was born, and here I suppose I
must die.


IMP. With your leave, father, I think I have somewhere heard, that all who are
now the inhabitants of the deep are unbelievers. How comes this to pass, If the
great Infidelis cannot live in those torrid regions?


INFID. I perceive, child, that you are no great proficient in theology: as for
me I have dealt against divine matters all my days. It is your province to
counteract moral principles, not interfering much with things divine, and my
province to oppose truth rather than promote immorality; therefore I shall
inform you how it comes to pass. Know then, that what a man is when he dies,
such he is in the eye of the moral law to all eternity; for death casts the
dye, and the same posture in which the tree falls it must lie for ever; but
with unbelief they never more agree. For instance, many of them whilst on earth
could not be prevailed on to believe that there is a God, but in hell they are
feelingly convinced of the truth of this doctrines. Now they believe that there
is a terrible God, and that they are fallen into his dreadful hands. Search
hell through all its corners; ransact every furnace in the fiery world, and
you will find never an atheist therein. Others were not quite so stupid as to
imagine that this beautiful world, and all things therein came into existence
of themselves, and that the economy of nature is wholly effected by chances*
therefore they assented to the being of God: but (...) it enthusiasm to suppose
that this God should subject his creatures unto a written law. They sncered at
the authority of the scriptures; ridiculed every part of instituted worship;
and gloried in their infidelity: but now they are sentenced to hell, and have a
specimen of eternal torment, they most sincerely believe the veracity of the
scriptures; finding themselves to have been judged according to what is written
in them. Other's, whilst health and strength continued with them, supposed God
was only jesting, when he threatened the sinner with the vengeance of eternal
fire, but now they are in hell, enduring their vengeance, they verily believe
that he was in earnest. In short, son, many of them disbelieved that there is
either God or devil, heaven or hell, but now, all these things are certain,
even to demonstration, with them; they having been driven to associate with the
peers of darkness.

The very best of historical fa^^^ is to be found in hell: there are millions
now inhabiting there, who when on earth could boast that they had good hearts,
and believed well all their days, but who never began in reality to believe the
report of the bible, till they tasted the sulphur of the lake. Then they
believed very sincerely, though very much against their inclination. Now do you
understand me when I tell you, that unbelief cannot live in hell?


IMF. Yes, but you amaze me, sir! I never heard so much before. What a learned
devil you are! The famous Pope Hellbrand himself could not have discussed the
subject with greater accuracy. One may see from you what it is to be conversant
with popes, councils, convocations, and the clergy. But in our country all the
conversation runs upon horse-coursing, card-playing, cock-fighting,
fox-hunting, whore-making, swearing, lying, cheating, and drinking. Not a word
about religion, unless it is to damn the parson for a sanctified hypocrite. And
more, sir, I never knew that I had so many brethren and sisters before. Right
well I know that I was begotten by you, but I looked on myself as your only son
by Ignorantia, my mother. Those honorable spirits whom you mention as my
brethren, I always took to have been sons to Beelzebub, your brethren and my
uncles. I should never have thought of a fraternal relation subsisting between
them and myself in any other way than cooperation.


INFID. You have been greatly mistaken, Impiator, for Beelzebub never begat a
son besides myself, and my brother Fastosus, who is something older than I. I
am aware that (...) some, who allege that Contumax, Crudelis, Discordans, etc.
are the natural children of the great Beelzebub: but it is a mistake; for they
are only his grandchildren, sons ^o my brother (...). The very moment that
Contumax was brought forth, our great father Beelzebub, with all his adherents,
were cast down from the ineffable heights of primeval glory, to the depths of
bottomless perdition, and according to a certain historian, were nine natural
days in falling. Now, my dear Impiator, by this account, Contumax is your
cousin, and my nephew. So that you are not only a brother in government with
those illustrious princes: but sprung from the same famous ancestors with them.


IMP. Indeed sir, I am astonished at your story, but you know that I am no
scholar, and that ought to excuse for my ignorance of matters so profound;
besides, such things very seldom make a great impression on my mind, being
quite out of my latitude. However, I should be glad to know how your extensive
government was established?


INFID. How it elates my mind, to hear my dear Impiator express a desire after
instruction! I will inform you as far as I myself have known. My kingdom, which
is indeed extensive, was established as follows: as soon as I was born, I began
to call in question the truth, goodness, and authority of the Almighty, and in
every respect set myself to oppose the eternal, by contradicting every word
which he spoke to man.

For instance, when God said to man, "Thou shall not eat of the fruit of such
and such a tree." Although then in my infancy, I stepped up to man, and thus
interrogated him; has God indeed said so? Are you sure of it? Are you not
mistaken, think you? You must needs have mis^nderstood him, for it cannot be
consistent with the goodness of such a being as God is, to forbid your eating
the fruit of such a divine tree. And as God had said, "In the day you eat
thereof you shall surely die." I addressed myself to man after this manner. Die
too! nay, you shall not die. That is only an empty threatening, to keep your
consciences in awe; for God does very well know that if you eat of that
precious fruit ye shall be g^^s like himself; having knowledge of good and
evil: for this it is that he has prohibited the use of this divine tree. My
brother, ^astosus, also performed wonders on this occasion. By these means I
brought over man to my obedience; thus I established my interest upon earth,
and hitherto I have maintained it, With safety may I say that my good friends,
both parsons and people to this day, love me as their lives, and at any time
sooner take the bare word of the adored Infidelis, than the word and oath of
the God of Heaven.


IMP. Why, sir, you began from a child to work the delightful works of darkness.


INFID. Yes, I am the oldest of all the Belzebubian offspring, Fastos^s alone
excepted, and I yield in point of government to none of the princes. Fastosus
and I, indeed, have a dispute between us, concerning the extent of our earthly
territories; I can freely allow him the pre-eminence with respect to his
angelic dominions; but I can never be brought to o^v^ that his sway over
mankind is more extensive than mine, nor yet more sovereign. I yield to none in
this debate, for all men are concluded under my governments and what makes
greatly for my interest is, the far greater part of them, cannot be persuaded
that I have any real existence. Thus it is, my dear Impiator, I reign almost
universally over mankind, and they perceive it not. Many thousands of those
good people who believed nothing of my existence, and who, in their own
imagination had believed well all their days, have I conducted very safely down
to the dark abodes of ever-growing anguish. Within which they were ^o sooner
entered and began to taste of the entertainment, than they were fully convinced
that they never had believed aright. It is the unparalleled dexterity of our
administration that all our works are performed in obscurity. And let me tell
thee, child, it will require a better light than any natural ray of the human
understanding, to trace and detect our deep intrigues. Thus far, with respect
to myself and government. I shall take it kind if you will in your turn oblige
me with some account of yours, my son.


IMP. Yes sir, your command shall be instantly obeyed; yet upon this condition
only, that you excuse my inaccuracies, because I know my self to be the most
illiterate devil of the fraternity, and cannot speak like the courtly Fastosus,
the reverend Infidelis, or the intelligent Falax.


INF. No apologies, Impiator, we all know, that neither you, nor your disciples
have any taste for learning; therefore, we expect not to hear you speak as an
orator, but as a plain illiterate devil.


IMP. Then I proceed. My kingdom does not consist of all the land known by the
name of Impiety-Real, as some geographers allege, several provinces being made
over by treaty, to my uncle Fastosus; such as the provinces of Civility,
Legality, Presumption, and Formality. I reign openly, only, over the land
called Impiety-Enormons, and in our country the laws are as black as the
bottomless pit, for there, iniquity is established by authority. As to the rest
of my kingdom, it was like all the branches of Belzebub's government,
accomplished by subtilty and guile. For man considered simply as a creature,
could never have been subjected to my sway; for this reason I was put to my
shifts, to find out some proper method for introducing my regal power.

So violent was the opposition to it, that my brain was put to the utmost
torture, and after all I should have been obliged to return to my native
country, with my finger in my mouth, had it not been for the timely assistance
I received from my worthy friends and relations. My good old mother, who you
know has an excellent hand at a dead lift, by means peculiar to herself,
kicked up such a dust, as almost put out the eyes of one of the most vigilant
and formidable of my numerous adversaries; a captain, from whose hand I had
much to fear, his name was Intellectus; from that time to this, he has been
incapable of discerning my deformities, and the danger to which men are exposed
by my dominion. And what makes very much for me, the old gentleman can hardly
be persuaded, but his eyesight is now as good as ever it was. I need not tell
you the advantages that resulted to me from thus his deception. At the same
time my worthy uncle Fastosus, came up to the second, a sturdy chief, whose
name was Volens, as tradition says, and he gave his back a most dreadful
wrench, insomuch that he has never recovered his former posture. I myself took
a po^sonous, or rather an intoxicating apple, and having gilded it over with
leaf-gold, presented it to the third, whose name, if I remember right, was
Rationalis: it answered my expectation. He swallowed the bait, and ever since
has called bitter sweet, and sweet he has called bitter.

This triumvirate being thus disabled, I found my conquest extremely easy, and
without any struggle on the part of the rest, I confined them to incessant
labor and drudgery, in the different parts of my extended territories, where
they are as content as possible with their condition, many of them believing
they are still in the garden of paradise.


INFID. Indeed, learned or unlearned you display uncommon merit. Great is my
honor and happiness in having such a son. The potent Impiator will do honor to
the venerable name of Infidelis to the end of the world. Well, my son, will you
please to proceed?


IMP. Perhaps you have heard that my kingdom is divided into several cantons,
according to the dispositions of my subjects, each canton having its proper
employments.

1. There is the canton of drunkards, out of which I select all my courtiers,
and officers in general. This canton has several communications with all the
other parts of my dominions, and this we call the royal-canton.

2. There is the swearers canton, a set of people the most unaccountably
foolish of all my subjects; but a people very profitable to our government.

3. There is the canton of thieves, to which all pilferers, robbers, gamesters,
and deceitful dealers belong. A very populous and splendid canton this is.

4. There is the liars canton: these are a people possessed of two tongues; a
people who have very much of the features of great Beelzebub, and a very
populous and polite canton it is also.

5. There is the canton of Sabbath Breakers, here there is hardly room enough
for the inhabitants, they are so exceedingly numerous.

6. There is the adulterers canton: this is a very dark place; seldom visited
by the rays of the sun. The fornicators cohabit with them.

7. There is the murderers canton: the darkest and most miserable place in all
my dominions, yet for all that, it is very well peopled. For here are ranked
not only those who cut one another's throats, like the Alexanders, Tamerlanes,
Philips, Louisses, etc. but also oppressors of every sort, cruel husbands and
wives, disobedient children, who break their parents hearts: false friends,
back-biters, and calumniators: indeed all who wanton in the unhappiness of
their fellow creatures, like corn-factors and carcass butchers: so that you see
here are many inhabitants, and that too of considerable figure. It Is worthy of
observation, that all the cantons have easy passages from one another, so that
although the employment in each is different from that of the rest, they all
hold communication with one ^^other, as subjects of the same prince, and heirs
of the same inheritance.

Yes, so numerous are the roads that lead from one to the other, that if a
ma^gets into any one of my cantons, it requires no less than omnipotent power
and wisdom, equal to omniscience, to extricate him from a labyrinth so
dangerous: and it is well for me that it is so, for (...) of my subjects are
frequently terrified, especially ^^se that work in the deep mines, lest they
should dig (...) through the earth, and tumble into hell. But a (...) discovers
that, their efforts to deliver themselves are all ineffectual, for the road by
which they escape from one canton, leads them into another equally dangerous.
Many ways there are to throw a man down into my mines, but believe me, if ever
any one comes up again, it must cost the Almighty an errand from heaven to
rescue him. I assure you, sir, that by the help of these subtle passages and
intricate turnings, I keep my subjects endaved with as little trouble to
myself, as any master devil that ever ascended out of the bo^^^mless pit. But
by the way I am constantly employed in planning out fresh measures for the
slaves to pursue. Oh! sir, the end will show that I give ample demonstration,
of my fidelity to my royal grandfather Beelzebub, of whom I hold my lands by
sief.


INFIO. My dear son, how it rejoiceth my aged heart to hear of your wise
administration! However infatuated your foolish subjects may be, the great
Impiater lacks not craftiness. By you, my son shall my name be perpetuated
when I am dead and gone. For I must die, my child. As soon as the mighty angel
shall sound the dead awakening trumpet, the great, the far famed Infidelis must
resion his breath. Yet be not you discouraged, Impiator, for you shall live
forever. You know how I fostered you in my bosom, and endued you with
qualifications to sit on the throne of Profanity, where so successfully you
reign. Permit me now to tell you that knowing that I must die, I have, like all
other wise people, made my will, and for your encouragement I have appointed
you my son, with your uncle, Fastosus, your highly honored brother Desperando,
and your cousins Contumax, and Discordaus, the joint executors thereof, and
sole heirs unto all my dominions and subjects, who at my decease are to be
transported to the land of torment; there you shall reign in eternal triumph
over them. Then it will be, and not before, that great Impiator shall arrive at
the zenith of his glory.


IMF. I suppose so, sir; for I am told, that about that time the provinces of
Civility, Formality, I resumption, Legality, and Hypocrisy, so famous in the
empire of Fastosus, are all to be annexed to my dominions, which will then be
very extensive, and the government of Prosanity very respectable.


INFID. I would ask you now, my son, for a description of those famous cantons
you mentioned, but as affairs of importance call me hence, could not you favor
me with an interview for this purpose tomorrow, precisely at twelve o'clock?


IMP. I will, sir, fare you well.


DIALOGUE IV. FASTOSUS and AVARO.
BEING privy to the appointment betwixt Fastosus and Avaro, I took care to
arrive in the valley time enough to hear all that passed; for now my business
was left to shift for itself, and every thing gave place to the force of
curiosity, which bore down like an inundation every thing before it. If my wife
consulted me in any thing I would answer "Fastosus." If my children told me of
their progress at school, I would abruptly reply, "Horrida Vallis!" When my
journey men, or apprentices talked to me about the shop business, my answer
was, "the great Avaro." And if they said any thing about my good friend the
parson. I would say, "Oh! the wonderful Infidelis!" In fact, I could think
about nothing but the devils in the valley. Therefore I took care to provide
myself with every thing necessary, and away I went to the Vale of Horrors, and
had not long been there ere I saw Fastosus and Avaro come traveling toward
me. And thus they began their discourse.

AVAR. I am glad, very glad, sir, that you are here so soon. I was afraid that
you would find much business at Paris, besides finishing my lady's robes.


FAST. I did find more than I expected, cousin, for I had no sooner finished
with the mantua-maker, than I was waited upon by a hatter, who begged to be
informed, whether it was most genteel to six the loops of an hat an inch and an
half, or only one bare inch in depth, and whether a gentleman is most of a
cavaller with his h^t cocked in right angles? or with one obtuse and two acate
angles? Before I had well satisfied the hatter, i^ came a gentleman per^ke
maker, who humbly asked m^ whether a nobleman looks most like a hero when he
has one, or when he has two curls bobbing over his cars. Provoked that the
gentleman mechanics should suppose I had nothing to do but to cock hats, and
adjust wigs, I wrinkled my forchead into a most majestic frown, and made the
following answer, "Get hence thou sneaking our. I have known a lord before now
that had his ears so covered with tires of ^^rrls, that he could not hear the
commands of his superiors. The brave princes ^^dinand and Frederick of
Brnuswick, and the noble (...) of Granby will soon break through all the
redoubts of a barber's for^^fication." T^^ was wrote before the conclusion of
the late war.
The words were no sooner out of my mouth, than I was sent for by his grace the
d -- e of C -- ll, to inform him whether it was most graceful for a courtier to
wear his hat with the front declining on the right or the left side of the
brow. To whom I said, "Good my lord, you may soon resolve this difficulty,
without seeking to the devil for advice; if your grace will only mark well to
which side of the block the hats of the vulgar incline; then be sure to let the
hats of the courtiers turn always contrary to the v^lgar method. No sooner had
I satisfied his grace, than L -- s desired to know which was his bes^ way to
keep up his character, and support his dignity in Europe, on the loss of his
dominions in America: for answer I referred him to good Mr. Maubert, of
Brussels, who has as good a hand a^ a ^ead lift, as if he had been bred a
priest. And so cousin, with no small difficulty I broke loose, and am come
hither according to appointment.


AVAR. By what you say, honored sir, I perceive that, wheresoever idleness
prevails, it is not among us, for we have no rest day nor night, but go about
plotting the destruction of mankind.

For my own part, I assure you, I have had but little rest since I saw you
last; and so very fond are mankind of my counsels, that I expect but very
little rest for the time to come. You know I was going to secret a bag of
money in the Valley, when you and I met. This was no sooner done than I was
waited on by a parson, who had his eyes upon a good living, with a view to
receive directions about obtaining it. And he was followed by a tradesman, who
had a desire to make a profitable break of it; but begged direction how he
might do it honorably; I referred him to the goddesses Perfidia and Fallacia
for instructions, as they more immediately preside in that department. This
honorable gentleman dilpatched; I was attended by a certain curate, who having
acver had inclination nor opportunity to examine the canons of a certain
church, came to consult me whether it was lawful to christen a child, if the
parents had not money enough to pay the fees. I told him, by no means, for if
you once begin to officiate gratis, you will have enough of it and the parson's
trade will be worse than an attorney's cler^ship. The gentleman took my advice,
being determined to seek the good of the church: and truly, because the mother
had not two shillings and six pence to pay the parson, she could not have her
son made a child of God, and an heir of the kingdom of heaven.


FAST. Well but, (...), is that matter of fact?


AVAR. Indeed, sir, it is what actually happened, not five hundred miles from
London bridge; and there is a c^^tain gentleman alive who could av^^ch the
(...) of it (...) he thought proper.

Having dispatched the journeyman patson, I was sent for in all the baste by my
good friend the attorney. He, worthy gentleman, h^^ undertaken a cause, which
he very well knows, can never be defended upon principles of honor and
honesty; but his client is a rich man, can well be ^^eecing, and therefore he
could not in conscience put him aside. He knows exceeding well how to turn the
rich man's cause to his own emolument, if he could but (...) so as not to
injure his own credit. That was the perplexity which he was in, and what he
begged me to clear up; said he within himself, "Can I but get this cause to
depend in chancery for a few years, (which by the way is the highest point in
law for a desperate cause) I shall gain some hundreds of pounds by it." As soon
as he had done his duty to me, he very humbly laid the matter without reserve
before me. Then said I, my good sir, let not the suit disturb you, I will
manage it both for your honor and profit, never fear me. Who is he that is
employed against you? To which he replied, "Oh! a very skilful man. No less a
person than the great Mr. Falsehood. A very eminent attorney indeed!" Come, said
I, let him be sent for: this was done, and the Lawyer Falsehood attended
accordingly.

Being both seated in my client's great parlor, the good man addressed Mr.
Falsehood thus, "My best friend, Mr. Falsehood, you and I are engaged as
opponents in this suit; both of the gentlemen are resolute, and will bear a
good deal of fleecing; you know what I mean, sir. Now all is as yet uncertain,
and the issue will greatly depend upon the measures to be taken by you and me;
I would therefore, good (...) that we make it certain; if right take place, it
will be spe^^^ ^ver, and we shall make but a poor job of it, but if it is well
managed, it may produce some hundreds apiece. My advice is, sir, that it shall
hang in chancery, like a poor man's soul in purgatory. What do you say, Mr.
Falsehood?"

Mr. Falsehood replied, "It will never do, good sir. It will never do, to bring
it to a speedy issue; that is certain. But I Will tell you what we will do. You
know that you have the worst side of the cause, and if I act the part of an
honest man, you will soon be obliged to give up: but I shall act the part of a
skilful lawyer, which will suit both of our purposes much better. I shall give
you all the advantages that I can, in order to keep the cause depending, 'till
the patience of our clients is quite exhausted, and they agree to put the
matter to arbitration. As they are both men of resolution, by that time it will
be a job worth gathering."

So having set the two worthy lawyers to drink a bottle to the good luck of it.
I left them, took wing and came hither; but I can tell you, if I had not soared
aloft I had not been here so soon, for I saw a great number of parsons,
lawyers, and farmers watching for me; I gave them the slip however, and
artfully dropped my influences upon them. Surely they may allow their master
sometimes to converse with his friends.


FAST. Ah! Ava^o, when we subjected man to our powers, we planned out a great
deal of employment for ourselves; for so fond are they of us, that they will do
nothing unless one or other of our fraternity preside over every action.


AVAR. Sir, if it would not be offensive to you, I should be glad to hear some
account of your origin, and of the nature of your government?


FAST. Avaro; a spirit earth born as you are, must be too grovelling in his
genius to understand much of my history, dominion, and operations; otherwise, I
would with all my heart favor you with the relation you desire.


AVAR. Well, sir, but I am willing to learn of you, if you will condescend to
instruct me. However untractable I am among mankind, you shall find me
teachable enough with you.


FAST. You promise fair, cousin. I love your submission, and therefore shall
begin. Observe then, I am of high parentage, as well as of heroic deeds. I was
born in heaven, cousin. It was there that Satan the great archangel begat me,
upon himself; and as soon as I was begotten, I in return begat him; and the
very moment I was begotten, I was brought forth, and instantly killed my father.


AVAR. Indeed, uncle, you start high. You told me that I could not understand
you, and now I perceive the truth of it; for really I understand not one word
of all you have said: I hope, sir, you will condescend to explain your parables.


FAST. Well if you understand me not, I shall descend lower, though indeed, I
hate to speak of my own affairs in a vulgar style, so as to be understood by
every petty spirit. But as you, Avaro, are of excellent use to my operations, I
shall stand upon no distance, but avoid all ceremonies with you. Understand me
then, when God almighty had created all the hosts of heaven, every angel was
perfectly pleased with his station; the most solid and joyous contentment
reigned among, and united the etherial inhabitants, who were, in those days
very numerous. No one so much as wished his station altered. No one thought
himself capable of higher felicity and perferment than he enjoyed. The
adventurous Satan himself, though he has not been blessed with one moments rest
ever since I was born, before that time possessed all the sublime and refined
pleasures, his exalted capacity was capable of. And well might he be pleased
with his station, seeing he was a mighty prince among the angels, next in
greatness to the So^ of God, who was appointed lord lieutenant of the creation.
And a mighty prince in heaven he would have continued, had he not afterward
become a candidate for omnipotence. As for me I was not born then, but I have
heard old Satan my father, with flames of malice and indignation darting from
his eyes, tell how the most perfect harmony existed among the hosts of
paradise; till it happened that a declaration was made from the lofty throne,
that the Son of God was predestined at a time appointed, to assume a nature
inferior to that of angels; and the most high commanded that, in that nature
all the angels of God should worship the Son, even as they worship the Father,
and that all should submit to the government of the man whom God delighted to
honor.

At this instant I was begotten in Satan's alarmed breast. And cried out, It Is
enough that such ^xalted spirits as we, submit to him in his present
unincarnate state. But worship and submit to him in an inferior nature, let who
will, I will not. What does he mean? Will the Almighty debase his first and
best; and make us subject to an inferior nature? No, it shall never be said,
that Satan the archangel stooped so low! The great archangel's voice was heard,
his resolution was approved of, the standard of rebellion set up in heaven, and
many millions of angels, whose natures I had changed, joined it that day, and
fell into the depths of bottomless perdition. Now do you understand me?


AVAR. I understand you pretty well when you say, that Satan begat you: but you
say, that you begat him, and millions of devi^ besides, it run always in my
head that God had made every devil in the bottomless pit; but if I understand
you aright, you say you made them all.


FAST. True I do say so, and I will not quit an hair's breath of my just
prerogative. God never did, nor ever could make any sinner, either angelic or
human. Mind well what I say, for I perceive you are dull of apprehension, and
but of a shallow judgment. It was not I, but God who made them creatures. God
created them in a holy, pure and glorious state, and endowed them with powers
to preserve their primitive station, in the upper skies: but it was I, not God,
who from angels of light transformed them into devils of darkness. The very
moment I was conceived, I changed them from light to darkness; from holiness to
sin, from glory to dishonor; and thus, though not as creatures, yet as devils
they are wholly of my formation. Do ye understand me now?


AVAR. Yes, sir, I understand you as to that, but you said just now, that the
moment you were brought forth you killed your father. Great sir, these are dark
sayings.


FAST. Aye, Avaro, to such as you they are dark; but I Will explain them; I did
not mean that I annihilated his angelic nature; no, he is an angel still,
although a black one. But I meant that, I (...) an hi^ primitive dispositions
to goodness, killed the life of holiness that once was in him; deprived him of
the favor of God, which some people prefer even unto life. I made him that
crooked, perverse (...) which you see he now is. I opened the overflowing
^^^ices of divine indignation, which continually pour down upon him, whatever
he is doing or wherever he flies, and not upon him only, but upon all his
adherents. Was not this killing him to purpose, think you?


AVAR. Indeed it was. You had not hurt him half so much, uncle, if you had
deprived him of being. I wonder that he can endure the sight of you after all
that has befallen him on your account! you have deprived him of every good, and
brought every evil upon him, and yet he loves you as his own foul. It Is
strange! Wondrous strange, Fast^sus!


FAST. You Will think it stranger still, when I tell you that he is so far from
hating me, that ^e will do nothing, either on earth or in ^^ll, amongst men or
devils, but as he is directed and prompted to it by me. And so far is he from
repenting of what he has done, that he has told me a ^housand times, if it
were to do again he would do it. Nothing grieves the heart of old Satan so much
as this, the very man whose exaltation he opposed, whose sway he resisted, and
whose person he has still in the most perfect abhorrence, is dignified, not
only by a personal union with Jehovah; but by all judgment being committed into
his hand, and the public adminiscration of all the affairs of heaven, earth,
and hell devolving upon him. Great is his torment, from the consideration, that
he, with all his adherents, must receive their final sentence from the same
person, who of all beings, he hates with the most consummate hatred, and on
whose account he hates and seeks the destruction of all the creatures of God.

It Is a perpetual hell to him, that the object of his greatest aversion,
sits on the circle of heaven, and holds him continually as with bit and
bridle; limiteth his operations at pleasure, and sovereignly appoints his
license by an unalterable determination. When through confirmed malice and
desperate resolution, Satan struggles for larger scop^, Immanuel gives him a
check, saying, hitherto thou may go, but no farther." And sometimes so
severe is the check, that the prince of darkness is quite overturned; and
whilst sprawling on his back, for very vo^ation, that he can go no further, he
rages, and roareth louder than a thousand lions, so that all the arches of
gloomy Tartarus resound; then in the anguish of horrid despair, he bites his
ad^^ntine chains, foams at the mouth, and utters such d^eadful blasphemies, as
none but himself can utter. What is the most r^^^^kable of all is, that the
more rapidly, the torrent of the Almighty's wrath pours in upon him, the fonder
he is of me, the c^^se of all his misery.


AVAR. Sir, you say that Beelzebub will do nothing without your direction; if I
understand this right, it is not he, but you who are governor of hell. Pray,
sir, where are all his princely prerogatives then?


FAST. It is not fitting, Avar^, that you should criticize upon my doctrine:
you ought to embrace it implicitly as I deliver it to you.


AVAR. Pardon me, great sir, you put me in mind of some of the modern parsons,
for that is the very way that they w^^t their doctrine to be embraced,
implicitly, without questioning its currency. It Is merry enough to ^ear them
exhort their hearers, to search the scriptures, to try the spirits, to take
hoed what they hear, etc. and yet after all, if any one of their hearers
attempts to bring the parson's own sermon to trial by the scriptures, he is
deemed a troublesome, self-conceited fellow, and if he happens to disprove his
doctrine by the scripture, he is presently dealt with, and excommunicated as a
troubler of Israel. For the parson would have other peoples doctrine tried,
and, if false, refuted; but it is impious to do so by his own. Brave days,
Fastosus, are these! It is quite laughable to hear the modern clergymen tell
their hearers, that they have a right to private judgment, and to know the mind
of God for themselves; and at the same time obliging them implicitly to abide
by the confession of faith already authenticated. That is, uncle, the clergy
will allow you to controvert the scriptures, if you choose it, but their own
articles must have your implicit submission.


FAST. Well, cousin, you have fairly laughed me out of my resentment, by the
droll conduct of your parsons. However, what I said, Avaro, I will maintain. It
shall never be said that the devil. Fastosus, did at any time eat his words;
but I will condescend to explain myself. Without me, Beelzebub would be none
other than an angel; but mixing myself with his angelic faculties, I render him
a perfect devil; the same I do with all the rest of my infernal subjects.
Beelzebub himself is but a titular prince; it is I who instigate him, that am the
great devil of all. To tell you more, it is I who formed hell itself, as a
place of punishment. Such is the rectitude, and equity of his nature, that God
never would, nor could, inflict any punishment without my intervention. He was
ever guided in all his works by his own perfections, and therefore could never
have punished sinless beings: all beings would have remained sinless, but for
me; so in making sin, I made the punishment of it. For if once sin is
introduced, punishment follows of course; it being as natural for sin to bring
forth punishment, as it is for the sun to send forth light and heat.

No being possibly can be a devil, but that being who is possessed and governed
by me, every being thus possessed and governed, whether angel or man, is a
devil. But for distinctions sake, we ascribe only the plain name of fiends, to
the angels whom I govern, and to men and women under my dominion, we give the
names of devils incarnate, because they i^habit bodies of flesh. The difference
in the stature of devils is not, that one is less devilish than another, but
their being possessed of more noble endowments, and more extensive qualities
than others. So you see the devils of quality among us, are more intelligent,
more subtle, and crafty than devils of a vulgar race. The reason why Beelzebub
is head over all the infernal tribes also, is not because he is more depraved
than his adherents, but because he was originally created in a more glorious
station, possessed of endowments more exalted, and blessed with more extensive
natural powers. As such, being once depraved, he is capable of excelling his
fellows, as far in diabolical achievements, as at first he excelled them in
their heavenly station. The same rule holds good, through the varicus ranks of
my subjects. Were you to ask me, why it is that devils without a body, are
capable of exceeding in sweet rebellion, those spirits who are embodied? I
would answer without hesitation, "Not because the one is less vicious, or one
whit less depraved than the other, but for the following two very good and
substantial reasons;

1. Although I reign and rule in the heart of every one of them, yet whilst
they are in the body, they are laid under particular restrictions by the
Almighty; so that they cannot do all the evil which in their hearts I prompt
them to do: and therefore they cannot be so much like Beelzebub in their actions
as they would be. Fear and shame, very often prevent people from gratifying
their impious and unclean inclinations, when a love of virtue, and the fear of
God, are absolutely out of the question.

2. Because the natural powers of man are very far inserior to the powers of
infernal spirits. The more extensive a man's natural capacity, the nearer he
may arrive to the stature of Satan, if unrestrained by the grace of God. Hence
a crafty and learned pope, is by far more like the devil than an ignorant
swag-bellied friar. Yea, Avaro, the more enlarged the capacity of either man or
devil may be, as it makes him capable of the higher degrees of wickedness, even
so in proportion to the natural abilities of both shall the punishment
inflicted be. No wicked being is so capable of being wicked as the ^^afty and
understanding person, who, if he is not truly virtuous and holy, must be truly
wicked and devilish. Hence one Hume, one Voltaire, is an hundred times more
capable of being useful to us, than fifty H -- w -- ds, or even five times the
number of popish priests. You may take this as a general maxim, that the most
enlarged soul must be the most tormented, if not saved.


AVAR. One may see by your learning, sir, what it is to (...) born among
spirits. Why, you can converse as freely^ and fluently about the nature of
angels and men as I c^^ do about gold and silver coin: great, great, sir, is
your merit.


FAST. How should it be otherwise, Avaro, when you consider the subtilty of my
nature? I am the very soul of Beelzebub, and all his vassals. Petty spirits may
boast of their conquests one to another, but they must all be silent when
courtly Fastosus opens his mouth. You, Avaro, Impiator, Discordans, etc. have
all of you made a^ great inroads upon mankind as can possibly be expected from
such unseemly spirits as you be; but as for me, you see I am a spirit of a
comely deportment, and caressed by all. Indeed many people are now adays of
opinion, that a specie of my nature is absolutely necessary, in order to make
them respectable in the world, and prevent the injuries which otherwise might
be offered to them. Nor is there any who can discern the fatal consequences of
being under my direction, except those who are enlightened from above, by him
who was given for a light to the Gentiles. I lodge securely in the secret
caverns of the heart, and from thence I convey my influence so imperceptibly
through all the words of the mouth, and actions of the life, that you rarely
meet with a man or woman, who will own that they have the least acquaintance
with me; though with many of them, the judicious beholder, will easily perceive,
that I am deeply concerned in all they do or say.


AVAR. Indeed I have often heard people declare, that they never saw the devil
Fastosus, nor had the least acquaintance with pride. Yet, they said, a little
spirit ought to be shown, that every one might know his proper place. But I
perceive now, that pride itself is that same spirit which they deem so
necessary, notwithstanding their supposed freedom from it, and aversion to it.


FAST. The very same spirit, Avaro, though they do not know it, for I deceive
them at every turn, being capable of transforming myself into so many different
shapes, and bearing a name so suitable to each, that even when I lord it over
them with the greatest power, they remain utterly ignorant of their subjection
to me. Sometimes I assume the appearance and bear the name of my avowed enemy,
humility; then you will see people of fashion, or those who think themselves
such, descending lower than their station, for no other reason than to get a
good name. At another time you may see me transformed into the likeness of
Charity, and I prompt my slaves to bestow their alms, in order to be esteemed
benevolent and generous. I have seen a man of wealth and industry, perform such
actions with this and no other view, and he has made his poor b^lly to suffer
for it many days to come, when at the same time he had his thousands out at
use. Then I take upon me the name of Decency, and am greatly employed in
regulating domestic affairs, descending even so low, as to take cogni^ance of
meat and drink, dress and company; then you may see madam, extremely diligent
in persuading Miss Prim and Miss Stiff not to be seen in the company of those
of an inferior station. Ere you are aware I have got the name of Good-Breeding,
and oh! what wonders of fashionable civilities I work, and forward the great
designs of hell. At this time you will see my lady, who having forgotten the
fashions prevailing above twenty years ago, when she was under forty, is as
careful as possible not to deviate in the least from the customs of them who
were born since she was a wife and mother. Sometimes I bear the name of a
spirit of honor; under this name I prevailed in ancient Rome, and now reign
over many of our European cavaliers; in this character I do great execution
among the British gods at the west end of London, where the greatest enormities
are deemed excusable, but the putting up with an affront, an unpardonable evil.


AVAR. There would be nothing done in camparison of what there is among
mankind, if we appeared in our ow^ likeness, and went by our proper names: for
there are thousands that love us extremely while in disguise, who would be
ashamed of us, if we went by our proper names of Covetousness and Pride. As for
my part, I am fain to perform all my works in disguise; bearing the feigned
names of Industry, Frugality, etc. But, sir, will it please you to give me some
account how you first made your entrance good amongst mankind.


FAST. I have already told you, that as soon as I was born, I obtained full
dominion over the adherents of Beelzebub; this taught the angels of the deep,
that the only way to seduce innocent beings, was to inject my nature into them;
and that the seeds of pride being once sown, they could not fail of most
abundant fruitfulness. Man was originally created in a ^^ly and happy estate, a
perfect stranger to those evils which now prevail over, and reign predominant
in the natural and moral world. You could not have seen so much as one symptom
of pride or covetousness, or other vice, either in Adam or Eve, in their
primitive state. They loved without unchastity, and enjoyed without
uncleanness; nor were they in the least acquainted with the racking torments of
jealousy. No anxious thoughts perplexing fears, nor distracting cares,
disturbed their peaceful hearts. Envy, anger, shame, and resentment, were
strangers to the new created pair, and never set foot in paradise before my
arrival there. Their sole delight was to contemplate the beneficence of their
God.

Our eagle-eyed angels when they saw the noble deportment of man, soon
perceived that he was of the same nature, which the Son of God was
predestined to assume, (for as some think be might, out of love to the human
nature, appear occasionally to the heavenly hosts in the form of man Some may
think that this parenthesis is an impeachment of the knowledge of Fastosus,
supposing that himself was ignorant, whether the Son of God did or did not
assume the form of a man in his intercourse with the heavenly legions. But it
ought to be observed that this judicious devil is relating ^ransactions which
were antecedent to the time, when he professes to (...) been born.
) for the resisting of which decree, they were damned to the depths of ever
burning hell. The first discovery Beelzebub made of the blessed situation in
which man was created, filled (...) noble mind with such violent agitations of
rage, envy, ma^^ce and pride, that his fury burst beyond all bounds. He
stan^ped and raged in a most tempestuous manner; insomuch that he shook the
sable firmament of hell, and brought his consederates to enquire the cause of
his anguish. A council thus convened, after the prince had a little recovered
from the first flock of transporting rage, he related to them what he had
discovered concerning the inhabitants of Eden. Asked advice of his senators,
who, to a devil vowed speedy destruction to man. Some demar there was
respecting the plan of their operations; for the impolitic part of the assembly
finding the smallness of their number, were for having man assaulted by storm;
but the more sage politicians voted for craft, as the likeliest method to
seduce them, At last the august assembly came to this unanimous resolution,
"That the great Beelzebub should, by certain means, by him to be devised,
inspire them with my nature, nothing doubting, but if that could be done, they
would soon declare in favor of the devil's government."

After he had well weighed every circumstance, the arch-apostate undertook the
enterprise: but did not judge it proper to exercise force against them, knowing
well, that if their resistance proved equal to their power, all his destructive
measures must unavoidably be broken, and the enterprise miscarry. Therefore
like a wise hero and consummate politician, he resolved to accomplish by craft
and subtility, what was not to be done by open assault, nor did he think it
advisable to address them in his own form, least he should frighten them at his
first appearance, and by that means render their seduction for ever after
impracticable. But judiciously concluded that the most promising method was
(...) assume the body of one of their familiar domestic anim^^ which were dally
under their observation. Accordingly after long consultation with himself, and
strictly examining the brutal tribes, he possessed a beauteous serpeut,
perceiving that it was head of the repule world, and best fitted for converse
with man, with whom also it was more familiar, than all the beasts beside. Thus
equipped for executing the deep projected scheme, he still acted with caution
becoming the most consummate experience. He cared not to attack them both at
once, lost by any means they should see through his disguise, and he should
occasion his own repulse; therefore he craftily lurked near them, and overheard
their discourse, that he might better learn which of them was the weaker v^ssel.

Being ^^pirit of great penetration, he soon found that, the woman was not only
the weakest but the youngest; and what greatly encouraged his hope, was, that
the man loved the woman with the most tender affection, a circumstance very
painful for him to behold. Peace being now a stranger to his own bosom, it was
grievous for him to see the selicity of the human pair. In consequence of these
discoveries, he made no attempts upon the man; but bent all his endeavors to
seduce the woman, not doubting but if the could be effected, the man would come
of course, so strongly was he attached to his yoke fellow.

I would tell you the whole now, cousin, but I must go and assist my lady Gaity
to dress; for she is to dine with my, lord Frolic today. About four o'clock
I Will meet you here.


DIALOGUE V. INFIDELIS, IMPIATOR, and DISCORDANS.
FASTOSUS and Avaro had not been long gone, before I saw Infidelis and
Impiator, stalking up to the ^endezvous, and as they walked thus conversing:

IMP. But is it possible, sir, that the p^pists should ascribe an equal, if not
a greater glory, to the blessed virgin, than to the Son of God?


INFID. It is not only possible, but certain, and as a proof of it, I shall
repeat to you one of their prayers to her; a prayer which can by no means be
offensive to any of our people. "O Mary! The sta^ of the sea, the haven of
health, the learned advocate of the guilty; the only hope of the desperate; the
savior of sinners, Thou call thyself the hand-ma^^ of Jesus Christ, but art
his lady; for right and reason wills, that, the mother be above the son: pray
him and command him from above, that he lead us to his kingdom, at the world's
end." Here you see, child, that although he was believed by his apostles to be
God over all; the papists have found out a way to put him under the command of
his virgin mother. Not only so, but they have put him under the command of St.
Ann, reputed by them to have been his grandmother, as may be seen in that
famous prayer, approved and authorized by the doctors of the Sorbonne, in
Paris; I Will repeat the passage, being the fourth paragraph in the prayer, "In
homage of the right and power (of mother) which you had over your daughter,
(Mary) and of grandmother over her son, and of their (Mary's and Jesus's)
submission, which they render you." Here you see he is supposed to submit to
his grandmother Ann, as well as to be under the government of his mother Mary.
I could tell you strange things, son, about the popish religion, and I intend
it ere long; but for the present, I would beg of you to give me some farther
account of the different cantous of your devotees. I think they were seven in
number.


IMP. I shall describe them to you, sir. And it would be proper to begin with
the canton of Drunkards, beca^^^ that is the royal canton, where I keep my
court; but wit^ your good leave, I shall refer the description of it to the
last.


INFID. Son, your will is your law in this particular, take whatever method
your thoughts suggest as best.


IMP. Then I begin with the canton of swearers, the most foolish and
unaccountable set of people upon the face of the earth. This canton is divided
into two provinces, both which are full of people: in the first province dwell
the false swearers; and the profane swearers, in the second.

The province of false swearers, is divided into three districts, the first of
which is inhabited, by knights of the post, a set of gentry who get their
living by giving evidences in causes to which they are perfect strangers. These
knights commonly make their court to the c -- k of arr-ings, whom they know is
best capable of finding them employment. It is not a great many years since, a
gentleman walking in the sessions house, in the Old Baily, was accosted by one
of these knights with, "Pray, sir, do you want a witness? Sir, I Will serve you
as cheap and as well as any man." Gardener, bishop of Winchester, formerly was
a mighty protector of this order of knights: and at this day our good friend,
the father of the world, his worthy inquisitors, and not a few right reverend
prelates, are head men in the district of false swearers. Many a good
Christian, has been brought to the stake, or gallows, by their assiduity, both
among papists and pagans; and more especially the former, who are far from
being so honest, as the latter; and not by half so consistent.

The second district is inhabited by the mercenary swearers. This is a race
supposed to be descended from the knights of the post; and to be sure there is
a great likeness betwixt the two. The mercenary swearers will buy a piece of
goods for five shillings, and as soon as a buyer presents himself, tells (...),
that upon his life and soul, it cost him six shillings. (...) he meets with
another seller of the same commodity, (...) order to obtain a good pennyworth
he shows him the goods for which he paid five shillings, and tells the
stranger, that, "As he hopes to be saved, he gave no more than four and
sixpence for it." The dealers in horses, drovers, and butchers, are singulary
dextrous at this kind of swearing. In this district, it is a prevalent opinion,
that a man is not fit to live in the world, unless he can swear to a lie.

The third division is inhabited by the foolish swearers, a people the most
remarkably stupid, of any under the government of hell; some of them are so
accustomed to it from their infancy, that they do not so much as know when they
swear, and are as destitute of design in the practice, as the parrot when it
scolds the chamber maid, or as many good people when they say their prayers at
church. Others seem to have such a low opinion of their own probity, that they
imagine no one will believe what they say, unless every sentence is ushered in
with an oath in the van, and confirmed by another in the rear. Gentlemen of
family, fortune and fashion, are stationed in this class, and are extremely
dextrous here. Nor are the officers of the fleet and army less learned, or
devoid of those embellishments. The greatest part of the English officers
indeed, marine and military, esteem a man not fit to carry a musket, unless he
can swear an hundred oaths in a quarter of an hour, without any qualms of
conscience.

The British army so far excels in this fine art, that they can fairly curse
the French off the field of battle, without ever striking a blow; so terrified
are the French at the oaths of the English. Aye, father, I assure you, that
this heroic practice, is now so prevalent among the basest of the multitude,
that I could pick you out a low lifed boatswain, who will vie with an admiral;
and a dwarfish drummer, who will swear with a lieutenant general, for any
money. Yea, I could pick you out a fellow, who cannot procure whole shoes to
his feet, that yet will match any noblen^^^ or esquire in the land at swearing.
And, sir, if honor (...) sists in being adepts here, the vilest pedlar may vie
(...) the best of the gentry, and the very footpad may challenge a peer of the
realm. The canton of swearers, is a very populous and very honorable place.
Here are dukes, knights of all orders, marquisses, and earls. And a very
worshipful canton it is too, for numbers of very respectable corporations, and
many justices of the peace reside in it.

I have often laughed, to see a delinquent brought before a magistrate, and by
him be obliged to pay two shillings for every attested oath, when the
magistrate himself, had not manhood enough to maintain conversation for ten
minutes, without being guilty of profane swearing.


INFID. Pray thee, my son, what are the qualifications requisite to a justice
of the peace in thy country.


IMP. Two qualifications only, sir, are requisite. The first is, that the
gentleman be pretty well to live in the world, and the second, that he shall be
an obsequious tool to administration. As to knowledge of the law, love to the
people, regard to moral principles, and all such stuff, are altogether out of
the question. I was going to say, it is a very religious canton too, because
here you may find a considerable number of reverend parsons, both papists and
protestants. As for their oaths in use, they are various, as the fancy of the
swearers inclines them. Some swear by heaven, others by the God of heaven: some
swear by Christ, others by his blood and wounds; some by St. Peter, others by
St. Paul; some by St. Mary, others by her virginity; some swear by the pope,
others by his holiness, and by his infallibility; some by the life of their
sovereign; some by the life of the devil, and some by their own lives. Some
there are who swear by the church, others by the liturgy and mass; and some who
for want of a better epithet, swear by their own eyes and limbs.


INFID. Indeed, son, these are a set of as foolish people, (...) one would wish
to meet with. The devil himself would (...) wish them to be more foolish. One
would wonder to ^^e men of distinction, who disdain to conform to the vulgar,
in other particulars, rank themselves with gypsies, and sturdy beggars, in this
most abject and unmanly practice. Sensible people, and some there are still
among men, do not esteem a man the more for his acres or pension, but for his
virtue and good sense, and hence a swearing gipsy and a swearing gentleman are
held as equally dishonorable. But no more of this, I intend not to become a
moralist at this time.


IMP. I assure you, profitable as they are to me, I am ready to crack my sides
with laughing, to see how foolishly they fight and brawl, curse and damn each
other, and how ready they are to forward the devil's interest, notwithstanding
it is to their own everlasting ruin.

The second canton is that of thieves, and a very flourishing canton it is,
notwithstanding we every session send a freight over the Stygian lake, The
author has often lamented the unhappy, and untimely end of the malefactors hung
up every sessions; sometimes for things perhaps comparatively trifling, and
which in themselves cannot merit so severe a punishment. It does not appear
from scripture, or reason, that common theft, should be punished with the
gallows, and especially when the matter stolen is of small value. Nor does it
appear to be good policy to deprive society of a member, who might afterward
be useful, on account of some rash and unguarded invasion of his neighbor's
property. Hang them once, their services are for ever lost to the community. If
other methods were taken, villainy would be more successfully suppressed, and
the members of society spared for usefulness. The British senators must needs
see, that the hanging trade does not lessen the number of rogues. Nor the
untimely end of one leave suitable impressions upon the minds of others. To be
bound to hard labor for the space of one year, would be more terrible than to
be transported for seven; and besides, use might introduce a laborious habit,
which would render stealing unnecessary. I (...) persuaded, that to a dissolute
young man, who hates labor, to be chained to a dung-cart, or placed in some
other servile station, would be more dreadful than Tyburn itself.
who no more return to their native country. This canton being very extensive,
is likewise divided into several lesser cantons. The first of which contains
the gentlemen-thieves. A very courtly, polite, and fashionable set of people.
Gentlemen thieves, are such who enjoy places of honor and trust, and are not
careful of their duty to their king and country. It is observable of them, that
when they are out of place, they are the greatest enemies to corruption, and
the staunchest friends to liberty in the world. They are capable of no
influence, but that of patriotism, so long as unprovided for; but the moment
their happy stars make them placemen, they forget their parriotism, drop their
enmity to venality, and seek nothing so much as their own emolument, leaving
the publi^^^^ shift for itself. It is thought that not a few gentle^^^ thieves
live, within a hundred miles of famous Tybu^^^ and some people farther think,
it is great pity that solemn tree is not more frequently graced with them; but
in modern times it is quite unfashionable to hang any but the little thieves.
If an ingenious mechanic should die for filing a single guinea; an extravagant
youth be hanged without mercy, for putting you in bodily fear, on the highway;
or a vain girl in the prime of life be executed for stealing a few yards of
lace, and others plunder the nation of thousands with impunity, it shows that
there must be a defect somewhere.
Those gentlemen having no principles, above ambition and avarice to influence
them, being once in place, are capable of being more injurious to the
commonwealth, each of them than an hundred highwaymen; and yet Tyburn is not
honored with a gentleman thief, above once in a century, much to the grief of
real patriots.

Another class of gentlemen thieves, are our officers by sea and land, who
impose upon their king and country, by false musters: and in a very peculiar
manner those who make their own fortunes, (no matter whether in the East or
West Indies) by the fatigue of their men, who are left to remain in their
original penury: these, together with the commissaries for the army, agents for
regiments, etc. are all stationed here.

^he second subdivision is peopled by what we call the fashionable thieves. A
prodigious populous place is this. Here dwell legions of attorneys; vermin, who
for five shillings worth of labor, will charge their clients near the same
number of pounds; and very conscientiously take pay, for wilfully perverting
and defeating a just cause. Here you may find gentlemen, who can procure
witnesses to swear just as you would have them, and pack a jury that can give a
clear verdict, over the belly of the most consistent evidence. Such a jury
has, ere now, saved a noble neck from the deserved cord, through the
all-subduing power of money. To this famous division, belong the tradesman, who
will take more from an unskilful buyer, than he knows in his conscience his
goods are worth: a thing very common among dealers. Also the wealthy gentleman,
who, in buying will take advantage of the indigence of the seller, and pay, if
he can, less than the real worth of what he buys; this practice is now so very
near to universal, that tradesmen deal with one another, for the most part, as
if they were all known to be rogues and cheats, and he is the best tradesman,
that can best guard against the villainy of his neighbors.

Here dwells the careful tradesman, who if a man once owes him five pounds,
would write down five pounds ten shillings. This method is so much in vogue,
that many people dare not trust their names on the tradesmens books. As for my
friend, sir Rodger Latepay, he has had such experience of it, that his word is
in danger. In this fashionable division, dwells the tradesman, who, conscious
that his own capital is expended, supports his luxury and grandeur, at the
expense of his dealers; and many such there be in town and country. The
avaricious farmers, manufacturers, and householders, who make their servants,
and mechanies, work under their usual wages, from the prete^^^ of deadness of
trade, etc. The buyer who is conscio^^ of his present inability, and spends
without any probable view of being hereafter able to pay, dwells in the very
heart of this division; and hard by him dwells the father, who, to gratify a
depraved taste, squanders away his estate, to the defrauding of his wife and
children. All of these, sir, (...) very fashionable people.

The third division is that of holy thieves. That is, men whose theft is in
holy things. By holy thieves, I mean unholy men, sustaining holy offices. Such
is he, who enters into orders, merely for the sake of a good living. All who
climb over the wall, and come not in by the door, are thieves and robbers.
Thieves, because they steal the portion of the priests; for having no right to
the sacerdotal function, their participation of the altar, is sacrilegious
theft. Robbers, because they make havoc of the church, and deprive God's
children of the food allowed them by their heavenly Father. Here dwell shoals
of popish priests, and very considerable numbers of protestant clergy, of
various denominations, as well as the total sum of pagan and mohammedan musties.
His holiness the pope of Rome, is indeed president in this division, for he
steals the prerogatives of God, and applies them to his own private use.

The fourth division in the canton of thieves, are those whom we call the
sporting thieves. Such are card-players, cock fighters, horse-coursers, and
gamblers of all sorts. I know of none of my sporting subjects, but what will
win if they can, either by upright, or inequitable means. Therefore with us it
is an established maxim, that the true gambler is the certain thief. Here too
you may find princes, nobles, spiritual and temporal, and judges of every rank.
Ha! ha! ha! how have I been ready to split my sides with laughing, to see an
archbishop lay aside his mitre, and take up a pack of cards; and the sacred
judge, after having pas^^^ sentence on a criminal, lay aside all his solemnity,
and ^^t on the sprightly sportsman. Then cried I, oh! the bench! oh! the
pulpit! O the gambler.

The fifth division in the canton of thieves, is inhabited by what we call
fantastic thieves. A very contemptible canton this is with sensible people. Yet
foolish as they are with their nostrums, they make it appear, that there are
people more foolish than themselves, for they pick the pockets of the
neighboring cantons very cleverly. Here dwell your Dassies, Godfries,
Stonghtons, Fluggers, Lowthers, James's, Turlingtons, etc. Here the famous Mr.
Mountebank is president, and Mr. Ardrew Arc^ee is his deputy. In this division
nothing is heard of but pills, lozenges, troches, baliams, elixirs, drops,
co^^^^als, and the ready coin; for the fantastical thieves can-give no credit.

The sixth division consists of plain honest high way men. Honest, when
compared with many of the others, for when they are about to rob a man, they
very honestly (...) him their design, and stake but a few high words, and the
mouth of the pistol against the purse and all that is in (...) which,
notwithstanding the odds be greatly (...) the traveller's fide, the highwayman
carries lightly off^ (...) the watch into the bargain. Whereas many of the
gentlemen-thieves, carry on their work so slily, that you know not their
intention of robbing you, till long after the robbery is committed. Oh! Tyburn,
Tyburn, thou have long groaned for such men as these!

Here too are many venerable priests, who, by pretended pardons, dispensations,
etc. play the pick-pocket to great advantage. Much could I say about this class
of veterans in the thieving trade, were I not afraid of exciting their
resentment, which would be very detrimental to my designs, as they lead the
consciences of the laity, just which way they please.


INFID. Indeed, my son, by your account of them, the highwaymen, and
pick-pockets, are less prejudicial to soci^^ty than many who are held to be men
of great renown.


IMP. Ay, sir, a thousand times, and I can tell you that, some of the greatest
of names are enrolled in the annals of this canton of thieves. There are the
Grecian and Roman heroes, almost in general, particularly great Alexander, and
Julius Caesar. There is Tamerlane, there is Kouli Khan, there is Philip of
Spain, and there is L -- s of France, who has as good an inclination to
thieving as any body. Poor gentleman, it is not half a century since he put
forth his hand, to pick the pocket of George king of Britain, but he got his
singers most woefully bitten, before he could pull them in again. But what is
bred in the bone will never be out of the flesh; therefore as the English did
not take care, effectually to secure themselves when they had it in their
power, they must expect further experience of French theft.


INFID. One would have thought that, the English have had so many instances of
royal thest, from that quarter, that they would have effectually prevented
future danger-from thence. Nor are our good friends the Spaniards less inclined
to the thievish practice than their neighbors; witness Peru and Mexico, those
once opulent and populous kingdoms, which now belong to them in the same
manner, as the purse of gold belongs, to the highwayman, who took it from the
gentleman he murdered.


IMP. Ay, sir, great thieves are abundantly more hurtful to mankind, than
thieves of a dwarfish size; though famous Tyburn, and the places akin to it,
seldom have the honor of ushering them into the other world.

The third canton is the liars canton, a people with double tongues, and of the
nature of an otter, amphibious; the great Beelzebub himself is grand president
here, but is represented by two famous deputies, namely the artful Mahomet, and
the good old gentleman at Rome. Of the two the latter is most in favor at
court, because, as Beelzebub says, he is so very much of his own image; although
it must be owned, Mahomet bears a very great resemblance. All the holy fathers,
my lords the inquisitors, with their assistant familiars. All the venerable
patriarchs, and princely cardinals, reside in the metropolis near the exchange,
in the principal street, which is a straight thoroughfare to hell. The bishops
of both ranks, are stationed next to them, and greatly facilitate the journey
of passengers. The very populous suburbs are inhabited by the sons of St.
Ignatius; than whom, none are more excellent at the arts of lying and evasion;
and here too are abundance of friars of every order, who though less crafty
than the jesuits, are very diligent in the great work of deceit. In this
country, politeness and learning have arrived at the greatest perfection, here
are abundance of courtiers, and statesman, besides atheisls and deists, highly
esteemed by our people, for their learning and sense.

The (...) court liars, are like a dead fish, they always swim with the stream
of power. They are for or against stamp-a^^^, and general warrants, just as the
sentiments of their superiors direct; they are Protestants, or intollerant
papists, or neither, just as their prince is inclined, or as their own
interests require. Their consciences are as tender as a willow, and will turn
any way with the application of a purse of gold, a place, a pension, or a
peerage. When it serves their low and base purposes, you will find them
patriots, but if the good of the nation clashes with their sinister views, you
may find them traitors, either to church or state, or to both. Of this class
were Bonner and Gardener, zealous Protestants in the days of Edward the sixth,
and bloody papists in the reign of his sister of scarlet memory. To this class
also belonged Sharp, the archbishop of St. Andrews, for it was not conviction
but gold, that changed his sentiments, from presbtery to prelacy. All the
arguments which my lords, the bishops of England had advanced, made no more
impression upon him, than an arrow would have made upon a rock of flint; but
when his mojesty came in a rhetorical manner, to press him home with a heavy
purse of gold, a coach and six, and a bishopric, he was quite confounded, and
had not a word to say for mother kirk of Scotland. Such court arguments as
this, sir, stop the mouths of many a patriot; lord C -- m is a recent proof of
this. Such was the force of his elocution, that it could gain battles, subdue
states, reverse laws, and make placemen tremble, till he was unhappily
confounded by a place, a pension, and a peerage; and now, poor gentleman, he
has nothing left to gratify his ambition, but the melancholy reflection of what
he once was.

There is another herd of court liars, (excuse the phrase, sir, because it is
the common opinion, that of all vermin, court liars are the most detestable)
who fawn like a spaniel upon every prince, that ascends the throne, in order to
ingratiate themselves into his favor, thereby to make sure of their own
emolument. If the manners of the prince are ever so dissolute, they caress him
as their most wise and amiable monarch. Though he were as much of a dastard as
Sardanapalus, they will persuade him that, he may vie with Hector for
magnanimity. If he is a drunkard, or glutton, they will flatter him with his
temperances or represent his luxury as a princely virtue, very becoming a royal
personage; even if one half of his subjects be famishing for want of bread.
Some of those court liars will tell their prince, that it is no crime at all
for him, to enter his neighbor's territories, and murder twenty or thirty
thousand of his subjects, though there is really no cause given on their part,
for the hostile invasion. Some such villains precipitated Louis of France into
a war with Britain, which would infalliably have proved his ruin, had he not
been well befriended by some people near St. James's.

A truly patriotic courtier is a strong pillar to the throne, but court liars,
are the destruction of that prince whose ear they govern.

It is my opinion, that a prince has need either to be a very wise man himself,
or to have very honest men about him. Happy is that nation who has a wise and
pr^dent king, and at the same time honest and faithful ministers. Earthly
thrones are so infested with fawning flatterers, that if the prince is not very
well acquainted with his bible, it is difficult for him to know, whether he is
virtuous or vicious.


INPID. That is a book in little esteem. Great men are for the most part too
polite to trouble themselves with its contents, because they are so
unfavourable to their practices.


IMP. True, and by those means princes are more readily deceived. For a mitred
courtier may, perhaps, tell his prince, that it is lawful for a royal
personage, to deba^ch the wife or daughter of one of an inferior rank, but
unlawful for a plebian; notwithstanding his spiritual lordship knows very well,
that when God said, "Whoremongers and adulterers I will judge," he exempted not
the prince any more than the peasant, for with him there is no respect of
persons, on account of their worldly dignity.

Another right reverend courtier tells his prince, that it is allowable enough
in him, on the Sabbath, after the irksome service is over at church, to divert
himself with a quiet, civil game at chess, quadrille, or whatever his pious
inclination leads him to; and that it may be lawful for some favorite nobility
to assist at the sport; but, says he, it is utterly unlawful for the husbandman
and low mechanic; though the downy doctor knows well enough, that when the
Almighty sanctified the Sabbath, it was not a part only, but the whole Sabbath
he intended.


INFID. Well, Impiator, whatever license the right reverends allow at court,
their sable brethren in the country are not less indulgent; for in most
parishes in England the people may swear or pray, get drunk or communicate, go
to church or or stay at home, get to heaven or hell, just as their inclination
leads them, for any concern his reverence the parson gives himself, provided
always he is not cheated of his dues.


IMP. I know, I am well befriended by many clergymen; but to return to the
prince, I assure you I have often thought that, of all men, it is the greatest
difficulty for him to be a good man, and get safe to heaven. He has so many
about him, who a^^ base enough to commend even his vices, and but very few who
love him well enough to correct his errors. But if I become a moralist now,
you will suppose I act out of character. However, many have exhausted all their
wit and good nature upon the court liars, they are still the same, they lie as
fast as ever for the sake of money, estates, high places, etc. therefore some
people call them mercenary liars.

But many of the inhabitants of this canton are less ambitious, and will very
freely tell lies for a penny gain; amongst those are the traveling tradesmen,
who carry their shops upon their backs. Them we call the petty dealers, and the
humble l^^rs. But we have others more generous still, who will give you a lie
fresh from the mint, with no other view but to raise a laugh: these we call the
merry liars, because they go laughing to hell. Others we have who stand in the
capacity of godfathers and godmothers, who very roundly promise and vow for to
do for the child what they never inten^ (...) people call them the foolhardy
li^^. Next to them reside a very venerable tribe, called by the name of
reverend liars. Reverend, because in holy orders; and liars, because they tell
my lord bishop, that they are moved by the Holy Ghost, to take upon them the
office of a deacon whereas they are moved by the hope of a good living, not
knowing that there is such a being as the Holy Ghost; and deeming it enthusiasm
to profess to be moved by him. When once put into orders, and a benefice, those
worthy gentlemen rave against all who profess to be influenced in their
devotion, by the holy Spirit, as fanati^s, enthusiasts, and madmen. Now either
my good friend the parson lies to my lord bishop, or his congregation; but the
truth is he lies to both.

The fourth canton is, that of Sabbath Breakers, which is a very populous,
polite, and opulent canton indeed. The far greater part of the nobility, and
other gentlemen of rank and fortune, reside here: they are too well bred to
worship God on Sunday, in public or private. They scorn to suppose themselves
indebted to the Almighty for life, and bre^th, and all things; or to be
accountable to him for the use they make of their time, estates and talents.
They leave it, to the low-lifed mechanics, to go to church or meeting, or when
there, to be devout and take notice of what they are about. Let the parson talk
about heaven, or hell, or what he will, they are unconcerned, never once
supposing themselves endued with immortal souls.

There is my good friend, my lord Time-lagg, a nobleman of the first
distinction; he is so taken up through the week with contriving how to provide
for himself, and his creatures, that he is in no condition to go to church on
Sunday, but chooses some convenient part of it for an airing; either in the
coach with my lady, or on horseback with his consin, 'squire Idle. Mrs
Housekeeper also is very closely employed in preparing tea and chocolate
against their return. Mr. Steward is very busy in preparing his rentrolls,
studiously contriving how to extract an estate for himself, out of his
master's, so that he cannot go to church at any rate. The footman and my lady's
woman must needs attend their master and mistress, the coachman and postillion
must guide the machine; the butler and groom must be within call, one to take
care of the horses, and the other to furnish with claret or champaign; so that
the minister is very little obliged to his lordship for finding him an auditory
to preach to.

The London tradesmen come up as near to his lordship's example as their
circumstances will admit of; their spirits are quite exhausted with the
fatigues of weekly business, therefore instead of leading their families duly
to church, you may meet squadrons of them every Saturday night and Sunday
morning, going to regale themselves with a Sunday's pleasure, which consists in
^ating, carousing, and riding.

Then there is your Sabbath Day visitors; very genteel people. The tea-table
gossips are much concerned here, and hear you may find hundreds of tables, the
conversation of which is supported at the expense of the reputation of some
absent; for it must be observed that our gossips are so absolutely destitute of
innate ideas, and are such perfect strangers to the affairs of civil life, that
they cannot support conversation five minutes at a sitting, but by the help of
slander. Hence some people have faid, that slander is the very soul of
conversation. And sure enough if you will pick out all the slanderous
expressions from the conversation of our gossips, you will have but a very
scanty fragment remaining.

There are others so given up to indolence, that they keep great part of the
Sabbath in bed, on a couch, or in the easy chair; these people are so
exceedingly oppressed with the weight of their own bodies that they can attend at
neither church nor chapel, although active enough the other parts of the week;
and yet they are good Christians, and hope to go to heaven when they die; and
yet they seldom think of any thing, but living for ever, in order to which they
eat, drink, and sleep away the Sabbath. These go by the name of lazy
Sabbath Breakers, and all who are employed the whole morning, in preparing
superfluities for dinner, live along with them.

Another class of Sabbath Breakers, consists of the petty dealers, who by or
sell commodities, for back or belly, on the Sabbath day. We call them the
mistrustful Sabbathbreakers, because they cannot trust God with their
customers; and slothful Sabbath Breakers, because they do not provide for their
families, on the six days appointed for labor. England, with all its bravery,
is horribly disgraced by a set of pros^ne people, such as gro^^rs, chandlers,
butchers, ^^^bers, and bakers; who will not miss the taking apenny on the
Sabbath, any more than another day. Besides them, there are tailors,
mantua-makers, and shoe-makers, who with their late finishes, make great
encroachments on the Sabbath, and that in the most open manner.


INFID. I thought, in England, the law had made provision against such enormous
breaches of the Sabbath.


IMP. Yes, the law^ do indeed make provision for the suppression of such vices,
but I have the pleasure of seeing the enforcing of those laws, very often, left
with people, who are entirely devoted to my interest; so the laws are
frequently asleep, when I am awake and upon my rounds.

But there is another tribe against whom there is no human law. I mean the
thinking Sabbath Breakers; a careful, industrious set of people, esteemed by
all and known but to ^^w. They are constantly employed through the week, and
are glad of the Sabbath's approach, that they may repair their bodily fatigue,
and give a free scope to their plodding minds. When they awake on the Sabbath
morning, they are deeply contempla^ing some transactions of the past week, or
concerting measures proper to be followed in the ^^^^ing. Nor does the man
^lter his subject when he goes to church. No, he is quite uniform, try him, and
you will find him all of a piece. Let the parson choose what subject he will,
the other sticks to his text; so that it often happens when the minister thinks
his auditory is collected, and the bulk of his parish appear at church, he is
mistaken, for the greatest part of those whom he thinks to be present are only
there in appearance: their minds, their better part, being absent on other
occasions.

For instance, the parson sometimes thinks, that he sees 'squire Folly and
madam his lady, in the front pew of the right hand gallery: but he is mistaken,
for only their bodies are there, their minds are absent. As for the 'squire, he
is busy chasing the hare or fox, over all the hedges and ditches in his manor;
and his lady is mentally at this ball, or the other assembly, or at this play,
of the other opera; or perhaps she is cheapening silks at Mr. Caut's,
silk-mercer, on Ludgate Hill.

Sometimes the merchant seems to be at church; however he is only there in
body, his soul having sailed in the good ship Bonaventure, to buy slaves on the
coast of Guinea, or barter goods at Bengal or Malabar. The mercer, draper, and
grocer, seem sometimes to be there, but frequently it is an imposition, for
although their bodies may indeed be present, their souls are gone on a journey,
to visit their customers, or are left at home in the counting house, balancing
their books; examining their tradesmen's bills, that they may know with whom
they can deal to the greatest advantage. Perhaps issuing forth a capias against
'squire Latepay, a gentleman well known to those dealers; or it may be, the
soul is busy, entering protests against certain extravagant manufacturers.

As for the industrious farmer, you may well think, he has something else to
employ his mind, than either sermon or prayers; for it must needs require much
thought and forecast to determine right, where to sow his wheat, where his
clover, and what land to set apart for hemp; how to dispose of his young colt,
and the gray horse, who is in danger of losing his eyes. And he, good man, has
found from long experience, that he can contrive better at church than any
where else; and being willing to thrive in the world, he will let slip no
opportunity proper for advantageous consideration.

But I can tell you, sir, if the people so frequently put the cheat upon their
parson, he in his turn retaliates upon them; and many times when the
congregation flatter themselves that, they see the parson in and hear his voice
from the pulpit, they are mistaken, for it is only his body, his soul being
attending the levee of this nobleman, or the other bishop, making his court for
a fatter benefice. These, sir, are some of the thinking Sabbath Breakers.

Then there are the mad Sabbath Breakers, a set of the very dregs of humanity,
and yet by some means or other their impious practices are connived at,
notwithstanding interdicted by all laws divine and human. Such are our pellet
throwers in Yorkshire and Durham, our football tossers, who are sound all over
the nation; our leapers, runners, tavern-hunters, and all of every
denomination, who exercise themselves in any sport on the Sabbath, are
stationed along with the mad Sabbath Breakers.

Last of all there are our religious Sabbath Breakers, a district that is
formed of party zealots, and self-seekers, both preachers and hearers. As for
the former, their doctrine is various, one man preaches the pope, another,
preaches the councils, one preaches St. Dominie, another, St. Francis. One
preaches episcopacy, like the great Sacheveral, another preaches presbytery, as
the only way of salvation. One preaches up mankind in general, and another
preaches his own personal endowments in particular, but as for preaching Jesus
Christ, that is quite foreign to their purpose, and is therefore left to be
performed by others. Thus, sire, you have had a view of the canton of
Sabbath Breakers.


INFID. And a noble canton it is, my son, both rich and populous, of great
service to us, and vast enlargement to the territories of Beelzebub. How
illustrious is the throne of great Impiator! I long to have a description of
the rest of your kingdom, but for the present I must be gone, my son. Will you
please to give me a meeting here tomorrow morning?


IMP. I will, sir, adieu.


DIALOGUE VI. FASTOSUS and AVARO.
PRIVY to the appointment betwixt Fastosus and Avaro, I resolved to stay their
coming, and had not been long before I saw them at a distance, walking up the
valley toward me. Arrived at the usual place of conference, Fastosus struck
twice with his rod on the earth, and instantly there arose two thrones of the
blackest ebony, one of which he occupied himself, and the other was filled by
his cousin Avaro. Thus enthroned, Fastosus opened the conversation, whilst I
seized my pen, and sat eager to catch the fleeting sound.

FAST. You know, Avaro, when we parted in the morning, I was going to assist my
lady Gaity, to dress for her visit to my good lord Frolic. I went accordingly,
and hard work I assure you we had of it. As soon as I appeared before the
toilet, I received orders to render myself invisible, and not to depart the
room, that I might be in readiness to adjust the head-dress, and bosom
ornaments. Yes, madam, said I, I will give your ladyship due attendance; with
that I rendered myself invisible to her, but continued visible to all other
beholders. So to dressing we went. First we ornamented the feet, which was
attended with very considerable difficulty; it cost us several tyings and
^^tyings before her ladyship was pleased with her own foot. At last having
finished the feet, and my lady viewed them several times in every position, we
proceeded to other parts of the important work. First, we did and then we undid
every part of the finery* But our hardest work about the head and bosom was how
to put one as much as possible out of its native form, and to expose the other,
so as to make sure of attracting the eyes of beholders. Monsieur Frissieur, who
was our assistant, gave it as his opinion, that to come up to the very zenith
of the mode, it was necessary she should bear an head as much as possible, in
resemblance to a ram without horns; and Mrs. Prude, my lady's woman, told us
plainly, that Mrs. Pander, whose province it is to establish female customs,
had expressly declared, every lady worth above one hundred a year, ought in a
full dress to wear her bosom quite naked. My lady is adorned with excellent
hair, but it will not serve her except it bear a look the most unnatural
possible. Her skin, fair as alabaster, we were obliged to daub with patches,
the color of Belzebub's coat, as a token of her loyalty to the black prince of
the nether regions. But how to place these patches was a ^^^stion of no
ordinary concern, and hardly resolved at last* First, we tried one large patch
on her chin, but my lady soon perceived that it had the beauteous dimple, which
nature had there impressed, and therefore it was presently removed. Then we tried
how the cheek would answer, but alas! it obscured the lively rose, which is a
native there, and which my lady takes great delight to view in her glass; on
this account we exempted the cheek from the burden. At last, after much
anxiety, and very serious consideration, it was resolved that we should six it
on the middle of her forehead, resembling the eye of a cyclope, and put a
little one on the left side of her chin, bearing the likeness of a mole.
However, it cost several trials with them in both places, ere the patches would
(...) agreeable to her ladyship's fancy.


AVAR. Ah! Fastosus, if the ladies only knew, how ridiculous they make
themselves look in the eyes of the judicious, they would be very loath thus to
deform their native beauty. What delicate beauty? What perfect comeliness do we
see rendered disagreeable, and ridiculous by these transformations. And how can
they be but disagreeable and ridiculous, when all the decorations of nature lie
concealed, and nothing appears but the manufactory of art, that great
supplanter of nature? Such ladies are certainly greatly deceiv^d by you,
Fastosus; for the end proposed by all those metamorphoses is, to render
themselves agreeable to the gentlemen, whereas they produce the contrary
effect. Art can never beget love. This is nature's work alone. Art may indeed
excite lust; but nature alone begets that love which a virtuous lady would
strive to obtain. It is strange. Fastosus, that nature has so little, and
affectation such great concern among people of fashion as at this day? Well, I
hope you pleased her at last?


FAST. Yes, yes, I hope I did, but my work did (...) end with madam; for Mrs.
Prude, her woman, who w^ assisting us in the the equipment of her lady, and
often p^^ her tongue (...) cheek, and bit her lip, to prevent (...) laughing
out, when she saw her mistress's vanity. ^s soon as I had done with her lady,
beseeched me that I would put a few pins into her clothes, because she was to
attend her mistress to lord Frolick's; and notwithstanding my patience was
almost spent before, I was obliged to stay ever so long, pinning and unpinning
her, for Mrs. Prude affected the fine gentlewoman, almost as much as her
mistress.

But what vexed me worse than all the rest, was just as I got to the bottom of
the stairs, to make my escape, the cook-maid caught me in her greasy arms, and
begged me to assist her to dress herself in her half-holiday clothes, as her
sweetheart was to take the advantage of her lady's absence to come and visit
her. I could not deny the girl, (...) cause I thought she really had need of
considerable amendment before she presented herself to her lover. So after we
had pinned and unpinned a considerable time, I burst through the casement, to
avoid the importunity of the laundry and chamber-maids, whom I saw coming. Thus
I gave them the slip; for those ladies and their female attendants, would
drudge any devil in hell off his feet, might they have their own way. But I am
right glad that I am come hither from among them.


AVAR. Then, sir, I perceive with all your greatness, you have no objection to
assisting a waiting woman or a cook-maid occasionally.


FAST. No objection at all, cousin; the soul of a waiting woman will sill a
vacancy in hell, as well as that of her lady. The difference is this; the lady
of honor is capable of drawing more to hell along with her, than the
waiting woman can, therefore I choose to make sure of the mistress, and for the
most part the maid comes along by her example. But as soon as we get them
safely enclosed within our flaming prison, we let them see we are no respecters
of persons; for the mistress and her maids, my lord and his valet, the 'squire
and his groom, have all the same apartment allorted them, feed all at the same
table, drink of the same cup, and are served by the same devil, whom they never
find to be sparing of his liquor? but to serve them plenteously, though much
contrary to their inclinations.


AVAR. That doctrine you unpreach when you attend upon them, Fastosus. You
wisely keep your thumb upon that, and indeed it is well so to do; for comely as
your appearance is, they would discard you else. Serious thoughts of futurity
would spoil all our sport, uncle.


FAST Indeed, Avaro, I am not such an half-wit as to tell my lord, that his
riches and grandeur, if nor duly improved, will sink him lower in the
bottomless abyss, than the rustle plebcan; nor am I such an inconsiderate
devil, as to tell him that his hunting hawking, horse-coursing, cockfighting,
card-playing drinking, swearing, whoring, etc. are the broad ways to
never-ending torment. Neither do I foolishly tell, my lady, that balls,
assemblies, plays, etc. are the rosy paths which lead most infallibly to ruin.
No no, let me alone for that: I warrant me I can keep my counsel well enough;
and as for them they will find all out at last, without any instruction.


AVAR. If I remember right, Fastosus, when we parted last, you were relating
the manner in which you made your ^^^rance good amongst men; I should be glad,
sir, if you will be so obliging as to finish that account.


FAST. I purpose it. Avaro. You may remember I told you that, great Beelzebub,
having discovered the woman, to be the weaker vessel, he made no attempts upon
the virtue of the man, but resolved, by all means to seduce the woman, not
doubting but she would bring over her husband to our interest along with her.
It happened one night that Adam had a dream, ominous of our conquest, which
made him very fearful, lest any part of his, or his wife's conduct, should
promote the dire event; ^^erefore he reasoned with her, concerning their duty
to their Creator, gave her the strictest charge, to keep out of the way of
temptation, and withal informed (...) that he was not without his fear^ even
upon her (...). But she for her part, just as the devil would have it, resolved
to separate herself, from her husband that day, which she had never done
before. Whether she thought to endear herself more to him, by letting him see
how well she would resist temptation, if any should offer, or took it rather
ill, to be under his tutorage, I pretend not to say; but mangre all his
entreaties, she would go forth, by herself, into a distant walk, to gather some
delicious berries, for an innocent repast for her and her lord, at noon.

This was an opportunity, just to Belzebub's wish, and he took care to improve
it to advantage. I told you before, that previous to this, he had possessed the
body of a beautiful snake, in those days man's familiar domestic; and now
finding Eve at a distance from her husband, the serpent discovered himself to
her, and with more than animal gestures attracted her eye. Captivated with its
unusual motion, she stood ravished with its beauties, and admiring its agility.
As it drew near to her, she put forth her gentle hand, stroked its skin, and
the subtle animal^ after its manner, returned the compliment by laying its
shining head on her lap. Their ^ation was near to the tree of knowledge of good
and evil, upon which the forbidden fruit luxuriously hung. To this tree the
serpent frequently looked with all the languishment of ardent desire, till once
be made sure that the woman observed it. Lie still, thou pretty creature, said
she, (stroaking it) what makes thee look so earnestly at that prohibited
fruit?" "Ah! thou fair goddess, returned the serpent, I have good reason to
admire the sovereign virtue of that delicious tree: for I was created only in a
brutal station, without consciousness of mind, or the use of my tongue; till
being on my thoughtless ramble yesterday, I chanced to espy this amazing tree,
whose fruit hang^ in such luxuriance. After a sh^^^ pause, such as a brute may
be capable of. I climbed up the tree, and began to feast on the most delicious
fruit that ever was eaten. Joyful at my happy fate, I soon became sensible of a
self-conscious mind, capable of discerning between good and evil. Soon my
tongue, which before cleaved to the roof of my mouth, was united, and I could
express sentiments of joy in the most rational manner. And now when I met with
you, I was going to renew my repast on the fruit of that sovereign tree.


AVAR. Oh! Fastosus. The most subtle scheme that ever was heard of! Well, this
may be spoken to the honor of Beelzebub, when I am dead and gone.


FAST. Well, but Satan did not then know of the happy consequences that have
since arisen from this affair, to some part of the human race. However, having
laid his snare with all the subtilty he was master of, he thought it well to
assault the pure mind of Eve with unbelief See page 43.
. He asked her, if the reason why she was so divinely beautiful, was not her
feeding often upon the fruit of that so sovereign a tree? The woman answered,
"No, we have never so much as once tasted of it, but invariably observed the
command of our great Creator, who has put us into this garden, and said unto
us, "Of every tree of the garden ye may freely eat, but the fruit of the tree
of knowledge, of good and evil, ye may not eat, for in the day ye eat thereof
ye shall surely die." To whom the serpent. "Indeed! Did he really say so? Are
you not mistaken think you? Die too! why am not I dead then, I who have eaten
of it so plenteously? No, no, you shall not die. That is only an empty
threatening to keep you in subjection to him; for he very well knows, that the
moment you eat thereof, you shall be like himself, knowing good and evil; no
longer be man and woman, but become gods."

The woman replied, "Aye, but my pretty creature, how shall I know that I shall
be a goddess, if I should venture to eat of that desirable fruit." "Know! said
the serpent, you may easily know it, if you consider that, if I, who was
created only a brute beast, am by eating the fruit of this tree, exalted to
humanity, you, who are more than half a God already, shall certainly, by so
doing, be exalted to real divinity." With these words he injected into her
bosom some seeds of my nature, which fermented to that degree, that nothing
would now serve her turn but to be deified. Sagacious Beelzebub, perceiving the
uproar I had made in her mind, introduced all the train of real vices, which
now infect the human species; subjected her wholly to his sway, and she as his
instrument, could have no rest till she got her husband's neck also fast in
Belzebub's yoke.

Thus was pride first introduced into the terrene creation, and thus was man
subjected to my powerful sway. Being brought forth in the heart of man, I
arrived instantly at full growth, involved them in sorrow, enveloped them in
blindness and ignorance; and instead of that happiness and dignity which
Beelzebub had promised them, of becoming gods, I brought forth in them, trusty
(...), the elder born of my earthly family; and he, as a spirit of great power,
made Adam and Eve fly to a thicket, to hide themselves from the presence of an
offended God. Instead of becoming gods, I transformed them into the image and
likeness of father Beelzebub, in which image they begat and brought forth their
children. It was now that I begat the lovely Discordans; to us the more lovely,
because he is antinatural* No sooner was he born, but he sounded a trumpet, and
cried, "To arms, to arms." Then you might have seen the rhinoceros and
elephant, the eagle and dragon, the lion, panther and wolf, appear in all the
fury of martial spirit, and proclaimed an eternal war against one another: nor
were Adam and Eve exempted from domestic uneasiness themselves.


AVAR. All this worked just as the devil would have it; and greatly enlarged
the territories of hell, by annexing earth to the infernal crown. Well, uncle,
I perceive by your account, that you are the father of sin, in the mind of both
angels and men.


FAST. True, Avaro, I am, and so well is my power established, that I am the
very last that shall be subdued, and rooted out of the hearts, even of those
that hate me, and who at last shall be delivered from my yoke. This is true,
cousin, whether you believe it or not, and I assure you, that, I have the
pleasure of giving many a painful heart-pang, even to those who curse my name
and nature. But to my story, cousin, I manifested my powerful sway over man, in
the case of my faithful servant Cain, not only in his bloody revenge against
his brother Abel, who had revolted from (...) government, but in making him
despair under his punishment.

I triumphed gloriously over the inhabitants of the antidelusion world, who for
my sake, scorned to submit to the commandments of God, resolving to be guided
by the thoughts of their own hearts, all of which were inspired by me,
therefore every thought and imagination of the heart was only evil continually.
I wrought them up to such a degree of rebellion, that the Almighty resolved to
bear with them no longer, but to sweep them away with the besom of destruction;
yet he would not do it without giving them proper warning, and calling them to
repentance and reformation. One, Noah, a famous preacher of righteousness, was
the instrument raised up, on this occasion, and to be sure the man preached
faithfully, and fervently; but I had the pleasure of hardening the peoples
hearts to that degree, that he met with nothing but abuse for his pains. Every
body accounted him to be a frantic enthusiast, fanatic, or methodist; till the
divine patience was quite worn out, and their destruction came upon them by a
deluge, which swept ^^^em all from the face of the earth, except this same Noah
and his family; and for my part I do not remember a time, on which hell had so
many visitants at once as then.


AVAR. But how could Noah and his family be saved, when the deluge came upon
all the earth?


FAST. Why, Avaro, it was by the help of a ship, which he was taught to build.
For this same Noah was the first ship-carpenter in the world, and although a
prince, he was not above laboring with his hands. But it galls me to think,
how the Almighty mixes mercy with judgment, for in this destruction which he
brought upon the old world, he taught the new world the most necessary and
useful art of navigation, by means of which, he will spread the knowledge of
himself over all the earth.

After this I set up my lofty standard on the plains of Shinar; multitudes
flocked to it, and became my humble servants. It was now. I projected the
scheme of erecting a tower equal in altitude to Jacob's ladder. Two special
advantages I alleged to them would acerue from it when fi^^hed. The first to
perpetuate their name to the latest posterity; the second and greatest
advantage would be, that thereby they might bid defiance to the Almighty. Such
provision being made for their safety that, on the first appearances of
judgment begun, they might retire to the tower, where the waters could not
follow them. But here you may observe, I played the devil with the children of
men, for, although I flattered them with such advantages, I believed in my
heart, that such a presumptuous, daring undertaking, would have provoked the
Almighty, utterly to have destroyed them root and branch. And indeed at one
time I thought I had gained my po^^t, for he did come down and confound their
language in such a manner, that the great design miscarried. It was diverting
to hear the bricklayer call for mortar, and lo, a box of brick was brought him;
another calls for bricks, and the server ^^^s for a board of mortar: one calls
out for a level, and he receives a plumbline; another asks for a square, and a
level is brought him. The bricklayers, provoked to see themselves mocked by
their servants, not as yet knowing their language to be consounded, began to
lay their resentment upon the bones of their laborers; and the laborers
considering themselves as very ill used, returned the abuse upon the builders,
and thus they quarreiled and bickered, (...) they were fain to leave off ^he
work, and beta^e themselves to other employments.

But alas! cousin, in this affair the devil was outwitted; for we all thought
that this haughty attempt would have provoked God utterly to destroy them; but
he made use of our project only to send them abroad to people the earth, the
(...) widely to make his glories known. And to the deep mortification of all
our black fraternity, especially father Beelzebub, upon the ruins of the tower
was written, in everlasting characters, the following (...). "Here the devil
overshot himself." But this was a trif^ing ^^suppointment in comparison of many
others, some of which I may perhaps give you an account of.

Wherever the sons of Noah went, I went along with them, and not a great number
of years had the earth been dry, before I persuaded them to forge, found, and
carve to themselves objects of religious adoration, more agreeable to their
fancy, than the God who made them; and by this means it was, that pagan
idolatry was introduced, which, strictly speaking is the religion of pride
alone; even as the present Roman catholic religion is that of pride and
covetousness. I will tell you strange things of my government. Avaro, at a time
convenient; but as we were coming along, you mentioned somewhat about the
clergy of France, pray what of them, cousin?


AVAR. I have often, sir, made honorable mention of the dutiful disposition of
my dear children, the French parsons; but I had some years ago, occasion to try
an experiment, which greatly quickened their devotion, and clothed the face of
all the country with poignant sorrow. By their unwearied pursuit of the
interest of the church, that is to say, by their coaxing, wheedling, and
threatening of people, out of their goods and chattles, for the benefit of the
clergy; they were grown so fat and purse-proud, they were not able to say half
of the masses they were paid for, nor to attend upon the duties of their
pretended devotion; which persisting in, they themselves would have contributed
(...) the opening of peoples eyes, to discover the cheat.

I imagined that nothing could be more suitable, than physic, to purge off some
of their grossness. I went straight to Versailles, demanded an interview with
the most Christian Louis, and accordingly was introduced by one of the lor^^
(...) his bedchamber. As soon as he had done me greeting after the royal
manner, proportionable to his very great esteem for me, I opened the
conversation in the following manner: "My royal friend, said I, perceiving that
you have been ransac^ing the world lately in quest of gold, to supply your
pressing and growing wants, I am come to inform you where you may meet with
store of ^^o^dores, yea, treasures in abundance, without traveling out of your
own dominions." "Is it possible, said he, I pray thee lovely spirit, where are
the golden heaps to be found?" I replied, "the clergy, the clergy, sir, are so
overgrown in riches, that they are hardly able to say an hospitable mass for
the dead, or even to go about to cheat and defraud people out of their money
and souls as heretofore." "Ungrateful villains, said he, to hoard up their
money to lie by them useless, when I, their king, am just at the point of
becoming bankrupt. I Will ease them of their burden, I warrant you; I Will let them
for once know, that they have another master besides the pope, and leave it to
them to replace their stores the nearest way they can." I was not afraid but my
scheme would work to my mind, for I took him at the very ^ick of time, when the
king of England had emptied his coffers, by destroying his naval force and
trade; and poor gentleman he knew not well how to fill them again.

Glad of such an opportunity, he assembled the heads of the clergy, and
demanded of them an exorbitant sum, in the way of a free gift; a very genteel
way of robbing the church indeed. The holy gownsmen, like dear children of
their good Avaro, showed themselves as tenacious of their gold, as the paw of a
lion is of its prey. They used every argument which priestly subtilty could
invent; they lugged in both heaven and earth as protectors of their property;
yea, they even told him that to command them to part with their money, was no
less than robbing the Almighty, just as if the Almighty and them were partners
in the trade of priestcraft. But clergymen have the advantage of all princes in
that, their cause is always the cause of God; although God, has in reality,
nothing to do with them or it. They held both with teeth and hands, rather than
generously to assist their sovereign, though now become almost insolvent. But
you know the proverb, "The weaker goes to the wall;" and so it was with them.
He being stronger than they, prevailed, and although their money came from
their coffers like blood from their hearts, they were obliged to comply. But I
can assure you, the parting with it cost them more real distress of soul, than
ever the selling of their consciences to obtain it had done. The sorrow of the
priests is for the most part a farce, but their sorrow on this occasion, was
deep and unfeigned.

It was not a great while after that, moidores failed a second time, and other
resources being drained, he again had recourse to the sons of the clergy; and
did by them as they commonly do by the laity. I mean, their money being gone,
he was content with stripping them of their plate; so that were you now to see
the cabin^^ of a French priest, you would find it as empty of plate as Gland
the shepherd's pantry. And I am of opinion, that Louis having found the way to
their nest, he will take care, they be no more overgrown in riches. But to
repair their late losses they can now look out for a prey, with as much
penetration as an eagle, and are rapid as a panther in seizing on it.


FAST. It is my opinion, cousin, that, if princes were to take care that the
church should not become too rich, there would not be so many religions as
there are; but who would not be a priest, or a nun, when they may r^ll amidst
the blessings of both worlds; and under the pretense of religious retirement,
enjoy every thing grateful to the flesh, in the greatest luxuriance, without
any labor or toil of their own. I assure you, cousin, if I were not a devil, I
would choose to be a priest myself.


AVAR. Being a priest is not such a great privilege now as it has been, though
it is still preferable to any trade of the lay kind, the expulsion of the
^esuits has been very injurious to priestcraft. The church is sure to thrive in
the reign of a prince who is under the direction of a jesuitical confessor: and
the priesthood will always find in him a powerful protector: but I fear much
that the princes of Europe from their late advances, will at last throw off the
yoke of ecclesiastical tyranny.


FAST. In fact, cousin, it is not a little strange, that they have not done it
ere now. Nothing can be more preposterous, than for a prince, who has
sovereign sway over extensive dominions, to be under the control of an
arrogant priest, as if it were by him that kings reign, and princes decree
judgment. Or as if he were the prince of the kings of the earth.

However, cousin, you forgot that it is time for us to go on our nocturnal
circuits. Mine is very extensive, I must therefore bid you adieu. Tomorrow
morning let us meet here.


DIALOGUE VII. INFIDELIS and IMPIATOR.
FROM what I had heard and seen, you may think I took care not to be too late,
in attending the fable gentry in Horrida Vallis, where I was got before any of
them arrived; and prepared for taking down their discourse, the first of which,
that I heard, was by Infidelis to Impiator.

INFID. How illustrious is thy throne? How extensive are thy dominions, oh!
great Impiator, my son! Before you the greatest grandees of the earth do bow.
Will you please, my s^n, to finish your account of the remaining part of your
territories?


IMP. I will sir, and you may observe that the fifth canton is that of the
adulterers and fornicators. These are divided into literal and mystical. The
class of literal adulterers and fornicators, are so fashionable and notorious a
people, that a description of them seems unnecessary; and so very disagreeable,
that it would be offensive to you. I shall therefore do no more than describe
their dwelling, and assure you, sire, that every individual of them is a very
humble servant to your son Impiator. Their dwelling is on the banks of a river,
the source of which is in the court which runs through every part of the king's
dominions, carrying the inhabitants along with it; and at last disembogues
itself in hell, where all adulterers and fornicators shall infallibly be
tormented, as a proper counter-balance for their fleshly pleasures; where
instead of women, they shall have devils; instead of wine, the sulphurous
liquid; and instead of beds of down, the boisterous billows of Phlegethon.

Next to them are the mystical adulterers and fornicators. By whom I mean, all
that have any commerce with the whore of Rome, that old bawd with the scarlet
gown: or in other words, all who have the mark of the beast, either on their
foreheads, or their right hands, and such who have this mark upon both.

By those who have the mark of the beast upon their foreheads, I mean the
worthy preachers and hearers of the Arminian doctrine of the church of Rome; as
also the straithooped gentlemen, who believe with the charitable Italians, that
there can be no true faith but that which they profess, nor salvation but in
their community. The far greater part of the clergy belong to the former, and
the good Sandemanians, belong to the latter class of doctrinal papists, or
mystical adulterers.

By these who have the mark of the beast upon their right hand, I mean the
practical papists; the whole bulk of the holy catholic church, and besides
them, all that do the works of the beast, after the example of that orthodox
church. By the works of the beast, some understand every part of religion which
is not founded upon scripture institution. Such, say they, are consecrating of
churches, baptizing of bells, dedication of ^^eeting-houses to certain saints
or angels, as the patrons of parishes; the worshipping of saints and angels, by
celebrating an annual festival in honor of their name; such are your observers
of high festivals; abstinence from meat at certain seasons of the year;
worshipping toward the east, as if God were not every where present. Bowing at
the name of Jesus, as if it was more august than that of Jehovah, etc. Such,
sir, with many more whom I might name, are the mystical adulterers and
fornicators.


INFID. Aye, but my son, you have not told me which are the fornicators, and
which the adulterers; I want to hear that, for the one is usually distinguished
from the other.


IMP. Yes, sir, they are distinguishable enough: for the practical professed
papists, profess not the least degree of relation to Jesus Christ, as the head
of the Christian church, but own themselves to be the adorers of the whore, who
sits on many waters, are held to be the fornicators; whereas nominal
protestants, profess themselves married to Jesus Christ, as the great head of
the Christian church, and notwithstanding this pretended marriage with him,
maintain a doctrinal commerce with the whore of Rome; on which account they are
to be held as the adulterers.

The sixth canton is the murderers habitation, which is divided into two grand
divisions. In the first are murderers of others, these are subdivided into
petty cantons. In the first of which live the mental murderers, just upon the
frontiers of the country. They are a people, who, without just cause, are angry
with their neighbors; this lambent flame they inwardly cherish, till revenge
is begotten along with hatred, envy, and malice; with them, therefore, nothing
is wanting but opportunity to destroy the reputation and life of the object of
their hatred, with safety to themselves; but very often it happens that their
hatred and revenge destroy their subjects, ere they have an opportunity of
avenging themselves. The verbal murderers live next to them, in a very spacious
country, because they are very numerous. By the verbal murderers I mean, those
who withhold from the character of others, the good which they do deferve, and
speak of them the evil which they do not deserve; or even the evil which they
do deserve, in a way, in which they would not wish others to speak of
themselves, in like circumstances. I attend, for my (...), in many companies,
where the conversation cannot possibly be supported, for a quarter of an hour,
but at the expense of some absent (...), and so fashionable is this, in polite
life, that it is become a proverb. That scand^^ is the very life and soul of
conversation. To this petty canton belong all tale-bearers, backbiters,
railers, evil-furmisers, and particularly the very obliging gentry, who tack,
But, to the end of all their encomiums on others, as He is a good sort of
gentleman, But -- or she is an agreeable lady enough, But -- where you may
observe, that little unintelligible word, But, stabs the gentleman and lady's
reputation through and through.

Having past through this, you come into the country of those who murder with
their looks. In this country you may see an eye to curse a man to hell and
damnation, and an eye-brow, call a man a scoundrel, and knock him down. The
Rev. Mr. Adam Gib, primate of the associate synod in Scotland, has lately had
his heart wounded so deeply, by the looks of some of his elders, that it is
thought he cannot recover the stroke as long as he lives; but for the good of
the public, he has prosecuted them before the presbytery, who, without
enquiring into facts, sentenced the reputation of the irreverend elders to be
hanged, drawn, and quartered, to the great consolation of the p^^^s sufferer.
As soon as you get out of this country, you come

Fourthly, Into a very extensive plain, inhabited by what may be called
domestic murderers. A set of beings who murder with impunity, no suitable laws
being provided against them.

Here dwells the parent who spends wastefully, what should regularly support
his family, so that his children are brought up in the most dissolute, and
irreligious manner, as a preparati^e to the must vicious practices; hence, who
her the children prove (...) or vicious, strict equity accounts the (...) and
careless parent the murderer, Near to these (...) parents lives the lascivious
husband, who estrangeth himself from hi^ lawful consort, and frequenteth the
company of lewd women. Many you may find here, who, as the very worst of
selous, rob their wives and children of their legal property, to support the
most infamous strumpets, who, like the horse leach, are continually saying,
give, give. Such men are sure to find the truth of that saying. "A whore is a
deep ditch." Here it is a very common thing to see the most virtuous women, so
ill used by their murderous husbands, that they languish and grieve under their
affliction, till at last they die of a broken heart. No assassin ever better
deserved the gallows, than such husbands; ^or no assassin ever put the person
whom he murdered to equal torture. The very same may be said of the l^scivious
strumpet, of high or low degree, who is false to her husband.

Among domestic murderers, live the parents who, for the sake of an agreeable
settlement, oblige their children to marry, with persons whom they cannot
possibly love. This lays a sure foundation for certain murder, and brings the
party to the grave in the most distressing manner.

But if covetous parents, would only consider, that a compelled marriage is
worse than a poisoned dagger, pl^nged into the bosom of their offspring; they
would certainly have more compassion than to persist in the iniquitous measure.
Here likewise live those, who restrain their children from marrying the objects
of their choice, merely because there is a deficiency, of a few hundreds, or
thousands in the fortune, Parents, who can relish nothing but money, and have a
a wrong notion of honor, make no s^ruple of conscience, to render their
children miserable all their days, rather than suffer them to marry a degree
and an half below themselves. It is very strange, that the laws of nations
should make no provision against this murder; and stranger still that those of
Britain countenance and encourage it.

However, marriages are seldom happy, where the affections are not joined,
prior to the matrimonial ceremony. Money may unite the persons, but it cannot
unite the affections, as appears in numberless instances: of which
disconsolate, dull and heavy husbands, brokenhearted wives, frequent divorces,
elopements, domestic quarrels, and divided families, the natural effect of
forced marriages are evidences.

There is yet another species of domestic murderers, connived at by the law.
They are such who, not only train up their children in idleness, but in luxury
and wantonness. By these means, their spendshrift sons, if of high birth, are
fitted to become robbers of the nation, when their own fortunes are spent; and
if of middle life, they are fitted for the highway, and consequently for the
halter. Nor is this method of training up, less fatal in its influence, on the
female sex, for it prepares them for the stews, or the suburbs of the stews,
where gentlemen's courtezans dwell, perhaps for theft, and then for the gallows.
Idleness and luxury, is as rank poison to the mind, as arsenick is to the body.
Many people indeed, lament the young gentleman's unhappy fate when he is going
to Tyburn; but very few censure his parents, as the first cause of his untimely
end, by the manner in which they brought him up. This is some comfort to us
however, that though such domestic murderers act with impunity from man, the
law of God will take such notice of them, as to bring them to hell, if their
crimes are not repented of. To be sure it would be more agreeable to us, to see
them enter hell by way of Tyburn: but the devil cannot always have his will.

Another sort, are very careful to preserve the bodies of their children, by
providing diligently for them, (...) necessaries and conveniences of life; as
they grow up, are as careful to preserve them from the highway and the stews,
by putting into their hands a business by which to obtain a comfortable
livelihood; and after all prove the murderers of their children. For on the one
hand, they restrain them not from bad company, which leads to destruction;
company that corrupt the principles, vitia^^ the conduct, and lead into bad
practices; such as Sabbath-breaking, gaming, lying and swearing, etc. Nor on
the other hand, do they take any pains to cultivate their infant minds, further
than to know how, when, and to whom they should make a genteel bow and curtesy,
and how to express the modish compliments in a graceful manner. They never once
deem it necessary to instill into their minds an early sense of religion and
virtue.

Many parents, if their children learn a little polite behavior, do not much
care whether they read the bible at all.

In this country too dwell duellers, boxers, boasters, and provokers; all the
bands of assassins, and intriguers against men's lives. His ho^ry holiness, is
captain general of this band, also his cardinals and inquisitors are next to
him in honor. Here dwell persecutors of every name: popish, episcopal or
presbyterian; all who impose religion on men's consciences by the power of the
sword.

The second division is that of self-murderers, and I assure you, sir, this is
a very populous place, more crowded than the former. Here dwell gluttons,
drunkards, and intemperate persons in general; for there are more who eat and
drink themselves to death, than the fever, the consumption, and the sword
destroy. Idle, lazy, and slothful persons, live here, under the character of
second-hand murderers, their idle habits introducing diseases of the most fatal
nature. The immoderately careful also, kill themselves with mere anxiety. In
the next town the envious are stationed (...) those who are as mortally wounded
by the prosperity of their neighbor, as any man can be by a dagger. (...)
suburbs live those whom we call the impatient, for (...) is not so very
deathly, as impatience under it. Over the bridge live the ambitious, a people
of lofty views (...) crack their heart strings, by climbing. In the
neighborhood of the latter live the lascivious, who kill themselves by little
and little, and ^^^boil their flesh, ere they present it to the worms. I might
add to this list, a prodigious number besides, known amongst us by the name of
foul murderers; but as I was never very remarkable for knowledge in casuistical
divinity, I shall leave this to others, and proceed to

The seventh and royal canton of drunkards; which is divided into two very
grand divisions the first of which is inhabited by the sot, and the second by
merry companions. The soaking s^ts, are a well seasoned race, who seem as if
some of their ancestors had been of the bristly kind* They are a swinish set of
people, always grunting, but when their lips are in the cup, unless it may be,
that the calf mounts them in the morning and rides them till half past two,
then dismounts just in the middle of dinner, and the eager swine vaults into
the saddle, and rides them till they are lame. The ensign of the sots division,
is a long tobacco pipe, and greasy fore-breasts of a coat; and if any man have
business with them, he would do well to wait on them in the morning, before the
calf dismounts; for after that they can do nothing but grunt, till sleep
dismount the pig again; thus they are ridden alternately by the calf and the
pig. (...) ^he so^^ drink merely for the sake of liquor, and in process of
time, their blood becomes so inflamed, that they carry the arms of their
company upon their faces which are dyed into a kind of bastard scarlet color,
and grow as rough as the skin of a shark, with preternatural pimples.

The second division is that of merry companions, or according to men of
learning, good-fellows. They abhor the name, (...) the practice of drunkards;
you could not affront the^ ^orse, than by telling them, they are in love with
the (...), for the sake of her liquor. Were you to ask them (...) reasons for
frequenting the tavern, they would soon (...) you, that it is not for any love
they have (...) the liquor, (...) go there merely for the sake of good company.
By the way, sire, they go to the wrong place to seek for it, for no good
company haunt taverns and alehouses. Good company is most likely to be found in
good places, but taverns and alehouses, are quite of another cast, being public
portals, through which many pass to the nether reigons. Yea, such a good
opinion has Beelzebub conceived of them, that many of the landladies, and their
daughters, are appointed his factors and agents upon earth.

It is the practice of merry companions, to meet at the tavern, or some other
place of public resort, as many evenings in the week as business will admit of,
to read and expound the newspapers, give their opinion of the proceedings of
the ministry, of commercial transactions, or to comment on the operations of
war. Sometimes they meet to play what they call a civil game at cards,
back-gammon, etc. or it may be to reproach some neighboring presbyterian
parson, for his affected sanctity: for you must know that they not only hate
sanctity itself, but its very appearance. Often you may hear them deride the
fanatic, for what they call his narrow and biggotted spirit, and at the same
time, applaud the reverend Mr. Live-loose, for an affable, free and generous
soul. Many of those merry companions, who will by no means bear the name of
drunkard, I can pick you out, who will drink a bottle or two at a sitting, and
go home betwixt one and two in the mo^^ing with eyes as fierce as those of a
hy^^na.

In short, sir, if you were to go through my canton of drunkards, when our men
are all at work, you would hear as great a noise, as if Vulcan with his cyclops
were there, hammering thunderbolts for Jupiter. And would certainly imagine,
that hell had burst its belly, and poured (...) entrails amongst us, on account
of the hideous (...) swearing, damning, sinking, scolding, and bawlin^ (...)
^ing and fighting, boasting, lying, cheating, and uncle^^ (...), looks and
gestures, which there abound. This (...) the royal canton, out of which I
choose all my (...) men; which you must own to be sound policy, for if (...)
get a man to become a drunkard, I can cause him to commit what wickedness I
please; and I must tell you, that this canton is inhabited by men of all ranks,
occupations, and persuasions.

Thus, reverend father, I have given you a brief account of my dominions, but
if you were to pass through the several cantons, and see them all yourself, you
would say, that the hundredth part has not been told you.


INFID. Oh! my child! my dear Impiator, how my aged heart is filled with joy,
on hearing your pleasing story. Illustrious indeed is the kingdom of Profanity.
You honor me, my son! Your success does great honor to the name of Infidelis.
But I pray, do you know any thing of a set of people, whom they call Nazarenes;
^^y are the only people in the world who have cast off my yoke. Oh! how it
would rejoice me to hear, that your craftiness, had engaged them in your
service!


IMP. I know them very well. A small body of despised, precise creatures, hated
by all the world* I assure you, sir, I have done all that lies in my power, to
bring them under our dominion. But mortified I am to tell you, that I have
never been able to conquer one of them. Immanuel has published very strict
laws in his kingdom, absolutely prohibiting his subjects from touching,
tasting, or handling any thing that belongs to us, or so much as visiting our
cantons; and they are so firmly attached to his government, that it is with the
greatest difficulty, now and then, we get one of them down into our mines. But
when such a thing does happen, my subjects have a good day of feasting and
mirth; send gifts to one another, of such things as they have and the shouts of
joy, "So we would have it," may be heard ^^^ll the cantons of our dominions.

For (...), it happened once that Noah, who was in the main, ^^^^ter enemy to
our government, was induced to make a (...) to the drunkards country, which
caused much gladness (...) the land. The triumphal flag was displayed upon
(...) of Ham, wherever the news were spread, and every man reported to his
neighbor, saying, "Behold he is become like one of us." At the same time, the
confederates of Shem, covered themselves with sackcloth, put ashes on their
heads, exchanged their pleasant songs for lamentations, mourning and woe; till
the patriarch was safely returned to his own country again.

It happened also o^ a certain time, that I was happy enough to inveigie David
the great, within the borders of the adulterers canton; who, to cover the
infamy of such an expedition, ^^^hed with violent precipitation into the very
heart of the canton of murderers. The monarch's arrival was soon proclaimed
among all the murderers and adulterers, who made a grand entertainment on the
occasion, and invited the blaspheme^^ to partake with them. Oh! Infidelis, if
you had been there, certainly you would have tired your sides with laughing, to
see how they footed the treble dance, whilst the music played. "The best of
them are as bad as ourselves" And all joined together in this chorus, "What we
do in public, they do in private,
"The difference is only in show."
Then they clapped their hands, and shouted, "So, ho! brave boys Now we are all
on one side. The man after God's own heart has joined our communion. The
psalmist of Israel is now one of ourselves. Hypocrites altogether, who pretend
to more religion than others. Thus, sire, from the fall of one, our people
concluded that all were bad.

The like fell out in the case of Peter, the Apostle, who, on a very dark
night, missing his way, was first trapped in the liars share, and then in the
swearers gin, so that he denied the Lord who bought him, and cursed and swore,
that he did not so much as know jesus of Nazareth. I can tell you when such a
thing does happen, that we entrap one of the Nazarenes, it greatly increases
the industry of my subjects, and bends them more than ever, under my yoke.
Indeed, as there is no other way to Zion, but what lies directly through the
very heart of my dominions; there is now and then, one of them tumbles into our
mines, especially in the dark and long nights of winter.


INFID. Now and then, child! I thought you had often companies of them at once
in your dominions.


IMP. No, sir, I cannot say so. I Will tell you how the mistake happens. We
frequently have companies of those who are called Nazarenes, it is true; but
then the name and the nature, are two different things, all the world over. In
order to bring true Christianity into disgrace: the great and wise Beelzebub
stirs up some of our country people, to put on the outward habit of the
Nazarenes, join their company, and travel with them, almost to the borders of
the kingdom of Profanity, but not one of them can be persuaded to set a foot
out of their own country. As those people pass along the road, in their own
country, it is not much to be wondered at, if they do occasionally try their
hands at their old employments. But as for the real Nazarenes, I assure you, I
very seldom meet with one, who has curiosity so much as to view our land as he
passes through it. Even when our subtle emissaries do entrap one, let me and
my chivalry do what we can, we never detain him beyond a certain time; when
some powerful messenger is d^spatched from the skies, to deliver him out of our
tenacious hands. But we have the satisfaction of often procuring them an hearty
drubbing, so that many of them afterward go halting to their graves. I myself,
have seen Immanuel meet them, in the very midst of our kingdom, s^ize, bind,
and chastise them, till with blurred faces, they humbly submitted to kiss the
rod, and heartily blessed God, that ever the birch-tree was planted.


INFID. Aye, child, they are made to kiss the rod, that is, the plagne of it;
for then they bid farewell to the pleasures of Profant^y. Oh! were it but
possible, by any means, to harden them against the rod, what advantages might
we reap from it! Of indeed could we, as I have often strove to do, make them
faint under it; it would answer the same end: but, beyond all our power to
hinder, Immanuel does some how, along with the stroke, convey sustaining
strength. Yea, sometimes, even makes the rod itself, in some respects,
pleasant, and at all times profitable to them. Ah! my son, we shall never be
able to rob him of one of his own, for when he chastises them with a visible
hand, he sustaineth, and comfort them with an hand invisible.

But let us not be discouraged, nor yield the contest. Let us destroy whom we
can, and let us disturb, and distract the minds of those whom we cannot
destroy. Let us think of the great Beelzebub, what achievements he is daily
performing, notwithstanding he groans in the yoke of eternal despair? And for
your encouragement, my dear Impiator, let me tell you, such is your care, to
maintain a despotic sway over your subjects, and such is their attachment to
your person and government, that both you and they may be assured of warm
lodgings in the palace of great Beelzebub, as soon as this world cease to be
the stage of action.


IMP. Yes, sir. Such is the flourishing state of my kingdom at present; but I
have many shocks at one time and another; it is but a few years since, I was
terribly afraid, lest I should have lost my British subjects.


INFID. Lost your British subjects, my son! Who, or what is he, who dared to
attempt any thing against the great Profanity?


IMP. Ah! fi^e^ A powerful enemy, no less a person than George the third. He
was an enemy to my powerful sway, when he was only prince of Wales, and as soon
as he ascended the throne, he more openly showed his dislike to me: publishing
an edict for banishing me from his dominions, enjoined his officers to
apprehend me, wherever I was to be found: and under the penalty of his
displeasure, prohibited his subjects from entertaining me at any time,
especially upon the Sabbath Day; a day on which I am used to get above double
business done for Beelzebub. Had I not been well befriended by the British
nobility, as well as by the commons of the land, bad days had come upon me, for
what will not precept, enforced by example, be able to accomplish?

Had he, like many princes before him, only enacted laws against me, and still
continued to correspond with me himself, I should have had little to fear; but,
would you think it, sir, he actually attempted to clear the court of me; will
suffer no swearing in his presence, nor gaming on the Sabbath evenings in his
palace, and even discourageth drunkenness and debauchery. Indeed, sir, if
inferior magistrates had all been of the same disposition, with their king,
poor Impiator had been obliged to quit the realm, and live in exile, like the
devil Crudelis.


INFID. That the king of England, is a sober and virtuous prince, will admit of
no dispute; but the case of Impiator can never be desperate, whilst you and I
are in such high esteem with so many magistrates and placemen. We shall be
regarded much sooner than he. So long as inferor magistrates can be kept in
subjection to us, there is no fear of our interest, let the prince be ever so
virtuous. I as an old stander in the world, have seen much of mankind, and out
of my consummate experience shall offer some things for your encouragement.

A good king may enact good laws, but it is impossible he should execute them
without the assistance of his subjects; therefore your kingdom, my son, can
never suffer, till a law be made, which shall render all common drunkards,
swearers, Sabbath Breakers, whoremongers, extortioners, etc incapable of the
office of a magistrate. Whilst magistrates can suffer buying and selling on the
Sabbath Day; whoredom, drunkenness, and swearing, to abound in the streets,
with impunity, what has Impiator to fear? Does it not demonstratively prove,
that such magistrates are firmly attached to the devil Impiator. No danger, my
(...) no danger at all. Let the king and queen both abhor you ^^ver so much,
unless they can get men of virtuous dispositions, established in places of
trust, the devil Impiator shall reign in spite of all they can do to prevent it.

Do you think that a magistrate, who is himself a drunkard, will ever strive to
suppress the beastly sin of drunkenness in others? Or that he who is a profane
swearer, and tolerates the practice of swearing in his own household, will ever
exert his power to suppress it in others? Can it be thought, that a man who
keeps his woman, instead of his wife, will be very assiduous to suppress the
reigning sin of whoredom? Or, that he who can without conscience, grind the
faces of the poor, will ever be a promoter of piety. Never fear it, Impiator.
All you have to do is to debauch the minds of as many magistrates as you can,
then you will have the vulgar of course, when they see vice reign with
impunity. This second sighted devil, seems to have judged rightly of the case,
for profaness of every kind, has made most awful advances in the present reign,
notwithstanding the virtue of the sovereign. Divorces, consequent upon conjugal
infidelity, were never so rife, since England became a nation. Masquerades and
routs, which received but little countenance in some former reigns, in this,
meet with all that the vainest heart can wish for. That this is the case, let
Cornely's, the pantheon, and the female cotery bear witness.



IMP. After all, sir, I think there is reason for some fear, when we consider
the power of example. You remember how, according to tradition, it turned the
heads of all the Macedonian army to the one shoulder, in the days of Alexander,
and how it raised a hump upon most of the genteel backs in England, in the days
of king Richard the third, of bloody memory. Now, sir, if example were to have
the like effect at present, Impiator could not live in England.


INFID. I am sensible, son, that a virtuous example is not without its proper
influence; but this I have always seen, people are more easily drawn by
example, into vice, or even in^^ things indifferent, than into virtue. Assure
yourself it will require a stronger power than the example of the best and
wisest of men, to draw a vicious person to the love of virtue.

Should the virtuous example of a prince have any influence upon others, you
must take care to nickname them, get them pointed and hissed at, and despised,
and all will go on very quietly.

Let us go now in quest of our kindred, my son: I expected to have seen some of
them here this morning.


DIALOGUE VIII. INFIDELIS, AVARO, FASTOSUS, IMPIATOR, DISCORDANS.
INFIDELIS and Impiator had but just done talking together, and were about
departing, when Fastosus, Avaro, and Discordans came up the valley, and saluted
each his kindred, in which salutation Infidelis thus began.

INF. Honor and renown to the great Fastosus! Furious contentions to restless
Discordans; and heaps of glittering wealth to the careful Avaro. To which
infernal salutation

FASTOSUS replied, Darkness and confusion surround my brother Infidelis;
lewdness and debauchery attend my cousin Impiator: I am glad to see so many of
our family in the valley at once,


INF. I pray you, cousin Discordans, how do you do? these many weeks have
passed since I saw you.


DIS. Even jaded out of breath, uncle. How do you do, most rev. sir? And how do
you, my worthy cousin?


INF. Having with great care caused our influences to rest upon our subjects,
we came hither to the valley, to regale ourselves with a dish of sweet
conversation, which we hope will now be more agreeable, on the arrival of so
many celebrated worthies. But I would know, cousin, where you have been so long?


DIS. Been, uncle! I have been busy, wandering to and fro, on the face of the
earth, as usual, promoting the interests of great Beelzebub. So diligent have I
been, that I have had no time, since I saw you last, so much as to take a nap.
But as you observed just now, having left my Influences upon mankind, I hope to
enjoy the pleasure of my uncle's company, for a season.


INF. How, cousin? Are you so close at it? I thought your affairs had been
urgent only upon certain occasions.


DIS. Indeed, sir, mankind are sond of me, almost to distraction. I believe I
have as much business now adays as any devil of the club, and I manage my
affairs with as much dexterity too.


INFID. What is that sta^^ you have in your hand, cousin? And what is that
looking-glass that hangs by your side? By your looks you are too vigorous to
need a staff to lean upon; and to judge by the appearance of your person and
dress, I should have thought you had as little need of a looking-glass.


DIS. You are pleased to bantor a little, sir but that which is well received,
is never ill delivered. This which you call a staff, sir, is my telescope; and
this glass is my inverting mirror, the two chosen instruments, by which I carry
on all my operations.


IMP. I thought, cousin, we devils have no need of glasses, either perspective
or visual. What! is your sight bad, Discordans?


DIS. No, no; my sight is as piercing as the eye of an eagle, but piercing as
it is, I cannot do without my glasses.


IMP. Then, I suppose, the glasses are for the use of your subjects. Indeed,
cousin, I never took you to be a friendly devil before.


DIS, Not so friendly as you imagine, coz, nor are the glasses for their use,
^ut for their abuse. For there is not one, who makes use of either glass, but
he is abused, as sure as ever he uses it. This is no very great friendship,
sir, is it?


INFID. No, cousin; if so, you approve yourself the offspring of great
Beelzebub. I should be glad to hear something of their uses, and the manner of
your operation by them.


DIS. I am ready to oblige you, sir, if the great Fastolus is pleased to permit
me.


FAST. You do me honor, my son. I permit you with all my heart.


DIS. Then, sir, if you please, you shall try my telescope first. Take it in
your hand, sir, and put it to your eye -- Now, sir, what do you see?


INFID. See -- I see the greatest mountain that ever I beheld -- the top of it
reaches even to the stars. Str^^^^ I did not think there had been such a thing
in (...) worl^^ Why, the highest mountain in Armenia, is but a ^^^ock when
compared to this!


DIS. Now, sir, be pleased to take down the glass; look the same way with your
naked eye, and try what you can discover.


INFID. Nay, now I can see nothing at all, but a m^^ hill, about a score of
yards from us. But what is gone with the mountain, think you?


DIS. That very molehill, sir, is the mountain, which you saw; to convince you
of it, Impiator shall make the trial likewise. Now, Impiator, what do you see?


IMP. See, why I see the wondrous mountain; and I see, a prodigious number of
mousters, ten times as big as an elephant, traveling up the sides of it.


DIS. Now, sir, the molchill is the mountain, and the ants are the monsters
that inhabit it.


INFID. Amazing! that any instrument can change the appearance of things, so
much from the reality. Indeed, Discordans, I can hardly believe my own eyes.


DIS. Sir, you shall have full conviction. Put the glass to your eye, and mind
well, when I roll this ball on the green, and tell me what it appears to be? --
Now, sir -- you have seen it, what do you say?


INFID. I am more astonished than ever. It appeared to be well nigh as huge as
the body of Saturn, and seemed to roll through immeasurable space. Now I am
convinced, incredulous as I am.


DIS. All is well, so far. Now you shall try the other end of the telescope,
and learn the wonders of miniature. Let us look toward the other side of the
valley. You see a very large oak whose arms are extended at least two hundred
feet in breadth. Do you not see it, sir?


INFID. See it. How you talk! I might see that tree without spectacles, if I
were three-fourths blind.


DIS. Be not too positive, sir. Take a good view of ^^ow, lest you should not
apprehend it, with the glass.


INFID. Why cousin, I cannot fail seeing this tree at the first trial, it is
such a large one, and just at hand too?


DIS. Well then, please to put the glass to your eye, the contrary way, to what
you did before. -- Now, sir, what do you see?


INFID. I can see nothing at all. What is become of the tree, think you?


DIS. Look better, sir. The tree stands just where it did, I assure you.


IMP. I suppose my father has not the glass right at his eye; has he, cousin?


DIS. Yes, yes, it is very right. Do you discover any thing of the tree yet?


INFID. No -- nothing at all; is not the glass fallen out, think you?


DIS. No, sir, the glass is all right. But tell me do you see nothing of any
kind?


INFID. Yes, I see at a prodigious distance, some kind of a shrub, about the
size of a common thistle, to me, it appears to be about fifteen inches high.


DIS. Look steadfastly at it, sir -- and see if you can find out what species it
is of?


INFID. I take it to be a small oak plant, but at such a distance, it is not
easy to distinguish the species of such a diminutive shrub.


DIS. Now, sir, I perceive, you discern it right, if you please you may take
down the glass. You see, sir, the oak tree stands just where it did; and now
you can discover nothing of the shrub. Believe me, sir, the plant, which you
saw, is none other, than that stately oak, magically diminished in its
appearance, by the power of the glass. The oak itself, has undergone no
change, neither did the ball, nor the molehill. All the change is only in
appearance.


INFID. I am amazed, at the astonishing powers of this instrument, when it is
used one way, it magnifies a molehill to a stupendous mountain, and a tennis
ball to a world; and when used the contrary way, it reduces an oak of the most
gigantic stature, into one of the most dwarfish shrubs. I pray you, cousin,
what is the name of this instrument? And where was it invented?


DIS. Sir, the name of this amazing instrument, is PREJUDICE, it was invented
by Lucifer, the most famous mathematician in hell; is of excellent use, in
forwarding the delightful works of darkness, and securing the dominion of
Beelzebub, over mankind upon earth.


INFID. Dear cousin, I am quite impatient to have a description of its uses; it
cannot fail being of excellent service, if skilfully managed, as I doubt not it
is, in the hand of Discordans.


DIS. Sir, having already seen something of its amazing effects, you may well
believe it is very useful to me. By this partial glass, it is, I sow
contention, strife, and discord, wherever I come. It is my custom, when I begin
my operations, and intend to set people together by the ears, to visit each of
them separately; apply my glass to his eye, in the magnifying way, and as you
see, it is so constructed, that it will turn any way. I turn it toward
himself, by which he obtains a partial view of his own virtue and merit. Then I
apply the glass the contrary way, and direct my dupe to consider his vices in
the diminishing medium, by which he almost, if not wholly, loses sight of
them. Having had such a partial view of his own virtues and vices, the fool
takes the former to be a thousand times greater, and the latter a thousand
times less, than they really are; by these means he is so prejudiced, in his
own favor, so far, that he is ready to quarrel with all who think not as well
of him as he does of himself A recent instance of this effect of self-esteem,
the author met with in his nearest religious connections, which he thinks meet
to add to those instances of more ancient date.
. Thus, I prejudice almost every man in his own favor, so far, that each looks
upon himself as most worthy of general regard. From this, it is, that you may
meet with a drummer who looks upon himself as more able to command well, than
his colonel; or a catchpole, who deems himself fit for an alderman; and a
scurvy attorney, who flatters himself, that he knows more than the lord
chancellor of the realm.

But for this prejudice in their own favor, you should never hear of
revolutions of state, destructive wars, cruel assassinations, and domestic
broils, amongst mankind so grateful to us infernal spirits. It Is by this
device, you will find one fool wiser in his own conceit, than ten men who can
render a reason. Yea, gentlemen, it is from the good opinion almost every man
ha^h of himself, originally derived from the use of my partial telescope, that
all divisions and animosities of every kind, and amongst every people in church
and state do flow. Though indeed, the gentlemen concerned in religious
contentions, would persuade the world, that it is the glory of God, and the
furtherance of the gospel they have in view, in all their curses and anathemas,
which they toss and retoss against one another; the vulgar take it for granted
to be so, and therefore readily join with their reverend leaders.

In the mean while, man being sufficiently prejudiced in his own favor, I
betake me to the following operations from whence all jealousies, back-bitings,
murmuring, evil-surmisings, etc. spring. I put the diminishing end of my
telescope to the eye of my dupe, and direct him thus, to behold the virtue of
his neighbor. The instance of the oak, reduced to the most diminutive shrub,
will convince you that a man's virtue will appear little enough, if at all
discernable, when viewed with my partial glass. So when the man with it
examines the virtue of his neighbors, he is put to his wits end to find any
virtue at all, just as you were to find out the oak: but he sees, as he thinks,
too much cause to conclude, that his neighbor is a very bad man. And if such a
thing should be, that a man's virtue is so strong, that it forces evidence,
even over the belly of prejudice, by its own native luster; its appearance is
changed from its reality, as the oak to the shrub, in the foregoing experiment.

Then I direct my disciple to apply the magnifying end of the telescope, and to
take an ample view of his neighbor's vices and deformity; and this he does to
the greatest advantage; the two instances of a molehill transformed to a
mountain, and a rolling ball to a revolving world, will convince you, how
glaring any man's vices will be, when viewed with the magnifying end of my
valuable telescope, Prejudice.

On obtaining this discovery, says my dupe, "Ah! how glaring his vices appear!
when I sought for virtue, I could not discern so much as the smallest of her
traces in him; but now I seek for his vices, truly there is nothing else to be
seen. Can this man be a Christian? No, surely! If this be Christianity, I will
for ever renounce it." Thus, my very reverend uncle, I frequently persuade
people who are really worthless, to despise, revile, and contemn those who are
in every respect much preferable to themselves; to deny the character of
virtuous men, even to the most virtuous of their day.


INFID. Now, nephew, you de^ight my ear indeed; and I freely own you of my
illustrious kindred; nor are you less dextrous in pursuit of your calling, than
the greatest of all our fraternity: The great Fastosus and I only excepted.


IMP. Gentlemen, I have been silent a long time, which, I believe, I am as
little given to as any; but now, wonder unbraces my tongue, and I cannot but
admire the art and industry of my cousin Discordans.


DIS. Although I am no way remarkable for gratitude, I thank you, cousin
Impiator, for your compliment. There is this glass, which likewise demands your
attention, will you please to examine it, gentlemen?


INFID. Come, cousin, I will, please to let me look at it.


DIS. Now for a fresh surprise. Do you please to place the mirror, and look
into it.


INFID. I will, cousin. But what is the matter, think you? I see nothing but
gross darkness. How comes this to pass, Discordans?


DIS. It is the nature of the instrument. Be pleased to turn yourself so as to
look upon either, or all of us, in it, Now, sir, what do you see?


INFID. Strange! you all appear as angels of light. Did I not perfectly know
the contrary, I could have sworn upon the alcoran, or the mass book, that
Impiator had been Uriel; Avaro had been the genius of Benevolence; that
Fastosus had been Humility; and you, Disoordans, the angel of Peace.

This glass is really more wonderful than the former. What an amazing power of
invertion it has, cousin? Why it transformeth light into darkness, and
darkness into light; changes the appearance of devils, into that of angels of
light. Well, Discordans, if this will not answer your end, I do not know what
will. I pray you, cousin, what do you call it?


DIS. This, sir, I call my inverting mirror; but the proper name of it is FALSE
REASONING: An instrument of the true Luciferian construction, and most
admirably adapted to my dividing purposes. It is the oracle at which, for the
most part, mankind enquire after the truth of any matter; but from what you
have seen you will readily believe, that there is no truth in it; therefore its
discoveries, if the truth were known, would be deemed absolute falsehood. But I
am very careful to keep up its honor with the people, as I could do but little
business without it.


FAST. Right, my son; and it proves to be in high esteem; for the ancients were
not more fond of our brother Apollo, who kept his court at Delphos, than the
moderns are of the inverting mirror of False Reasoning.


INFID. Good cousin, a word or two, concerning its uses, yea, make an oration
of it, if you please; for it will be very agreeable, even to Impiator himself,
I dare say.


IMP. No danger of me, I assure you! I begin now to have some cast for
information, all that I have heard being so very agreeable. Cousin Discordans,
you may freely proceed, without any fear of bearing too hard upon my patience.


DIS. But for this inverting mirror, gentlemen, I could do but little against
the children of men; for excellent as my telescope of Prejudice is, it would be
altogether useless, but for the mirror: but by the help of this, the telescope
performs mighty deeds in favor of our government.

By this mirror it is, I cause offense to be taken, when none is offered, nor
designed; yea, even when the good of the party is sought after; and thus I
ferment differences, amo^st the most fervent solicitations for unity. A certain
great man, some thousand years since, had such a proof of this, that he
complained bitterly against our people, saying, "When I am for peace, they are
for war."

By this mirror it is, that public or private reproof is not only rendered
useless but even hurtful to the party reproved, and frequently prejudicial to
society. So very much are people given to examine all matters in our famous
mirror, that it is almost impossible to point out one man in a whole county who
has wisdom enough to bear reproof with becoming patience. So that if it is an
argument of folly, to turn away the car from reproof, or to harden the heart
against rebuke, these are brave days for folly.

By this wonderful mirror, I make even the preached word, not only useless to
many, but offensive to some: for instance, it sometimes happens, that the
preacher, as it is his duty, exclaims against drunkenness, at that instant I
step up to the drunkard, hold the mirror before his eyes; immediately he begins
to view the parson's conduct in a very uncharitable light, and as a guilty
conscience needs no accuser, he concludes it is himself that is aimed at.
"Well, says he, I see how it is some spiteful person has told him that I was
drunk the other night, and he is wicked enough to expose me to all the
congregation. Has he no faults of his own, that he can be so free in trumping
up other people's failings? Cannot he preach the gospel without railing against
individuals?"


INFID. I have often seen it to be dangerous to our interest for a person to go
with a guilty conscience to where there is a faithful ministry.


DIS. By this time, I clap my telescope to his eye, and direct him to view the
parson with it; which is no sooner done, than he exclaims, "Aye, aye, his vices
are as great (...) mine! and greater too. If he is not a drunkard, he is
something as bad; he is covetous, all know that; and he is uncharitable and
spiteful." Then I turn the end of my telescope toward himself. "Well, says
he, the parson himself is more wicked by one half than I am, I meddle with no
man's character, I am in charity with all men. -- I am just and honest in all
my dealings. If I hurt any body it is myself, and w^^^ can the meddling fellow
have (...) do with that?"

Thus does this wonderful instrument invert the nature of things, so as to turn
a well meant admo^tion, into a piece of envious raillery, what is really in
itself a virtue, is changed in its appearance to a vice, and if the least
degree of zeal appears in the delivery of reproof, it is traduced as passion
and ill nature. By the use of these two famous instruments, I set one great man
to pull the ears of another, at the various courts of earthly princes, where by
my management the truly worthy are frequently disgraced, and the worthless
advanced to power. What ups and downs succeeded each other in the court of
Versailles, in the days of madam Pompadore, when not the merit of the hero, but
his attachment to that lady, was considered? If he was a true Pompadorian, he
was sure to be advanced, however much of the calf his disposition had imbibed:
but if an anti-pompadorian down he came, though he were as wife as Ulysses, and
valiant as the son of Thetis, and so it fared with them in their bad success in
the late war.


FAST. I suppose, the public would never object to their prince enjoying the
common privilege of man, in having a favorite friend, near his person; were it
not that the party selected for that purpose is apt, insolently, and
inconsiderately to crowd his own d^pendants, qualified or unqua^ified into
places under the government But what France suffered for such misconduct in the
last war, will be a warning to neighboring nations.


INFID. I should like to have the history of your glasses cousin. And I imagine
a few instances of your operations by them will be exceedingly agreeable to all
the company, if you will be so obliging so favor us with them.


DIS. With all my heart, sir. The first instance I remember, was in the case of
Cain and Abel. As for Abel, you know, ^e was a rebel against our government,
enlisted under the banner of Immanuel, and bore arms against the monarch of
darkness, to whom trusty Cain was firmly anached. Abel was well acquainted with
the acceptable atonement, then to be made by Jesus of Nazareth, and had respect
to it, in all the services which he offered to deity; his sacrifices and
services were therefore the fruits of faith, and consequently acceptable to God
whom he served. On the other hand, our friend Cain had no respect to the
mediation of Immanuel, but considered his services as well deserving acceptance
with the Deity, in virtue of their own intrinsic excellence. Of course both him
and his services were rejected; for you know, whatever is not of faith, is sin,
and consequently detestable to the Almighty. Abel offered his sacrifice, and
Cain presented his gift; the one in faith, and the other without faith; the
result was, Abel was accepted and Cain rejected.

As soon as I was aware of this, and saw discontent visible upon his
countenance, I went up to Cain, and began to ply him with my instrument. "Let
my lord Cain, said I, try his brother's conduct in this faithful mirror;
accordingly he viewed it, and as he viewed, he said, "Ah! now I see how it is,
-- he knew that a lamb, or kid, would be more acceptable to God than corn; he
would not inform me, I suppose, lest I should share in the blessing: Is this
acting the part of a brother? I see now through all his pretended love, his
whining advices, and hypocritical cant."

This wrought just as I would have had it. Then I desired him to view himself
with my telescope, which he did, and thus exclaimed, "Why, I am a thousand
times better than my brother Abel! I have as much righteousness in my one hand,
as he has in his whole person." Said I, "Now take a full view of your brother
with this glass." He did, and as he looked, he said, "My brother is the most
contemptible creature I ever beheld. I wonder not now to hear him complain of
his unworthiness, as he does in his whining way." "Look again, I said." Then
said Cain, "Why, Abel is so swelled with pride, that he cannot contain
himself." "Look farther," said I: "Aye, replied he, I see what he aims at. He
thinks I shall be his servant, and no longer his superior as elder brother."

You know it is usual for my worthy friends, Envy, Revenge, and Cruelty, to
follow me in most of my enterprises. It so fell out, at this time, that those
three diabolians were present, but none of them attempted to speak a word, till
Cain had viewed his brother Abel with my instruments, in a light the most
disadvantageous to him that could be. But Cain having obtained this view of
Abel, up comes Envy and thus addressed him: "Friend Cain, I am heartily sorry for
your disgrace, and am grieved when I observe to you, that it is my opinion you
will never be able to endure your brother's greatness and prosperity, now he is
accepted, and you are rejected. I am much mistaken, if his ambition cease to
operate, till he enslaves you entirely under his yoke. I much fear that is what
he aims at Now, my friend, a^ you are the elder born, it is but reasonable,
that you should be ruler; but for the elder to be subject to the younger, is
what I would advise you never to submit to." Then said Revenge, if honest Cain
will be ruled by me, he will make himself amends for all the grief he has
sustained. To whom Cain. "I pray thee, thou sweet spirit, which way shall I do
it? Shall I burn his tents, destroy his flocks? what shall I do, to make myself
amends?" Do, said Crudelis, what should you do? Knock him on the head at once:
"Else, said Envy, he will be an eye-fore to you all the days of your life."

Thus the matter was determined, and accordingly Cain took an opportunity one
day in the field to murder him. In this instance, Abel's virtue and faith were
considered as vicious craftiness; his sincere aiming at the glory of God, and
his self-denial were by my inverting instruments interpreted pride and
ambition. Deluded Cain revenged himself not according to reality, but according
to his own jealous suspicions, and groundless surmises.


INFID. Realities seldom appear, Discordans, where you reign, or your
operations would not be so successful as they are in common.


DIS. True, sir, there is no possibility of maintaining strife and contention,
but by inspiring one man with mistaken notions of another, and each with a good
opinion of himself. This is the spring of all contention.

I remember I made rude work between Jacob's wives; I think their names were
Leab and Rachel, the daughters of your friend Laban, Avaro; and that too, for
what neither one, nor the other could possibly help. Rachel was plump, fair and
beautiful, but withal for many years barren. Lea^ (...) less beautiful, being
afflicted with tender eyes, and (...) these two sources, I let the world see
the inconveniency (...) polygamy or bigamy. But to pass from the discord of the
women. I come to their sons, amongst whom I made a pretty sort of an inroad,
which for a season yielded me exquisite pleasure.

You must know it is always more pleasure to me to stir up discord among the
good and virtuous, than any people whatever, although by the way, it is much
more irrational in them to quarrel with one another, than for those who are
strangers to equal privileges. Yet such is my dexterity, that whilst they are
in this world. I can make them very often behave to one another, more like
enemies than friends and brethren. However, they escape my tyranny the moment
they forsake their clay, and I am forever banished from their peaceful mansions
in the other world.

To return to my story. Young Joseph, son of the deceased Rachel, was his
father's favorite; and the fond patriarch, to evidence his distinguishing
regard to him, clothed him in garments of many colors. This badge of affection
sat very uneasy on the minds of his brethren, who, to a man, resolved to teach
future parents the folly of partiality toward their children; yet had conduct
enough to bridle their resentment, till a favorable opportunity should offer.
It was not many years, before an opportunity offered; for Joseph had a dream,
divinely inspired, of which! made very suitable improvement. He dreamed, "that
he and his brethren were all reaping together in the field, and ^o! ere he was
aware, his sheaf stood upright in the midst, and all his brethrens sheaves,
stood round and made obeisance to it."

Young Joseph, suspecting no harm, in his simplicity told his dream to his
brethren. Not long after he dreamed, that the sun, moon, and eleven stars, made
obeisance to him; and in the same simplicity of heart told his brethren this
dream also, never once suspecting that they would comment upon it to his injury.

At this time, I happened to make a visit to them, and having the matter
without reserve laid before me, I requested them to examine it with my
instruments, as you know I am never backward when there is any hope of
business. As they examined it, they were unanimously of opinion, that the
hanghty boy was but too sensible of his father's over-es^eem for him. "Vain
youth, said they, he can think of nothing, but being lord over his brethren: It
is evident from his repeated dreams, his mind runs upon it through the day; for
what people ruminate in the day, they are apt to dream of at night." Such was
the sense my mirror gave of the affair. Then said I, Gentlemen, be pleased to
survey the matter with this telescope, meaning Prejudice. They did so, and
said, "Did ever any body see such an haughty presumptuous youth, as this
stripling of a brother of ours is? It may be the young ambitions wretch feigned
his dreams, the more easily to introduce his supremacy! He be our lord! Most
he? His pride is boundless. It is not enough, that he hopes to lord it over his
brethren, but his old father must, it seems, make obeisance to his arrogance.

It was now I called on my brother Revenge to appear; to whom I willed them to
make their case known. This they did, and he, without hesitation (as you know
he is a ready witted spirit) gave them his advice: "Gentlemen, said he, the
fact is evident; but why do you perplex yourlelves? You have it in your power
to prevent his aggra^d^zement; yonder he comes and here is a pit hard by, drown
him in it, and see what will become of his dreams." "By all means, said Envy,
for you see the old man is so doatingly foud of him, that he is ready to take
his dreams to be divinely inspired; and the more foolishly the youth can dream
the fonder his father is of him; so that it is now, if Joseph is well, he cares
^ttle what becomes of the rest of his children."

The son^ o^ Jacob in part followed our advice; they cast Joseph into the pit,
which happened to be dry: But the angel of compassion wrought so far upon them,
that they spared his life, sold him to a band of Ishmaelites, who were to take
care to dispose of him in a foreign market, far enough from home. So you see it
was by the help of my incomparable instruments, Joseph was separated from his
brethren.


INFID. If right reason had been director, they would have allowed it possible
that God might speak, in a dream, or in a vision of the night, to the lad; that
it was time enough to p^nish him, when he actually became guilty of asurpation.
But in your way, right reason is quite out of the question, cousin.

If agreeable to the great Fastosus, I hold it good we disperse, for the
present, that our affairs on earth be not neglected; and let us meet here
tomorrow morning for fresh conversation.


FAST. It is very agreeable to me, sir.


DIALOGUE IX. FASTOSUS, INFIDELIS, IMPIATOR, DISCORDANS, and AVARO.
IT was my business to mind the appointment, and give due attendance; which I
resolved to do, whatever should be the consequence: accordingly I was there,
ere the arrival of the infernal gentry, whom I waited for with impatience. At
last, they all came up the valley to the place of conference; where five sable
thrones were ready to receive them. As soon as seated, the following converse
began:

INFID. Indeed! is it possible, that my lovely Impiator has so far prevailed,
as to make a reverend vicar drink till he is fuddled? Such a conquest as this
makes greatly for our interest; for when the parishoners know, that the parson
himself was drunk in the week, they will pay little regard to his sermon the
ensuing Sabbath. Let him preach repentance, and reformation, with all the zeal
he may assume, every hear will say in his heart, "Physician, heal thy self." I
always knew that you Avaro had large dealings with many of the clergy, but not
till now that my son Impiator, had obtained such great power over them. What!
and swear too: To see a parson get drunk, or to hear him prefanely swear, would
give joy to the devil himself, amidst all his disappointments. I assure you, in
the days of the Puritans, I would have crept forty miles on my hands and knees
to have heard the one, or seen the other. But thou my son --


IMP. Indeed, sire, you may depend on what I say. Great and formidable are my
enterprises. These eyes of mine have seen the foot ball thrown down at the
church door, on Sunday after service, in the presence of the parson; who, like
the father of his people, gathered up his gown, and stood patiently to see
which of his flock could with greatest dexterity make it skim the sky. This you
will say, was a pretty sort of transit, made by the holy man, from worshipping
the God of heaven, to serve the famous devil Impiat^r. Ah, gentlemen, were I
but an eloquent spirit, I could tell you such wonders, about the profaneness of
both priest and people, as would rejoice your hearts, and make you confess,
that few devils have more ascendency over mankind than myself, O! the young
students, who are training up for the ministry, are charming lads. It is but a
few years since, a nymph, who had been under the tution of some of those young
clergymen, came to an overseer of the poor of the parish, near a certain
university, and desired to speak with him. What is your will, said he? I am
with child, said she. I see that, returned he, but who is its father? Three
gentlemen of -- Hall, said she. What do you talk of three for, said he, only
one of them can be its father. Indeed, sir, they are all three the fathers of
my child, and are all willing to give security to the parish: and three very
civil gentlemen they are, I assure you. I think, said the overseer, they have
not behaved very civilly to you, seeing you are with child by them. O sir, said
she, they behaved very civilly to me, they got me to their room, and kept me
there for above a fortnight, and all the while I ate with them, and slept with
them, at free cost.


AVAR. Well, but brother, can you assert that as fact upon your own knowledge?


IMP. Yes, Avaro, I can; and more than that, the overseer is yet alive, and can
at any time attest the truth of it.


INFID. Well, I think they are hopeful gentlemen of which to make ministers of
the gospel; gentlemen who may be of great service to our government.


IMP. It is on that account I mention the affair. And I could tell you a
hundred such pretty little stories.


FAST. Supposing my reverend brother ^ufidells, for the information of these
younger devils, were to relate part of his history, might it not be well.


INFID. I am ready to do any thing, that tends to the prosperity of our common
cause; with a view to this I have already given Impiator some account of my
birth and first enterprises, and now for common instruction shall proceed.
Having ascended the throne of Infidelity, the first thing I attempted was, to
lull men into a persuasion that I did not at all exist, and that there is no
such devil as unbelief in being. When I could not so universally prevail in
this as I wished, I endeavored to persuade each of them separately, that
bowever Insidelis might reign over others, for their part, he had no dominion
over them. For, said I, you have a good heart, and have believed well all your
days. Although, as I said before, I have conducted many of those, who fancied
they had believed so well in their lifetime, very safely down to the chambers
of horrible despair, where they were very soon convinced, they had never
believed at all aright.

Then I endeavored to persuade the people, that the threatenings of God's law
against sin, ought to be considered as a fancy, and, to strengthen this
doctrine, I thus preached: (for you must know, I have been a great preacher in
my time) "Look you, you timorous minded mortals; you may clearly see, that God
has created you, with all the passions and appetites that attend you, and can
you believe that he did this, with a design to prohibit the gratification of
them? No, surely! Could it be consistent with the character of that God, whose
goodness is unto all, and whose tender mercies are over all his works, to endow
you with these passions and appetites, and then damn you for gratifying them?
No, no, those threatuings are exhibited only to keep your consciences in awe;
but never designed to be rigorously executed. -- The law will make large
allowances for the inclinations, passions, and infirmities of the human nature;
never sear it. The soul that sins need not to fear dying as the scripture
has threatened; and man shall not be cursed, though he continue not in all
things written in the law to do them,"

Here, gentlemea, you may see my falacy, in dealing with mortals, for although
all the faculties and passions of the soul were indeed essential to its
creation state, none of them were then irregular; none acted from i^^proper
influence, for every passion centred in its lawful and proper object Besides,
all sinful motions and desires of the heart are the effects of my dominion over
man.

Then I proceeded to persuade them, that God had forsaken the earth, and took
now no notice of the (...) of men, so that every man might, with the greatest
(...), gratify his peculiar inclination. By these means it was that the great
Impiator was brought into existence, whose dominion has increased, every year,
with great rapidity.

I persuaded men that this world is the most certain good. A bird in the hand,
said I, is worth two in the bush. Make sure of this world, and never sear for
the other. Do you consider this as your abiding place and build your nest in
its highest branches if possible. In this I succeeded so well, that every man
by nature, and almost all by practice, look upon the present world as the
chiefest good. Then it was that Avaro was born in our family, and ^mbitiosus
was born in the family of astosus.

All this, you must observe, I did in disguise, or rather in a state of
invisibility; I dare not tell a man, when I wait upon him, that my name is
^nfidelis; for although they are fond of my nature, even to distraction, there
is not one of them but what hates to be told that he is coucerned with me.
Indeed, you cannot affront any of my sub^^ts worse than by naming him after me,
and calling him Infidel.


IMP. That is the very case with my subjects, for although they love my service
with all their hearts, they hate to be told of it. If a man should at any time
reprove one of them, for his enormities, you would soon hear him damn the
reprover, for a methodist, or puritan, or a sanctified hypocrite.


INFID. It is no manner of difficulty for me to lurk unperceived by them, in
the corners of their dwellings: but I cannot possibly hide myself from Moses
the vicegerent of the Highest. He is a person of a most piercing eye, and can
trace all the motions of spirit, therefore it comes to pass that he and I, have
frequent bickerings. Moses being the perfection of light, and I the most
consummate darkness, there is an eternal war proclaimed betwixt us, and we
never meet but we are at daggers drawing.

Sometimes he comes knocking with a tremendous hammer at the doors and windows
of my lodging, as if he would lay the house in an heap of ruin, whilst the
people within, start and tremble, at every thunderclap of his hammer. Amidst
their consternation you may hear him from without, call to them within, with a
voice louder than many thunders, in the name of his august Master, to bring
forth the devil Infidelis, and all his train, to public execution. But I am
always well befriended by the people of the house, who, for the most part, tell
him that neither Infidelis, nor any of his train, live with them, and that his
excellency must needs have mistaken the door. They tell him, he would do
better, to enquire at the house of Tom Drunkard, or Jack the swearer, where
very probably, say they, that evil spirit may dwell.

This is often the beginning of a rupture betwixt him and them, for he is not
to be so easily deceived; he shoots his burning arrows, with deathly
vengeance, in at the windows against the people of the house, who I exhort, by
all possible means, to resist to the last extremity. Never did you see the
warlike Corsicans exert themselves with such ardour in defense of their
liberties, as my subjects in defense of my government.

Sometimes they so besmear his heavenly face, with the filth they throw upon
him, calling him severe tyrant covetous extortioner, unjust villain, and the
like, that he gives over the assault, and leaves them to my quiet possession;
then I take my seal, and seal them to destruction; for you must know, it is but
in some places he exerts his unfrustrable influence.

It is likewise observable, that, although my subjects will give Moses a good
character, while he keeps at a distance from them, every one, will sight to the
knees in blood, when assaulted by him, ere they submit; so fond are they of my
person and government, Sometimes it has happened, that, by irresistible force
he has broke open the doors, seized the people of the house by the collar,
dragged them to the brink of a pit, called Despondency, into which he tumbled
them headlong, and lest them shut up in that dreary dungeon.

As soon as he is departed, I go to work, and turn some neighboring brook into
the pit, with a design to drown them, or throw down earth, stones, etc. on
purpose to smother them; and so I continue to pester, and disturb them, till I
am frightened away by the sound of Immanuel's trumpet, as he himself approaches
for their deliverance; for you must know, I cannot stand my ground, but take to
my heels, when he appears. Many a time, do I hear myself cursed for an hellish
brat, even by those, who but very lately, would have risked life and fortune,
and with the greatest bravery fought, in the cause of prince Infidelis: but as
soon as they obtain a glimpse of Immanuel's glory, they have done with my yoke,
and I lose their affection for ever.

However, as I cannot endure that rational scripture light should shine in the
hearts of men, I have often been puzzled to find out proper methods to resist
the power of Moses, for he is excessively turbulent sometimes, and frighteneth
my subjects into a pretended service of his Lord. In order to appease him, the
sons of men agreed to build a temple, and dedicate it to the Most High; rather
choosing to worship him, than be destroyed by the artillery of Sinai.
Accordingly to work they went, and built a sumptuous dome for divine worship,
in order to stop the mouth of that never-ceasing accuser. Now, though I. things
are likely to take an awkward turn with me; if this worship is not interrupted,
I shall lose many of my present slaves. So I put my plodding brain to the
torture, in order to find out proper methods of prevention; and I can tell you,
gentlemen, I went wisely to work; you remember that, Avaro, for you were my
helper.

The ease was this. We prepared the image of a woman, fair and beautiful to the
eye; the was inwardly made of clay, and outwardly adorned with the appearance
of burnished gold; in her right hand was a regal scepter, titles of state, and
plumes of honor, etc. In her left she carried a heavy purse of money, and a
cask of oriental jewels; upon her head was an imperial crown, studded with
sparkling gems, which dazzled the eye of beholders, whilst they read the
following motto, which was written, in all languages, on her forehead; "I am
the mistress of the whole world." We secretly conveyed this image into one
corner of the temple, and placed it in such a manner as to be seen of all who
entered.

I soon perceived that the bait was suitably dressed, and our idol had charms
enough to attract the attention of the people. Ha -- ha -- ha, you would have
laughed, till your sides were tired, had you been there, to see how the slaves
looked asquint upon the idol, as they approached the altar of God. Aye, and in
the midst of their devotion, how they cast the tail of their eye toward the
place where she stood. After their worship was over. O how they bowed and
cringed, be before her ladyship; the very parson himself did her humble
reverence and many times embraced her in the most affectionate manner. Then
said I, "A fig for Moses and all his threatening, I have the slaves as fast as
ever."


IMP. Indeed, sire, you played the devil with them then. But what said Moses,
Did he calmly yield the debate?


INFID. No, no, he is none of your easy tempered people, I assure you: his
eagle-eye soon discovered the cheat, and as soon did he resolve on vengeance,
as appeared by the event. Laden with burning faggots he came to the temple, and
roaring like many thunders, he said, the flashes of lightning bursting as he
spoke, "This people draws near to me with their lips, but their hearts are
far from me; put away from among you that accursed evil, and worship the Lord
with your souls, as well as your bodies, with your hearts as well as your
voices, or look for destruction even in the embraces of your idol."

This said, he hurled his brands amongst the people, and terribly disturbed
many of them; indeed it was something alarming to see them so ghastly, and
tremble at his fearful menaces. In their first alarm, they were for removing
the goddess out of the temple, for fear of immediate destruction; but being a
little recovered from their fright, the far greater part found such relenting
toward her ladyship, that they could not bear the thoughts of parting with
her, believing still, in despite of Moses, that her comely presence, was highly
necessary, to render religion tolerable; and rather than part with her, they
resolved to part with the temple of God itself.

Some few of them indeed, were resolute for her removal, deeming the urgent
command of the heavenly accuser, not at all unreasonable, but their company was
very inconsiderable, and their strength inadequate to the enterprise: when they
attempted to remove her, they could not so much as move her feet off from the
pedestal; and notwithstanding the command was urgent, the far greater part of
the people could not help, even in the midst of their devotion: looking toward
the idol, with an approving countenance, and there she stands to this day,
adored by most, and a snare even to the virtuous and good.


AVAR. Great and manifold are the services which that ornamented idol has done
to our government, amongst both preachers and others; for many of the
sacerdotal tribe, have not the least view, in their preaching, beyond a genteel
living, and further preferment; to which end, adulation and flattery, is more
studied than the gospel. If they can but get the world to smile upon them, they
desire no more* Give them riches and honor, they may preach the gospel who will
for them. Let the people only pay their dues punctually, they may choose, for
the parson, whether they will serve God or the devil whether they will go to
heaven or hell. Brave days, gentlemen.


INFID. Yes, Avaro, the times are not to be complained of; nor indeed have they
been bad, for many hundred of years, if circumstances are duly attended to. But
to my story. In process of time, men became sensible, that, unless the heart
was fixed upon God, in acts of religious worship, their services could not be
acceptable; but how to fix them they could not find. Being afraid, the result
of their enquiries might prove dangerous to my interest, if not interrupted. I
advised them to make to themselves representations of God, in wood, stone,
brass, or iron, but rather of silver, or gold; alleging that the more valuable
the metal, the more acceptable the sacrifice would be.

The sons of men no sooner heard than approved of my scheme, and resolved
forthwith to put it into execution. Then ere you were aware every village was
furnished with one or two god-makers, a set of artificers, from whom our
present saint-makers in Italy, Spain, Portugal, etc. are descended; for modern
times have not changed, but only given a different name to this craft, by which
the popish parsons get their wealth.

But, alas! having never seen the shape of God, at any time, they were obliged
to form their images, in the mould of their own fancies, which being various,
it came to pass, that in one place, the invisible Deity was likened to an old
man, with a venerable long beard, grasping a bunch of reeds, which they called
thunder. In another place he was represented as half man and half beast; yea,
so curious were the fancies of the artists that in one place God Almighty was
made like a fish, in another like an eagle or hawk, and in another like a log
of wood, and indeed sometimes like a beast with four feet. So very briskly was
this trade carried on, that all who were able to buy, had in a few years, one
or more god-almighties, of man's making, in their own houses. The very same as
our good friends the papists, have got almost every one, a savior in his
pocket or chamber. In the holy Roman church, you may find in every house, a
Jesus Christ of one kind or another, for there, there be many sorts of Jesus
Christ's, as golden Jesus Christ's, silver Jesus Christ's, wooden and even paper
Jesus Christ's, all made with as much craft as the ancient pagan gods.


AVAR. That trade of shrine, making among the papists, is a good sort of trade,
but I can tell you it falls far short of the craft of saint worshipping, by
which the priests get their wealth. Many a wooden saint there is in the holy
church, which has brought into the priest's treasury above six times its
weight in gold. And indeed the pagan priests reaped equal benefit from their
gods, from whence we learn that priestcraft has been the same in all ages.


INFID. Some people there were of more refined knowledge than their neighbors,
who advised against the trade of god-making, saying. "We must not bow down to
graven nor moiten images, nor in any wise worship them." My priests, according
to my directions, answered as follows; "It is not the image which you worship,
nor do you at all bow your knee to it; but being emblematical of the divine
presence, it greatly assists you in your devotion." This learned reasoning
calmed the consciences of most of the dissenters; won them over to the religion
by law established, and greatly wrought for the good of the church.


DIS. Why, sir, that is the very apology which the papists make for
image worship, relict-adoration, etc. but indeed it is no wonder, seeing their
religion is one and the same with that of the pagans.


INFID. Some few there were, rigid non-conformists, who insisted, that God must
be worshipped in spirit and in truth; insisted that all idolatrous lumber
should be cast out of the temple; by which the worthy clergymen of that age
were so grievously galled, that they were forced, in a pious and tender manner,
first to give up the heretics to the devil, and then put the flesh to death,
for the salvation of the soul: in the very same manner (and for much the same
cause) as the holy Roman fathers excommunicated and burned the protestants. But
the devil knows to his sad experience, that the church has not half the power
the pretends to, for out of the vast numbers, which she has generously given
to him, it is but a very few he has been able to receive: notwithstanding both
the pagan, papal, and other churches, have hereby shown the good will which all
along they have borne to him and his interest.

Having fairly introduced idolatry, I tried, if possible, to lead men further
off from their maker still; and for this end I brought in gods and goddesses, a
numerous train; for instance, if any man was more remarkable than others, for
murdering his neighbors, or for giving large gifts to the church, i. e. the
clergy, I got him deified as soon as he died, and had worship offered to him,
in the same degree with faint-worship in the church of Rome; for saint worship
and hero-worship differ only in name.

Indeed it is but doing justice to saints, in the Romish calendar, to observe,
that the greatest part of them obtained their faintships, for murdering of
princes, massacreing protestants, robbing their heirs, for the good of the
church, or for raving mad enthusiasm. Well, I went on and prospered, till I had
brought all the world, a few individuals excepted, to worship the works of the
mason, carpenter, blacksmith, or founder. Encourage but any trade, and it is
sure to prosper: the god-making trade being universally encouraged, prospered
exceedingly; for in a little time there were national gods, much the same with
the seven champious of Christendom; provincial gods; county-gods; parish-gods;
and even household gods, to the great emolument of the clergy. I think,
gentlemen, you must all allow, that I have not spent my time in idleness among
mankind.


FAST. No, no, brother, idleness don't suit you and me, we will leave it to
foolish men and women so to spend their lives; but we will fulfill the old
proverb in use among them, viz. The devil is never idle. Let them enjoy their
idleness in this world, we shall very likely find them enough to do in the next.


INFID. I think it is something more than seventeen hundred and sixty years
agone that I had a trial of a very extraordinary nature to grapple with, such
as I never had before then, nor ever shall encounter while I breathe the
sulphurous smoke of the pit. Oh, it was a sore trial, gentlemen. Immanuel, a
very dear lover of men, having sat on the circle of heaven, for near four
thousand years, with much relenting of mind, and longings for human happiness,
from thence beheld the dreadful havoc I made in the world, rendering the whole
posterity of Adam the children of wrath. Often did he call to the inhabitants
of the earth, to take me up and burn me for a witch but they were too much my
friends to regard his advice: and indeed had they regarded, it would have been
an undertaking such as they could not execute without auxiliary strength. He
sat long, and long, he wondered that there war no friend to help against so
potent an adversary; when at last he saw, there was none to help, he arose from
his jasper seat and, in a transport of love, declared, that his own arm should
bring salvation. According to the high determination, he dismantled himself of
the robes of manifest glory, laid aside his imperial diadem, which irradiates
all the crasts of light, posted down to this world, on the wings of compassion
resolving to conquer by dying.

Alarmed at such an unprecedented enterprise, I dispatched our swift winged
coutier with all possible speed to hell, to inform my great father, and the
infernal divan, of the astonishing event. As soon as Fame reported her story,
the monarch summoned his poors to (...) him in the flaming council chamber,
there to deliberate on the matter, and having majur^ly weighed every
circumstance of it, it was resolved, to dispatch the devin Malevolus to
Fastofus and me, with directions suitable to the occasion. That he, with
Ambitiosus Persidia. Falax, and me, should take up our residence at Jerusalem,
with the scribes, (...), and doctors of the law. We immediately obeyed our
instructions, and succeeded admirably in our embassy. At the same time Crudelis
and Concupiscentia, were appointed pienipotentiaries to the tetrarchical court
of Gallike, where they received infallible testimonies of Herod's esteem.

Against the time that Immanuel was to be revealed, Herod admitted but cousin
Suspiciosus to frequent audiences, of which the devil Crudelis to his
everlasting honor, greatly availed himself. He perfuaded the tetrach, that,
for his own safety, it was highly necessary he should kill, destroy, and cause
to perish, all the children in (...), from two years old and under, in order
that young Immanuel, who was formerly called, the ancient of days, might be
involved in the general massacre. This was the opening of our evangelic
campaign since which time we have caused the shedding of as much Christian
blood, as if collected into one mass, would make a tide to deep as ever was
seen at London Bridge.

At this time there appeared one John Baptist, a zealous Nazarene and harbinger
to Immanuel; he was likely to do great injury to our interest, therefore it was
thought best to have him destroyed, which by thy means, Discordans, we happily
accomplished in part. Perhaps, Discordans, you can give a better account of
that affair than I, as you were more deeply concerned in it.


DIS. I do not know that uncle; but I am ready to tell you what hand I had in
it. You all know the man, and a trusty friend of ours he was, as any in his
day. You know he most inordinately loved Herodias, his own brother Philip's
wife, and by the direction of our friend Concupiscentia, he added incest to his
adultery, by taking her to his bed. It was about this time, that this famous
Baptist, the founder of the sect called by his name, began his public ministry,
and, fearless of man, exclaimed against all manner of uncleanness, for he was
faithful to his commission. Well, this same austere Baptist took occasion one
day in the following manner to reprove the tetrach for his lewdness; Herod,
said he, the God who made thee, has for his own glory exalted thee to the
tetrachical dignity, but far from studying his honor, thou actest most
unworthily, and turnest his goodness to thee into wantonness. Do not thou
know that the same God who made thee ruler in Gallilee, has said, "Thou shall
not commit adultery," put her therefore away from thee; if thou do not, thou
must expect that the Most High will mingle for thee the cup of his indignation."

I was then at the court of Gallilee, and did not fail to improve the Baptist's
admonition to the most fatal purposes; I transformed myself into the likeness
of a grave courtier, a form very familiar to me; went up to the king, and held
my inverting mirror before his eyes, bidding him to take a full view of the
matter thus: as my humble servant, he did as I directed, and immediately said,
"I perceive this field-preacher, this same Baptist, is an enemy to the Roman
government, and because I am a friend to Caesar he has taken this advantage
against me; doubtless to prejudise the minds of the people, either to the
divesting me of the tetrarchical power, or to the subversion of Caesar's
government.

When I had brought him thus to misconstrue the honest designs of the Baptist,
I held my partial telescope to his eye, through which he looked with great
attention, and as he looked, said, "What a presumptuous wretch is this, to take
upon him to reprove me? Me, who am his lord and master, and can soon destroy
both him and his father's house. Must Herod be reproved by this despicable
fellow with the rough garment? Is it now so low with Caesar's deputy, the
tetrach of Galilee, that he must mildly bear the insolence of every snarling
peasant. No, it is inconsistent with our dignity, to let such daring boldness
pass with impunity. If a courtier, or nobleman, clothed in soft raiment, had
taken a little liberty with me it might have been borne. But for this field
preacher. This baptist, hah!"

By this time the great Revenge, that famous devil whose history is so
tragical, thought it time for him to appear at court, and as soon as he judged
it convenient, thus accosted the offended king. "My lord the king, if your
highness suffer such insolence as this to go unpunished, your nobles will
contemn you, every paltry priest will say, Yonder goes the incestuous Herod;
aye, the very publicans and Herodians will allege, that you are unworthy the
dignity you sustain, and all will censure your pusillanimity, in letting such
during insolence pass with impunity. Remember, my lord, that if wide-mouthed
Fame should, as is very likely, report the matter in Caesar's ear, it is ten to
one, but he will cashier you, either for your reputed incest, or your want of
magnanimity. Sir, for your honor's sake, east John into prison." Herod was
easily persuaded, and John was committed to jail.

On mature deliberation, however, he was afraid of putting him to death, for he
knew that the people had a good opinion of the renowned Baptist; therefore he
lived in prison, notwithstanding Reven^^ (...) solicitations for his blood. On
every occasion (...) m^t with Herod, he thus accosted him. "W^^^ (...) Baptist
dead yet? What! not yet, sir? (...) by sparing him so long, sir? I assure you,
(...) to die for his insolence. Sir, his crime is (...) high treason against
your person." Thus he (...) laily.

It happened, at a certain time, (...) made a great festival in honor of his
own name, which festival proved fatal to the innocent Baptist; (...) ever since
he had given offense, the devil Revenge had taken up his lodgings with Herodias
the tetrarchess. She very well knew how foolishly precipitate Herod is wont to
be in his wine, and how much his eye was to be allured with a well-performed
dance, especially it (...) by a handsome young lady. Not at all doubting but
Herodian her daughter would captivate the king, so far as to bring about the
much desired death of John Baptist, she decked her in superb array, instructed
her what to ask, if he should be pleased with her, then led her into the hall,
where Herod and his nobles were carousing. There she footed the hornpipe with
such exactness, that the mistaken eye of the tetrach took her for a divinity,
and swore that he would offer a great sacrifice to her, to the value of one
half of his kingdom, if her highness would only deign to inform him what
fr^rifices were most acceptable to her. She replied. "Human sacrifices are my
delight. Give me then the Baptist's bead in a charger."

Now there began a horrid scuffle in the tetrarch's breast. If he fulfilled not
his oath, he thought he lost his reputation with (...) nobles who sat at (...)
with him; and if he did behead John Baptist, according to his oath, he exposed
himself to the resentment of the people.

In the midst of this scufile, in came Revenge, and thus addressed the king. "I
assure you, sir, John deserves a thousand deaths, for his insolence to your
highness." "Befiles, said Fastosus, who was then at court, the great tetrarch
has no way left but this, to preserve his own character unblamed." I hen cried
Herod, "Who will go for us to prison, and behead the Baptist^" To which
Crudelis replied. "Here am I, send me." Accordingly, having obtained Herod's
consent, (for we can do nothing against mankind but by their own consent,) he
went and beheaded Immanuel's harbinger.

Thus, gentlemen, you see, that by my famous instruments, False-reasoning and
Prejudice, I cause offense to be taken where there is none intended. John only
fulfilled his divine mission, and sought the good of the tetrarch, by calling
him to repentance; but my mirror interpreted his honesty into treachery and
insolence; which clearly shows, that it changes the appearance, quite contrary
to the nature of things. But reverend uncle, I prevent your proceeding with
your story.


INFID. The cumbersome Baptist, thus dispatched, we united all our forces
against Immanuel himself, who was, by the Jews, called Jesus of Nazareth. Many
were the conferences which we had with the Jewish rabbis, doctors, priests,
scribes and pharisees, in which all our debates turned upon that object of our
common hatred. The high priest, Fastosus, Malevolus and me, were always placed
at the head of the assembly, and every article was finally referred to us for
decision. The venerable high priest addressing himself to me, asked what I
thought concerning the pretensions of this Galisean? To whom! replied. "If it
please your reverence, I think he is an arrand impostor, for his father yo^
know, his mother you know, his brethren and sisters, are they not all with you?
But, continued I, when Messiah shall come, no man can tell whence he comes,
nor whither he goes." Gentlemen, you will always know my style, by its
elegance, wherever you meet with it, should it be even in the volume of
revelation.


FAST. I well remember these things, and the learned oration, which at that
time, I made in the Sauhedrim, and now we are associated in such a friendly
manner, I have a good mind to repeat it to you. You have it in the following
manner. "Hearken to me ye righteous teachers of the law; the virtuous governors
of the Lord's inheritance, and I will unfold to you a just state of the matter.
You all know that the expected Meniah, shall descend from a virgin princess of
the lineage of David; but is this the son of a princess? Is his mother a
virgin, being the wife of a carpenter?" Here you will observe how I led them off
from the truth, by attending to appearances rather than reality; for Mary the
mother of Jesus, was actually a princess of the line of David, though obscure,
and actually a virgin when he was conceived, though after that the wife of a
carpenter. Every circumstance attending his birth, corresponded exactly with
ancient predictions recorded in the Bible; though by the way, it was by no means
suited to the expectation of the Jews. But to my very great mortification I
must confess, that, although the great men of the earth rejected him, the
Angels of heaven descended to hymn their new born Lord. The constellations of
the firmament, showed forth the birth of the Messiah. Eastern sages heard the
proclamation of the stars, and came to the city of Bethlehem, to offer
oblations to the incarnate source of life.

So very clear indeed are the Old Testament prophecies, concerning this affair,
that the generality of the Jews were, at that time in full expectation of the
coming of Messiah; therefore it required great address sufficiently to blind
their eyes that they should not see, and know him when he came, to which
purpose my speech was wonderfully adapted. "You know, and all the holy rabbis
know, continued I, that Messiah shall come in power and great glory; shall
break the iron yoke of Roman servitude from off your necks, and exalt the
throne of David, his illustrious ancestor, high above the thrones of the kings
of the earth, giving to his happy subjects dominion and great glory, subjecting
to your government all those who wish your destruction. Worthy assembly, said
I, you have chosen the great Fastosus, as your president and director; hearken
therefore to me, and I will show you my opinion, concerning your expected
Messiah, and his appearance among you. It is most probable, that when he comes,
he will be born of illustrious parents, in the family of David; and when grown
mature in years, you may expect to see meet in him, a combination of all great
and good qualities. By his wisdom and prowess, he will rekindle the martial
spirit of the Jewish warriors, leading the armies of Israel to glory and
conquest, and his throne shall be exalted above all the kingdoms of the earth.
You may therefore expect that when Messiah shall come to your deliverance, you
shall see an illustrious prince, attended by a warlike retinue, breathing
vengeance against your enemies. But can this be him? Could the Messiah, think
you, find no body but poor shepherds, to be the publishers of his birth? More
likely, if Jesus had indeed been the Messiah, he would have made choice of your
reverences for his heralds. Can it ever be supposed my venerable rabbis, that
an obscure person, attended by a few despicable fishermen, can have any legal
pretensions to the vacant throne of illustrious David? Or can it ever be
thought that the son of a Galilean carpenter, attended by a few of the
riff-raff of the people, is likely to restore the kingdom to Israel?

Besides, continued I, let him be what he may, it would bring dishonor on the
princes of Israel, should they submit to be governed by the son of a mechanie.

Who knows but the coming of Messiah may be yet more glorious, and ye shall see
the heavens open over your heads, he shall appear in the firmament guarded on
right and left, by innumerable battalions of armed seraphs, with whom he may
descend and stand upon the mount of Olives, before he shall make his triumphant
entry into the holy metropolis of Jewry. Then shall he dispatch his flaming
soldiers, with full commission to kill, destroy, and cause to perish all such
stubborn Gentiles, who refuse to submit to the Jewish empire, now become
universal. Your enemies all destroyed, great shall be your felicity and glory,
for he shall reign among you in righteousness, peace, and glorious prosperity,
unto all generations.

To whom, my worthy rabbis, will he come, but to such a generation of
righteous men as yourselves. Ye yourselves are witnesses of your own
righteousness and devotion. None say longer prayers, none give alms more
publicly than you do. So great is your zeal for religion, that ye rob widows
houses for the good of the church. So pious your example, that my life for it,
it will be imitated by the clergy in after ages. Your wicked ancestors fell
very far short of your piety, for they killed the prophets, and stoned them who
were sent unto them; but your reverences, so far abominate their murderous
deeds, that you build and beautify their sepulchr^s. You may safely conclude,
that you are the righteous generation to whom the Messiah will come. Thus I
swelled their expectations so very great, that, when the real Messiah was
actually among them, they reviled him, as the worst of Impostors.


INFID. The great Fastosus and me, having showed our opinion, the devil
Malevolus was humbly reques^ed to speak his mind. And he by this time was in a
transport of rage; boisterously cried out, "Away with him for an imposing
villain! If he were the Messiah, would you ever find him coming out of Galilee?
Search, and you will see that out of Galilee arises no prophet; neither can
any good thing come from thence. Were I in your places I would rather be
subject to the Romans for ever, than suffer this fellow to reig^ over me. I
hate his person -- I hate his attendants -- I hate his laws and doctrines --
And above all, I hate his pretensions to the crown of Israel.

"It were low times with you indeed, if an obscure carpenter should be ex^^ted
to the throne, to reign over the Lord's inheritance."


FAST. If I mistake not, it is time for us to attend our industrious subjects.
Shall we meet here tomorrow at noon, brethren?


AEL. Agreed, sir. We will meet.


DIALOGUE X. All the DIA^O^KANS present.
AS soon as the infernal gentry decamped, I went home, and found our
parish priest at my house; I thought this good opportunity of acquainting him
with my adventure: but he concluded with the rest of my neighbors, that my
brain was disturbed, and that those imaginary gentry were only the fruits of
distraction. However, as I thought myself capable of judging between
imagination and reality, I le^t the parson to his mistake, went to my closet to
correct what I had taken down in the former part of the day; got all ready by
next day at noon, to listen to the sable gently. Exactly at noon they came, for
I found them exceedingly ^unctual one with another. As soon as they were seated
on their ^bon thrones, they resumed their discourse; and hi^ fidelis thus began.

INFID. It happened that the venerable rabbis held another council, to assist
at which the devils Fallax and Perfidiosus were invited. In this august
assembly, the main thing to be considered was by what possible means, right or
wrong, they might perfecute and destroy Jesus of Nazareth from the face of the
earth. The great rabbis and doctors, by this time began to fear, that if some
decisive step was not speedily taken, all the country would become Nazarenes*
This induced them to apply to those worthy spirits, (who are known to be
excellent contrivers) and fervently solicited their Mistance. And as th^^ are
by no means bashful, they very soon gave the high ^^^^edrim satisfaction.

Venerable rab^^^, said they, we are apprehensive, that it will be very ^^^ult
to accomplish any thing against this Jesus of Nazar^^^ unless we can stir up
enemies against him, among (...) of his own household, and cause some, who ^at
(...) his table, to lift up their heel against him; for you all know his
conduct is perfectly unblameable. Now we have at no great distance a notable
limb of the devil, trained up in all the mazes of deep deceit and treachery,
sitted for such perdition. Him will we persuade to i^gratiate himself into the
favor of Jesus, and to become one of his train^, When this is done, he shall
act the ^raitor, and betray him into your hands, nothing doubting but you will
then take care to destroy his life, how innocent soever he may be."

"Certainly we will, rejoined the high priest, for it is expedient that one
should die for the people." Accordingly the devil was dispatched to this son of
treachery, whose name was Judas Iscariot, who, being a plodding coveto^s man,
in hope of getting a bag of money, took his instructions from Per^idiosus, went
and joined himself to the train of Jesus, and obtained a part in the apostolic
ministry. In the mean time we and the auxiliary Jews, did all in our power to
prevent the advancement of his evangelic kingdom, by bringing the person and
ministry of Jesus into as much contempt as possible. We represented him as a
glutton, a drunkard, a Samaritan, a wizzard; and in short every thing that was
bad. His doctrine we represented as subversive of the law; notwithstanding we
knew him to be holy, harmless, and undefiled, separate from sinners; that he
came to magnify the law, and make it honorable. (...) his works were such as
carried their own evidence (...) them, and which could by no means be
contested, we persuaded many of the Jews, that they were performed by the power
of Beelzebub. Others, who were better informed, being stirred up by the devil
Malev^^^^, out of pure malice, ^ell in with the common cry, and defamed him as
one who had intercourse with Satan; and thus they sealed themselves ours; as we
need never fear loosing a man after he is capable of such tran^actions.


IMP. And who were they chiefly, father, who thus acted the devil's part so
perfectly as to ^in unpardonably?


INFID. Not the vulgar who knew not the law, I assure you; but men of priestly
reverence, genti^men in holy orders, gentlemen venerable for their ^rudition
and literature; the doctors in divinity, the scribes of the law, the religious
Pharisees were the men, and their descendants have in every age been their
humble imitators. It is unknown how much the devil has been obliged to
gentlemen of the gown, (...) ^^holiasts in general.

It happe^ed in process of time, our friend Judas found an opportunity to
betray him into the hands of the principal priests, for the goodly reward of
thirty pieces of silver; for even Judas would not serve the devil for nothing.
At the same time my son Slavish Fear, who is a spirit of gigantie stature, fell
upon and routed all his followers, so that none of them remained with him in
his last temptations. As soon as Immanuel was seized and fettered, they led him
in triumph to prison and judgment, where our steady friends Hatred and
Falsehood, were appointed witnesses against him in behalf of the commonwealth.
So very hard did they swear against him, that he was brought in guilty of
death, as had been agreed on beforehand. As soon as the jury of priests brought
in their verdict, the devil Crudel^s and Pilate, who (...) judge, arose and
gave sentence against him; which for its singularity I shall repeat.

1. That, the Jewish ploughers should make their furrows long and deep in his
devoted flesh.

2. That, his face should be marred with shame and spitting.

3. That, his cheek should be bruised by the ^^avish hand of the barbarous
smiter.

4. That, he should be delivered over for further torment, to those who plack
off the hair.

5. That, in point of the greatest coutempt, his temples should be torn with a
mock crown of piercing thorns.

6. That, he should be crushed to the earth beneath the weight of the cro^s, to
which he was to be nailed for execution.

7. That, in his extreme ^orture, he should have no drink, but the ^ourest
vine^^^ mixed with gall.

8. That, in the most bar^^^o^, manner which devils, priests, and soldiers
could devi^^, his mangled body should be stretched upon and ^ailed to the
accursed wood. And.

9. As unworthy of either, that be should be lifted up betwixt heaven and
earth, a spectac^e to devils and men, and there hang till he was dead.

As soon as the sentence was denounced, the devil Malevolus cried out, "Away
with him -- soldier^ away with him -- come, let us crucify him, his s^ntence
(...) by far too mild -- away with the varlet to Calvary." So they led him away
to crucifixion.

At the same time our infernal nobility were struck with amazement, at the
seeming power which man had gained over Immanuel; and great Beelzebub, in the
midst of his astonishment, thus addressed his senators, "Once was the memorable
time, that we made such an attempt, to subvert the government of God, by
resisting the power of immanuel; but great was our defeat, and dismal our
overthrow. Our designs were not only frustrated, but we ourselves in the height
of our confusion, fiercely hurled from the resplendent summit of primeval glory
into the yawning g^lph of unfathomable perdition, where we are still reserved
in these horrible chains, to the judgment of the great and terrible day -- a
day, the very thoughts of which make this noble fram^ of mine to tremble as the
quaking asp, ^ut how it comes to pass I know not, these earth-born sons of ours
seem exceedingly to surpass us in power: For I saw Immanuel stand fettered at
their bar, dumb as a sheep before her shearers, he opened not his mouth. I am
much afraid there is some hidden mystery in it. -- What is this? -- My
undaunted mind is not wont to misgive me thus! -- What can this unasua^ tremor,
which now avades my heart, portend? I hate timidity -- and yet I cannot help
fearing, that this commotion of my intellects is ominous of some event fatal to
our interest.

I cannot deem it possible that the God of heaven and earth would patiently
submit to such indignities, had he not some ends to answer by it, to which we
at present are strangers. Often have I prophesied true; but O! may my prophetic
mind be mistaken in its present timorous forebodings. Mean while, let us, my
infernal brethren, harden ourselves in despair; for it is now long since Hope
took wing and fled from these dreary mansions. Strong in fury and fired with
revenge, let us quit ourselves like devils and ^vowed enemies of righteousness.
As for me, I hold it good that instantly we fly to the assistance of our
devoted friends the Jews. Having this unexpected opportunity, let as not said
to improve it to the best advantage; (...) it not be owing to our negligence,
if the state of Immanuel be not overturned. Let not us have the hell to
reflect, that we omitted any thing which might tend to promote the interest of
darkness.

Great Beelzebub finishing here, and his motion being universally approved of,
all the legions of reprobate angels, a few excepted who were left to look after
the affairs of the damned, took wing for earth to assist at so very amazing an
execution. Arrived at Calvary, they formed themselves into an invisible ring
around the elevated cross, where, to their unspeakable astonishment and wonder,
hung Immanuel the maker of the world; and you may be assured they did not fail,
as far as it was in the power of fallen spirits, to torment his opressed soul.
Ay, ay, so successful were we devils, priests, and soldiers that day, that no
less was hoped for than a decisive victory over the Son of God.

But, how shall I speak it? To the everlasting mortification of the infernal
peers, just as Immanuel was to all appearance ready to expire, on a sudden he
exerted his mighty power, seized old Belz^bub and dashed him against the cross,
then casting him to the earth, he so bruised the head of the serpent with his
heel, that there is great reason to believe he will never recover as long as he
lives. It would have grieved the heart of the very Crud^li^ himself, to see the
abuse which our great and venerable parent received on that occasion.


IMP. Well, sire, I cannot but think-how truly the prophetic mind of Beelzebub
foreboded his misfortune: But what were the rest of the chiefs a doing? Why did
not all the veterans flee to his assistance?


INFID. A pertinent question indeed, considering by whom it is made, my son.
But I assure you, we were never so greatly mistaken in our days as at that
time. For when we thought ourselves sure of the victory, to our sad experience
we learned, that Immanuel was strongest in death. For even when he was a dying,
he laid us all under the most perfect arrest; none of us could take one step,
either backward or forward, but as he gave permission; so that being spoiled of
all our power, we could not help ourselves, much less the afflicted prince.
This done, he cried out with a voice which shook the very foundations of both
earth and hell, "It is finished," and was then conveyed by Death into an
invisible state.

This done, once more we thought ^he day our own; but here, I cannot omit that
fearful stagmation of nature which happened then, and the set of new preachers
which were i^^oduced. For when all under our influences, had forsaken Immanuel,
who was betrayed by one, ^^^^ied by another, and forsaken by all his preachers;
the indignant sun could not endure that sight, as if angry and ashamed at the
proceedings of the sons of men, covered his face with a sable cloud, and denied
one smiling ray to delinquent earth, whilst his Lord was ignominiously
crucified. As if it had been seized with uncommon tremor, the earth itself,
fell into a fit of violent convulsions, the mountains reeled, the rocks rent,
the graves opened, the dead arose, and all to preach the sufferings of the God
of nature. An invisible hand rent the vail of the temple, that cloth of
extraordinary texture, in twain from the top to the bottom, and a voice was
heard to say, "The glory is departed from Israel, and now the most holy place
is laid open."

Death having conveyed Immanuel to its lonely mansions, the resolute, though
maimed Belz^bub, our great prince, recovered himself is much as was possible,
his head being incurably broken; mustered his maimed forces, and went to the
assistance of Death, if possible, to keep Immanuel fast prisoner in the silent
tomb. Nothing doubting, but if this could be, we should render all that he had
heretofore done and suffered, null and void. The better to succeed in this
important enterprise, we sealed the door of the sepulcher and set a watch of
faithful soldiers, instructed by the chief of the Jewish priests; and still to
make the security stronger, every fiend did his ^tmost to impose weights on the
buried body of Immanuel, to prevent his resurrection from the solitary grave.

But to our eternal confusion, on the third day of his invisible state, he
arose shook himself from the dust, came to the door of the sepulcher, burst it
open, and laid hold on Death, who stood as continel next to the door of the
tomb, ^rampled him under his feet, and by main force wrenched from him his
poisonous sting, that sad repositary of all his strength. This done, he said,
"Henceforth, monster, nast thou no power over the people for whom I have died."
Then he broke impetuously through all the lines of martial inferuals, who stood
in firm phalanx around the tomb; seized the lately wounded chief, who was very
ill with a fever in his mind, arising from his disaster upon Mount Calvary. He
took the fiend, the great Beelzebub, chained him to the ax^e of his chariot,
mounted his seat, and rode triumphantly through the gathering crowds of joyful
saints, who on golden pinions descended from heaven in solemn strain^, to hymn
their all conquering and triumphant Redeemer.

O my friends! my dear infernals, it must have pierced your hearts with the
most poignant sorrow, to see him dragged in triumph through all the hosts of
saints and angels, who fearless stood in blazing ranks to see the longed for
solemnity; and at the same time, to see our beloved friend Death lie gasping
for life at the door of the sepulcher. Great was the confusion of the infernal
brigades, when they saw their principalities spoiled, and Death and Satan so
terribly handled: yea, so tremendous was their amazement, that to escape the
avenging hand of risen Immanuel, they retreated even to the nethermost depths
of hell, and his scattered disciples again resorted to his erected standard.
But the greatest disappointment and consternation was, when we understood that
after all our diligence and hazardous exploits, we with our auxiliary priests,
etc, had done nothing, but what the hand and council of God had predetermined
should be done; that by our seeming victory over Immanuel, he had for ever
subdued us under his seet; and that all our hatred, envy and cruelty, was fully
recompensed into our own bosoms; now deeper damned ^han ever.


AVAR. Hah, father, these were troubles indeed, such as do not happen every
day; but it is not for us to desist from tempting when our designs miscarry,
then should we not act the part of desperadoes. such as we are,


INFID. Ah, gentlemen, great was the cause of my dismay, for Immanuel gave such
demonstration of his Messiahship, that all which was written in the prophets
concerning him, was exactly fulfilled in his life and death: yea, so very
striking was the evidence, that many cried, Truly this is a just man, and
others, Truly this is the Son of God. Therefore I greatly feared that all the
world would become believers in him, and consequently shake off my yoke. But I
was much obliged to my good friends the Je^^ish clergymen; for their reverences
greatly befriended me, and w^rmly espoused my interest; exerted their utmost
power to establish the throne of great Infidelis, and to destroy the early
seeds of Christianity sown by Immanuel, and now beginning to grow.

Immanuel having in opposition to all the powers of darkness, finished the work
for which he came down to the earth; he triumphantly ascended to his native
heaven, to the primeval embraces of his eternal Father, and assumed all the
ensigns of empyrean glory.

Soon after this the high festival of Pentecost drew on, and as I formerly
attended at Jerusalem, in the midst of many thousands, who, according to the
law, came up to worship upon that occasion, not only from Indea, but from
nations very remote. I dreaded no harm at the hands of a few ill^terate
fishermen, having not been informed that any of the rulers, or of the scribes
and phariseas, had believed in Jesus, and therefure was at no pains to prevent
the multitude coming up to the solemnity as usual. But here was another shock
my kingdom sustained; for Peter the fisherman, who, so very lately like a
dastard, impiously denied his Lord with profane oaths, now filled with the Holy
Ghost, stood up in the midst and clearly proved that jesus was the very
Messiah, and upon this occasion played off the heavy artillery of Sinia on the
consciences of my people, which was attended with success so fatal to me, that
no less than three thousand were pierced through the heart at once, and fell on
the field of action. Now it was that my evil apprehensions were again alarmed,
plainly perceiving that the artillery of the word was levelled against my
person, and that the first end of the gospel was the subversion of my
diabolical government. However, I drew up all the forces which I possibly
could, in the hurry of that surprise, and had just time to give one general
discharge, my soldiers crying out as they gave the volley, "These men are
drunken with new wine." It was but a poor opposition to doctrine so powerful, I
allow, but it was the best that could at that time be made, for we were obliged
to retreat in much confusion, and leave the Christian fishermen masters of the
field.

As soon as we were a little recovered from the disorder into which that
unexpected misfortune had plunged us, I summoned a council of war, in which the
self-righteous Jews were the principal, next to our infernal train. I myself
gave special orders, that some method should be concerted effectually to
destroy the name of Jesus; for, said I, "If we let them alone all the people
will believe in their doctrine." In this council it was resolved, to raise an
army of those who were the greatest adversaries to the name of Jesus, to whom
orders should be given to kill, destroy, and cause to perish all who believed
in this way, till the Christian religion should be banished from the face of
the earth. This army was raised, and the command given to Saul of Tarsus, at
that time a mighty zealot for us, and who, for a season, made dreadful havoc of
all that believed contrary to the faith of the priests; for it ought to be
observed, that the opinion of the priests, has been esteemed true orthodoxy,
and the only faith, in all ages or countries.

But here another sad disappointment and loss besel me, for as this same
captain Saul was on his march to Damascus, to fight a pitched battle with the
Christians, it so fell out that Immanuel himself was taking a tour in the
valley, to see how the pomegranates budded, and falling in with trusty Saul on
his journey, unveiled his own personal excellencies to aim, and laid him under
an immediate arrest. As soon as he saw the beauties of Immanuel, he felt the
most sincere esteem for his person, and conceived the most exalted sentiments
of (...) friendship and love. Yea, he was even so much grieved (...) had drawn
his sword against him, that he renounce^ (...) ^ervice of Infidelis on the spot
took the oath of allegiance (...) Jesus, and thenceforward hated my person and
government with the most perfect hatred; old what he could to overturn our
state and subvert our government.

Immanuel having the most tender regard for Saul, gave him a new name, written
upon a white stone, appointed him one of his prime ministers, and sent him on
an embassy to my subjects, to negociate a revolt from me.

You cannot conceive the astonishment the Jewish clergy were in, when
swift-winged Fame arrived and blowed it abroad in every street, that Saul, who
was formerly so zealous for our interest, was now become a ringleader of the
sect of the Nazarenes, and was likely to do us more mischief than all who had
gone before him.

By this time several of the Jewish rabbis, rebelled against me, and joined
themselves to the (...), who now made it their whole business to go from (...)
place, exhorting my subjects to revolt, exposing my deformity and devilishness,
to all they met with. O! those were trying times, for, notwithstanding we had
forces out against them, in every quarter of the world, to impede their
progress, the word of God, by their means, prevailed in (...) manner, that it
was beyond our power to suppress (...) for if we burned one Nazarene, two more
presently (...) up out of his ashes. Even Rome itself, then the (...) of the
world and seat of pagan virtue; Athens, where Minerva was said to have been
trained up, were soon infested with this new doctrine, and very considerable
numbers in them durst oppose our government and dispute our title to empire.
Even alleged that the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, and that
all pagan virtue is but dross and dung in comparison of the gospel of Christ
Jesus.

However, to out my story as short as may be; after many hundred thousands of
the Nazarenes were slain, my subjects became weary of the war. By this time
they saw clearly that persecuting them to death only served to increase their
number and strength: So that if those restless devils, Malevolus and Crudelis,
would have been quiet, they would gladly have dropped their weapons, and agreed
to a cessation of hostilities with the Christians.


IMP. Little judgment as I am allowed to have of historical affairs, I myself
have seen what effect opposition usually has upon that class of people, for if
in any place where my standard is most eminently elevated, there happen to be
any of that sect, you shall find them more fervent in their study of virtue,
and zealous in their opposition to me, than in those provinces where morality
or civility preside. Ah, gentlemen, we have had trying times past over us!


INFID. Trying times indeed. For, notwithstanding the fervent zeal of Malevolus
and Crudelis, the many fore campaigns they had served so enervated their arms,
that, although their principles remained implacable, they were even obliged to
sit down in despair of ever being able to extirpate the religion of Jesus from
the world.

But my fertile brain soon produced fresh devices; seeing many of my temples
forsaken, and my idols without mercy thrown to the pavement, I began to think
of other expedients to impede the progress of Christianity. I labored to
introduce Ease, and her handmaid Prosperity among the Christians, not without
hope, that when they were full they would forget their God. The better to favor
this deep contrivance, I persuaded the valiant Crudelis to scabbard his sword
for a season, and leave the people of our hate to the possession of their
tranquillity.

It was not long that this scheme had been put in practice, ere I began to reap
the fruits of my wisdom; for ease and prosperity wrought more to my advantage,
than all the excursions of the devil Crudelis. When they were at ease from the
lash of persecation, they were foolish enough to quarrel among themselves,
grievously bit, and devoured one another, the cause of their strife for the
most part being, who should be the greatest?


FAST. A very important question, much canvassed, but never as yet resolved.
Had I been a clergyman instead of a devil, I had certainly been a great casuist
in this part of school theology. Never was a point of doctrine more belabored
certainly than this, and never were people more divided in sentiments than
about its resolution, even from the great church of Turkey down to the smallest
dissenting congregation. The divines of the established church in Turkey stands
stiffly to it, that Mahomed and themselves ought to preside over all the
believing world. The doctors of France, Spain, and Italy, are as firmly
persuaded that pre-eminence is due to none but his holiness and themselves; and
that all who are not of the same opinion, are certainly in a state of damnation.

As for their reverences in England, though they will deny no honor to his
popeship, which really is his due, they will submit to none as the leading
priest but his Grace of Canterbury, and consider that church which they are the
pillars of, as the purest establishment that the lower world can boast of.
Others indeed there are who greatly question his Grace's right to preside, and
therefore refuse to bow to his mitre, and will have a pope of their own
choosing, resolving to be enslaved in their own way. Hence, although the
reverend members of the associate synod cannot in conscience submit to the
corrupt governors of the kirk of Scotland, all of whom they have long since
recommended to the care of the devil, much less can they bow to a metropolitan,
whom they call the image of the pope, they can very cordially submit to the
government of the reverend Mr. Adam Gibb; because they themselves had the
pleasure of choosing him. That goes a great way. And hence it is, every society
has its po^^. -- The venerable -- of -- at -- submit for the same reason to the
great -- and the -- of -- to the Rev. -- so that it is not submission itself
that is objected to, so much as the mode of it: for gentlemen will be
submissive enough, may they but choose a pope for themselves. But remember
this, whoever is chosen the pope of a party, is by his partisans always deemed
the greatest. For instance, at the Foundry none is so great as the Rev. Mr.
John Wesley, sometime fellow of Lincoln college, Oxon. And at the -- none ever
preached or wrote like the great -- D. D. author of -- and of -- and of -- etc.
etc. etc. But amongst them all, a very few are found who consider Jesus Christ
as the greatest, and who properly call him, Master.


AVAR. I thought Immanuel had settled that point long ago. Did not he establish
this rule for the observance of his disciples, Whosoever will be great among
you, let him be your minister; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him
be your servant? did not the divines abide by his determination?


FAST. No, Avaro, Quite the reverse; for the schoolmen will have it, that he
who is chief shall be lord over his brethren: by these means they have annexed
a certain degree of nobility to their religion, which Jesus never intended to
be joined with his. But we hinder the reverend Infidelis proceeding with his
story.


INFID. Those female fiends, the ladies Prosperity and Ease, as
plenipotentiaries for Beelzebub, made great proposals to them, and indeed they
soon established kingdoms, principalities and powers, of the Christian name.

Then were the Christians able to maintain themselves against their Pagan
neighbors, my professed subjects. This I patiently bore, believing that the
martial spirit of the Christians, a little indulged for the present, would
greatly make for our interest and the final establishment of my kingdom.

Those revered-ladies, Prosperity and Ease, had not been long amongst them, ere
many who bore the Christian name were desirous of coming to terms of agreement
with me; but upon this express condition, "That in the treaty of amity betwixt
them and me, it should be stipulated, that they still be called by the name of
Christ, for it was now become scandalous to bear the name of another." This
request I thought reasonable enough, and that to grant it would be no very
great concession on my part, therefore I readily agreed, and the treaty was
confirmed. It is an invariable rule with me, that it is not very material
whether a man is called a Christian or not, provided I have but safe possession
of his heart: for names do not change the nature of things.

This amiable fiend, lady Prosperity, rested not in her pleasing operations,
^till she had quite reduced the oriental nations to such a degree of reason,
that they petitioned my personal return among them, and as my loving subjects
returned to their allegiance. Having now secured the oriental, the splendid
lady and me, undertook the conquest of the occidental church; and, the better
to succeed in our enterpri^e, we fixed our abode at Rome, famous both for
ancient and modern paganism. As for me, I knew it was necessary I should remain
incognito, till a fair opportunity should offer for my emerging out of
darkness: but my lady Prosperity decked herself in her richest attire, and
openly resided among the Christians, who were so ravished with her excellent
beauties, that he was deemed the most happy man who could prevail with her
excellency to take up her lodging in his house. Her ladyship, you know, is not
to be won by every one who addresses her; here she acted according to previous
instructions, and made free with the bishop's house, as best suited to our
purpose.

Wonderful were the works which she performed there: for at her first arrival
the bishop was no more than a plain honest man, having but one congregation in
his diocese; but first the created him, Reverend; then, His Lordship; then, His
Grace; and after that, His Holiuess, etc. Indeed the vast dominion and immense
revenues which she conferred on him, so swelled the haughty prelate, that, not
contented with the honors then possessed, he claimed dominion over all, as the
father of the whole world, Even this was short of giving content, unless he
should also reign over heaven and hell; therefore he has seized the gates of
both, and lets in and out just whom he pleases. Nothing sho^ of arrogating to
himself the prerogatives of the Almighty, could satisfy his ambition, such as
his holiness, infallibility, supremacy, etc. The devil himself never aimed at
higher things. In the mean while her ladyship, at her leisure hours, waited on
those who were of any account among the Christians, who for the most part had
nothing of Christianity but the name. Some indeed were firmly attached to
Immanuel, who could not be bribed even by her largest offers; but their number
was comparatively small. Seeing the progress which Prosperity made, they went
about the streets complaining in some such words as these: "This harlot
Prosperity will be the ruin of Christianity."

In process of time I was sent for to the bishop's court, he being entirely
reconciled to me. The worthy prelate received me with all the reverence due to
my person, and laid before me a beloved scheme which he had designed, and of
which he desired my opinion.

Having maturely digested his plan, I replied. "Worthy and self-adoring sir,
has your holiness power sufficient to defend your deityship, providing your
divinity should be called in question?" To which his holiness. "Yes, yes, yes,
I have -- I have -- There are several potent princes, who will conspire to make
me omnipotent. They will spend their substance -- depopulate their dominions --
destroy their bodies, damn their own souls, and the souls of their subjects, in
defense of my godhead. -- There are many wise priests also, who will contribute
all these wisdom, for their own emolument, to make me omniscient o^
infallible." Having such an agreeable account of his holiness's affairs, I
resolved all his scruples at once; for thus I addressed him, "Most subt^^e of all
the priests, if thus you are supported, I think all things go very favorably.
Therefore lose no time in publishing to the world your excellent scheme of
divinity. Let it be proclaimed that lienceforth you are no longer man."


IMP. His holiness was in the right of it to disclaim humanity. What mortal man
was ever endowed with such qualities as are his? What mere man was ever
infallible? Not Peter, he fell low enough. Infallibility is an essential
attribute of Godhead, and his holiness being possessed of that, must needs be God
What man ever did, or ever will reign with despotic power over all the priests
and princess of the earth, putting down one and exalting another at his
pleasure, like his holiness. It is by him that kings reign, and princes decree
judgment, and not by the Almighty, as formerly. Therefore his holiness can be
no mortal man. And yet a mortal god is a strange sort of character.


INFID. The great priest than^^ed me for my good advice, secretly renounced the
name of Jesus, and swore allegiance to me. Called for Falax, whom he chose for
his scrivener, and lerfidiosus whom he appointed secrerary, Then, with all
convenient speed, issued forth an edict, in which it was declared,

1. That the word of God is no longer of any force, to decide religious
controversies; but that the bare word of his holiness at Rome should determine
in every case.

2. That no man henceforward should dare to search the scriptures, contrary to
the resolution of the apostolie chair; the Bible being condemned as a book full
of heresy and protestant tenets; containing many things pernicious to the souls
of men, and very derogatory from the honor of the holy mother church.

3. That the pope's bible, or cannons, (...), and ^legends, are to be held as
the only rule of (...) and practice, exclusive of all others, under pain of
ete^^^^ damnation.

4. That God, who made heaven and earth, has no longer power to save or damn
any man without the pope's permission; and that the infallible bishop of Rome
would save and damn whom he should think proper.

5. Notice was given to all whom it might concern, that the free pardons were
already all expended. So that a former proclamation, made from another quarter,
which held forth nothing but free pardons, is to be held null and void; and
that in future no man may expect pardon, unless the full price is paid into the
hand of a faithful priest, as delegate of his holiness.

6. That the Holy Ghost is to be deemed incapable of the work of
sanctification; all the souls he has undertaken to cleanse, having been found
with many spots upon them, before they passed through his holiness's furnace,
hereafter to be named.

7. Advertisement; That his holiness the pope has, at great expense, obtained a
very large quantity of the most purifying fire in hell, together with a
battalion of the most skilful furies of the pit to work the flames, both of
which he has placed in limbo, alias purgatory, where, for a proportionable
sum, promptly paid unto one of his holiness's vassals, or priests, any cathelic
spectre shall be burned as white as a bishop's band.

8. The better to encourage this branch of priestcraft, it was declared that
no case is quite desperate, but that of those who abide by the Bible as the
only rule of faith and practice.

9. It was declared, that the Almighty has no longer any power to support
princes in their sovereignty, that power having devolved upon his popeship;
who, for the future, would exalt or debase princes, as they proved steady or
unsteady to his interest.

10. It was enacted, that no man should in the least call in question the
pope's divinity, his supremacy, and infallibility; and every person thus
offending (...) be deemed an atheist, an heretic and traitor, and as such
should be destroyed.

Now, my brother, having thus far carried on my history, let me beg you to
recite some part of yours.


FAST. With all my heart, brother, but it must be tomorrow morning. Our time is
now spent. Business must be attended, or it will wither and decay.


End of the First Volume.
Infernal Conference: OR, DIALOGUES OF DEVILS.

By the LISTENER.

IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. II.

LONDON: PRINTED: PHILADELPHIA: REPRINTED, And Sold by STEWART and COCHRAN,
No. 34, South Second-street.

DIALOGUES OF DEVILS.
DIALOGUE XI.
FASTOSUS. PRAY, Crudelis, what is this mighty affair that so highly tickles
your fancy? Let your kindred share in your mirth, I beseech you.


CRUD. Yesterday afternoon I was conjured up by Squire ^roadfield, to assist in
the whipping of a poor man, who being ready to perish with hunger, unluckily
begged a morsel of bread at his door. But before I give you an account of the
whipping, I shall first give your a specimen of the gentleman's character.

Squire Broadfield is a gentleman and justice of peace. He is worth five
thousand a year, and that is enough to make him a gentleman, even if his father
had been a beggar; to make him wise, though born a fool; learned, although a
very dunce. Indeed, it must be owned, the principal part of his worship's
education was had under Dr. Ringwood and Dr. Jowler, the celebrated tutors of
his kennel. Their maxims he perfectly understands, and their virtues he has
dopted; but five thousand a year you know, makes the study of the kennel truly
classical.

Talk you of Orpheus to him, his worship proposes the virtue of Ringwood to
your consideration. Do you admire the ardour which flames in the Iliads; his
worship says, no m^sic like the voice of Jowler. Tell him of the majesty of
Virgil, he will bid you mind well the gait of his horse, what a majestic creature
he is. An emperor, says he, might be proud to ride such another. Do you
recommend the pleasures of solid learning to him, he is in raptures about the
diversions of the chase. As yet he has avoided the yoke of matrimony; not that
ever he was an admirer of continence, few gentlemen being more conversant with
the fair sex than his worship.

He keeps in his house a wanton train of overfed servants, the superfluities of
whose table would comfort the bowels of many indigent: besides a pack of
hounds, which devour more than serves to maintain all the poor in the parish
workhouse. But this miserable wretch who cannot work because he is lame, and
having no parish to flee to for relief, chooses to beg rather than steal, for
which his worship ordered him to be severely whipped by my good son the beedle,
till be shall be made willing either to steal for a living or to die of hunger.


IMP. I am not certain that John Ketch, Esquire of fatal character, had any hand in
procuring the law for whipping beggars; but certainly it adds greatly to his
revenue. Nor am I certain that it was made on purpose to drive vagrants from
begging to stealing, in order more speedily to ease the nation of such a
burden; but certain I am, it greatly helps to fill up the Tyburn chronicle. But
what more, cousin?


CRUD. As the poor lame fellow was confronted by the beedle, and was convinced
of the reality of his worship's benevolent intention to have him well flogged;
he fell on his knees, and implored mercy for God's sake, and for Christ's sake,
etc. promising that, if he might be forgiven this once, he would never return
to these parts any more. He pleaded his indigence, his hungry belly, his
lameness, his belonging to no parish, and every thing his fear could devise;
but all served only to harden the justice's heart the more. He ordered the
beedle to take him away, and do his duty immediately. The beedle signified to
him as they drew near to the whipping-post, that he felt some relentings of
heart toward him; and that if he could only give him an handsome fee, he would
favor him as much as his reputation would admit of. But, upon enquiry, finding
that the old fellow was so wicked as to have no money, his heart became like
brass, and he resolved to ply him thoroughly to the satisfaction of his worship.

Accordingly when 'Squire Broadfield and me arrived in company to see the
sport, there was the poor raseal, whose poverty was his principal crime, tied
to the post, and mangled with the cord, which the lusty beedle plied with
nervous arm.

Oh! how his worship and me did laugh, to see the villain, whose poverty was
obstinate, leaping, as his lameness would let him, and wrything his bloody
back, as the whip was lustily pryed about him by the sturdy beedle; who, for
his part, would rob, and steal, and do any thing, rather than be whipped by a
trusty brother of the trade; yea, would act^en thousand villainies rather than
die of hunger. This fellow must be a most incorrigible rogue to be sure, if he
is not willing by this time either to steal and be hanged, or patiently to die
of an empty belly.


IMP. What, Crudelis, have they made a law to whip all the beggars that infest
your country?


CRUD. No, no, Impiator. I heartily wish there were such a law, for then I
would even quit my devilship to become king of the beedles. If all beggars were
to be punished at the whipping-post, (as I know no reason why they should not)
perhaps his worship himself, and his reverence the parson of the parish, would
not escape a thorough drubbing. And yet, Crudelis, as my name is, I think the
whip-beggar-law is very partial and unjust, as it lays hold on none but poor
petty beggars, who would be content with bread, shins of beef, and table beer;
whilst others may with impunity beg, and obtain some thousands a year of the
nation's money.

What are all the ranks of mankind, but so many beggars? Does not his
reverence, the inferior clergyman, b^g a living from my lord bishop, or some
neighboring nobleman? And do not their lordships beg of the king? Do not the
very members of parliament come hat in hand, and meanly beg of the corporation,
having no consciousness of worth in themselves? Do not the pliant courtiers sue
to the favorite for places of trust for the sake of the profit? Beggars all,
besides the stern patriot, a pelican which does not appear once in a century.
But if their lordships, the noble beggars, and their honors, the gentlemen
beggars, are to be considered as authors of the whipping-law, I should have
wondered indeed, if care had not been taken to exempt themselves from its
penalty.

The case stands exactly thus. If a gentleman, extravagant beyond his revenue,
begs for a thousand or two per annum, he shall not only escape with impanity,
but obtain his suit, provided always, he will be the humble pliant creature of
the minister; but if a poor helpless, low-born wretch, pinched with hunger,
happen to beg a piece of bread in an interdicted place, he shall be exercised
a^ the whipping-post.


INFID. I think sir, you agreed to give us some account of your affairs. We
should hold ourselves much (...) by the favor. But for this, I would beg the
history of my son Crudelis, who makes himself so merry at the expense of
foolish vicious mortals.


FAST. His history might be entertaining enough, I suppose; but doubtless mine
must be much more elegant and instructive, as my concerns have been mostly with
venerable gentlemen, and with none more than those of the sacerdotal function.

Notwithstanding I prevailed with the Jews, almost unanimously to contemn the
person and testimony of Jesus of Nazareth, the Christian religion gained ground
in the world. Yea, the word of God grew mightily, and prevailed over the
traditions of both Pagan and with sages; therefore, from thenceforward I found
it necessary to deal deep in the things of religion.

I began my trade with ecclesiastical titles, which were altogether unknown in
the days of Christ and his apostles; a set of goods very venerable with the
populace, and wholly of my manufacture. An assortment of trifles, which greatly
pleased the lords of religion, and forwarded the deep designs of priestcraft.


IMP. With your leave, sir, I have heard that all the lord bishops are
descended in a direct line from the apostles; must it not then follow, that the
convocation at Jerusalem consisted of the most reverend fathers in God; their
graces, my lord Peter, my lord Paul, etc. etc. metropolitans; and the right
reverend fathers in God, my lord Stephen, my lord Philip, my lord Timothy, my
lord Barnabas, etc. diocesians.


INFID. Son, you ought not to interrupt your honorable uncle. You may remember
that these titles are all of later date.


FAST. My nephew shall hear, if he will but have a little patience. The famous
lady Prosperity and you, brother, had not been a very great while at Rome,
before I found sufficient encouragement to erect my office for vending
sacerdotal titles there; and I must own that for many years I had a brisk run
of trade, till in fact the church had room for no more, from the great
infallible priest at Rome, down to a Cumberland curate. The first introduction
of this kind was a very brilliant medal, inscribed with these five capital
letters; P. A. T. E. R. which having finished, I presented at a general
convocation of bishops, who as yet were not become reverend. They were highly
pleased with the device, having never seen such a thing before. The worthies
examined it one after another, and all found that the venerable letters, well
put together, and properly interpreted, signified Father. And ^^rtainly the
event has proved, that great is the magical power of this medal.

Every one said to his fellow: What can be more agreeable to our function than
this venerable title? Are not we the fathers of the people? They forgot that
One is he Father of the people, even God. I was therefore des^ed, with all
speed, to procure a like medal for every member of this august assembly. Soon
after this, I provided medals more highly finished, and inscribed; P, A, T, R,
I, A, R, C, H, A, one of which I bestowed on the holy bishop of Rome; a second
I gave to the bishop of Alexandria; a third to that of Constantinople; a fourth
to that of Jerusalem, and a fifth to him who presided in the church of A^tioch.
In all which places my medals were more highly valued than the finest ruby; and
he who could by any means obtain one of them, was supposed to be ^levated f^r
above the common rank of mortals.

Long and very successfully had I followed this medalian trade, when a famous
and worthy pre^a^e of Rome, who was a great admirer of my productions, came
into my office; after doing obeisance to me, and turning over my pretty
devices, he asked me, "If I thought, with all my ingenuity, I could produce a
genuine medal with this ^^scription, P, A, P, A, S,: S, U, P, R, E, M, U, S.

OR,

EPISCOPUS UNIVERSALIS." I told him, that if ^ll the artists in hell were to
unite their wisdom in one mechanical head, it would be utterly impossible; for,
said I, the whole creation does not furnish sufficient materials. But if it
please your holiness, I can make you a ^^am medal of that sort, which may
perhaps answer all the ends you have in view, as we^^ as if it were real. Oh!
said he. I care not for my part whether it is real or counterse^t, if I can
only, by your assistance, my worthy Fastosus, impose upon the credulity of
mankind; and make the w^rld believe that I am supreme pope and universal
bishop; th^n I should reign, with despotic power, over the estates and
consciences of all Christians. My good friend, please you to make me the medal,
and I will cause the world believe that I had it from the Almighty, with
letters patent under the broad seal of heaven, for the sole use of it to me and
my successors for ever. "I well know, returned I, that your holiness means no
more, than in a pious manner to impose the cheat upon the world, the better to
fill your coffers, and aggrandize your name; in which laudible undertaking,
your adored Fastosus shall be ever ready to direct and assist."

To work I went, having called in the assistance of several of our friends, and
made a counterfeit medal, in the likeness of a treble crown, with certain
inscriptions of the cab^listic kind upon it. They were short but pithy
sentences, ^s you shall hear. On the one side of the first crown was inscribed,

He that is honored as the weater of this medal, is possessed of infallible
knowledge. -- Opposite to that was carved, in fine Italian, He is supreme over
all laws, divine and human. -- On the right side of the second crown, were
these words in large capitals, This is the head of the church. -- On the left
were these, This is the viear of Christ, and successor of Peter. -- On the
third and uppermost crown were the following. The keys of heaven, hell, and
purgatory, are in his possession, and used only at his pleasure. Round the
edge, was this writing. He reigns supreme over all the kings of the earth,
put^eth down one, and exalts another at his pleasure.

When finished, I presented it to the arch-prelate, who received it with all
imaginable thankfulness, viewed it with the most exquisite delight, and oftener
than once, protested by his infallibility that he had never seen any thing
contrived with equal art, nor so suitably adapted to his aspiring principles.
Transported with joy, he cried out, (...) thou ingenious spirit? bloss thee for
thy assistance? This precious medal will exalt my name above all that is called
God; all the European princes will now become my vassals, and the adorers of my
priestly majesty. But to complete the work, I pray thee, good Fastosus, think
of some suitable device for me, by which I may bind all the various ranks of
the clergy to my interest; for I shall never dare to show my miraculous medal,
nor divulge the delightful inscriptions on it, unless I have something of the
like nature to present to their reverences; for this alone will excite them to
favor the cheat. As for laymen, the scum of nature, I regard not them. They are
asses, upon whom we shall ride with pleasure and profit; and if at any time
they ride restif, we will tame them with the rod of discipline, and so belabour
them with the cudgel of excommunication, that with gladness they shall submit
implicitly (...) our decisions. Could not the great Fastosus strike me a
variety of medals, of different worth and designs; and lodge them safely in my
possession, that I may have the sole distribution of them amongst my depending
clergy; for unless they cleave ^s close to me, as the scales to the back of
Leviathan, I shall never (...) able to support my pretensions to infallibility
and supremacy.

To which I replied, "Great priest, in order to bind (...) ^lergy inviolably to
your interest, let me advise you to take care that your decisions be always in
their favor; place your own grandeur in the front of all your proceedings, and
let theirs immediately follow it;" which advice the good man cordially
embraced, and ever since has invariably followed it with the utmost precision,

From henceforth, continued I, I give you full power and authority to preside
over all those medals which I have already issued forth; and for the future the
disposal of them shall be at your holiness's pleasure. I will moreover add to
the number, and you shall have more than sufficient to gain all the clergy to
your party. But observe, you must receive this power at the hand of great
Fastosus, for it is by me alone you can lord it over the estates and
consciences of men. The great prelate heard with attention, and then rejoined,
"Mighty Fastosus, if you will oblige me in this, you may depend upon me and all
my successors as faithful subjects; implicitly obedient servants to your
highness, and your father Beelzebub. Nor do I doubt but the rest of the priests,
for the sake of power, will be equally loyal to you, and implacable enemies to
Immanuel, therefore, your kindnesses shall be gratefully returned on our parts."

Very well, said I, but be sure that all your villainy be carried on under the
show of sanctity, otherwise you will do us but little service,


AVAR. Then sir, by what you say, it may be concluded, the hoary prelate at
Rome is very sensible that he is Belzebub's agent, and that all his
pretensions, beyond those of the lowest pastor, are an imposition.


FAST. Yes, Avaro, he knows it very well, and that makes him more like unto us:
indeed the cheat is so palpable, that any one who has read his Bible with
attention must needs see through it. But by these proceedings, I soon found I
had cut out a great deal of work for myself, so that I was obliged to be doubly
diligent. However, my sole delight being to promote the works of darkness, I
soon str^ck off seventy new medals, inscribed CARDINALIS. These I presented to
his holiness, who examined them with great attention, and was highly pleased
with the inge^ious device.

"Most noble spirit, said he to me, these medals I perceive, will raise the
gentlemen who receive them next in dignity to myself, and they will be the
first and most able to support the sea of Rome." You must needs know, my
friends, that this prediction has been fully accomplished. For, in all ages,
since the cardinals received their medals they have been truly indefatigable
(...) establishing the power and supremacy of the pope. H^^ holiness and they
being so intimately connected, that they must stand or fall together.

In the next place, I struck off a considerable number somewhat what inferior
to the former, distinguished by a Mitre on one side, and on the other by the
inscription ARCHIEPISCOPUS; which, in like manner, I presented to the father of
the world, much to his satisfaction. These, said he, shall fix the class next
to the former, and I doubt not but every one of them will be sufficiently
obsequious in expectation of a cardinal's hat. The archbishops being thus
disposed of, I took all the diocesian meda^s, which I had formerly produced,
and put them under the ^re and disposal of the great prelate; and he was
pleased to assign them to those, who were next in place to the archbishops,
each one in humble expectation of higher preferment.


AV^R. Hah, uncle! was it you that made those titles ascribed to the various
orders of the clergy?


FAST. Was it I, do you ask? Yes, it was I indeed! Who ever read in the New
Testament, any thing at all about a supreme bishop, or about cardinals, and
lord bishops? I made them all, I assure you, cousin; though I will not affirm,
that every person who has borne these names, has been absolately under the
dominion of pride.

To my great honor I speak it, Avaro, I ceased not when I had made their
lordships the diocesians, but went on with my trade, till I had procured
curious medals for a very great number of abbots, swarms of monks and friars;
jesuits, franciscan and dominican friars, with a long train of etceteras, who
soon appeared in shoals, as numerous as locusts when they ascend out of the
bottomless pit. Then followed the bare headed capuchins, mendicants, penit^^^,
pilgrims, etc. without number. Those religious gentry o^e all their dignity to
me, unless it may be that Avaro has some little hand in the matter.


AVAR. You do me great honor, sir, in mentioning me as a worker together with
you.


FAST. After all this, the subtle priest thought that the antichristian
hierarchy of Rome could not stand upon a foundation solid enough, unless all,
or at least some of the princes of Europe were invested with ecclesiastical
titles, and so adopted into the new modelled church. Therefore I told his
holiness, that I had three highly finished medals by me ready prepared, fitting
for royal personages. Here (...) ^scribed, Rex Catholicus; let it be presented
to your servant his majesty of Spain. This second medal, inscribed, Rex
Christianissimus, will be an acceptable present to your vassal the French king;
and this third inscribed, Rex Fidelissimus, I advise you to bestow upon the
little monarch of Portugal. His hoary holiness with raptures replied, "Very
good, most noble Fastosus, this device will doubtless secure all these three
princes, as so many pillars to support my infallibility. But what of the king
of England, sir? I dread those islanders. Is there no medalian charm, by which
that invincible prince can be secured to our interest? I pray you good Fastosus
lend me an hand in this.

I shall endeavor to serve your holiness, replied I, and then he withdrew.
Soon after I presented him with a medal suited to his wish. It bore this
inscription, Desensor Fide, and was given to the monarch of England; but alas!
I has not answered our expectations, for this same monarch instead of defending
the orthodox faith of Rome, was the first crowned head that protested against
the supremacy of the Italian bishop.


AVAR. It is somewhat droll, that the king of England having shaken off the
yoke of Rome, should still keep possession of the medal, which his predecessors
received as a present from the pope. One would think that when the pope himself
was renounced, in strict justice all his gifts should have been restored, and
the title Defend^^ of the Faith, have been, by a protestant prince, rejected
amongst the rest of Romish trumpery; but wonders never cease. Did you finish
here, sir?


FAST. No, Avaro, I assure you, many titles besides these were first issued
from my office, such as His Grace, a title claimed by many a graceless duke, as
well as antichristian priest. His Lordship, a title by which many a profane
nobleman and irreligious bishop are distinguished. His Honor, claimed by many
persons who never felt one desire after true honor. When a gentleman's honor
depends merely upon his estate, table and equipage, such a title as His Honor,
very ill becomes him, yet many such there are who claim the appellation.


AVAR. If high birth and an ample fortune do not entitle a man to his Honor, I
pray you what will?


FAST. An honorable conduct, Avaro, without which he is only a clown in
diguise. And many such fools you may find wrapped in scarlet and lace, with
swords dangling by their sides.


IMP. I beg leave to observe that, according to modern maxims in my country, he
is esteemed a man of honor, who can imitate the popish priests in scorning
wedlock, and frequenting the company of lewd women. He who is a stranger to
every delicate and chaste sentiment; who scorns religion, disregards morality,
and thinks it beneath his dignity to keep any of the commands of God; or even
for a moment, to reflect that there is an hereafter. It would be difficult to
persuade some people, that, the British senate is too much composed of such men
of honor as these. I should be glad, sir, to hear your opinion of a man of
honor more at large, for I know that you are wise.


FAST. A gentleman of true honor, fails not to improve his estate, be it great
or small, to the best advantage; for he is neither indolent nor extravagant.
His increasing revenues are not heaped up for ad^^ation, nor laid by as useless
lumber, but applied to clothe the naked back, and refresh the empty belly. His
principal care is not how he may aggrandize his family, but how he may best
serve his king and country: for he lives not to himself, but to the public
good. He adheres to strict truth, is an utter stranger to impertinent raillery,
and perfectly detests the voice of slander. In his civil affairs, he does the
same things to superiors, inferiors, and equals, which he would wish others in
like circumstances to do for himself. If at any time he is so unhappy as to
give his neighbor just cause of offense, he is free and open in confessing his
error, and ready to retrieve it to the utmost of his power. The title of His
Honor is well becoming such a man as this, whether his estate is great or
small, his birth illustrious or obscure. But mercenary statesmen, plunderers of
the public, ill deserve the titles with which they are distinguished. Happy
might it be for Britain, if she could always procure officers for every
department in government, who would prefer the welfare of the nation to their
own personal and domestic emolument. And this every man of true honor will be
sure perpetually to do.


AVAR. Then uncle, I am inclined to think, that men of honor are not quite so
plenty as some people have imagined.


FAST. I am sorry to say it, Avaro; but bad as the world is, there is still
many to be found, who with propriety may be called men of honor: but it is well
for us, they are mostly of obscure character. They cannot act the cringing
knave, and vilely flatter their superiors, in order to gain preferment. Their
countenances, adorned with comely modesty, cannot contend with the impudence of
fools and rogues; therefore continue obscure, even when the most worthless are
exalted. But if a truly honorable man, should by some miracle ascend to an
eminent station, and be entrusted with public concerns, his country is sure to
have a nursing-father, and not an accursed step-dame in him, as is often the
case with other governors.

There is likewise, his reverence the parson, a title ascribed to many men, who
lead very irreverend lives.


AVAR. True, sir, but it is the vulgar opinion that the reverence of the parson
does not depend upon his moral conduct, but upon his investiture received from
the hand of the bishop.


FAST. I know it, Avaro, but it is a prevailing mistake. Imposition of the
hands, even of an apostle, could never make any man reverend, whose doctrine is
heterodox, or whose conversation is immoral, otherwise our friend Simon of
Samaria might have been numbered among their reverences. Indeed, Avaro, were
any man hardy enough to attempt it. I know of no subject more proper for satyr
than the pretended reverence of the parsons. But he must be daring indeed, who
would set himself to oppose the orthodox priests of the day, for that would be
thought by many the very same as to oppose God Almighty himself, and every body
would cry atheist at him.


AVAR. Pray, sir, what is your opinion of reverence, and to whom may the
epithet of reverend consistently be given?


FAST. To very few of the leaders of any denomination, Avaro, and yet perhaps
to some few of every denomination among protestants. I hate them, cousin, and
could not bear to talk of them were it not to oblige you, for they are avowed
enemies to our administration, as you will see by the description of them. For
he is a reverend minister, whether he is educated at Oxford or Aberdeen, who
makes not gold, but the glory of Immanuel, and the welfare of immortal souls,
the first end of his labors. Who is assiduous in his study, fervent in his
ministry, and has a paternal affection for his people. Who studies not how to
please the great, or to gain the esteem of the staring mukitude, (...) to
approve himself to God and the consciences of men, not shunning to declare the
whole counsel of God, without any mixture of the inventions or traditions of
men.

You may follow this man from the church to the market, from the pulpit into
his family, and find him all of a piece; his whol^ conduct is one chain of
uniform (...). But it is not every gownsman, either papal or protestant, nor
even every dissenting minister, whom this description suits. Some there are,
who can deny it, who are ha^glity and overbearing in their spirits; indolent in
study; cool and lifeless in their ministry; thoughtless and unconcerned about
the real welfare of their people. Yea, some are so wretchedly lazy, or so much
taken up with idle and vain amusements, that it is with difficulty they can
bring forth, once a week, an o^ation, fifteen or twenty minutes long, and that
scanty production perhaps, when it is exhibited, proves no more than a lecture
on moral philosophy; or it may be a libel against some different party or
denomination of christians. You may f^llow some of them from the church to
their families, and be fully convinced that they are divines only in name; they
neglect in their families the very duties which they recommend to others; and
what is still more, co^nive at the same vices in their families, which they
expose and condemn in the pulpit. But after all, they have the cure of souls,
and are the venerable and reverend clergy, in the same manner as the pope is
the head of the ^^urch; I mean by craft and usurpation.


AVAR. I have got a noble company of these same par^ons in my corporation of
A^arice, whose ^oliness it is to vend wind in order to obtain wealth. A company
confined to no one denomination, but made up of all; every one of this company
has got his own system of priesteraft, but all are intent upon the main point,
viz. to get as much wealth by his crast as rossible. Indeed the mother church
of Rome very far outstrips the rest, for the may lawfully boast that her
clergy, to a man, are the steadfast worshippers of the god Avaro, their great
benefactor.

However the protestants, b^th Calvinists and L^therans, all who are freemen in
the company of avarice, keep as near as possible to the orthodox priests of
Rome, in making a lucrative trade of what they call the gospel. And however
they differ about what is, and what is not gospel, they see eye to eye in
regard to making profit of it, and turning the altar of the Lord to their own
^molument.


INFID. How should it be otherwise, my son, seeing there are in some places
manufactories, on purpose for making parsons?


FAST. So I have heard, brother, with this addition, that the making of parsons
is reckoned both a lucr^^ive and honorable employment, not unworthy of my own
patronage. But between you and me, the parson-makers are grievously
disappointed frequently, however little they are ^^^sible of it; for when they
put their materials into the refining (...), they hope to see at the end of the
process, a bright and shining minister of Jesus Christ, come fo^^: But lo! a
learned call is produced, and a fervent adorer of the god Avaro.


INF. It cannot be otherwise; for to our grief I speak it, the unalterable
Immanuel has reserved to himself the wisdom, power and prerogative to make
ministers of the gespel; and if men like Jannes and Jambres, will take upon
them to imitate the inimitable works of the Almighty, they may be permitted to
make things which may for a time be mistaken for gospel ministers, even as
those magicians performed miracles by divine permission.


IMP. So then, gentlemen, I perceive your opinion is, that learning the
languages and sciences unfits a man for being a gospel minister.


FAST. No, Impiator, no such thing, or the gift of tongues had not been given
at the feast of Pentecost: But it may be avered, that, if a man has no more
learning than the most learned university can give him, he cannot possibly be a
minister of Jesus Christ. It is resting in these things, as the only
qualifications, we think proper to laugh at, Impiator.


AVAR. Among those mercenary orators, there are whom we call the Jumblers. They
are such who study not their sermons from the scripture, but compile them from
the writings of other men: being destitute of judgment to direct them in their
compilations, they are obliged implicitly to rely on the sentiments of their
authors. So it comes to pass, that they contradict on one Sabbath what they
asserted and halfproved the day before, merely because they happened to (...)
on authors of different s^^timents. But, alas! poor men, what shall they do? It
is their trade; they know not how to get a living without it; they cannot dig,
and to beg they are ashamed; therefore are under, a necessity of jumbling
forward in the best manner they can. Of late years indeed, this jumbling tribe
have hit on a more happy method of management, by which they both save their
reputation and laborious study. Amongst learned men there have always been some
few of genius and industry, who have found means to turn the d^lness and
indolence of their brethren to their own emolument. They compose sermons,
print, and sell them to the others, who pay first a good price for them, then
preach them, that is to say, read them to their several co^gregations.
Enfield's, Webb's, and Trusler's sermons, have been of great use to many a dall
and lazy clergy man.


FAST. How is this, Avaro, you speak of the parsons as if they were at best but
learned fools? How is it possible they should be so highly revered by the
people if they were such?


AVAR. I speak but of some of them, uncle; and to make good what I say, I can
tell you that it is not the man, whom the ignorant populace revere, so much as
the gown, cassock, and band, and these they would revere if they were seen upon
an ass, provided always, his ^ars were hid with a bunch of well powdered hair:
I assure you, gentlemen, amongst the intelligent laity, it is deemed a maxim,
that any blockhead will do very well for a parson, if he has but friends to
recommend him to a living: as a proof of this I shall tell you a short story.
There is one Mr. Provident, a merchant in London, who has four sons at the
grammar school, under the direction of a learned gentle(...) of excellent
sense. It was lately Mr. Provident made (...) visit to his sons and their
tutor, when he took occasion to ask Mr. Teachum's advice in regard to his
disposal of them.

To which the schoolmaster replied. "Sir, I have often with pleasure observed,
a penetrating judgment, solid understanding, and an inviolable attachment to
truth, ennobled with the generous principles of true benevolence, in your
eldest so^. These qualities, sir, are excellently adapted to the mercantile
life; I would therefore advise you to train him up in your own business. Your
second son, master Thomas, has genius sufficient for any business; but I hope,
sir, you will excuse me, if I tell you that I have discerned one thing in him,
which, in my judgment, un^its him for the capacity of a mer^hant. As I know,
sir, you would have me to speak freely, you will not be offended with me, if I
tell you, that it is a selfishness and contractedness of spirit, together with
a violent propensity to lying and ^^quivocation. If he were my son, sir, I
would bring him up to the law, in which he will very likely make a conspicuous
figure. Your youngest son, master James, has, if I mistake not, along with a
very considerable degree of dullness, an heart that is a stranger to sympathetic
seelings; but possesses genius sufficient for a physician. I would point out
the royal college for his residence."

Here Mr. Provident the merchant interrupted him, and said, "Sir, you have
given your opinion of the two eldest, and the youngest, but you say nothing of
Harry, my third so^; I pray what do you say of him?" To which, the teacher with
a blush replied, "if it is agreeable, sir, I would advise you to make him a
clergyman." To this the father, with a mixture of grief and anger, replied,
"What ^ir, do you think he has genius sufficient for nothing else?" I am
afraid not, said the master; but you can easily make friends with my lord
bishop, and procure him a considerable benefice. Take this step, sir, and his
lack of gen^is will scarcely be known, as he may preach and administer the
offices of the church by proxy, which you know is very gentleman like.


INFID. And do you really think, Avaro, that it is want of abilities to preach,
that causes so many vicars to keep journeymen to do their work for them?


AVAR. With some, sir, want of abilities is the principal cause, and with the
r^st, an utter aversion to the work, though by the way, they professed to be
drawn to it by no less an influence than that of the Holy Ghost: but that was
when a benefice was the object of their pursuit, and therefore not to be
regarded after their and is obtained.


FAST. Cousin Avaro, here I believe we must stop, as we have certainly
overstaid our time. I hold it good therefore that we depart, and meet here at
the usual time tomorrow. Business you know must not be neglected. Adieu, my
kin^men.


DIALOGUS XII. FASTOSUS.
WELL, gentlemen, I hope no idleness has attended any of our fraternity since
last meeting. I went directly from you to assist a London Jeweller in forming a
set of earrings and pen^ents upon a new construction. I made him sensible of
the most elegant plan, enjoined him to pursue it, give the praise to his patron
Fasto^us, and so I left him.

IMP. I pray you, sir, what is the real use of earrings? For my part I have
never been able to apprehend it, unless it is to save a small matter of gold
against a day of penury.


FAST. They are of no use at all to the wearer, Impi^tor, though they help the
goldsmith and lapidary not a little; but they are of excellent use to our
go^^rnment. You know the boring of the ear always was, and now is, an ^mblem of
servitu^e. Yea, it is an (...) point, that the act of boring, and suffering the
ear to be bored, is a token of subjection to the infernal monarch.


IMP. Ah, fir, how violently the spleen would rage among the ladies, were they
to know what you say of them.


FAST. And let it rage, cousin, what is that to me? The ladies are too much in
love with courtly Fastosus, to banish me from among them even in their
spleenish fits. But to explain the doctrine of earrings, be it observed, that
the crafty Beelzebub has an invisible chain fixed to the ear-ring by which he
leads the wearers a wild-goose chase through all the vanities of the times. No
sooner does the sable governor t^g a l^dy by the ear, than she feels an impulse
upon her heart, which directs her to the playhouse, opera, Vauxhall,
Sadler's-Wells, or elsewhere; but very seldom to church. If at any time, for
the sake of company, she takes her pleasure at church, the great deceiver keeps
such a gingling of the chain in her car, that she cannot attend to one word of
the service; by these means the park, the mall, the playhouse, and the church,
are in effect the same thing to many ladies of fashion.


AVAR. And are all who wear rings in their ears, to be looked upon as slaves to
the great Beelzebub, uncle?


FAST. No, Avaro, not all, for the invincible Immanuel has broken the chains
and loosened the bands of servitude from many, nevertheless, they still wear
the rings in their ^ars to testify what they have been. And what news from your
friends, Avaro?


AVAR. Very little, sir; only that diligence, frugality and good husbandry, go
on as usual. All heads plodding, and all hands active to get and to save; for
getting and saving is all the cry with them. I had a little matter to attend to
last night, at the Swan-tavern, where there was a very respectable meeting of
manufacturers, by whom some few things tending to promote emolument were
considered. The first consultation was, "How they might conveniently lessen the
quality of their goods, that their profits might be somewhat advanced:" in
order to this a plan was proposed by Mr. Dolus, a very great tradesman, which
was unammously agreed to by the rest. The second thing was to settle the
prices, and come into mutual engagements, that no one should under-sell his
brethren, which after some slight altercation was as unanimously settled. You
must know, mankind are not satisfied with being oppressed by infernal tyranny;
but to add to the devil's work, are got into the happy way of joining in
combination to oppress and devour one another. Nor is this practice peculiar to
any one set of men, but is common with dealers of every kind and denomination,
from the opulent farmers to the dealers in coals and candles.

When this was done, a question was put, How they should finish a certain
quantity of goods against a certain day then proposed? For it seems they have
large orders at present. To which one of them said, he thought it necessary to
advance the journeymens wages in order to encourage their diligence. But this
gentleman's motion was unanimously rejected; as an unprofitable way of
proceeding, very ill suited to the growing demands of their several families.
It was then proposed, that a small premium should be given to every workman who
should finish a certain quantity of goods in a limited time, then and there to
be stipulated. But this was also objected to, it being alleged, that some
method might be found, that would produce the desired end, and yet save all
those unnecessary premiums; which if given would introduce a very bad custom.

At last an old gentleman, whose hoary locks shone as silver from under his
weather-beaten wig, arose, and most judiciously addressed his brethren in the
following manner: "Gentlemen, you all know that such is the indolent
disposition of journeymen, that in general let their wages be ever so good,
they have no notion of obtaining more than will procure them a bare maintenance
through the week, and a few quarts of strong beer on Saturday night and Sunday.
Therefore to advance their wages, is the certain way to have them work less
than they do at present. But let us lessen their wages in proportion to our
extraordinary call for goods; for by how much more we drop the prices of
workmanship, by so much the more work shall we have done. A bare living they
must have, let the prices be ever so low; and but a bare living they will have,
if they are ever so high. If we advance the price, they work less, and if we
drop it, they will, they must work more. I say then let us drop the prices."

The old gentleman's advice was cordially embraced by them all, and every one
blessed the sagacity of the old for now grown gray in wisdom. And this day, or
to morrow, the journey men's wages are to be lessened accordingly.


FAST. In the close of our last interview I was going (...) observe, that my
prevalency is great amongst the nobility and gentry. By my indefatigable
industry the greater part of them are rendered altogether insensible of their
origin, so that they look down on their inferiors as a set of despicable
creatures, of a species very different from themselves; not considering that my
Lord Superb^ and poor I azar A^^a^ms are by nature brethren, formed of the same
materlan, and conceived in the womb of the same earth.


AVAR. Yet sir, if my observations are just, I think (...) of an imperfect
notion that they were originally formed of the earth; (...) part of the
substance of the earth is esteemed much more precious and valuable than
another, perhaps the people of fashion have the happiness of being formed of
the more rich and esteemed particles, and the rest of mankind the infelicity of
deriving their beings from vulgar clay. This is the more likely, as there is a
manifest difference between their constitutions and those of people in the
lower spheres of life; the first being brittle and feeble, the latter more
robust and healthy.


FAST. That is false philosophy, Avaro; the brittleness you speak of does not
proceed from any defect in the natural constitution of their frame, nor from
any rottenness in the materials of which they are made, but has its cause from
themselves. Many of them in their infancy are nearly starved, from an infamous
notion that enough of wholesome food is injurious to them Some learned
physicians, those celebrated defranders of the grave, have found out that bread
itself, which has been esteemed the staff of life in all ages, is at last
become dangerous to the constitution, and therefore to be used with caution by
all sorts of people, especially such as are best able to see the doctor in case
of personal indisposition. As for the poor it is less matter what they ea^, as
the faculty can reap but little advantage from their sickness.
: and you will commonly find that food which yields the most healthful aliment,
is withheld from them at the instance of Dr. ^^rawl, the family physician. This
same gentleman has not so little sense under his great wig as not to know that
his own personal emolument, is intimately connected with the weak constitutions
of people of quality, especially the ladies. By his many years study of physic
he has proved to a demonstration, that if the young gentry were suffered to eat
enough of wholesome food like the farmers children, his business would not be
worth following.


AVAR. I know it well -- for there is one of my disciples, a certain physician,
eminent in practice, who has acquired a genteel fortune by prescription, and
who, if he is indisposed himself, will not suffer an apothecary's drug to pass
his gullet, a plain indication that he knows it to be hurtful. I have often
thought, a good constitution put into the hand of the doctor, is like a good
cause put into the hands of the lawyers, it gets worse with deceitful handling.
When a man is by the force of medicine fairly got down, the skilful physician
knows very well how to hold him betwixt life and death as long as possible;
till at last he dies by inches of that prevailing distemper which kills so many
people of fashion.


FAST. True, Avaro, but farther to prove the gentry the causers of their own
infirmity, I would observe that what in infancy, penury and want leave of the
constitution unconsumed, luxury and idleness well nigh finish in youth; so that
when the lady comes to embrace an husband, the one half of her remaining days
are spent under the hand of the Doctor, and the other half in pleasure and
dissipation. As for the young gentlemen, before the (...) down on their faces
is able to resist the razor, they have commonly contracted such loathsome
disorders, as render them more fit for an infirmary than for the marriage bed
and have more need of a surgeon than a wife. Thus, Avaro, you may see by what
means the constitutions of the gentry are so frequently enfeebled.

That they are formed of the same materials with their inferiors will appear,
when you consider, that there were none either noble or ignoble in the original
state of mankind; all were on a common level; but when we had made a conquest
of them, it became necessary for the Almighty to dissolve the original
equality, that the world might be rendered in some measure tolerable to all,
amidst the confusion and disorder which our dominion over them had introduced.
For if people cry out that the world is bad now, it is certain it would be
infinitely worse were superiority and inferiority utterly abolished. Moreover,
the Almighty to manifest the equity of his procedure, has so ordered it, that
the system of superiority and inferiority is perpetually upon the change. You
may find some persons now asking alms from place to place, who are descended
from princes and nobles; and others in the most exalted station, who had their
descent from very beggars.


INF. Ay, brother, that very consideration, to urge no more, if duly attended
to, would prevent the contempt which people of elevated rank are apt to let
fall on their inferiors. But let them go on till the grand leveller Death
approach. He spares neither rich nor poor, noble or ignoble. Samael knows no
distinctions cannot be bribed like temporal judges, admits of no excuses, and
is an utter stranger to pity. At prince, at peasant, at the noble ear^ and his
servile groom, at the dame of honor and the scorched cookmaid, he aims alike
his unerring shaft, and brings all again to the dust from whence they were
taken, to (...) in their original equality.


FAST. There is another race which we distinguish by the name of mongr^ls, with
whom I am deeply concerned. This generation of half-bred gentry includes
tradesmen, the gentlemen of the law, and of the faculty, together with the
farmers. These gentry consider themselves as pretty near, if not altogether on
a level with the country 'squire, and therefore affect the manners or their
superiors as much as possible. They are gentlemen, their wives are ladies and
madams, and their children masters and misses. Hundreds of such gentlemen and
ladies have I known, who could not justly boast that any of their ancestors,
back to the tenth generation, were proprietors of so much as a single cottage
with a cabbage garden. Yet they imperiously assume a title of address, equal to
that of the queen's majesty; and no labourer or mechanic must dare to approach
them, without a sir or madam in his mouth.


INF. I have sometimes thought those ladies you speak of, are either a^hamed of
their given names, or hold them too sacred for the propsane mouths of servants
and vulgar creatures; and indeed he would be deemed the most unmannerly wretch
that ever trod upon English ground, who should say that ^arah Algood is his
mistress; for Sarah must give place to madam, and she is now madam Algood, the
shopkeeper's lady, and it would be more than her place is worth, for a servant
to name her mistress in terms less respectable.


AVAR. Excuse me, gentlemen, you know I love to be concerting schemes of
profit, and here is one ready projected, which if saithfully executed, would
either fill, the exchequer, or make a distinction betwixt persons of real
quality and their apes in middle life.


FAST. What is your scheme, cousin? let us hear it, if feasible.


AVAR. I would advise the nobility, gentry, etc. never to go to an
horse-course, cockpit, or play house; not to go to Bath nor a bawdy house,
that is to say, never to rest till they have procured a bill, in which it shall
be enacted, that every man shall pay the sum of ten pounds ^erling per annum,
who suffers his wife to assume the name of madam. I would likewise have a tax
of half the value laid upon every young master and miss, the farmers,
apothecaries, attorneys and tradesmens children, unless the husband or father
can make it appear that is annual rent, clear of all encumbrance, is not less
than four hundred pounds; if so much or upwards, he should stand exempted from
any such penalty, and enjoy the free use of such names of quality in his family.


INF. Although it is quite foreign to my purpose, to dietate any thing to
mankind which may be of service to them, I am free among ourselves to say, that
my son's scheme is well concerted, and might answer valuable purposes, were it
carried into execution. The numerous bankruptcies, which make trade so
precarious in England, have their spring in this fatal imitation of people of
quality, so prevalent among tradesmen. Could this so very pernicious practice
by any means be suppressed, the industrious merchant and manufacturer, would meet
with fewer losses by their retailing customers.

To your scheme, however, I would add another tax equally necessary, and that
is upon every Playhouse, Assembly-(...) and place of pleasurable resort.
One-fifth at least, of every ticket to Almack's Ranelagh, every Playhouse,
Cornely^s Sadler's-wells, the Pantheon, and every rout whatever, ought to be
sacred to government. Till this, or some such thing is done, it will be
difficult for the sensible English to believe that their governors aim at any
thing beyond their own emolument. As for the tax upon (madam) it appears
indispensibly necessary, and can admit of no delay; however, we interrupt you,
Fastosus.


FAST. I have a great deal of pleasure in stirring up people to quarrel with
their Maker, and to say unto him, "Why have thou made me thus? I love not the
station thou have placed me in; I have got parts to quality me for a better
than this in which thou have placed me, therefore I am not dealt with according
to my merit." The poor labourer, who by the way, is the most happy and
contented of his species, is not altogether pleased, because he was not born a
gentleman and heir to a good estate. The 'squire and his lady are almost mad
with anger, because they were not descended of noble ancestors; the nobleman
himself takes it very unkind that he was (...) govern a kingdom. He (...) heir
to a crown has two things at (...) he is much offended: first, because the
Almighty is so long in taking the father to himself, to facilitate his own
accession to the throne: secondly, he is not well pleased because it is a
regal, and not an imperial crown to which he is born heir. As for the man who
is born to imperial dignity, he is angry because he is not appointed lord of
the whole world. And one you know, who having obtained the sway of the whole
world was angry with God, because he had not made two worlds for him to govern;
even so angry, that he is said to have cried again. Thus in all ranks and
degrees of life I make people quarrel with their Maker.


INF. I have often heard it remarked by our infernal sages, that if the
ambitious mind were to obtain what it is now in pursuit of, true contentment
would be as far distant as ever; and an Alexander, who covets a second world to
ravage, could he get that, would want a third, after that a fourth, and so on
till he had plundered the many millions of worlds which God has made. Even
then, were such a thing possible, his ambition would be as insatiable as ever,
and his last effort would be the same as that of father Belzebub's; I mean, he
would attempt to plunder the eternal throne itself. Thus they allege, that the
lowest degree of ambition and discontent in man, if the Almighty were
continually to gratify it, would ascend to the most daring attempt, of which
the infernal monarch himself is capable. After all, I have observed that the
greater part of people are so far from deeming ambition to be criminal, they
think a spice of it is indispensibly necessary to a man of honor.


FAST. I know it, brother; but that is a striking proof of the blindness to
which we have reduced them. Ambition, discontent, etc. reigning in any person,
are infallible symptoms of an heart totally depraved, and altogether under my
influence. But let them go on to cherish an ambitious spirit, they will find
their mistake at last. That judicious pagan, Epictetus, seems very capable of
instructing many who are called Christians, and who have the advantage of the
bible. Yes! Infidelis! you and I both know, that ambition is the very vice
which ruined our black fraternity, but for it they had been in heaven to this
day.

As some quarrel with their Maker, on account of the^e situation in life, I am
equally successful in stirring up others, to take offense at the manner in
which the Almighty has formed their bodies; as to their souls, they do not
regard them, indeed seldom consider that they have an immortal spirit belonging
to them. If by chance such a thought, as that they have an immortal soul,
should pass through their minds, it gives them no concern in what position it
is found, because they take it for granted that nobody sees it. So very
inconsiderate and stupid are many, that one who understands the language of
hearts, provided he could delight in the voice of discontent and murmuring,
might meet with high entertainment amongst our people. For,

One young lady says, O! if the Almighty had made me an inch and half higher,
then my person would have been abundantly more proper: her neighbor is as ill
at ease, because she thinks the Creator has bestowed superfluous labor upon
her, in giving her a couple of inches of redundant height, which she looks upon
as a very considerable deformity, Another says, why did he make me with round
shoulders? might he not as easily have made them square? I am ashamed to go
into company, because I have not a handsome carriage of the head and neck. What
the backboard and girdle can do, has been tried to press in the prominent ^s
humeri; but sad experience teaches, that she may as soon wash the Ethiopian
white as make that even which the Almighty has made crooked. Nor less
afflicted is her kinswoman on account of the yellowness of her skin.


AVAR. I have heard several people of allowed knowledge, modestly wish, that
all court ladies labored under the same misfortune the last unhappy
gentlewoman does; being persuaded that if it were so, naked breasts would never
more be brought into fashion, to the annoyance of the gentlemen, and the
scandal of the ladies, for you know fashions are all born at court.


FAST. Not at the court of London, Avaro, but Versailles, therefore it would
indicate better sense in your knowing people, to wish the French ladies the
above misfortune. It is held an act of high treason against the French, for the
English court to receive any fashion which has not had a certificate from
Versailles. This policy seems indeed very mysterious, when we consider that the
British heroes can so effectually drub the monsieurs, as to make them cry
peccavi, and at the same time the French ladies should have the English in such
absolute subjection.

It is impossible, for any person to conceive the trouble I have, in preparing
those ladies for the ball or assembly, or pantheon, and what art I am obliged
to employ, in hiding their supposed defects and redundancies. The lady who
fancies her stature to be somewhat too low, obliges me to add to it the whole
length of a super tall pair of wooden heels, and is extremely careful to set
off her little body to all advantage possible, so that every beholder must be
struck with the most perfect gentility of her appearance. On the other hand her
neighbor, who is over-tall, is as careful on her part, to have the flattest
heels that can be wore, and is equally industrious in decking to the best
advantage the whole of her extravagant height.

Nor has her neighbor, who is affected with a dun or yellow skin, less
trouble and anxiety of mind, besides her great toil of body. The waste she
makes of wash-balls, and the best recommended cosmetics, together with her own
and her servants labor, in endeavoring to rub off the native tinct, is not to
be conceived. But alas! it is labor in vain. All the comfort which remains for
her, is derived from a black necklace, assisted by two or three well disposed
patches, which she hopes may in some measure over-cloud the hated yellowness of
the adjacent parts.

So absolutely foolish are they, that I have some subjects who say, "Ah me, why
were my ankles made so strong and fleshy? O that they had been slender and
genteel; then I should not have been thus dependant on the mantua-maker for a
covering for them." However, gentlemen, were it not a rule established among
the fair sex, that ankles somewhat gross are altogether ungenteel, it would
puzzle a philosopher to determine how it is that small feet and slender ankles,
come to have more virtue and real worth in them, than those that are otherwise.
But certainly it is deemed to be so, and those imperious dames, who have been
favored to their liking, do what they can to mortify those who are less happy
in their pedestals. Against this disease there is no effectual remedy. Small
sized shoes formerly gave them great hopes of relief, but alas! they generally
made cripples of their wearers.


INF. I have always observed, that, when people have applied to the artist, to
have that mended which they think the Almighty has marred, the punishment is
connected with the crime, as a token of the just resentment of a jealous God,
who has left none of his works imperfect; and who would have them all, as
indeed they ought to be, well esteemed. Hence come corns upon the feet, and far
greater unevenness in the symmetry of the body, than was before their
application to the mechanic.


FAST. Another of my disciplesses has got hair of a madder red, and such is her
folly, that it grieves her beyond measure. But with all my wisdom I could never
find out the reason, why red hair should be any more scandalous, than yellow or
flaxen locks: or how it is, that scarlet is held to be such a courtly color
upon broadcloth, and yet so scandalous for a lady to have her head of a scarlet
color. But the lady herself is so apprehensive of the scandal, that she is
obliged to exchange her native locks, with a neighboring barber, for a set of
flaxen false-curls; these she flatters herself will very well become the native
fairness of her skin.

Perhaps, indeed, to spare the natural crop, she may blind the eyes of
beholders with powder, which may help to conceal the awful secret. The like
expedient is used by women of a coquetish disposition, when to their great
grief and inconsolable sorrow they first perceive old age dying a whiteness
upon their temples. In order to prevent the world having any suspicion that she
is advanced in years, the coquet procures a defense against the appearance of
hoary hairs, and thus she keeps herself as much as possible, from the belief
that she is growing old, till the detested wrinkles on her forehead betray the
fatal secret, and then she declines faster than other women, because her grief
gives swiftness to her decay. Another lady is exceedingly grieved every time
she looks in her glass, because, as she thinks, her face is too much upon the
fire to be deemed lovely; but she comforts herself with the reflection that she
has good features, and the great artist, when he finished her has left a
dimple in her chin. On the other hand, her cousin beholds a system of agreeable
features in her own countenance: but oh! the dejection of her heart, on
recollecting the paleness of her lips. To (...) the defects of nature in this,
before she goes abroad, she (...) recourse to her pencil and vermillion shell.
Thus she has some means of comfort within her power, but her poor sister who is
seamed with the smallpox, is quite inconsolable. If at any time she expresses
satisfaction, it is in speaking of the former agreeableness of her features,
and fairness of her skin. But alas her joy is presently clouded with the
melancholy consideration, they are for ever gone. Some ladies are highly
offended because their hands are so big, others that their fingers are too
short; and now and then you may mere with one, who is dreadfully tormented
underneath a king Richard back; which is sure to prove an intolerable burden
all the life of the unhappy woman.


INFID. Nothing more fully demonstrates our dominion in the hearts of mankind,
than their being ashamed of their shapes and physiognomy; the supposed
deformity of which, they could by no means have prevented. Every degree of this
kind of shame, is a tacit reproach of the Creator, and therefore daringly
impious. Many you may find, ashamed of the innocent defects of their outward
frame, who are not in the least ashamed of their vain lives and immoral
conversations; to rectify which ought to be their principal concern. And were
there as much pains taken to rectify the disorders of civil life, as there are
to hide the supposed defects and redundancies of the body, and to alter the
tincture of the skin, the world would be very different from what it is. But
you take care to prevent that, Impiator.


DIS. One who has made mankind no part of his study, would deem it impossible
for rational beings to be ashamed of and concerned for innocent deformities of
the body, with which no person of common sense will ever upbraid them, and
which never can by any means lessen the esteem of the judicious (for who can
make that straight which the Almighty has made crooked, or white which he has
made brown?) And at the same time neglect the infinitely more valuable mind.


INFID. By your account, sir, your vassals have got a wrong notion of beauty,
as by our long observation it appears, we may sometimes see a great deal of
beauty in a person whose bodily parts no way tend to recommend him. Real beauty
lies in the constitution of the mind and the proper use of its intellectual
faculties; every thing else compared with this is like the tinsel when compared
with the purest gold.

That person appears truly amiable without external comeliness, who can bear the
lack of it with a becoming grace: and who to make up for all outward defects,
is studious to embellish the immortal mind. That is a part of man always
capable of improvement; but for the body, they may fret, murmur, and repine at
its defects as much as they will, they plainly see it does not mend the matter,
for who by taking thought can add one cubit to his stature, or make one hair
whiter or blacker?


FAST. Such is my dominion now, nor was it less in the more early ages. I made
rude work in the tents of Jacob, between his two wives and among his sons; and
by those means I greatly disturbed them whom I could not destroy.


INVIDIO. I have till now been silent, but beg leave to observe, that I think
our labor is far from being lost. Seeing, though we are permitted to destroy
none who are good and virtuous, we have the pleasure of distressing and
distracting them. And certainly no music can be so agreeable to our ears as the
sighs and groans of our enemies. There is something so agreeable in the
destruction of infidels and distracting the rest of mankind, that I have often
heard our father Beelzebub say, he would rather aggravate his own torment a
thousand degrees, than be robbed of that pleasure. His and our happiness lies
chiefly in distressing mankind, especially the virtuous and good,
notwithstanding he overheard Immanuel when he said, "I give unto them eternal
life, and none shall pluck them out of my hands."


AVAR. One would wonder it did not wholly discourage him from making further
attempts against such people, especially if what I have heard is true: I mean
that very affliction which they endure by his means, will be an aggravation to
his own misery; but his hatred against them is implacable.


FAST. It is not altogether his hatred and malice against them, which excite
him to persecute them with such unwearied diligence: but it happened on a time,
that Beelzebub was by, when one of his heavenly heralds declared, That in all
the afflictions of his people Immanuel himself is afflicted. And at another
time he heard another say, That Immanuel is touched with a sense of human
infirmities; nay, then said he to himself, they shall not want for afflictions
if I should endure a thousand hells. It will be a heaven of delight to me, to
see my fiery darts bound off from the persons to whom they are shot, and strike
him whom I have in the most perfect abhorrence. So that it is Immanuel himself,
rather than those who believe in him, at whom Satan is so much enraged.

To return to my story -- By my means the knot of sisterhood between Rachel and
Leah was untied, friendship and love fled to a distance far remote from their
tents. But this was not the finishing stroke of my artifice, for when one
generation passed away, you might always be sure to find me with those, who
made their appearance next upon the stage of action. Hence I was found with the
sons of Jacob, and made them perpetrate deeds very unworthy of the patriarchal
character, and that even in the lifetime of their father* The destruction of
the Hivites by the sword of Simeon and Levi, in revenge of Shechem's rape on
their sister Dinah, was wholly by my instigation. They grieved, and that
justly, but pride alone called up the demons of revenge and cruelty, who
drenched themselves in Canaanitish blood.

When Joseph dreamed of his future advancement, I prerailed with his brethern
to hate him, and give admission to every baleful demon; under whose influence,
even at the bazard of their father's life, they fold him into Egypt. There I
stirred up Sabrina, the wife of Potiphar, to revenge her slighted charms upon
him; Joseph himself to swear by the life of Pharaoh, and to carry it very
strangely to his brethren in the time of their affliction, notwithstanding he
himself had seen such wonders of divine providence, as mentioned by the writer
of his life. Just it was that his brethren should have been afflicted for their
former perfidy and baseness, but Joseph could never have been persuaded to be
instrumental therein, but by my instigation.


IMP I am surprised, sir, you should select the history of those reputed the
best of men, for exemplifying your dominion; whereas you make no mention of
Ham, Ishmael. Esau, etc. I thought your dominion over them was more full man
over the other.


FAST. I mention the best on purpose to save myself trouble, cousin. For when
you hear of my power over them, you will easily conceive that my dominion over
the rest of mankind must be absolute. I might indeed do myself honor, by
telling you of the part I had in the Iewdness of Ham, the despite of Ishmael,
Esau's revenge, etc. etc. but as I understand it all implied in the present
plan of my narrative. Indeed it would be endless to tell you of even a
thousandth part of my archievements; and I am persuaded it is more agreeable to
you, to hear of my occasional prevalence ever the virtuous, than to have a full
display of my uninterrupted dominion over the infidel part of mankind without
it.

Yet it may not be amiss, by way of specimen, to give you one instance of my
influence over infidels in general. Amongst the millions I might adduce. I
shall refer you to Bafuris Pharaoh king of Egypt, in the days of Moses and
Aaron. Notwithstanding the might signs and wonders which God wrought by the
hand of his Hebrew servants, he was so absolutely under my dominion, that he
^ardened himself against the Almighty, disregarded the voice of his prophets,
and would not suffer the people to go into the wilderness to worship. Moses and
Aaron wrought works ^uprecedented, in the presence of the king and his nobles;
but I persuaded him that the whole was effected by the power of magic, and that
Jannes and Jambres his own encha^ters, could do the same were they called to it.

I had got such possession of his heart before ^^y miracles were wrought, that
he thought himself inferior to no being whatever, and scorned subjection even
to the Almighty, Pharaoh's magicians in diverse instances, by a divine
permission, imitating the wonders wrought by Moses and A^^ on; he persuaded
himself that he was at least equal to that God who sent them, and in the most
haughty disdain he said, "Who is the Lord that I should obey him?"

You have all heard that no man has hardened himself against God at any time,
and has prospered: nor did (...) prosper. I hardened his heart against every
divine inju^ction -- till the God of the Hebrews utterly confounded the
Memphian magicians, and made the haughty monarch not only willing to let the
people go, but eager to thurst them out of the land. However they had not
traveled very far, before Pharaoh, being a little recovered from his
consteriation, was induced by me to pursue and oblige them to return to their
drudgery, alleging the great loss which both his majesty and the Egyptian
monarchy would sustain, by the departure of such a number of vigorous slaves.
Pursuant to this purpose he mustered his chari^ts and horsemen, all the
Egyptian chivalry, pursued the fugitives, by dient of sword to compel them to
return to their spades and wheel-harrows, Every one must praise my noble
intentions, for I designed that both hosts should have perished, the one by the
sword of the Egyptians, and the other by the thunderbolts of he^(...) I
conjectured upon good ground, that if Pharaoh destroyed the Hebrews, the
Almighty would avenge their blood upon ^im and his kingdom,

The husts of (...) overtook the Hebrews near Pi-ha^ireth, where the raging
ocean met them in the front, and (...) ridge of imp^ssible mountains enclosed
them on either hand^. "Glory be on me, cried the exulting monarch, see ^ow my
happy stars have hemmed in the fugitives. Now shall they either return to the
servitude, (...) perish on the points of Egyptian swords; and Pharaoh shall no
more be (...) with a God greater than himself." But Phar^oh's ^^astings were
(...) ^^^ture, his hopes were blasted before they were full blown; for incame
to pass, that the Almighty took the cause of his people into his own hand,
wrought advation for them, and with an high hand destroyed him and all the
Egyptian chivairy.

Business calls me hence, gentlemen, I hold it good that we (...) till
tomorrow.


DIALOGUE XIII. AVARO.
INDEED, (...), what I tell you is true, you canout conceive how much I am
carest by the grovelling (...).

FAST. Do not boast, consin, nor let it (...) enter your mind, that your
reception amongst mankind is more cordial and hearty than mine, for where there
is one person who prostituter himself to the devil Avare, there are at least
twenty who fall down at the shrine of the (...) Fastosus; (...) I will still
own, your crastiness has subdued not a few to your grovelling sway.


AVAR. Nor a few indeed! every nation furnishes its (...) to make up the
number of my abject slaves, who adore me under feigned names, suitably adapted
to the genius of each country. For instance, in Holland, I am called Mynh^^^
Industry; in France, Monsieur Prudence; in Spain, I bear the name of Don
Diligence; in Austri^ and Russia, as also at the Hague, I am known by the name
of Good Policy; and in Great Britain and her colonies, I (...) called Mister
Care, alias Mister Frugality; but my (...) name being rightly translated will
read Covetousness.

Great advantages arise to us from the conce^lment of (...) proper name* The
word covetousness you know is of such a true brimstone color, that unless I
had some method of disguising it, I could get but few adorers in comparison of
what I have. There are thousands who delight to keep (...) under their roofs,
by the ^^^gned names of Industry (...) Frugality, who would be afraid to be
seen in my (...) under the name of Covetousness. They rise up early, (...) up
(...), they eat the bread of carefulness, can never (...) enough of work done
by their servants and laborers; they but as cheap and sell as dear as they
can, and are for ever concerting schemes of money-getting, and yet they are
(...) covetous; all the world could not persua^^ them that (...) are the
worshippers of the devil Avaro. Even those (...) morning and evening desires
run in the follow (...) "What shall I do to get money? (...) shall I (...) keep
what I have got out of the reach of pilsering (...) Such are their desires, and
yet they are not covetous; (...) withstan^ing their increase, they cannot with
pleasure (...) the needy, unless by so doing they can serve themselves and yet
they are not covetous. Such people are very (...) consider gain as a proof of
their godliness, and it is dissent for them to believe a poor man to be honest;
if his hone^^ is so (...) that they cannot deny it, they will tacitly (...) him
with either indolence or want of ^^conomy, as they take it for granted, any man
may prosper in the world if (...) will -- and yet they are not covetous.


(...). Your disciples. Avaro, it seems, have but little (...) with that Divine
Providence which we are (...) strained to confess; that providence which
emptieth the storehouse of one and fills that of another, according to the
dictates of unerring ^isdom. But by long observation we have learned, that the
race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, but to whomsoever the
Arbiter of the ^^iverse is pleased to give the blessing. What most surprizeth
me, is to see so many of your people among the professors of religion; do you
think they have never heard that those who love the world have not the love of
the Father in them, and that friendship with the world is enmity against God?
Or do they suppose themselves capable of serving both God and ma^^mon?


AVAR. With your leave, sir, such texts of scripture are (...) no weight with
our people. Some consider them as interpolations, others as mistranstated,
others still deem them (...), therefore not to be regarded; and all agree, that
the force of such passages ought to be reasoned away. Yes, brother fiends, you
may meet with many, who, if their ^^eutal sentiments may be known by their
outward conduct, believe themselves capable enough of serving both God and
mammon, and that it is very consistent to love ^^th God and the world at the
same time. All the week (...) they are so earnestly engaged in pursuing worldly
advantages, that one would suppose they have got an assurance that for one
thousand years, at least, to enter upon, their souls shall not be required of
them; or indeed one would think they believe not a syllable of the bible, or
that there is either God or devil, heaven or hell. Yea, so ardent is their
chase after gold, they cannot spare so much time (...) to ask their servants
whether they intend for heaven or ^ell at death? Whether they serve God or the
devil? Whether they read the bible, or idle plays and novels? Whether they go
to church or a^e-house on a Sunday, or indeed, whether they are Pagans or
Christians, Papists or Protestants? and yet they are good Christians
themselves, members of churches, and worshippers of the God of heaven.

Notwithstanding their fervent zeal for, and unwearied diligence in the service
of mammon, they will not absent themselves from church on a Sabbath day on any
consideration; but with all sincerity imaginable, with the devotion of one
holiday they wipe off the stains of the former six, and on Monday come forth as
fresh for the avaricious chase as ever. Thus you see, my subjects by their
conduct plainly tell you, they believe it very p^^lible to serve both God and
mam^^on, and thus they give the lie to divine testimony.

It is now as it always was; many people follow religion with the same views
with those of the loaf and fish followers; they take up religion to procure a
character among men, that it may serve as a cloak for their mercenary purposes.
The person de^^^ed religions, being capable of executing a varicious schemes
with greater facility and advantage, than the man who is known to be an enemy
to all religion.


FAST. It seems, Avaro, your money-hunters can adopt religion or any thing to
the great end of getting. I know thousands who would not attend the worship of
God at all, if they found not their account in it. I have laughed many times,
at fo^ing the atheist and the deist come to ch^^^ and receive the facrament, to
qualify them for places of public concern. It may safely be supposed, that men
who believe not the sacrament to be of divine institution, have som^^nds, no
way religious, to answer by their receiving it. It is not a little droll too,
to see many who for conscience sake dissent from the church of England, when
they have the prospect of preferment, come cordially to the altar and receive
the consecrated elements from the parish priest. Mortal man could not do more
to see^re all the emoluments of both church and state to their own party for
ever, than the authors of the test act did, and yet many dissenters play the
devil i^ cheating them, It must be a close hedge indeed, in which some people
will not find a hole to creep through.


IMP. Ay, uncle, and it is every whi^ as droll to see many of my subjects, who
never attend at church except upon those occasions; men who spend their whole
time in drinking gaming, and whoring, admitted to the table of the Lord, to
serve a turn in pol^^es, contrary to every rule divine and h^man; and yet those
men commence the pillars and governors of the church, without coming near its
assemblies on other occasions. These things make amazingly for our imerest.


INF. Not many days since, your son, Discordans, gave us a most agreeable
account of some of his operations, by the instrumentality of Prejudice and
False-Reasoning; I should be glad, my nephew, if you will be pleased to go on
with your story.


DIS. I have no objection, sir, if my honored parent will be pleased to
permit. But Discordans cannot so much as breathe, without the instigation of
great Fastofus.


FAST. You do me great honor, my son, and have my permission to proceed; but
as I have urgent business in hand, ^^d am already acquainted with your story, I
shall leave you for the present, and meet you here tomorrow. Darkness and
confusion attend you all.


DIS. This same glass, False-Reasoning, is the mirrer in which the Jewish
clergy, doctors of law, scribes, and pharisees, tried the doctrines and actions
of Immanuel and ^ll his followers. By these means they were fatally deceived,
and led to reject the council of God against themselves; yea, hardened to that
degree, as to say, the light which ^^lighteneth every man that comes into the
world, is absolutely darkness, and to charge the maker of all things with ^^ing
a magician; even to put forth their sanguinary hands, and murder the Lord of
life.

You may think I was closely employed in those days, as there was not a
pharisce in the whole world, whom I had not furnished with an inverting mirror
and ^elescope. By these means they became quite enamoured with their own
supposed virtue, and held all besides themselves to be accursed; that is to
say, hereties, because they knew not the law, i. e. they did not measure length
and breadth, exactly according to the standard of orthodoxy, which in all ages
has been the traditions of the elders, and not the scriptures of truth, as some
have erroneously asserted.


IMP. Hold, cousin, there I think you must be wrong, for I myself am wont to
hear Immanuel, (who you know could not lie) refer his hearers to the scripture
for the resolution of all doubts.


DIS. That is nothing at all to the purpose, cousin. I readily grant, and none
can honestly deny (...), that the scripture is the standard of truth; but truth
and orthodoxy are two things, very different, and sometimes diametrically
opposite to one another. Bible doctrine is the same in all ages and nations,
but orthodoxy in one nation differs at least as much from orthodoxy in another
nation, as the several climates do from one another. To go no farther than
Britain, you see what is south of the Tweed accounted the purest religion in
the world, is, upon traveling further toward the pole, deemed corrupt,
superstitious, and antichristian. So it is vice versa. Moreover, what has been
orthod^^ and apostolic in one age, has had the misfortune to become quite
heteredox and damnable in the next: so that there is no ce^tain standard of
orthodoxy in any nation; but truth is always the same, and knows no standard
but one.

Indeed the synod of Dort, and the reformers of the English church, have done
what mortal men could do to fix (...) everlasting standard of orthodoxy, by
tying all future professors to subscribe their traditions. But even that is
insufficient. For by the help of mental reservation, many subscribe contrary to
their real bel^ef; and others who have not that address, even go without a
benefice, let them believe the bible ever so piously. Yea, I have known many
do^^^ed hereties, and burned at a stake merely for believing the bible.
Orthod^x papists orthodox episcopalians, orthodox presby^erians, and orthodox
congregationalists, have all had the honor of patting people to death for
their want of orthodoxy; namely, because they were daring enough to think for
themselves, contrary to the known maxims of the orthodox priests in every age.
You know, it is observable, that the orthodox are condescending enough to
suffer other people (...) have thought for them.


IMP. What, cousin! has any sect of Christians, besides our friends the
papists, been found to persecute those who differed from them?


DIS. Yes, consin, every sect who has at any time been happy enough to grasp
the reigns of government for the time being. The worthy papists bore the bell
of orthodoxy for the space of twelve hundred and sixty years, during which time
much blood was shed by open massacres, secret assassinations, pretended
judicatures, acts of bloody faith, and at l^st, to finish the bloody reign of
antichrist, England, France, the Netherlands, and the valleys of Piedmont swam
with the gore of such who would believe the Bible sooner than the ^oice of the
priests. Queen Mary's reign furnished the orthodox in her day, with a fine
opportunity of discovering their zeal for the church, by murdering those who
believed and obeyed the Bible; but her reign being short, and ^lizabeth
ascending the throne upon her demise, the other scale rose uppermost, and the
protestants in their turn became orthodox; i. e. got the government into their
hands.

O the violence of reputed orthodoxy! Those same gen^lemen were no sooner
emerged from prison, than they also at the world know that they were not to be
differed from with impunity; that the formula of their faith and worship, must
be regarded with as implicit obedience as that in the former reign imposed by
the Papists. Now the Presbyterians, Independents, and other congregationalists
(...) the weight of their rage, or if you please, zeal for orthodoxy, and the
good of the church Now the prison^^pers, and their friend Master Ketch, had
pretty near (...) a run of trade as in the reign of Mary. And now the wild of
America began to be well peopled with Euglish protestants and oppressed
dissenters; and the good episcop^^^ans at home, kept the fleece to themselves,
and had all the good of the church before them. But those said Presbyterians
and Independents had no sooner crossed the ocean for conscience sake, and found
themselves secur^ from episcopalian rage, than they themselves commenced
orthodox, and set up their own formula on the staudard of religion to which
they required as implicit submission from others as the good bishops of England
had ever done from themselves; and now the poor e^ipedobaptist and quakers were
taught, that a mittimus is a mittimus w^^ther it is signed by a papist, an
episcopalian, or a presbyterian; and that sentence of death is to be dreaded as
(...) from the mouth of the latter as of the former. Those (...) dissenters,
who had so lately found Old England too hot (...) themselves, by the glowings
of priestly zeal for orthod^^^ soon made New England too hot for the poor
quakers (...) antipedobaptists, who to escape the rage for presby (...) fled;
the one to Pennsylvania, and the other to Bhode-(...) that they might not be
compelled to worship God (...) to other people's consc^ences, and contrary to
their own.


IMF. So then the old spirit of calling down fire (...) heaven upon heritics,
or those who walk in a different wa^^ it seems has prevailed in modern times as
well as of yo^^ O what a mask is that! human rage in the character of godly
zeal? It is wonderful to see people glorifying the prince of liberty, by
shutting their brethren up in a du^geon for conscience sake! worshipping the
Savior of men lives by putting people to death, because they will worship him
in a different form; and it is wonderful that the ambassadors of peace (as they
call themselves) should be the principal agents of this violence.


DIS. But for the amb^ss^dors, persec^tion had never born known in the world,
sir. The laity have so little zeal for God, that they would, if not instigated
by the clergy, suffer men to worship him according to the best understanding
they have of his mind revealed in the bible. But the ambassadors are quite of
another opinion; for by them it is determined, that God shall be worshipped in
the very mode by them directed, or he shall not be worshipped at all, if they
can help it. The honor of persecution, alias, punishing of hereties, must all
be ascribed to the reverend ambassadors.


IMP. By ambassadors, suppose, cousin, you mean popish priests, in
contradistinction from protestant ministers.


DIS. I mean both papists and protestants, cousin; and with me it is not very
easy to determine which best de^^rve the honorable appellation.

But to return to my story. I taught the respectable Pha^^ees in general the
use of my instruments, which as you saw in the late experiment, perfectly
inverteth every object; and so, by my prudent management, those very people,
held to be the most religious of the Jews, were wrought up to such a degree of
self-conceit, as to fit them for executing the will of the devil; still
supposing that they were doing good service to the God of Israel. Contemplated
under the ^^stec^^er of my ingenious instruments, those Pharisees, who were
darkness itself considered themselves as angels of light, and (...) became so
enamoured of his own personal excellence, that all who were not of their sect
and persuasion, were held (...) the most consummate ab^orrence; as accursed and
ignorant of their traditions, yea, even enemies to the Almighty.

They viewed Immanuel, the brightness of the Father's glory and express image
of his person, by the help of my glasses, in which to them, he appeared as one
come from Beelzebub, and performing miracles in the spirit and power of the
great apostate. His immediate disciples were indeed, men of whom the world was
not worthy, yet viewed by the help of these notable instruments, they appeared
as ^reatures the most despicable. Although men of peaceful principles willing
to spend, and be spent for the good of mankind, they were held to be enemies to
the public good; men who turned the world upside down: unworthy of a dwelling
in the tents of humanity, and therefore thrust out of the world with violence.
Such wonderful works were accomp^ished of old, by the help of these amazing
instruments, and still they are as ever perfect, and fit for operation.

Even at this day, when the whole system of revealed truth is examined by my
inverting mirror, it is misapprehended as cunningly devised fables; a well
concerted system of falsehood; or a priestly imposition on the consciences and
understanding of the laity. Yes, my fellow destroyers, by my wise government,
many who value themselves as the greatest masters of reason, are so absolutely
stupid as to suppose that the eternal God has left men at large without a^y
given law or revelation of his mind, to which their submission is required.
Being thus stupidly absurd, you will not wonder, that the same masters of
reason have been ingenious enough to find out, that this world, unwieldy as it
is, was dexterous enough to create itself, and possesses wisdom enough to be
its own governor.


INF. By your leave, cousin. This last part of your account belongs to my
administration. You preside only over dissension and division. I want to hear
some of your operations of this kind.


DIS. True, sir. But if I preside over dissentions, divisions, animosities,
etc. you know I must be allowed to use proper means, by which my works are to
be propagated; for I am not like those human fools, who expect the end without
using the means. Besides, sir, that one devil should assist another, is by no
means against the laws of our fraternity. If I, to promote my beloved discord,
call in the assistance of your bewildering influences; I also, in a kind
return, by the divisions which I foment, greatly strengthen the slavish bands
of great Infidelity. Our interest being mutual, I hope the worthy Infidelis
will never grumble to lend me all possible assistance, in striving to make this
earth, as much as may be, to resemble the regions of the damned. Moreover, our
great prince and parent is no way careful, about which of his illustrious
family is the instrument in damning a soul, so that the work of damnation is
effected.


INF. I have no objection, cousin, to assisting you, or any of our kindred. All
I desire is, to have due notice taken of my influence. Our leading view ought
undoubtedly to be the destruction of men, in compliance with the will of our
great ancestor. But I detain you.


DIS. The ancient pharisees were not the only dupes I have had in the world.
The great man at Rome, the father of the world, and head of the church of
antichrist, has been as much my dupe as people of less eminence, as I shall
show you in the sequel.


INF^D. What, cousin, have you become acquainted with my old friend? I should
like to know how that came to pass, and what acquaintance you have with him.


DIS. I accomplished it in the following manner. First, I (...) his supreme
holiness, with a pair of my instruments, in the right luciferian construction,
on purpose that he might, by their assistance, try all the bulls he should
publish, and all the causes which should come before him. For it ought to be
observed the time was, when the whole world wondered (...) infallible judgment.
Infallible, so given out, and so (...) ages received. Yea, so powerful, so
efficacious (...) been the word of his holiness, that ere now his very bre^^^
has blown the crown off from the head of one prince upon that of another. So
very extensive his sovereign sway, that to give a kingdom to a devoted friend,
was no more to him, than to give a snuff of sneezing would be to a trusty
Highlander.

From the use of my instruments, there arises a necessity that his holiness's
bulls, etc. should be the most perfect ^nantichristianism; so that in the
inverting mirror they may assume the likeness of unerring truth. It is the same
with the persons and things which the hoary father is concerned with; the
sentence is, in general, contrary to the real intrinsic merit of the party or
cause. Hence we find a turbulent Becket c^^^nized for a (...), and placed among
the Roman deities; and a pious Cra^mer conde^^ed to the stake Re^^ide is
rewarded as meritorio^s, whilst walking according to the dictates of conscience
is held altogether damnable, both in this and the future world.

From the proper application of this ^irror, popish bulls, d^crees of councils,
canons of churches, human composed for mula's of worship, are supposed to be
stamped with divine authority; whilst the Bible, that only revelation of the
divine mind, is co^^^^ered not only as i^sufficient to show to men the way of
salvation, but even dangerous to be read by the laity. A^^ is absolutely
forbidden their use, lest by knowing too much of the will of God, they should
perish from the popish faith; so the good old vicar obliges the laity to g^ to
hell blind^olded without complaining.

Nothing can be more certain, than that either his holiness the pope, or the
writers of the scriptures, must be mistake^. The for over says, the bible is
dark, mysterious, difficult to be understood, and even dangerous to the souls
of men; whereas the latter say, the scripture way of salvation is so plain and
(...), that the way faring (...) though a stranger, though even a fool, shall
not (...) therein. The pope, has for weighty reasons, been pleased to forbid
the use of the scriptures, under the heavy penalty of death and damnation;
Jesus the author of the bible, commands all men to search the scriptures; and
his spirit in Paul, applauds this conduct in the noble Bereans. Surely this
points out the very person of antichrist. His holiness at Rome, and all other
great leaders of the church, are of opinion that the scripture is not of itself
sufficient to be the guide of conscience, the rule of faith and practice,
therefore canons, creeds, liturgies, etc. are introduced to make the formula of
worship more complete. But Paul the apostle tells mankind, that, the scripture
is able through God to make them wise to salvation. So that the one or the oher
must needs be mistaken.


IMP. His holiness of Rome was in the right to ^^rbid reading of the bible, and
they find their account in so doing. The old bible, I am told, tolerates even a
gospel minister to lead about a wife, but confines him to one only. Therefore
this bible did not suit my good friends of the priesthood. But the pope's
bible, which forbids to marry, and enjoins an unreserved auricular confession,
gives the gentlemen of the cloth an opportunity, under the pretense of being
righteous more than others, of being lascivious to the uttermost, and to de^ile
all the nuns in the convent. What full sed friar would not choose a free
admission into such a seraglio, rather than be confined by sacred marriage, to
one only wife? With them it is a rule that much pleasure arises from variety.


DIS. So cousin, I find you are acquainted with our old friends the priests of
Rome.


IMP. I have been long acquainted with them. Why, cousin, the greatest part of
them dwell in my canton of literal fornicators, and they are all freemen in the
district of mystical whoredom.


DIS. I have taken care to furnish every true member of the Italian church,
with a partial telescope, by the help of which he takes a false view of the
members of all other communities whatever; and in the very spirit of the
ancient pharisees, holds all to be accursed who are not of his communion. By
these means also, the holiness of real saints is called heresy, and the heresy
of the papists obtains the name of holiness. The will worship, superstition,
and idolatry of those sons of the m^stic whore, they call piety, whilst the
pure spiritual worship of God in Christ is by them t^rmed schism and heresy.

In my instruments the papists, in general, view the righteousness of Immanuel,
as the ground of man's acceptance with God, and therefore say they, It is all
chimers, a mere shadow, a doctrine of licentious tendency, unfit to be
published amongst mankind. But when they consider their own personal merit by
the help of my telescope, they are ravished with their own supposed excellency.
"A righteousness of our own," say they, is a work of substance, and will bear
our dependence. Here is rightcousness of my own working out, enough to obtain
the favor of God, and to spare. Blessed be my own hands for working out my
salvation, and more than my salvation. Adored be my own heart, for possessing
more than holiness sufficient to bring me to heaven. Of the same opinion is the
Rev. Mr. John Wesley, with whom it is plain, that the grace of God is
insufficient to salvation, without the cooperation of the creature; who yet is
confessedly incapable of doing any thing aright. There is a very near relation
between the old gentleman at Rome, and his kinsman at the Foandery* Both are
Popes, though the latter is much more diminutive than the former.

There was a time when the whole assemblage of priests, took it into their
heads to promote their own religion, and to suppress that which had any
tendency to lessen the importance of the sacerdotal order. For their more
success, they enquired of my mirror as an oracle, for direction as to means
most proper for the purpose. Answer was given, "By the power of the sword."
Therefore in the popish bible it is written, "Those who in contempt of holy
church, shall take upon them to live according to the dictates of conscience
and scripture, shall die the death, and their estates shall he consiscated to
the prince of the realm; provided always, that one full moiety of every such
estate, shall without deduction be returned to his holiness at Ro^^, the prince
over the kings of the earth. Moreover, whoever shall hesitate about yielding
his conscience to the guidance of the priest, and shall not with apparent
willingness bind his soul to the borns of the pontifical altar, shall be deemed
and damned for an h^ritic; that is, shall be burned out of this world at a
s^ake, and shall burn for ever is the world to come, according to the good
pleasure of his merciful holiness."


INF. Ah, cousin, the devil was sad^y outwitted in that affair; for although
the ^urning of heretics was a pleasing diversion to our good friends the
priests, for the time being, it has brought them into contempt, which will
prove everlasting. Having set the world upon reflection, it is now found to our
grief, that the religion of Jesus has no connec^^^^ with a spirit of
intolerance, which, wherever it obtains, is known to be the spirit of
Antichrist. One would really suppose, that the successor of St. Peter has quite
forgotten the injunction given his predecessor, to cease from the use of the
swords and let it abide in its sheath, seeing he accounts its edge to be the
most convincing of all arguments. But I interrupt your story.


DIS. Often have I seen the whimsical hermit and fantas^cal devotee, take an
ample view of his own religious proceedings, with this partial telescope and
inverting mirror, and thus sounds the voice of self-applause from the
hermitical cell at the bottom of Sinai, or on the top of Ararat. "Lo, what an
high degree of holiness my own self-denial and assiduity have procured me.
Behold^ w^^^ great good my crucifixion of the flesh, and separation from the
world have wrought out for me; for which I may thank my own resolution. By my
pious diligence I have attained holiness sufficient to qualify me for; and good
works more tha^ enough to entitle me to heaven. Happy I, who have made such a
good improvement of my time! Unlike to those in^olent people, who, when they
die, are obliged either to purchase their pardons at an advanced price, or to
lie for ages in the flames of purgatory, burning away their rebellions. I shall
get safe to heaven without so much as touching at that flaming prison on my
journey."


IMP. Dear cousin, how I have laughed; laughed myself out of breath, strong and
healthy as my lungs are, to see the papal penitent after he has in holy zeal
whipped himself with the cat-o'-nine-tails, for the length of several streets;
till the impious offending gore has laid on the stones. Enamoured with his own
fortitude in so belabouring the sinful flesh: I have seen him, after his
penitential work was sinished, examine every stripe by the help of my valuable
instruments, and as he viewed, he cried with the voice of exultation, Ah, how
infatuated are those who hope to get to heaven in a whole skin, without
mortifying and punishing the wicked flesh? to expose themselves to such severe
exercises in the discipline of purgatory, for want of devotion enough to submit
to the discipline of the church; how Impious? But I shall have a speedy
entrance into happiness on my dissolution; for I mortify the members of this
body, and these wounds religiously inflicted voluntarily by my own hand, will
be as so many mouths to intercede for me with the Almighty.


AVAE. So then, cousin, the intercession of Immanuel is quite out of the
question, with your penitents, I perceive. And indeed those people who can whip
themselves to heaven, cannot have much need of his advocacy and intercession.
If the whip, well applied, can save a man from destruction, one would be apt to
conclude, that Immanuel might have saved himself the expense of such bloody
sufferings and agonizing sorrows as he underwent.


DIS. That is true, cousin; but their first concern is not with Immanuel, but
his holiness the pope. Not about the favor of God, but that of his reverence
the priest, who is thought to have all the orators of heaven under his
influence. Therefore, those that hope for favor with the inhabitants of heaven,
must be very careful not to loose the good graces of the parson; for it is
thought, that no man can meet with a cordial reception in the other world, but
what brings proper credentials with him from the ghostly guide of his
conscience in this. But death is a wonderful instructor, and teaches the poor
beguiled criminals, lessons which they never thought of in life; and amongst
others, this important one, That the favor of the pope and priest can be of no
more service to a dying man, than the favor of Mahomet.

When the true born sons of the scarlet whore are pleased to view the
protestants with my telescope, indignation rises in the heart, and thus they
give vent to their zeal and vengeance. Ah, what a goodly heaven would it be to
see those heretics broiling in the flames of hell; when shall vengeance fall to
the uttermost upon those, who da^^ despise the authority of the church and its
holy high priest?


INF. It is allowed on all hands in the church of Rome, that to protest against
the pope's supremacy, and disbelieve his infallibility, is the sin
unpardonable; for which no dispensation whatever can be obtained from the
clergy, however much their so doing may be approved in heaven. And it is an
article of the papal faith, that sire and faggot, rack and gibbet, are the most
convincing, or rather invincible of all arguments, therefore never to be
omitted in the decision of religious disputes.


IMP. When we consider, sir, that his holiness of Rome is not such an able
logician as Jesus of Nazareth, and has a religion very different from his to
defend; we must allow that he is in the right of it to reason with the edge of
the coersive weapon. Fraudulent religion is liable to many disadvantages which
that of truth enjoys, and although the one will eternally stand of itself
against all the machinations of darkness, the other will require the assistance
of violence and intolerance to uphold it. Who then can blame their papal
reverences for pulling the sword from its scabbard in order to convince
gainsayers? I have seen many by dint of found reasoning most grievously
confound the holy fathers, who became like dumb dogs that could not bark before
them, in a moment's time silenced by the end of a cord, or some other such
irrefutable argument. These are wonderful ways of enlightening the consciences
of heritics, gentlemen. But I pray you, cousin Discordans, have you no concern
among the protestants?


DIS. Not a little, cousin, which to morrow I may give you some account of, but
at present must forbear, the usual time of interview being clapsed. Adieu, my
kinsmen, adieu.


DIALOGUE XIV. DISCORDANS.
YES gentlemen, strange as it may seem, I assure you my advantages by these
instruments are great, and my influence even over protestants not to be
despised. Though it is true, I am at no pains to prejudice the protestants
against the papists, or to make use of my instruments in order to render the
latter more disagreeable than they really are. For whilst in the body, it is
impossible to make a thorough bred papist more diabolical than he is already. I
leave it therefore with the protestants to examine the worshippers of the pope,
in the mirror of revealed truth, by which the antichristianism of that religion
is sufficiently detected; and all the falacy of priestcraft is brought to open
light. But,

Great is the business which I do between one protestant and another; who,
although they unanimously agree to shake off the papal yoke, are most grievously
divided among themselves. They abominate the high and arrogant pretension of
Rome; yet they themselves are severally the most orthodox, and drink deeper
into the spirit of popery than they are perhaps aware of, even of the precious
spirit of intolerance and bigotry.

When a zealous churchman, such as Sacheveral, or his lordship of L -- f^, or a
Durell, Nowel, or Blackett, examines his own party (...) mirror; how enamoured
is the good man on the discovery of his own excellency: how much of the self
opinionated strain flows from his boasting lips: "There is no doubt, says he,
but our church is truly apostolical; the purest church in the whole world. We
hold fast the form of found words, and are not forgetful of the tradition of
the elders."

INF. No, cousin, they are not forgetful of tradition, for with all the pompous
parade of lordly prelates, there is not a small part of the episcopalian
formula that derives its e^istence from the traditions of even the Romish
father. Cringing and curtsying when the name of Jesus is pronounced;
worshipping with the face toward the east; keeping of lent and other holidays,
besides the Christian Sabbath; fasting on Fridays; crossing in baptism, with a
great many more, are all sprung from the Italian fount^^^* In like manner the
names of their priests evidently show that the pope stood godfather at the
christening. And he (...) looks on their canonical (...), must be instantly
convin^^^ that they are cut in the true Italian taste. However, they are not
the only protestants who hanker after papal customs, for even the Geneva cloak
itself discovers the taylor's acquaintance with the (...) of Italy. And yet to
hear the Calvinists boast of their reformation from popery, one would think we
could not find so much as a shred of the strumpet's garments within the pale of
their presbytery.


DIS. It is a rule with mankind in general, to look out narrowly for the mote
in the eye of another, whilst they tenderly pass by the beam which is in their
own eye; and as we have brought the world into such a state of disorder, it is
no difficult matter for the eye of jealousy to find faults enough. Sometimes I
clap my telescope to the eye of a true son of the church, and direct him to
surv^y the whole body of dissenters; he obeys, and then exclaims, "These same
roundheads are schismaties, pro^e to strife and sedition; self-sufficient,
turbulent, and uneasy bigg^^s; haters of apostolic discipline, and lovers of
licentiousness, who therefore spit (...) the face of their mother, and wickedly
leave the purest church in the world."


IMP. I pray you, cousin, are there none apostolical besides the episcopalians?


DIS. O yes, cousin Impiator; all are apostolical, if their own testimony is to
be credited; all the Romish clergy are apostolical, and give it out that Peter
the fisherman was their great-graudfather. The church of Scotland is also
apostolical, and the power of the twelve apostles is thought to have been
transferred to the Scotch presbytery. The independants are apostolical also, on
account of the soundness of their doctrine and regularity of some part of their
discipline. But both they and the north country clergymen labor under some
disadvantages; for the latter have lost the deed of transfer, which conveyed
the authority of the apostles unto the presbytery, and the former are unhappy
enough to be unable to produce either precept or precedent from the apostles
for infant sprinkling, which is notwithstanding a foundation doctrine, and by
them accounted Christian baptism. The baptists; or as the independants and
methodists respectfully call them anabaptists, you may be sure are not less
apostolical than their neighbors, having, besides all the advantages claimed
by the independants, the enjoyment of baptism according to the primitive
institution. So that no defect whatever, in point of a gospel spirit, can
hinder them from being apostolical.

Even Mr. Wesley and his preachers give themselves out to be apostolical,
notwithstanding Mr. Wesley asserts that salvation is by works, which the
apostle Paul denied. No contradiction whatever will hinder the teachers of the
people from considering themselves as apostolical. When I am used to attend the
Sandemanian church after service time, and divert myself with their playing at
blindman's buff, I confess I could not easily gather from what part of the
apostles conduct they derived their warrant for this game; any more than for
cards, skittles, attending plays and masquerades, going to Vauxhall, Ranelagh,
etc. etc. and yet this is the only apostolic church in the world in its own
esteem, taken in its proper connections. However it is said, some of the oldest
pillars of the church having had their shins repeatedly broken, and the elders
noses having been smitten even to bloodshed, they have laid aside that
dangerous play of blindman's buff, so very apostolical a few years ago, and
have found out ways and means of becoming little children, less dangerous and
more becoming their infant capacities, by which they may spend the evening of
every Sabbath.


IMP. By your leave, cousin; I have often been puzzled to find out how it is
the prelates of the church of England came to be apostolical and I protest I
cannot after all unriddle the mystery. I (...) heard my father say, that the
aposties were never conscerated to any see whatever in England, and that there
were not half the number of apostles there are of prelates even in this island.
Moreover, I have heard him say, the archbishops and bishops of the English
church are the successors of the arch-flamins and flamins, the eignitaries of
the old British pagan church, prior to the days of Lucius. Now if they hold the
honors and revenues of the pagan clergymen, how is it that they are
apostolical? Is it because the name is changed from flamin to bishop, or how?

Certain it is the English bishops must be of a more noble ^rder than the
apostles. They are lord bishops; they possess great revenues; they are clothed
in soft raiment, and dwell in kings courts; they are too high, too polite, too
dignified to preach in a common assembly, or indeed in any other more than
twice or thrice a y^^r. But the apostles were men of mean extraction, not
Lords, not Right Reverends; plain Paul, Peter, James, etc. they were contented
if their revenues would purchase food and raiment for them; they seldom
appeared among great men, in kings courts, otherwise than in quality of
prisoners; they were willing to spend and be spent, in preaching the gospel to
all people, and on all occasions; they had no carriages, no equippages; they
had nothing to glory but of their afflictions, which fell upon them in every
place wherever they came.


INF. There is some wieght in your reasoning, my son, and they will understand
it hereafter. But in the mean while, it is not clever in the churchmen, however
zea^ous, to charge the nonconformists with having separated from the church.
The church of England in her rubric defines a church to be "a congregation of
faithful men, where the word is preached, and the ordinance^ are administered;"
from whence it is plain, a church ^say meet in a house which has never a
steeple; and a man may leave the house of parish worship, or what is called the
parish church, and yet cleave to a congregation of faithful men and women,
where the ordinances are administered and the word preached, which the rubric,
as before observed acknowledges to be the true church. Churches are built of
living stones, which never a parish church nor cathedral in England is,
therefore a departure from them can never with propriety be said to be a schism
in the church. My good friend the high churchman, is some what unkind to the
nonconformists in this affair.


DIS. I allow it, sir. But I assure you the nonconformist^ perfectly understand
the law of retaliation, and is an adept in the use of my instruments. In some
zealous hour of self approbation you may hear his thoughts about the
episcopalians, "These episcopalians, says he, these mongrels, are monsters in
religion, like Ephraim they are neither baked nor unbaked, but like a cake not
turned; neither good protestants nor right papists. Partly they worship God and
partly they obey the pope. What consistency can there be in such a jumbled
religion? Can there be any good, where there i^ so much papal dross and refuse?
Any true religion, where there is so much false traditional superstition? Can
there be any thing of the substance, where there is so much of the shadow?" So
you see ther^ is never a sect of protestants, but will occasionally do the
(...) a kindness, in their treatment of one another.


INF. This language of the nonconformists is not general, cousin; for there are
many of them who can believe that a person may really be saved, although even
not of their community; and that all who differ from them, are not to be
treated as absolutely enemies to God and all religion. The like may be said of
the good people of the church of England, for amongst them you will find some
who do not really think that every dissenter is absolutely in a state of
damnation, and hope at least that a man may escape hell, even though he never
sets his foot in the parish church. However, I have often been highly ^^verted
at hearing the church parson on the one hand, (...) against the neigh-bouring
dissenters as worse than papists, instead of preaching the gospel; and on the
other hand, the dissenter, with the greatest d^^terity bandying back the curse
upon his reverence, as a dog that barks at the sheep of Christ. Prejudice,
cousin, deals all in extremes; it never touches on the middle path of judgment,
the path reserved for the gentle steps of candor.


DIS. It is not enough that I persuade the more bigoted part of both
conformists and nonconformists, reciprocally to consider each other as the
avowed and incorrigible enemies of Christianity, and themselves to be its
warmest votar^es. But I find means to procure the noncons a sight of each other
in my celebrated telescope, and each to treat the different denominations with
as much rigor and injustice, as if they were not followers, or did not profess
to be followers of one and the same Savior. The hottest episcopalian rage ever
felt by their forefathers, discovered not more bigotry than what some of them
discover against one another.

I was greatly edified the other day in paying a visit to an eminent quaker,
who, when with curious eye he was examining my instruments, was moved by the
spirit of self-conceit, to examine, try, cast and condemn all the sects of
professors around him, as destitute of the inward power of religion, and thus
having the telescope at his eye, he began: "Friend Episcopalius, I perceive
thou art so carried away with the form, that thou carest not for the power of
religion. Vain man, shadows are thy delight, and thou little regardest the
substance. Do thou think, friend Episcopalius, that the spirit is in the
service book? Why do not thee read friend Barclay's apology? Do thou
suppose that Christian ministers are ever to be seen shrouded in Romish weeds
and surplices? How can thy steeple-house be a receptacle of the meek and
peaceful saints, when there is such a clinking of bells from the top of it? Is
it not more likely a syuagogue of Satan, whose servants are turbulent and
noisy? Thy ministers preach for hire, friend, they take tithes and offerings
from the people, and how can they then be ministers of Jesus Christ? I advise
thee, friend Episcopalius, to consider thy ways, and turn to the light within
thee, then thy priests will let one shirt at a time serve their turn, and will
no longer preach for tithes and offerings. Then shall thou thyself be led to
renounce the fartasies of this vain life, and solicit neither for church nor
state preferment, but wilt content thyself with getting money in a way of
trade, like our self-denying brethren. I say again, vain man, consider how
worldly are thy practices."

"As for you my friends of the presbyterian and independent denominations, I
allow that ye do not conform to the corrected mass book, for which some praise
is due to you. But, alas! ye conform to the world notwithstanding. Look ye,
friends, your women wear ribbons of unholy colors; rings of gold, polluted by
the profane hands of the silver-smith; yea, ruffles, furbelows, and heads
frizzled, up to an enormous height, of downright French profaneness; your women
are ladies, madams, and misses, all of which indicate that ye are destitute of
the inward power, and neglect to look to the light within you. Yea, examine but
your own clothes, ye who call yourselves gentlemen, and see what irreligion
discovers itself in every part of their fabrication. Do you see, friends, your
parsons wear clothes of idolatrous black, and bands starched with superstition,
after the manner of popish and episcopalian hirelings. Ye make ministers
sprinkle your infants, use ordinances, and like all other worldlings, are as
much attached to shadows, as if the substance were not come; yea, your clothes
in general are made of unholy colors, such as are wore by the servants of the
flesh; ye wear buttons, made of metal, dug out of the bowels of this sinful
earth; even pocket-holes impiously gaping in the fore-skirts of your upper
garment; and to add to the height of your carnality, your hats are wickedly
cocked after the manner of the sons of antichrist. I charge you all, ye
presbyterians and independants, to turn to the light within you, and that will
lead you to the substance. Then will ye forsake all these lying and wordly
vanities."

"As for thee, my friend Baptismus, (continued the serious quaker) thou art
worse than all the rest; they have fairly given up some of the ordinances which
were in use in the apostles days, but thou retainest every punctilio; in this
therefore thou art formal and superstitious. By leading of people to submit to
those primitive ordinances, thou dishonourest the light within thee, which
teaches those who obey it to despise ordinances, as thou see in the case of
our brethren. Besides, thy clothes are of a dark color, like those of other
hirelings, and men-made preachers. Why do thou not imitate our elders in
wearing clothes of a religious color, even of an holy drab? Observe me,
friend, thy hat is cocked after a popish manner, and thou wearest a batton and
loop upon it, after the fashion of antichrist; why have thou not hooks and eyes
to raise it only to a half-bend, after the manner of the spiritual?

"It appears but too plainly, friend B^btis^^s, that thou art still in the
world. Thy preachers also wear popish cambric on their bosom, preach for hire,
and assume the epithet of reverend. Thee and thy friends, make a mighty bustle
about what thou call the scripture. I pray thee, friend, turn thee from that
dead letter, to the author of it within, so shall thou be taught to contemn
ordinances as we do, and to give honor to none of thy fellow creatures, how
much soever it may be due.

"But thou, my friend Wesley, come more near to the standard than any of thy
neighbors; thy priests are not hirelings, having only food and raiment, and
thou wisely take care of the rest: neither are they of human manufacture, but
are all like unto our elders, sent forth by special commission from heaven,
from whence thou say that thou derives^ thy own commission.

"Thou preachest the free agency of man also, and muttest none out from heaven,
besides those who will not fulfill thy conditions, or, as our elders say, refuse
to obey the dictates of the true light within them. Nevertheless, thou fallest
short of perfection, for though thou despisest the bishops as dumb dogs, thou
art mightily taken with the steeple-house; and although thou thyself wilt be
subject to no ordinance but what thou think meet, thou superstitiously
bindest both thy preachers and people to the observance of every rite of what
thou call the church. I pray thee, friend John, why do thou pinch thy
belly on Fridays? What see thou in the fifth hour more than in the ninth,
that thou should set it apart for what thee call devotion? Why should
thou exhort thy preachers to read the scriptures with thy notes, to read thy
other tracts in preference to all others, to pray at certain hours, as if the
spirit were at their command, and to preach twice every day of their lives?
Thou art too formal, friend, and regardest not duly the light within thee."


INF. And so your friend the quaker is pleased to tell all the world, that he
is possessed of the spirit of bigotry and selfconceit. However, he is not the
only bigot in the world. Bigotry is an epidemical distemper among mankind, and
I know no greater bigots than the people who profess to be the warmest votaries
for unlimited charity. Who was ever more bigoted than friend Barclay and his
quaking brethren? Or who in the world is more bigoted and dogmatical at this
^ay, then the reverend principal of the Foundry, that great votary for
unive^^al redemption, and the spontaneous agency of men. So very highly is this
gentleman esteemed by many of his people, that I have heard his labors
extolled above those of Paul the apostle; and indeed himself accounted to be
one of the two witnesses spoken of in the apocalypse. (...) in this they must
be mistaken, unless by sackcloth in which the witnesses prophesied we are to
understand prunella; for in black prunella, instead of sackcloth, has all the
pro^^^ies of Mr. John been published.


DIS. My friend the quaker having triumphantly survey^^ the supposed
imperfections of his neighbors, turned the ^^scope toward himself; then
gathering his muscles into a smile of self-complacency, he said, "Yea, it is
evident (...) I am a true follower of the light within, for I give ^^^our to no
man, how much soever it is his due; prince and peasant, noble and ignoble, are
all the same to me, my fellow creatures and equals. In farther obedience to the
invard light, I do not pray, not once in seven years, unless ^oved by an
impulse from the spirit. My inward bible I ^^en read, but the dead letter of
external scripture I leave to those who are fond of shadows. My raiment too is
all made of an approved color, even of sanctified drab; and my linen is plain,
though fine and neatly dressed. Yea, and Martha my good wife too, is separated
from the world, and is a suitable help meet to a spiritual man; she wears no
furbeloes, no profane cardinals, capuchins, dominos, etc. but all her apparel
is rich, good, and plain, becoming a separation from the world.


INF. With the quaker's good leave, I think the faults he finds in his
neighbors, are but like gnats when compared to the huge camels, which to my
certain knowledge he himself can swallow without straining. Besides the virtues
of which he makes his boast, even supposing them to be virtues, are all
external, and are no more than tithes paid of annise, mint, and cummin, whilst
the weightier matters of the law are neglected, perhaps even by this precision.


AVAR. I have often wondered what it is, that makes a drab color more
religious and becoming than another; yet certainly it must be so, for the
quakers are wise, very wise, and could not be imposed on, as every tradesman
who deals with them is ready to testify. Amongst my disciples, I have heard
amazing accounts of the wisdom of the quakers, and the use they are of, in
teaching even novices wisdom by their provident example. However, I have as
much wondered what the papists, episcopalians, and every other sect of
professors, discern so amiable and lovely in black, as to induce them to make
it a canonical color; and almost, if not altogether, essential to the
ministrations of the word. No doubt they have heard that Beelzebub is said to be
dressed in raiment of the deepest black, and one would wonder they should desire
their ministers to be clothed in the same uniforms, seeing they professedly
have declared war against him and all his principalities. Yet so it is, for any
other than dark colored clothes upon a minister, would frighten an auditory
out of their pews, and the best of sermons would not be worth hearing, if the
preacher were not invested in the sacerdotal livery.


FAST. It Is I my friends, even I, who am at the bottom of that religion whim.
But for me white would be thought to become the pulpit as well as black, and
green would be as holy as gray. I call it whim, because the greatest of the
Nazarenes, in ancient times, knew no color which was more holy than the rest;
and the same clothes in which the apostle Paul made his tents, served him as
canonical robes, in which he also preached the gospel. By this you may see that
my influence is very extensive, even in religious things.


IMP. What, uncle? Had not Paul a gown and cassock in which he preached, and a
surplice in which he offered up his prayers.


FAST. No, Impiator. Where should he have them? You may know that the gown,
surplice, etc. were contrived by the man of sin, I mean the son of perdition,
whose principal seat is at Rome; but in the days of the apostle he was not
revealed, notwithstanding the mystery of the popish doctrine had indeed began
to work. But all this while we forgot our good friend the quaker.


INF. Indeed, brother, we do not use the quaker handsomely in so long
neglecting of him; but to make him some amends I must tell you, that I have
often laughed heartily to bear those precise gentry exclaim against the form of
religion by others adhered to, as if they themselves were nothing but spirit,
when at the same time they are as formal a people as any upon earth. And in
truth very few of them know any thing at all of religion, besides that very
imperfect form which they have adopted. But we are wise enough to keep our
thumb upon that, for if the cheat were discovered, I am afraid they would be
glad to embrace that part of the form of religion which they reject, in order
to obtain the power of it, of which the far greater part of them now are
destitute.


DIS. I can tell you, the quakers are liberally paid back in their own coin.
And amongst every fect of protestants hitherto mentioned, you will find some
who seldom or never look at the people called quakers but through my telescope.
Were you by, when the quaker is examined by the rest of the protestants, you
would almost split your sides with laughing at their partiality and unfair
representation. "Say they, the quakers religion lies all in their dress, speech
and money getting. Their religion lies not in the head, but in broad brimmed
half-cocked hats -- Not in their hearts, but in their coats. -- Not in their
actions, but in their tongues. -- All their public meetings are calculated to
promote the great end of getting money and increasing commerce; are not
religious, but merely political."

By this you may see, that the quakers are abused and belied in their turn, as
well as they abuse and belie others. The above reflections are just enough when
applied only to some, or to a great many of them, but will by no means hold as
a general rule: seeing you all know, there is now and then a quaker who breaks
away from his subjection to the god of this world; and despiting all that we
and our sable clan can do to prevent it, gets safe within the palace of
Immanuel. Moreover there are at those public meetings some, though
comparatively few, who have a truly religious design in giving their
attendance. From these things you may see my friends, that prejudice deals all
in extremes, and ^nows not how to speak favorably.


INF. That is a gross mistake, into which we have with great vigilance ensnared
the posterity of Adam. When a small number only of any particular body of
people, are found guilty of a certain evil, the crime is usually charged upon
the whole; and the precipitate injudicious conclusion is, "they are all alike."
For instance, the Munster baptists were once guilty of certain outrages, with
which the whole lect of antipedobaptists are to this day very charitably
calumniated. And because very many of the quakers are amazingly wise to get
money, and to keep it when it is procured, it is often said they are all such,
and that Avaro is their lawgiver. Hey day, whether is the rule of moral equity
gone, that the professors of religion cannot set their eyes upon it? where is
that candor and benevolence which the Christian religion every where
recommends, that you, consin, have gained such an ascendancy over them?


DIS. By the instrumentality of these glasses, I got the preachers of salvation
by grace traduced as Antinomians and the doctrines of the word of God
bespattered, as so many sources of licentionsness. For instance, the preacher
as his duty is, declares, "That salvation is not of works but grace," and may
thus reason with the people. "You can do nothing that will recommend you to the
favor of God; the Ethiopian may change his hue, and the leopard his spots, as
soon as you, who are accustomed to do evil, can change your own nature, and
learn to do well; for it is not of works of righteousness which ye have done,
or can do, that your salvation comes, but merely by the calling of free
mercy." I instantly clap my telescope to the eye of the legalist, and he
exclaims, "What an enemy to good works, is this same wretched antinomian?
According to him, we may as well do nothing, as strive to procure the favor of
God; may as well lead lives the most vile and profligate, as study to live
righteously and holily; for according to this same preacher, our wickedness is
as acceptable to God, as our most holy and virtuous living. Yea, more
acceptable; for he declares, that harlots and publicans shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, sooner than those who do what they can to procure eternal
life by their holiness and good works."

Such is the language not only of the vulgar and ignorant, but of many who
profess to know much of religion. Whenever the self-sufficient Arminius is in
the humor to try the doctrines of the gospel in cry inverting mirror, and the
preachers of them in my partial telescope, he very heartily and with great
liberality bestows upon them such as the following reflections. "These wretched
Calvinists represent the almighty God, as a partial and unmerciful being, who
hides his gospel and withholds his grace from men of virtue, wisdom and
prudence, whilst he reveals himself to the most notorious transgressors. They
say, that a man of a regular inostensive life may perish forever, when a
murderer like Manasseh, a polluted prostitute as Magdalen, and a wicked
oppressor like Zaccheus shall be saved. If this is true, then we had better
live notoriously wicked, than sober, righteous and godly lives. What wretched,
what dangerous doctrine is this? They make God to be the author of sin too; for
they say that nothing comes to pass, but by divine appointment or permission.
They talk also of some horrible decree, in which God is said to have ordained
the things which are coming and shall come. No need of holiness, if salvation
is not of him that wills; no need of diligence, if it is not of him that
runs, but to whom the Almighty shows mercy. If God has mercy only upon
whom he will have mercy, and hardens whom he will, we may live as we please;
for if to be saved we shall not be damned, what diabolical doctrine is this?
These devils I perceive, are not very exact in literally copying the
expressions; but content themselves with expressing the spirit of preachers and
writers. If any reader should think that Discordans does injustice to the
Arminians here, he may be satisfied of the contrary by consulting Sellon
against Coler. -- Fletcher's defense of Wesley's minutes.
Thus the Arminian raves against the doctrine of the scripture, and all its
faithful preachers.


IMP. I pray you, cousin, who are these same Arminians? You know I am but
little conversant with religious people of any name.


DIS. The papists in general, cousin; and all the unconverted, who have any
notion at all about redemption through the blood of Christ. Mr. Wesley and his
followers, the Faxterians and Neonomians; for none exceed them in enmity
against the purity of doctrine. Thus you may see, that the Arminian party is by
far the most numerous, and most honorable among men, and therefore gains
proselytes from all quarters. Though by the way, it is a pretty strong proof
that it is the doctrine of antichrist, seeing Immanuel and his doctrines are
every where spoken against, by men or philosophy and natural religion.


INF. You know, cousin Discordans, that we have found out many ways of opposing
the pure gospel, and this is one among the rest; under our influence, the grace
abusing libe time censures the true Christian as legal, because he strenuously
pleads for purity of heart and regularity of conversation. On the other hand
the real legalist, whether he be Socinian or Arminian, alleges, that the
evangelical Christian is an Antinomian, because he utterly ^^sclaims the merit
of good works in the business of salvation. (...) deed on all hands those who
choose either of the extremes, never fail to censure such as adhere to the
middle path of judgment; which you know is the only path of safety.


FAST. Your observation brother, fulfils what is written in Immanuel's own
word, concerning these same Nazarenes, "As for this sect it is every where
spoken against:" however the enemies of true religion disser among themselves,
they agree in stigmatising the real Christian. Belarmine, Pucksius, Huberus,
H^^engius, etc. (...) fathers of the Romish church, heartily belabored them in
their days. Dr. Whitby. John Goodwin, Whiston, etc. of the English church, have
carried on the dispute with equal warmth, and improved the same chain of
arguments agains (...) latter days; in the present time, Dr. Harwood of
Bristol, Mr. Wesley of London, Mr. Sellon of Derbyshire, and Dr. Nowel of
Oxford, have managed the popish cause with amazing address, and all the while
pass for true protestants. So that every where, that gospel which is suited
only to the perishing (...), is spoken against as pernicious and ^^bversive of
holiness.


DIS. Our friends, the (...) world, always view the sect of the Nazarenes in my
glas^^, and as they look on them, they say: "What a despicable tribe is this? A
set of mean begganly people, the off scourings of the earth, and the very dregs
of humanity. Not a person of any considerable rank among them. Led by the nose
by a set of illiterate dogmatical fishermen. What person possessed of any souse
of honor would frequent their assemblies, or have any connection with their
societies?"


INFID. Your remarks are very just, my worthy cousin; for mankind in general
have forgotten that the scripture says, "Not many wise men after the flesh, not
many noble are called; but God has chosen the foolish things of this world to
confound the wise, and the weak things of the world to confound the mighty." So
that the very objections raised against them, prove the Nazarenes to be the
people whom humanuel has redeemed out of the world.


DIS. True, sir, but they see not the mistake. But to proceed; my instruments
farther represent them, as a set of hollow hearted hypocrites, whom our people
thus deride. "What painted deceivers are these, who make such a stir about
religion, and affect such an air of sanctity. Hear how they sigh and whine,
whilst that rogue of a fanatic tells them his cant story about I know not what.
The scripture says, "Be not righteous over much, seek not to be over wise." And
I dare say that we have as much religion as they, though we do not make such a
stir about it. I Will warrant me these hypocrites are more wicked in private than
we are in public; for although they will not get drunk, curse and swear as we
do, they will cheat and lie like the devil himself.


FAST. A demonstrative proof of the perfection of our conquest over them; for
mankind in general do not only hate godliness itself, but even its appearance.
And for this reason true sanctity, devotion, and self-denial, are commonly
censured as hypocrisy.


DIS. As our good friends of the world are not as yet perfectly agreed in their
manner of aspersing good people, it happens that different people pursue
different methods equally absurb and diabolical. Some for instance are pleased
to say, "These people are melancholy. See how they hang down their heads like
bulrushes as they pass along the streets. One shall never see them look
pleasant, nor hear them sing a merry song, as others occasionally do with
innocence: I hate that religion which makes people mesancholy."


INFID. People greatly betray their own ignorance, when they assign the canse
of melancholy to the religion of Jesus; the end of which is to revive and
comfort the melancholy sinner, whose heart is oppressed with a sense of guilt and
defilement. To revive the spirit of the contrite, to bind up the broken
hearted, and to make the lame leap for joy because they obtain the prey. Nor do
those revilets of religion consider that they themselves, by their contempt of
Christianity, do all they can to excite the grief of the sincere Christian, who
cannot see his fellow sinners walking jocosely in the paths of perdition,
without dropping over them a tear of commiseration.


DIS. No, they never think of the real cause, but with a disdainful sneer
continue to say. "See how they melt in sorrow; hark how they sign and groan,
whilst their artful parson tells them an horrible story about death and
judgment, heaven and hell, salvation and damnation, with I know not what. They
are driven out of their senses with such terrible doctrine. Who would thus
subject his conscience to the pedantry of these enthusiastic bigots, their
uncharitable parsons?"


FAST. The fashionable part of the world hate to think of death or judgment,
because the very thought would deprive their beloved pleasures of all their
imaginary sweetness.


DIS. That is just the case, sir; for another of my friends says of the above
people. "These ways which their parsons teach them are enough to drive a man
out of his senses. What man of spirit could endure restraint from all manner of
pleasure? According to them, one must not so much as play at cards, spend a
cheerful evening at the tavern, nor so much as take a Sunday's airing.
Play Houses, balls, and assemblies, must all be laid aside. And pray how is our
time to be spent? Read the bible, truly the most tiresome of books, pray the
one half of their time, and for aught I know hear sermons the other half of it.
What person of any taste could bear to be bound to the observance of such
measures? Let them read the bible who will, give me a good play or novel. I Will
have ^one of their religion, not I."


INFID. It is true, plays and nove^s are light reading, and well suited to the
taste of people-abandoned to dissipation. Nevertheless, even people of fashion
may if they please reflect, that reading the scriptures, praying and hearing
sermons, are subjects unfit for their ridicule; though by the way I do all I
can to promote this irreligion.


FAST. And as for me I hold it good we visit our respective divisions, to see
that the works of darkness be not neglected; and that we meet here at the usual
time.


DIALOGUE XV.
PRIVY to their appointment, I watched in my solitary retreat, impatient for
the return of the black fraternity, whom I always found extremely punctual
among themselves, and observant of every appointment, unless some very urgen
business demanded their presence elsewhere. At the hour appointed they arrived
at the place of rendezvous; and having seated themselves on their respective
thrones, the conversation was opened by

FASTOSUS. I have been thinking of the stupidity and ignorance of mankind,
exhibited in our last interview, and cannot but wonder, however dark and blind,
they do not see that the very people whom they censure as enemies to holiness,
because they oppose salvation by works, are the same identical persons who are
said to be melancholy with being righteous over much. Reason, even unassisted,
might easily discover the palpable absurdity, and for the future avoid a
contradiction so glaring. I would have my slaves consistent with themselves,
seeing I have given them the name of rationalists. But error will always be
inconsistent. However, Discordans, we will leave the blind sons of infidelity
to hag themselves in their fancied rationality, and attend to the remainder of
your story.


DIS. My sire, I am all obedience to him who alone could give me being, and to
resume the thread of my story would observe, that strange as it may seem, I do,
by the help of these amazing glasses make one evangelical minister quarrel with
another, and that merely because they do not understand each others manner of
expression. One man, for instance, will have it that Immanuel obtained his
personality by eternal generation; another will have it to be by divine
filiation; and another still is content to believe him to be the only begotten
of the Father, without attempting to explain how, or in what sense he is
begotten or filiated. All of those three are firm in the belief of Immanuel's
sonship, his deity, and mediatorial capacity, as well as every doctrine of
faith. And yet, strange as it may seem, those very men shall be so prejudiced
against one another, that they cannot comfortably have fellowship together; but
may even prove injurious to each others usefulness: and it may perhaps be very
difficult to determine which of the three discovers most of a gospel spirit.
Every one is in the right, and infallibly assured that the other two ought to
come into his opinion.

It is the very same with respect to diversity of gifts. One is led in a
peculiar manner into the doctrines of faith, well able to state, define, and
defend them against opposition. Another is widely led about in the wilderness
of temptation and affliction, by which he obtains peculiar talents in
comforting the distressed, and pouring oil into the b^^^^ding wounds of broken
hearts. And a third is kept on the mount of enjoyment; his heart is kept warm
by a sense of interest, by which enjoyment he is active and lively in the work,
a zealous promoter of practical godliness. All of which gifts seem to be
essentially necessary to a gospel ministry, and are all by the same spirit. And
yet, would you think it, these very men shall treat one another as unfound in
the faith in one sense or other? The first is deemed a dead, dull and useless
preacher, whilst at the same time he is effectually stopping the mouths of
gainsayers. The second, it is feared, loves to be peculiar, and verges a
little toward Antinomianism, notwithstanding many a feeble knee is
strengthened by his ministry. And the third is a rambling inconsistent
preacher, notwithstanding by his instrumentality many are brought to a seuse of
their sin and danger.

These quarrels are of great use to our government, as they fail not to
reproach Christianity, stumble the weak believer, and grieve all good men. But
this is not all. You know that two men may have the self same sentiments in
religion; and yet one shall choose to express himself in this manner, and
another in that, which difference of expression only may be attended with very
serion^ consequences, if candor is not present on the occasion. This was the
case with Trebonius and Theodorus. Theodorus heard Trebonius preach on a
particular occasion, found himself offended with some of his expressions, and
thought it his duty to make the preacher acquainted with it as soon as
possible. But as Trebonius has too good an opinion of his own seize
easily to retract a saying, he vindicated not only the doctrine, but the mode
of expression. Theodorus was now more that ever persuaded, that Trebonius was
unfound in the faith, and was not satisfied with verbally defending the truths
of the gospel, i. e. his own sentiments, but commenced a paper war with
Trebonius. His apology for this step was indeed artful, for he lugged in both
Christ and religion into partnership with him, and under their authority, or
pretended authority, he did what he could to impeach the orthodoxy, and mar the
usefulness of Trebonius.

When Trebonius read the performance, he found himself aggrieved, and something
within him being deeply wounded he resolved on retaliation. To work he goes:
first establishes his personal orthodoxy, which he also called the gospel of
Christ, then vindicated his own proceedings, which by an happy turn of ^^^^ght
he also linked with the honor of religion. Thou^^^^e truth is, neither the
gospel of Christ nor the honor of religion had any concern at all in the
squabble. However, having first set himself and his doctrine in a respectable
point of view, he proceeded diligently to search out and expose every blemish
in the performance, and in the end did as much for his brother as he before had
done for him. Thus those two champious for the gospel, that is for their own
honor, went on exposing to the public, all they were acquainted with of each
others weaknesses and folly; never once suspecting that by so doing each was
exposing his own want of wisdom, and a true Christian spirit. Mean while the
friends of both were exceedingly concerned, and in vain studied a
reconciliation between them. But O what pleasure did it afford our society? And
how did Ambitiousus and me, and other jocular devils, laugh at their folly and
childishness? From sources of no greater importance than this, I assure you,
most of the quarrels amongst professors arise. But when the contention is once
begun, it is hard to say where it will end. By these means we get the
affections of Christians divided one from another, and instead of being mutual
helpers of each other, as the Almighty designed them, we make them mutual
hindrances and burdens; so that though we cannot indeed destroy them as we
would, we disturb and distract them to an amazing degree.


FAST. My son, you would have had comparitively little advantage over these
same people but for my invention of school divinity. That is the great engine
of the devil Discordans But for school divinity you might even have retired to
hell, or contented yourself with doing business among the laity, or in the
unconverted world; for if the professors of religion were content with what is
written in the scripture, and chose as much as possible to express themselves
in bible language; there would be such a likeness in expression as well as
sentiment, that very probably you would find little to do amongst them.


INFID. I doubt it not, sir. Notwithstanding, I must assure you my kingdom has
suffered by controversy. For nothing has a more direct tendency to inform the
mind than well managed controversy But when it springs from blind prejudice,
and is carried on in a party spirit, it has a wonderful tendency to strengthen
my interest; especially if the contending parties mutually agree to expose each
other as much as possible, as in the late squabble between Parson Horn and
Alderman Wilkes; and which is for the most part the practice of polemic
divines. Those two important gentle^en, the parson and patriot, gave as much
pleasure to the court party, by flinging rogue and atheist at each other with
so much patriotic zeal, as some divines in their polemic writings have given
the devil by throwing heretic, Arminian, Calvinist, Antinomian, etc. in each
others faces Few divines can dispute without calling names.


DIS. I have before now stirred up a spirit of jealousy between a minister and
his people, and between one minister and another, in a manner inexpressibly
masterly. For example, about a century ago, the accurate Camillus preached an
excellent sermon at Potheina, which was heard by several of the people to whom
Junius was pastor; and they being greatly affected with the seasonableness of
the subject, and the practical manner in which it was handled, invited Camillus
to visit them, and preach in Junius's pulpit, not doubting but it would be
altogether agreeable to their beloved pastor. ^^ll of the sermon, when they
came home they could not help making Junius partaker of their pleasure. They
expatiated largely upon the excellency of his method, the fertility of his
illustration, and the propriety of his application, all of which they did not
doubt but Junius would admire as much as themselves. But this was not precisely
the case. Junius could not help being sensibly affected with what he had heard,
but prudence forbid him to deny Camillus his pulpit.

When retired, and reflecting on what had passed, he strongly suspected that
his own honor was injured, by his peoples high encomiums on Camillus's sermon.
"My people, said he, allege they never heard such an excellent sermon as that
which Camillus preached. It Is something strange, that this one sermon should
affect them more than all my seven years preaching among them. I never heard
them say half so much about any sermon of mine. It shows a great want of
affection and respect to me as their own minister, I conceive; and they shall
hear of it at a time convenient."


FAST. With Junius's leave I think he discovers a love of praise, which is by
no means the offspring of a^ humble spirit. He would rather be flattered, than
his people should be filent in his commendation. But the judicious seldom think
it prudent to say much in praise of any person to his face, how well soever
they may be affected toward him; and that for two very good reasons. (1.) Such
commendation has not a little of the appearance of flattery, however sincere it
may be in the party who bestows it. (2) There are but few who are able to bear
much commendation, without sustaining damage by it. A man must be led deeply
into an acquaintance with his own nothingness and insufficiency, before he can
bear to be praised and caressed. It is a very common thing in the gospel
churches, that if they have a member of more usefulness than others, they exalt
and extol him above his measure; so that he becomes elated with selfconceit,
and in the issue, when he cannot carry every point his own way, he turns
against his former caressers, and becomes the scourge of the community. In this
the righteous judgment of God is manifest, who will have all men to appear in
their native nothingness and emptiness, unworthy of the trust and dependence of
one another.



INFID. That is true, brother, and yet people may err wen on that hand, and be
cautious over much; for fear of p^ssing him up by unseasonable commendation,
may depress the spirits of their minister by withholding from him, that
countenance and encouragement which his spirit and circumstances require.

People are in all things given to extremes, and either a minister is carest
and almost adored as an unparalelled person, or he has little or no notice
taken of him. I remember a remarkable instance of this in the last century.
There was an independent church, who having a minister of a lively address and
sound doctrine, one who bid fair for great usefulness among them; yet a lineal
descendant of the great ^otrephes, who loved to have the pre-eminence; and one
who chose to direct them in all the concerns of life, in their families, in
their business, as well as in the church. To his government they yielded
themselves implicitly, and almost adored the ground upon which he trod. With
caresses and savours they loaded him, till they had raised him to the very
height of self-sufficiency and importance; from which they themselves at last
assisted to cast him down; and the contempt then poured upon him, pretty nearly
equalled their former caresses. After him they had another, of an almost
contrary disposition. He had but a very mean opinion of his own abilities,
either for preaching or governing. He had such constant acquaintance with the
power of his own corruptions, that he was commonly low and deprest in spirit.
He never assumed any superiority over even the meanest member, firmly believing
himself to be the vilest and most unworthy sinner of the whole community; he
stood in need of all encouragement possible, in order to hearten him for his
work. Yet the same people who had destroyed the former with unseasonable
kindness suffered the later to drag on heavily all his days that from them he
seldom or never heard of his word having been made useful. And I suppose must
have sunk under his discouragements, if strangers who afterward came into the
church had not been more free with him in discovering some degree of
affectionate regard. Different spirits will require different usage, in order
to preserve their usefulness: what was death to the former of those ministers,
would have been life and vigor to the latter; and what so exceedingly weakened
the hands of the latter, would in all probability have been the preservation of
the former. But we forget parson Junius, cousin.


DIS. Sir, Junius would have his own humor; and accordingly, when the time
came that Camillus made his vifit any person attentive to Junius's behavior,
might easily find that his friend's room would to him, have been more agreeable
than his company; notwithstanding for decency's sake, he forced himself to
carry it to him with some degree of seeming civility: I say, seeming, for even
Christian people have not as yet learned, to be exactly on all occasions what
they seem. But Camillus is a sagacious man, soon perceived Junius's coldness
through all his formal civility and seeming deference. He began to question
with himself from whence this coldness might have proceeded? In what he might
have given offense? But never dreams that jealousy is at the bottom. Is he not
offended with my doctrine? said he to himself. What can be the meaning of this
distant carriage of his? What have I done or said that might give him umbrage?
So Camillus reasoned, but hit not upon the real cause. And as Camillus is
somewhat fond of his own sentiments, though a man inferior to few who are
accounted good and religious, he could not help being in doubt about the
orthodoxy of his friend. By these means, happily invented by me, this
well-designed visit, instead of answering the valuable ends of promoting
religious friendship, rather tended, by my intervention, to al^enate their
affections from each other.

Junius would still have his own humor, and from that day forward discovered a
shyness to those, who seemed most delighted with Camill^s; and when occasion
offered, he did not spare bestowing on them, what is called a dry rub.

This was not all, for (...) could not leave his prejudice behind him when he
went to the pulpit, where he adapted his discourses accordingly. On the other
hand his people could easily see he was not in his usual spirit; and they
concluded, that they had given him no just cause of offense.

Mean while both parties mutually watched each others words and deportment. If
Junius happened to speak any thing harsh either from the pulpit or in common
conversation, it was said to proceed from a bad spirit. On the other hand if
any of them happen to object to any thing spoken by him, he immediately
concluded, either that his people were prejudiced against him, or did not love
found doctrine; for he had not a doubt of the soundness and truth of his own
doctrine. And so they went on, till in the issue there was a final separation.
Behold, gentlemen, how great a fire a little spark of my nature kindles. Every
well-wisher to the Belz^bubian government must acknowledge, that the devil
Discordans merits great applause.


FAST. I speak for the rest, my son, and own that your usefulness is of great
extent. I persuade myself your royal grandfather will well reward you, by
giving you eternal duration among the people of the nether regions; for
certainly your achievements merit the greatest esteem. Why, my son, you make
the Nazarenes weak as other men?


DIS. After all I assure you, at certain times I have hard work of it. I mean
when Mr Submission my avowed enemy, and me happen to meet. This Submission is
one of Immanuel's own children, a very great peacemaker, therefore his
business is directly opposite to mine; and although I hate him, I must say, he
is one of the meekest persons upon earth Never is he known to quarrel with any
person, except myself. And I confess, that in every scuffle hitherto, I have
had the worst of it; but I thank my stars, it is very seldom I meet with him.
When we do meet, meek as he is, I am quite nonplussed, and am obliged either to
flee, which I abhor, or to fall before him, which is yet a greater
mortification to a spirit so noble as I am.


INF. So then, cousin, I perceive you are as ill put to it when you meet with
Submission, as I am when! encounter his elder brother Fides. Fides is a warrior
with whom I have maintained a very long, though not doubt^^^ war; not doubtful,
because I am wor^^ed as sure as ev^^ I e^ter the lists with him. With great
facility I can overturn the power of every other heavenly chieftain; but this
fellow, this same Fides is Immanuel's champion, and has performed the most
unparalelled achievements; such achievements as never were performed by any
hero besides himself. He has subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained
promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenc^^ed the violence of fire, escaped
the edge of the sword; out of weakness has made people strong, causing even
from fainting to wax valiant in fight, turning to flight the armies of the
aliens. He has given to women their dead children again, sustained others
under the most cruel tortures, in such a manner that they would not accept of
deliverance; gave a good report of the promised land t^ those ancient worthies
who walked about in sheep skins and goat skins, destitute, afflicted, and
^ormented, of whom, notwithstanding they lodged in de^s and caves of the earth,
the world itself was undeserving.

These are a specimen of his a^chievements; but great and heroic as he is, he
finds that I am also of noble deeds; a spirit not easily rendered inactive, and
more difficult still entirely to subdue Although he has the promise of the most
complete victory in the end, I put him to exert his utmost; for when to
appearance I am dead as a p^bble, and Fides has the sole pre-eminence in the
soul of man, I play reynard with him, feign myself dead in order to escape the
vengeance of his arm.

In time he finds out my deceit, for I watch the opportunity when he is in the
very height of a paroxism, and can scarcely breathe. He is exceedingly
troubled with fits, which will sometimes hold him for a long time together, and
in which you would take him to be wholly dead; then I take the advantage, and
rise upon him with all my powers, and beat and bruise him till l^te begins to
return, which is not always of a sudden; but when he (...) the weight of my
arm, and the smart of the wounds which I inflict on him, his spirit returns to
renewed vigor, he unlocks the magazines of grace, and brings forth such
implements of war as I am not able to stand against; so that before he is well
out of his fit he is as strong as ever. At other times he is a long while
before he is freed from the effects of his fits; weakness, indisposition and
langour hang upon him for many mo^ths, at which time he receives no mercy at
the hand of Infidel^s.

This fellow is of the most amazing constitution, for whereas on one hand
business never fails to throw him into a lethargy, so on the other, hard
labor, severe conflicts, and cruel buffetings, never fail to make him strong
and vigorous; and what is very remarkable in itself, but very unlucky for me,
is, that the more he is beaten and bruised, the stronger he grows, and these
fits in which you would take him to be just a dying, it is said, only tend to
make him the more robust and lively; which is the reason that although I
frequently put him to great pain; I am always discomfited in the issue.

However, gentle friends, you must allow, when circumstances are considered, my
valor will at least equal, if not prove superior to that of Fides. He fights
under a certain assurance of victory, and knows of a truth, that in the end he
shall be more than a conqueror; I as well know that I shall be discomfited,
which would dishearten any besides myself, yet notwithstanding, the
discouragement, I give him many a vigorous turn for it ere I desist, and foully
trip up his heels oftener than thrice. Even when I have him down, sprawling and
gasping for life, I am conscious he will afterward renew his strength and give
me a most severe drubbing; and, that his victorious hand shall in the end put a
period to the days of great Infidelis. Yet this ^oble principle of royal malice
prompts me on, and I will not yield an hair's breadth whilst life endures. Oh
the fearful combats I could relate, which I have had with this heavenly
champion, this same Fides.


FAST. We shall be glad to hear of them, my brother, at another time; but at
present, if agreeable, I should like you to resume the story, part of which we
have already had Page 127.
, respecting the progress of your kingdom?


INF. You have already heard how agreeable to his holiness my instructions
were, as also of the laws by which the whole system of religion was inverted,
and how the pious priest had invested himself with the perfections of deity. I
knew that the introduction of this new Christianity might be attended with some
difficulty, therefore advised his holiness, the father of the world, to deify
some others as well as himself; but at the same time, lest his supremacy should
be in any wise infringed, to take care that none should be deified till after
their death, and that only with an inferior rank of godship. He took my advice,
canonized a vast number under the title of saints, and ordained masses to be
said to them out of his own newly composed bible: for the old bible in use
amongst primitive Christians having its laws so contrary to those of the pope,
was by his authority made null and void, and Rome once the mistress of the
world, became the mother of harlots? once more the seat of paganism. But for
distinction's sake, we call the latter Christian pagans, because they exercise
all their villainy under the specious show of Christianity.

In order to support the Christian pantheon worship, slaughter-houses were
built, and called holy inquisitions; where every one who was known to deny the
supremacy and in all ^^lity of his holiness the pope, or so much as harbor a
suspicion concerning the papal faith, was treated with as little mercy as if he
had been in hell. By these means, people were kept in the most dreadful awe; so
that, if any man happened to be intelligent enough to see through the cheat, he
was obliged to keep his mind to himself; well knowing that one word spoken
against the ^^crative faith of the priests, would have ensured his certain
death by means the most babarous and cruel. By this amazing subtility of
priestcraft, with the utmost security they cartied on their villainy, under the
mask of sanctity for many centuries, and all Europe trembled at the indignation
of the priesthood. For by means of my brother's medals, and titles of
eccl^siastical dignity, together with my blinding influence, the various orders
of reverend fathers, clave as fas^ to his holiness as scales to one another on
the impenetrable back of levia^han.

Yet terrible as the priesthood were, they could not totally prevent the light
of the gospel shining less or more, in some parts of Christendom, especially in
Britain; where Wickliffe and his disciples gave their reverences no small
uneasiness; for which they poured vengeance upon his bones forty years after
this demise. This same scripture light kindled in England by Wickli^^e's
ministry, spread itself to the continent, where first John H^ss and Jerome of
Prague, galled the sides of popish prelates: for which the very pious council
of Constance, first recommended them to the care of the devil by
excommunication, and then in the name of the ^^od of mercy, condemned to be
burned to death for believing the bible. It is amazing to think, with what
dexterity they have lugged in the name of the Almighty, to fanctify their
murders on all occasions.

About a century after this, a very strict enquiry after truth began, by the
instrumentality of John Calvin and Martin Luther, two avowed enemies to popish
wickedness. This revival of religion was very alarming to the priests of Rome,
and very injurious to my government. His infalible Holiness instigated by the
devil Crudelis, voted their immediate destruction by fire and faggot, by
poison, assassination, or any way; for there is nothing dreaded by this same
vicar of Christ, so much as the spreading of gospel knowledge.

These measures however I withstood, having from past experience found, that
coersive measures are by no means the most likely to reduce professors of
religion to the obedience of infidelity; and I thought it better to send the
devil Discordans to visit them, with instructions to make them quarrel about
the forms of religion, this I took to be the most likely method to invalidate
the testimony of both, and to baffle and confound their followers. This was
done, and they jarred exceedingly about circumstantials; but do what we would,
they spoke of the doctrines which are absolutely necessary to salvation, with
perfect uniformity, which greatly frustrated our dark designs; and this fire of
reformation so lately fanned, by degrees spread itself on the Continent, and in
Great Britain, where it arose in the days of Wickliffe.

The pope and me being loath to give up the government, we had always been
accustomed to have in these nations, did what we could to stifie the
reformation: but alas, it went on with rapidity in the days of Edward, and
might have made greater advances than it has ever yet done, if luckily for his
holiness and me, that prince had not been taken away in early life. Mary being
a princess just fitted to our turn, no sooner ascended the throne than I flew
to England, accompanied by the devil Crudelis, resolving at all events to crush
with oppression, all who rebelled against me and his holiness. To this salutary
purpose were transported from the pope's arsenal, abundance of hempen cord and
faggots beyond number, that we might oblige the people to renounce Jesus
Christ, and worship his Romish infallibility.

There were in those days two lusty bishops, right reverend tyrants in the
devil, Bonner of London, and Gardener of Winchester, who hearing of our
arrival, came equipped in their prelatic robes, to do us greeting, and bid us
welcome to the British shore. This brace of right reverend prelates, we
appointed prime inquisitors in matters of faith, and principal agents of our
intended cruelty: indeed none that ever sustained the office of p^iest, ever
were more trusty friends, to the government of Rome and hell, than were those
worthy prelates.

The vigilant devil Crudelis ceased not d^y or night from p^rsecuting the
saints, so that many of the ringleaders of the sect of the Nazarenes were
apprehended, tried, condemned, and tormented to death at a stake; such as
archbishop Cranmer, bishop Hooper, bishop Latimer, bishop Ridley, etc. etc. But
as it happened in former persecutions, so it fell out in this. The ashes of
burned saints proved such fertilizing manure to the church, that in defiance
both of hell and the pope the detest^. Nazarenes became by far more numerous
Wherefore, if our friend Mary, of zealous and scarlet memory, had not b^^n
summoned hence to receive her reward, the poor devil Crude^is must necessarily
have desisted merely from incessant and unsuccessful fatigue, and the Nazarenes
would have obtained rest, solely from our desperation.

But when Immanuel beheld such havoc made of his church, and so many places
bathed with sanctified blood, his wrath took the alarm; in his judgment he cut
down the zealous queen and her two trusty bishops, and raised queen Betsy to
the throne of England. Now the sword of persecution was wrested from the hands
of the papists, and the good people of the church of England, did for the
puritans what the zealous papists had done for them during the reign of queen
Mary. This same queen Elizabeth, was a great zealot for high church, and a
vigorous nurse of episcopacy; but the Brownists and other dissenters, felt the
full weight of her regal vengeance. I happily prevailed unexpectedly with the
divines of the established church, to retain the more refined part of the
popish system; which those men who were for a thorough reformation, both in
doctrine and discipline, could not comply with; and for their noncompliance,
we taught them that the arm of episcopacy is every whit as heavy as that of
popery, when it is exerted for the good of the church. And for my own part I
prompted their reverences, to coersive measures, being very apprehensive, that
the reformation might have been carried on farther than it really was.


AVAR. And I assure you, I myself was not idle in those days, but played my
game into the hand of great Infidelis. I met their lordships the prelates; (I
shall never forget it) in full convocation, and reasoned with them on the
intended reformation, and unto my arguments they lent a willing and attentive
ear. "Well, gentlemen, said I, do you intend to come to a thorough reformation
then, and reduce Christianity to its primitive simplicity? Have you considered,
gentlemen, that in so doing you must lose your princely revenues, and descend
to a level with plain Peter, Paul and Barnabas, which must needs be a very
mortifying step to some of you. Recollect, I pray you, how long your present
profits and dignities have been enjoyed by your predecessors in your several
sees. Long before Christianity was known in Britain; even beyond the ken of
history, this nation was divided into the several bishoprics and
archbishopricks by you enjoyed. Through all the ages of popery, the same
division of the nation into archflaminries and flamin^ies, continued under
their present denominations; and will you discover such a degree of
mortification, as to give up the profits annexed to your ecclesiastical
dignities? That were to show, indeed, that protestant bishops have less
providence than pagan flamins. Yet, if you are determined to purge your
religion from every relict of popery; your profits, gentlemen, must be parted
with, your revenues must be enjoyed no more, and how will this be relished by
you?" By such sensible and seasonable remonstrances, I won greatly upon the
minds of their lordships, and in the issue it was resolved, that rather than
part with their dignities and revenues, they should submit to many things which
have no foundation in scripture.


FAST. You bring to m^ mind, cousin Avaro, the reception I met with by the
dignitaries of the ancient church, on the distribution of the forementioned
medais. I went attired in my robes of slate, to deliver one of my
archiepiscopalian medals to a certain priest; whom I instantly created "His
grace and most reverend." He mumbled over to himself several times; "most
reverend, his grace," viewing the medal with the closest attention. It is -- it
is, said he, a very soft and agreeable mode of address. Most reverend; his
grace. Yes, my lord, said I, it is very musical, and what I myself only am
capable of composing. A mode of address very becoming the dignity of an
archbishop. Humble preachers, such as Peter, Paul, Ti^ thy, and Titus, might be
very well contented, without being their graces and most reverend, for they
were not as you are, courtiers, clothed in soft raiment. But for a spiritual
courtier, for the primate of a province, to prostitute his name to vulgar
mouths, would be highly unbecoming, would greatly eclipse the honors of your
elevated station. "But worthy, sir, returned he, you know this is a very
censorious world in which we live, and some people may be wicked enough to
suppose, that such a title as, his grace, does not so well become a man whose
breath is in his nostrils, and I may be censured as ambitious." I hope, my
lord, replied I, you will not meditate too much on the gloomy subject of
mo^^lity, or that will make your dignity cumbersome indeed. Honors fade, sir,
on the prospect of the grave. A^ to your being censured as proud and ambitious,
I hold the contrary; it will be deemed essential to your high estate, and the
use of the bible being prohibited, the laity will not know but your order is of
apostolical institution. Besides, there is my lord duke enjoys the same title
of address with your grace; so that instead of being censured as proud and
antichristian, all ranks of people will revere you the more for it; especially,
as it will make you a fit companion for princes. The nobility will consider you
as their superior, in as much as a spiritual duke is superior to a temporal, so
that in the church your seat will be next to the cardinals, and in the
senate house, next to the prince himself. The gentry will faun upon you
spaniel-like, in order to obtain preferment for younger sons, and the vulgar
will adore you as a demi-god.

I would farther advise you, to lay aside preaching to the vulgar race, and
apply yourself wholly to affairs of state; unless called to it, may be once in
seven years, to preach to the king and his nobles. "Ay, replied the the worthy
prelate, but how shall I dispense with the obligations I am under as a bishop,
to meditate on these things, to give myself wholly to the ministry of the word
and prayer, yea, to be instant in preaching the word in season and out of
season?" Oh sir, replied I, you need to be under no concern about that.
"Surely, sir, that is the duty of a bishop, replied he." Yes, very true, said
I; the duty of bishops, such as were in the apostles days; such bishops as are
appointed in the New Testament. But what has that to do with a diocesan bishop
or an archbishop, of whom you yourself are the first. There were none of them
you know in the apostles days; none appointed in the word of God. And therefore
the laws which bind scriptural bishops to obedience, can have no manner of
power over you as diocesans; much less can a metropolitan, such a bishop as the
apostles never thought of, be under any such injunctions. Surely your grace
must know that a lord bishop, or a gracious metropolitan must have enough to do
without preaching the gospel. Yet if these things are not sufficient to remove
the scruples of your mind; and you should still have a notion, that preaching
is a duty incumbent on you, I can put you in a way to satisfy your conscience,
without abating any thing of your greatness.

"Pray, sir, be so kind," said he May it please your grace, replied I, it is
neither more nor less than to preach by proxy, as people plead their causes in
a court of judicature. You know it is the same in effect, whether you preach in
person or by proxy, so that your numerous flock have preaching enough.

Farther, with your grace's leave, (...) not think it becoming your dignity,
even to say prayers in your own family. How far beneath the character of such a
spiritual dignitaly, to be down on his knees amidst his servants, worshipping
his maker? Let me advise you, either to lay aside family worship altogether, or
have it performed by a chaplain. This will have two very great advantages
attending it. 1. It will save your grace a great deal of hard and unpleasant
labor. And 2. It will make your grace's p^ety to be admired by the vulgar.
Methinks I hear one say to another, "What a good man is my lord, the
archbishop? for although he is too high for saying prayers himself; or has got
so much that he has no need to pray, he gives a good salary to Mr. Honeylip
duly to perform the offices of religion in his stead,"

All this while, the good archbishop continued absorbed in thought, and
awakening as from a trance, he said, with astonishment glowing on his
countenance. "Sir, you amaze me! So pertinent your counsel, so persuasive your
address. You have more than half brought me over to your opinion, as my future
conduct will testify."

Having succeeded even beyond expectation with his grace the archbishop, I
waited immediately on all the diocesans, within the pomifical jurisdiction, and
took the most likely measures to bring them over to our interest.

1. I persuaded them, as I had done the archbishop before them, that the
worldly grandeur with which I and his holiness had invested them, was certainly
too heavy a burden for them, to be able to ascend the pulpit stairs, above once
or twice a year; and that even then it ought not to be to preach to an ordinary
congregation.

2. That they might discharge their duty, to the souls within their respective
dioceses, by providing vicars to watch over them in their stead, in their
several parishes or divisions, that they might freely spend their time either
at the court of Rome, or at the courts of their several princes, without
sustaining loss at home.


DIS. Why, sir, according to your account, the readiest way to stop the mouth
of a noisy preacher, is to make a bishop of him.


INF. The only way in the world, cousin. Had the king of England given a
bishopric to the noisy Whitefield, as he was advised to do by a certain
nobleman; it is unknown what mischief might have been prevented. A bishopric
would have done him more real injury, than if all the bishops in England had
written against him. You remember well, how Dr. D -- d once threatened our
ruin, and promised fair for doing a mischief to our government; till our happy
stars fixed him in a prebend's stall, and a r -- l chaplainship; since which
time he has been quiet enough, and lets people sleep on and take their rest
securely.


FAST. Having secured both orders of popish bishops, I took care to establish
deans, abbots, monks, friars, vicars, chaunters, prebendaries, canons, minor
canons, etc. etc. From thence I proceeded to persuade the higher orders of
clergy, to encourage plurality of livings, well knowing that if a country vicar
could but procure a fat and fruitful benefice, he would even imitate his
betters, and preach as little as possible. I have often with great pleasure
observed, that if a benefice exceed two hundred pounds per annum, the poor
vicar who enjoys it, finds himself very unable to preach, and is therefore
obliged to hire a journeyman, to whom he leaves the bulk of his business. By
these means we got curates introduced into the church; a set of gentlemen sold
to slavery and inured to poverty, not for want of parts and learning, nor
always for want of piety, but for want of what is far more necessary to
preferment, a patron* A journeyman weaver, watch-maker, or cabinetmaker, can
afford a better table than many a gentleman, who lacks nothing but a patron, to
make him equal to the very first of bishops.

Happily it just answered our desire, and was not long before a sharp conflict
between the vicars and curates ensued; as it is not without a vein of drollery,
I shall give you a sketch of it. There was a certain vicar, who having obtained
a living of about 800 l. a year, called his curate to him one day, and thus
addressed him: "Mr. Curate, I am now in a station which will admit but of
little preaching; I must therefore get you to take that part of the service
principally upon yourself; I am under the necessity of visiting the
neighboring gentlemen, and assisting them in their polite amusements, as has
been the custom of my predecessors for time immemorial; so that little of my
time can be devoted to preaching or praying, and less still to study and
contemplation." Mr. Curate replied, "Indeed, Sir, I am but a poor bireling,
whose scanty allowance is no way adequate to labors so extensive. I am
resolved, sir, to measure my services by my annual salary." The vicar's
benefice being sufficient to raise him above preaching, and the curate's
allowance so small, that he could not afford to preach much, it so fell out
between vicar and curate, that the parishioners could not obtain above twenty
minutes preaching weekly, in return for their tithes, many dues and offerings.
This you know was greatly to our advantage.

Another instance of altercation, between the vicar and curate, I well
remember, which also was decided in our favor. "Hark you Mr. Curate, (said a
certain vicar one day to his journeyman) I expect you shall take the care of
all the souls within my parish, upon yourself; as I have much business of a
very different nature on my hands." "I take the care of them, sir, (replied his
curateship) what have I to do with them? I shall take no care of them, I assure
you." "Well, but Mr. Curate, said the vicar, I hired you on purpose that you
should take the care of them off from me." "Indeed, sir, rejoined the curate, I
will not, I am resolved; do you think that for the scanty allowance of twelve
shillings per week, I will put my own soul in the place of your parishioners!
No, sir, let him take the care of them, who is best paid for so doing." "Then,
said the vicar, let my lord bishop take care of them, for he is better paid
than either vicar or curate." By these means the parishioners may go to heaven
or hell, as most suits their inclination, provided always the fees are
punctually paid.


IMP. Well, father, I really think those curates were in the right; for as they
receive but journeyman's wages for doing the drudgery of the business, it is
unreasonable to desire more than journey man's labor from them. If they
perform the more servile parts of the office, for their scanty allowance, it
seems but meet the vicars, who receive the far greatest part of the profits,
should take the burden of souls upon themselves. If I am not greatly mistaken,
the far greater part of mankind, the vicars and highpriests alone excepted,
are of the same opinion with me and the curate. However, that was all in the
days of popery, and the church of England, has since been blessed with a great
reformation.


INF. It has so, Impiator, and been deformed again, almost far enough. Some
time after the reformation indeed, the gospel was preached almost every where:
in England, which made me apprehend the most dreadful consequences, and made m^
exert my utmost influence, in order to reduce the clergy to obedience.

This important point was in a great measure carried, by fixing their attention
inordinately upon tradition, and kindling relentings in the bosom of many a
gownsman, toward the old scarlet lady, whose government had been rejected. So,
that by degrees I drew them to take council, as formerly, from the wife
Infidelis; one particular instance of which I shall give you, if you think it
will not too long detain you from necessary business.


FAST. That is well thought of, brother. Idleness belongs not to our
fraternity; I hold it good, therefore, that we adjourn to our usual time of
meeting.


DIALOGUE XVI. FASTOSUS.
WHEN we parted yesterday, you mentioned some particular instance of the clergy
seeking to you for direction, brother; will it please you to relate it to us
now?

INF. It is only a little confabulation I had with my good friend, parson
Out-and-in. The case was this: I set out one morning for Rome, to remove some
scruples which infested the mind of his holiness, the father of the world; but
passing by parson Out-and-in's garden, I beheld the reverend gentleman in his
morning gown and velvet cap, walking slow and pensive, to all appearance in a
dejected manner. Charity bid me stop and relieve the thoughtful divine. At her
command I stopped, and called: So -- ho, Mr. Out-andin; how do you do? The good
gentleman awaking as from a trance, erected his body into a perpendicular
posture, pushed up the snout of his cap from over his eyes, and finding it was
me who called, instantly replied. "O my good friend, Ratio ^lis! (for that is
the name by which I am known by the clergy of all denominations) am I so happy
as to meet with you, in this so difficult season? I pray you, most honorable
tutor, be pleased to stop and give me your advice."

I went to him, and thus the old Levite began. "Most truly, noble, and
intelligent sir, I and my brethren, the g^nuine children of learning and
science, have long been much grieved at the rapid progress of fanaticism, which
now prevails amazingly over the people; so prevalent is it, sir, that fanatical
preachers are more followed, more esteemed than we, the votaries of almighty
reason. In (...) days, sir, there are some, who in a frantic manner decry the
^oble powers of the human soul, which we esteem to be almost divine, who preach
salvation, by what they call the righteousness of Christ, contrary to the
instructions which we receive from that illumitration which thou have given us.
We have long been studying how to suppress this fanaticism, and to promote the
more consistent doctrine of salvation by our own works, and the liberty and
freedom of our own will to perform perfect righteousness. It is intolerable,
sir, to hear men of virtue and piety, placed on a level with vile publicans and
sinners, who know not the law, and are therefore accursed. Impious in the
highest degree, to suppose that the benevolent Deity will not reward our good
endeavors to please him, by working out our own salvation, without trusting in
the righteousness of another."

To be sure, said I, to gentlemen of virtue and goodness, it must be very
mortifying to submit to be levelled with those who work not, but believe in him
who justifies the ungodly. Very trying, indeed, to own one's self to be an
hell-deserving sinner, when your own reason bears witness, that you deserve the
inestimable blessings of everlasting happiness, for your own personal goodness.
What man of virtue and moral goodness, what gentleman of a clear head and good
heart, like yourself, can bear to be told, that harlots and publicans shall
enter the kingdom of heaven sooner than you? I wonder not, my worthy sir, that
the preaching of salvation by the works of another, should be a stone of
perpetual stumbling, and a rock of invincible offense to you. And this offense
will never be removed, till we can so manage it, that this same book called
Scripture, is made to truckle to the more consistent dictates of human reason;
by which alone the authenticity of doctrine ought to be attested, indepondently
of any records whatever, either ancient or modern.

I myself have beheld the preaching of the cross of Christ, with a great deal
of uneasiness; but for seeing the self-righteous Jews break their bones by
stumbling upon it, and the wise philosophic Grecians turning merry-andrews, and
laughing at it as soolishness, I should certainly have sunk into despair:
because I was unhappy enough to see it prove both the power of God, and the
wisdom of God, to those who felt themselves actually in a perishing condition.
But my good Mr. Out-and-in, permit me to tell you, that whatever pain I endure
on account of a preached gospel, I can do nothing that will effectually prevent
it, without the concurrence of the clergy. By the way, let me not so much as
hint any defection of the clergy. No, sir, I thank my auspicious stars, by far
the greatest part of them are upon the right side of the question. There are
but few, very few, who preach those enthusiastic doctrines, with which the
articles, homilies, and rubric are stuffed; very few who concern themselves
about what is, or what is not, the doctrine of the bible.

But, to the matter of your troubles, sir, I apprehend they may be reduced to
these two heads only: To suppress the growth of fanaticism on the one hand, and
secure to yourselves the patrimony of the church on the other. "These are all,
returned he, if we can but accomplish these, we desire no more." Then, sir, if
no more is aimed at, I shall put you in a way by which you may-accomplish them.

Observe me then, my good friend Mr. Out-and-in, the first thing to be done,
is, to draw as thick a vail as possible over the personal excellencies, grace,
and righteousness of Immanuel; for these, wherever they are preached, have a
tendency to eclipse all human glory, and greatly to diminish the profits of the
altar; which you know are the principal things that ought to be advanced. The
holy trade of priestcraft can never prosper, but in proportion to your
departure from the doctrine of the cross. Yet this must be done with caution,
lest the eyes of the people should be opened, and the propagation of your
rational religion be prevented. The important question then is, "How you may
retain the character and authority of Christ's ambassadors, whilst at the same
time you are laboring to extirpate the doctrine of salvation by his blood,
from the rational world; as you cannot expect to be so much regarded by the
people, if ever you lose your claim to ambassadorship. Of this therefore you
must be very cautious, and by no means declare yourselves avowed enemies to the
gospel in so many express words.

No, sir, you must find out the most glorious names which possibly can be
ascribed to the Son of God, yet such names as do not imply his personal
divinity; these would spoil your scheme, and therefore must be rejected. For
instance, you must not call him Immanuel, the mighty God, the everlasting
Father, God manifested in the flesh, Jesus Christ, yesterday, to day and
for-ever the same; Alpha and Omega, etc. etc. These and such like names must
absolutely be laid aside, for they make directly against the rational scheme.
On the other hand, you must be equally careful not to speak slightly of his
person, name, and authority, by barefacedly calling him, but a man like
yourselves, as Doctor Priestley has precipitately done; and by so doing
betrayed the cause of rational religion into the hands of the orthodox, to be
mangled and tortured after the manner of that wicked Shaver. In short you must
consider, that the people are not all rational alike, and therefore a downright
denial of the Godhead of Christ may be attended with very serious consequences.
Some people are sirmly attached to the Athanasian creed, merely out of
deference to the judgment of their ancestors; and others are as firmly attached
to the scriptures, from an inward conviction of their divine propriety; so that
without the greatest care you may be baffled in your very first attempts to
promulgate your rational religion.

In short, sir, notwithstanding you believe him to be but man like yourself, or
at most but a dignified creature, you must of necessity, for fear of the
populace, give him a kind of suffragan deity or deputed Godhead, like that of
Mars or Mercury, in the pagan theology. Your friend Mr. Whiston, a man of deep
intelligence, has shown you what may be done in this way; do you, my good Mr.
Out-and-in, imitate the same Homer-like minister Homer-like minister. Homer was
a wonderful creator of gods and goddesses, and so was Mr. Whiston, from his own
account of the Trinity, which he makes to consist of one uncreated, and two
created Gods.
. To be more particular, you must never omit when you speak of him, to use
great and swelling words of seeming respect, as if you had the most profound
veneration for his person; call him the only Son of the most high God -- the
firstborn, and most exalted of creatures -- a being far above men and angels
-- under God, the great dispenser of all things, both in earth and heaven. Not
a syllable of his measuring the seas in the hollow of his hand; of his meting
out heaven with the span; of his comprehending the dust of the earth in a
measure; weighing the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance; or of
his taking up the isles as a very little thing. That is a description of Jesus,
most adverse to what you would have thought to be rational religion, which
considers him as no more than a man like yourselves; it is good therefore that
such descriptions should never be quoted. By keeping close to those
appellations which are proper to him, only as man and mediator, you will vail
his real personal dignity, and in time your audience will quite forget all
their old orthodox notions, concerning the proper deity of the Lord Jesus
Christ, which at present are so very offensive to you and your brethren.

2. When you happen to hear of any man, who is a zealous and diligent preacher
of Christ crucified, as the only foundation of the sinner's hope, you must look
to it that something be speedily done, to prevent his success, for such a man
is capable of being very injurious to us and our rational religion. His
followers will consider you as no better than birelings, mercenary priests, and
enemies to the gospel of salvation. Therefore you must, but always with the
greatest art, attack his character. Stigmatize him with such names of reproach
as you think will be most likely to take with the vulgar. However you must be
aware of touching his moral character, for that will be like the body of
Achilles, invulnerable even to malice itself. His religious character, because
less understood by the common people, will be more easily injured, and
therefore the most proper object of your attacks.

You may call him an enthusiast, which is a name understood by very few;
therefore the greatest part of the people will consider him as some outlandish
monste^, and avoid him as they would shun the path of a crocodile. Or you may
call him a methodist; this also is a name well calculated to excite popular
abhorrence, as you know many would rather choose to be papists than methodists.
Or you may call him an anabaptist, or fanatic. In short you may dress him in
what names you think will most effectually stir up the people to bait him as
they would do a bull or a bear from the forest; and so far as your influence
goes, you may totally prevent his usefulness; which you know will be a great
service done to the devil, and to rational religion.

But my good Mr. Out-and-in, take care that you be not too bare-saced in your
slanders, as Doctor Priestely has been in his against the orthodox dissenters.
His zeal for rational religion is so furious, that it prompted him to rend the
disguise, which ought by all means to have concealed his implacable hatred of
the orthodox. This however he has thought proper to discover in such a manner,
that his word in a way of slander, will now scarcely be taken by any body, so
that even the rationals themselves are ashamed of his rashness. But you, my
friend, may avail yourself of his miscarriage, and avoid the rock upon which he
foundered under full sail, by considering that, amongst the laity there are
always to be found a discerning few, whose penetration may be too keen for a
flimsy disguise. Now, should your malice be detected, your very reproaches
would bring him proselytes, as in the case of Dr. Trapp, of crabbed memory, and
the late Mr. Whitefield, Therefore let all your reproaches seem to flow rather
from pity than malice. Do not fail to commend something of the good that is in
him; this will be an excellent cloak, from under which you may with the greater
freedom shoot your arrows of calumny. For example, when his name is mentioned
in company, you may say, "He is a good sort of man, I believe; but I am sorry
for him, poor man, he has imbibed sad enthusiastic principles. The poor weak,
well meaning man would do good if he could, I believe, but is sadly led away by
methodistical notions." Sir, there are a thousand ways of vending scandal with
seeming pity, which some people are perfect masters of; but your divines are
too warm, and therefore their arrows fall to the ground before they inflict any
wound at all.

I have known an important minister ere now, ruin the reputation of his
neighbor with less then ten words speaking, and those too seemingly spoken in
much pity. Oh sir, there requites great art in scandalizing to purpose. Nothing
gives such a point to the arrow of scandal, as a seeming concern for the
welfare of the party whom you want to ruin. I could recommend you to certain
gentlemen in great estimation for religion and virtue, as the most accomplished
in this necessary art, did not I know that you disdain to learn from any
inferior to myself.

3. If you would invalidate the doctrine of imputed righteousness, you must
begin just here, and proceed in the following manner. That it is a doctrine
which must be brought into contempt, as you would wish to preserve the honor
of the creature, is clear to a demonstration; seeing, whenever a man is brought
cordially to embrace it, his looks, Irowever lofty before, are brought down,
and he lies at the feet of Jesus, as a perishing and lost sinner; which you
know is inconsistent with the dignity of a philosopher, or a rational Christian.

You must, my worthy Mr. Out-and-in, you must indeed, declare that man having
received no damage at all by the fall of Adam, and coming into the world in
perfect innocence, is capable of having a righteousness of his own, which will
justify him before an infinitely holy God. "Ay, but Mr. Rationalis, said he,
how shall I manage in this, seeing there are so many plain passages of
scripture which contradict me?" Do, my good friend! You must not mind that, if
you intend to be a rational preacher. You must show yourself a man, and leap
over them, as many have done before you. Imitate the zealous Dr. Priestley, and
like him, tell your hearers, that the scriptures do not mean what they say
Familiar illustration of certain texts, etc.
. What man of reason would regard a few adverse texts of scripture, when the
dignity of human nature is the subject in question?

For your encouragement, permit me to assure you, that, however adverse the
scriptures may be to your rational doctrine, the populace will be very
propitious.

You can never please men so well as by clapping them on the shoulders, telling
them their hearts are good, that they need not doubt of getting safe to heaven,
whether they believe in the Son of God or not. And ^ engage, sir, your auditory
will caress you for the sake of your pleasing doctrine.

4. As to the Holy Ghost, I would not have you absolutely refrain from
mentioning him and his assisting influence, because your people read of him in
your church liturgy so very often. But be sure roundly to assert, that it is
mere enthusiasm for a man to expect to receive the Holy Ghost in these days;
and let them solve the difficulty, how the thoughts of a man's heart can be
cleansed by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, whom they cannot receive, as
they shall find opportunity. It seems I proved as a kind of remembrancer here,
for he stopped me short, and said, "Let me see -- I think I should remember
something about the Holy Ghost somewhere -- Hum -- If I mistake not, it was
relating to the office of ordination."

Yes, sir, said I, it was; you only professed to my lord bishop, that you were
moved by the Holy Ghost to take upon you the office of a deacon. That was all,
sir. He replied: "I believe it was some such thing. But pray, sir, was it
rational in me, so to do, seeing I did not then believe that any man receives
the moving influences of the Holy Ghost in these times?" Surely, said I, it
was. You know, sir, no man can get a benefice without it in your way, and I
pray you, who would not do as much as that for a good living? Why should you
have any scruple of conscience, seeing you have got some hundreds a year by it?
I know many, very many, who did the same, sir, who can hardly procure thirty
pounds per annum. On my word you sold your conscience well. But for those sons
of science, they foolishly threw theirs away without the prospect of any
comfortable return. I assure you, a journeyman weaver can afford a better
table, than many a clergyman of the rank of curate.

5. Once more; as the works of the Savior of mankind must not be wholly
omitted; should you be asked, What Jesus did for his people? You must answer,
as it were in a rapture: "O! he has done great things for us. He descended
from the heavenly glories, and assumed our nature. He has abrogated the
severity of the old, and introduced a new and milder law; lived agreeable to
the precepts of it himself, and when his instructions were finished, he
confirmed us in his ways, and sealed the truth of his doctrine with his own
precious blood." Thus, my friend, you may, by good management, if grace prevent
not, deceive the very elect. Tears of thankfulness trickled down the old
genman's beard, he gave me most hearty thanks, and protested that no
instructions could be more agreeable to the di^tates of his own reason.


FAST. I can tell you, brother, your advice was not in vain; but has been
invariably followed, so that this rational religion is now very little
injurious to our interest.


INFID. It is very moderate, sir, and may well be tolerated even by our own
governors themselves. It has not the least affinity with the doctrine of the
cross; which is justly the abhorrence of every partizan of ours, as will appear
from the creed which I composed, and put into the hands of my friend Mr.
Out-and-in, which if agreeable I shall recite.


DIS. I pray you, sir, let us have the creed. It may afford matter of
entertainment to have the creed of the enemies of all creeds and confessions.


INFID. Not enemies to all creeds, cousin; only to those creeds which they deem
orthodox; those which debase the sinner, exalt the Savior, and thwart the
views of human arrogance. But they are very fond of such creeds as tickle proud
nature, eclipse the sovereignty of grace, and debase the Savior, as
insufficient of himself to save to the uttermost those that come to God by him:
as you will see in the following.

"I believe in the great God, the Father and fountain of Deity, as an absolute
and supreme being, eternal, immortal, invisible, omnipresent, all-powerful, the
Creator, Supporter, and Governor of all worlds. I believe in another God, who
is not eternal in his existence, not omnipresent in his essence; not
omnipotent, but entirely dependent on the great God for his very existence; not
supreme over all, as Paul the fanatic thought, but subject in all things to him
that made him; not immortal, but actually died about seventeen hundred years
ago, for purposes afterward to be mentioned. I farther believe, concerning
this second God, that he was created, as the famous Whil^on says, by the great
God in an ineffable manner, before the foundation of the world, far above all
angels, and appointed to be the minister of the wrath and mercy of the Creator.
I believe in a third God, called the Holy Ghost, created by the second God, or
suffragan of the supreme Deity, and that therefore he may properly be called
the grandson of the great God." --

"(...) beg your pardon, said Mr. Out-and-in, interrupting me, it would be more
rational still, to ascribe no deity whatever to the Son of God."

O sir, replied I, we shall fit you in that in the most agreeable manner; then
to the article of faith in the great God, add, "I believe in Jesus Christ as a
mere man like ourselves, yet pious and holy. A man sent of God, as a great
teacher, whose business in life was to introduce a new mild law, commonly
called the gospel; because God had altered his mind respecting the salvation of
mankind, since his giving of the old law, which upon examination, and long
experience, was found to be too strict and severe, consequently unjust and fit
for abolition. Wherefore he raised up this same Jesus Christ, a man like
ourselves, and sent him to correct the errors which infinite wisdom had fallen
into, in giving what we call the moral law. I believe, that when he obtained a
perfect correct copy, he taught it to mankind, and called it the new law, or
the gospel. I believe that this good man actually did make such corrections,
alterations and amendments in the moral law as he saw meet, notwithstanding he
positively declared, that "although heaven and earth should both pass away, not
one jot or tittle of the old law should fail, i. e. be superceded by any other
law whatever. I believe that Jesus Christ, this good man like ourselves, having
rendered the old law a perfect system, and having taught it in its purified
state, died to confirm the truth of his doctrine, just as Cranmer and other
good men have done since then. I believe farther, that he continued under the
power of death for three days, and then was raised from the dead, to show that
he was no imposter, but was actually commissioned to amend the old law, which,
prior to his correction, was neither holy, just, nor good, as the mistaken
apostle thought it to be. Farther still, I believe that in his exalted state he
is, as good Dr. Priestley observes, only a man like ourselves, notwithstanding
the orthodox ignorantly worship him as Immanuel, God with them; God manifested
in the flesh; the true God and eternal life; the Alpha and Omega; the first and
the last; and I know not what enthusiastic titles, such as that book called the
bible ascribe to Jesus of Nazareth.

Concerning the original state of man, I believe, that Adam did not beget his
children in the likeness which he himself bore, at the time of their being
begotten, but in the likeness which he bore before he had sinned; that although
the fountain became polluted, the streams continue pure and limpid; and
although the root was depraved by transgression, the branches and fruit are
holy and innocent. So that there is no such thing as orginal sin in any sense;
nor have the posterity of Adam any share in the guilt of his transgression. And
whereas, the death of infants is frequently alleged by fanatics, and orthodox
Christians as a proof of original sin. I do must rationally believe concerning
those that die in infancy, that either God in an arbitrary unjust manner
murders them without cause; or that their death is occasioned by some sin of
their own, committed either whilst they were in the womb, or before they had
being; for no man can die for the sins of another, says your oracle, and yet it
is clear that infants do die.

Moreover, I believe that every man is possessed of power, to justify himself by
the deeds of the law, and to procure salvation by his own willing and running,
contrary to the opinion of Paul, and the rest of the orthodox; that salvation
is obtained by works of righteousness of our own performing, and not by the
obedience and death of any person whatever; that the glory of our salvation
shall redound to the absolute mercy of God, and our own good endeavors to
obtain it; and not unto Christ, whom the orthodox enthusiastically say, has
loved them, and washed them in his blood, by which he has redeemed them to God
out of every nation, kindred, people, tongue and language."

This creed being cordially received by my votaries, I laughed in my sleeve,
and said, A fig for you all my enemies; Goodwin, Charnock, Owen and Crisp, etc.
etc. where are you now? A fig for all your snarlings at my principles! Lift up
your heads from the dusty pillows, and listen whilst your own descendants, ye
puritans, with all the force of eloquence plead the cause of great Infidelis.


IMP. Honored father, I admire your subtilty, and almost adore your
craftiness, who would have thought, when we heard the old puritans raving
against unbelief and profaneness, that in such a short time their descendants
would have forsaken the principles of their progenitors. But I give you joy my
sire, your operations have lacked no advantageous success.


INF. You are very obliging, my son! But I perceive you are not aware of all
the glory of this conquest. Perhaps my friends would think it strange if I
should tell them, that by this device, I have again introduced into Britain, as
gross Idolatry as ever was preached by the ancient Druids, as ever was known at
Rome or Athens, and (...) British divines have arrived at an higher degree of
^^^^^^ism than ever was known in the celebrated pantheon.


IMP. Nay then, my bewildering parent: out (...) it, and explain yourself.
What, idolatry again in British I happy stars!


INF. Hold, son -- Restrain yourself, I say. -- Do not you remember the charge
I gave you, Impiator, when I sent forth my several worthies to sound my
sleeping trumpet.


IMP. I can remember nothing at present, so great is my joy! O idolatry? How
glad am I that the Britons have again embraced thee?


INF. This, son, was my charge, and I desire you will remember it. Take care,
said I, Impiator, take care what you do. It is a matter of great importance to
our infernal interest, to which a blunder of yours might on this occasion be
very injurious. These men are gone forth upon my business; with a commission
from me, your father, to counteract a preached gospel, and as much as may be to
sap its foundation doctrines. Now, my son, in order to be useful to me, it is
highly necessary they should bear the appearance of the strictest sanctity, and
be not any wise defective in tithing annise, mint, and cummin, or how can they
impose the cheat upon mankind with success? Whereas, the appearance of devotion
and sanctity, will give energy to their arguments, and greatly recommend their
doctrine; there is no beating it out of the heads, even of the most ignorant,
that there is such a thing as devotion and sanctity, inseparably connected with
religion.

Now, my son, thou are but a purblind devil, and at best precipitate, therefore
thou may overturn my well concerted scheme. I charge thee therefore,
Impiator, as thou wishest well to our mal-administration, that thou shall
refrain from tempting these men into any of thine openly, notorious ways, and
to leave them entirely to my government; for they cannot miscarry whilst I have
the pleasure of reigning in their hearts.


FAST. A very necessary caution, and ought to be regarded.


IMP. I remember it very well, and have hitherto acted accordingly;
notwithstanding, I would rather allure every person to take up his dwelling in
some part of my dominions, But sir, I never knew that your rational divines
were properly idolaters.


INF. Do you consider then. They tell their hearers, that Immanuel is to more
than a dignified creature, who has no personal claim to the essential
properties of true and absolute divinity, notwithstanding many of them pay
divine honors to his name. Now, my son, the worship of a creature how
dignified soever, is by all allowed to be mere idolatry.


FAST. They deny the charge of Idolatry, brother, by alleging, that they offer
to Immanuel, only an inferior worship suited to the inferiority of his person
as a created being.


INF. The very thing, in which their idolatry consists, and is on a level with
that of the ancient pagans. It was an inferior kind of adoration, which the
ancients paid to their heroes and common Deities, in comparison of that, which
they offered to Jupiter their great God, the supposed king and father of all
the rest. Mars and Mercury, for instance, were never considered as supreme, but
as acting under the direction and delegation of Jupiter; as such, and such only
they were adored and worshipped; so that to distinguish between the worship of
the Father as supreme, and that of his Son, as inferior and subordinate,
instead of exculpating them from the charge of idolatry, does actually enforce
it.


FAST. But to clear themselves from the charge of idolatry they allege
farther, sir, the command of God himself, for their worshipping the Son,
notwithstanding his inferiority. The great God, say they, has given command
that all the angels of God should worship him, and that all men should honor
him; shall then our obedience draw upon us the reproach of idolatry?


INF. So they say. But if they knew the scriptures, only half as well as you
and me, who have labored all our days to cloud their evidence, they would see
that these commands, instead of exculpating them from, do actually bring home
the charge of idolatry upon them. God has expressly commanded, that, "Mankind
shall have no other Gods before him," as objects of religious adoration, either
by office or otherwise: And he would hardly have himself introduced another, of
a different nature, and commanded all men to worship him; seeing in this case,
one command would have clashed with the other. This would have been the spring
of wild confusion, and everlasting uncertainty; for the two commands being
diametrically opposite, no man could ever have known which of the two might be
obeyed with safety.

Would we but suffer them to reflect upon the divine commands, they must
unavoidably see, that their worshipping of the Son of God, as merely delegated,
with an inferior kind of worship, is absolute idolatry. When the first begotten
was brought into the world it was said, "Let all the angels of God worship
him," which they accordingly did at his birth. When he revealed himself to
Israel, the Father gave command, that "All men should honor the Son, even as
they honored the Father." That is with the self-same honor, as is paid to the
Father, on the foundation of his being one (in essence) with the Father.
Whereas had the Father ordained divine honors, to be paid to any being of a
different essence from himself, he would not only have overturned the ^^st
commandment, "Thou shall have no other Gods before me," but have given his
glory to another, contrary to his own express declaration. I would not
therefore have those sons of superior reason think it at all strange, if at
last they shall (...) themselves ranked with idolaters.


IMP. But, father, if I mistake not, you said, that with them paganism is
brought to as great perfection as ever it arrived at in the Roman pantheon. How
is that, sir? Seeing they are rational Christians?


INF. Yes, my son, they call themselves rational Christians, because they
believe and teach, "That the world (...) wisdom may know the Almighty," and
adorn their harangues with words, which men's wisdom teaches; but they are
pagans, notwithstanding, as will appear what you consider, that they worship
more Gods than one. Arians and Socinians both agree to worship one, whom they
say is truly and essentially God, and the king and Father of the other Deities.
Besides this object of supreme adoration they have other two, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, whom they honor with inferior adoration, just as the ancients did
the common Deities. I suppose, gentlemen, you will allow th^^ the worship of
two or three objects of different ranks, is as real paganism, as the worship of
so many hundreds: but I choose to distinguish the moderns from others, by the
name of Christian pagans, because they allow Jesus Christ to be one of their
secondary Deities. I am greatly obliged to you, my brother Fastosus, for your
assistance so kindly given, to enable me to accomplish my purposes; without it
I could not have brought my affairs to their present happy situation.


FAST. No, brother, you could not; but you are at all times welcome to my
assistance, in counteracting the simplicity of gospel truth. I myself should
greatly suffer, were the Arians and Socinians to discover what part we have in
their rational religion; and I am not without my fears that the incapacity of
the preacher for making proselytes, the dwindling away of their congregations,
and the contempt in which they are in general held, will in time convince them,
"That the world by wisdom knew not God," and so bring them to change their
present system of rational religion for that of the cross of Jesus, which is
truly rational, and ennobles every reasoning power of the human soul.


IMP. Ah, my sire! What a subtle spirit are you? With what laudible craftiness
must you have acted, to succeed in introducing pagan idolatry amongst modern
divines, even amongst protestant dissenters. I have long known, that the
papists are pagans in disgnise, but had no thought of rational Christians being
so far in alliance with (...).


DISC. Pagans in disguise, cousin! What do you mean? There is no mystery at all
in your father's doctrine; nor is there much difference between the ancient
pagans, and modern papists. The principal difference is this, The popish Juno,
whom they call the mother of God, is far greater in power, and more exalted in
glory, than the wife of Jupiter the pagan (...) acted in all things subordinate
(...) will of her husband, the king and father of the gods, who bore absolute
sway over the heavenly synod: but the popish Jupiter acts in subordination to
the will of his virgin mother. He rules the creation indeed; but then he is
still subject to maternal direction; so that it is not God the savior of
sinners, but the virgin Mary, the popish Juno, who possesses absolute
sovereignty, and what good they expect at the hand of God, is expected as to be
done in obedience to his virgin mother.

In all other things there is little or no disparity between the ancient and
modern pantheon worship. The pagans worshipped angels, whom they called gods,
the papists worship them also, knowing them to be creatures. The first had
their heroes and heroines whom they adored under the name of ^^migods; the
latter also have their heroes and heroines, whom they worship under the name of
saints. The ancients had their ambiguous oracles and lying wonders, and the
moderns have both, in far greater abundance; so that he must be blind indeed,
who does not see amongst them undisguised paganism.


IMP. Then it must follow, that the papists are greater friends to my father
Infidelis, than the Arians and Socinians, because these bear something of the
appearance of truth; but those have cast off both truth and its appearance.


INT. That is your wisdom again, my son. Impiator would make but a blundering
minister of state in my court, gentlemen. But my son, you may know, it is with
us a maxim of policy, that "Whoever comes nearest the truth, and is
notwithstanding destitute of it, is always capable of doing the most essential
service to my interest." Popish paganism is by far too barefaced to succeed in
England, where its absurdities have been so long detected. English protestants
will not worship a god of the bakers making, whilst their women retain the art
of making good plumb pudding, which will at any time be preferred to the
sacramental (...) for. But Arian and Socinian paganism is so subtly invented,
and so well refined, that it passes with many for rational Christianity.


IMP. I find, sir, you are under necessity as well as myself to act wisely,
with craft and cunning, finding that the same device will not with all people,
at all times succeed alike. We may sometimes, to some people, appear in our own
infernal likeness, and at other times we are fain to put on a deep disguise in
order to accomplish our designs. But no matter how, so that we have them safe
at last. However, gentlemen, there being such a prospect of plenty. I begin to
fear there will scarcely be room left in hell for us devils.


INF. Another stroke of my son's wit. It is well, Impiator, that your business
is to tyrannize only over the thoughtless part of the human race, or you would
be but of little service to our fraternity. But have you never heard, that
Tophet is wide and large, without elther brim or bottom? There is no fear of
wanting room. Besides, wherever the fiends may happen to be, they are always at
home, being sure to carry their hell along with them.


FAST. I have somewhere seen a map of that part of your dominions, brother,
where the idolaters dwell; if you have got one about you, I should be glad to
have a description of it.


INFID. I have, sir, and am glad it is in my power to gratify my much honored
brother. -- You see, sir, it is divided into two grand provinces, each
inhabited by different sects of idol-worshippers. That province on the left
contains the various sects of civil idolaters, and this on the right contains
the many denominations of their elder brethren, the religions idolaters. And I
assure you, they are two bodies of people very respectable.

The province which contains the civil idolaters, is divided into several
counties, all of which are very populous. In the first county live the
worshippers of vain pleasure, and this county is divided into several
regalities, in which the several sects or denominations of idolaters dwell,
acconding to the diversity of their inclinations. The first regality is
appointed to the worshippers of living creatures. This swarms with jockies, and
gamblers of the turf, both of noble and ignoble extraction. Along with them
live the worshippers of foxes, hares, and hounds, a very jolly ^^ce, I assure
you, well skilled in the literature of the kennel. But it is better to be a
slaye in a Turkish galley, than held as a divinity in this regality, for
adoration never fails to procure torture to the idol; as the panting of the
hare, and the well ploughed sides of the horse sufficiently demonstrate. A
little nook of this regality is by royal mandate made over to sterile wives and
maiden ladies, who for want of more agreeable objects of adoration, worship
monkies, parrors, and lap-dogs. The second regality is the habitation of those
who worship the dramatic poets, and their apes the players. At the shrines of
those idols, the worshippers sacrifice health and virtue, under pretense of
learning wisdom. They are very fashionable and honored people, with whom
legislators and guardians of public virtue are not ashamed to associate. Here
you may find legislators patriotically sacriflcing their own virtue, in order
to protect that of the ^ation; their own estates, in order to assist in public
^^^onemy; and faithlessly wasting their own time, in order to teach industry to
the inferior ranks of subjects.

In the second county, you will find all the worshippers of false honor; a set
of gentry extremely divided in the^^ sentiments relative to the object of their
adoration. One holy father falls down prostrate, like Cardinal Wolsey, before
the triple crown and pontifical dignity. A second is equally devout at the
shrine of a cardinal's hat; and a third, less aspiring, pays his devotions to a
bishop's mitre or prelatic ^abes, and the highest of his present ambition is a
bishopric. Other reverend gentlemen offer a more humble worship to a dea^^y,
prebend, or vicarage.

It is very observable, that in this county people never worship that to which
they have already attained; but having compassed their purpose, burn incense to
the idol next in rank, and thus the worshipper goes on, if death and
disappointment do not prevent him, till he has worshipped every shrine in the
pantheon.

For instance, whilst a curate, a vicarage is the idol; the vicarage obtained,
it gives place to a prehend or deanery; which once enjoyed, they also in their
turn give place to a hishopric; that to an archbishopric, which is the
principal idol of the English. But in other countries there are idols of
superior rank, so that the moment an archbishopric is obrained, incense smokes
to a cardinal's hat; which also obtained, loses its worshipper, who is now
converted to the worship of the triple crown, the great god and father of all
the other idols.

Nor are the laity less devout than their reverend brethren, for one man
worships universal empire, like Lewis of France and some others; but it is said
that George of Britain is an apostate from this religion. Another worships a
crown and scepter, like the descendant of a certain bricklayer; and many adore
the place of prime minister, chancellor of the kingdom, first lord of the
treasury, with every other place of honor and trust in government. Some you
shall see fall prostrate before a star and garter, whilst others are all
obedience to a coroner. The husband lies in the dust before "his honor,"
whilst his wife in raptures adores "her ladyship." His lordship is bended to by
one, and another pays all his devotion to his grace.

In this country, you may find some men religious enough to worship a
corporal's knot, or a serjeant's halberd. Some worship an ensign's fash, others
a lieutenant's commission, whilst the captain is absolutely as much devoted to
a regiment, as his colonel is to a nearshal's staff.

The third county is the dwelling of those who worship their own bodies, than
which, I presume there is not a more ravenous idol in the synod. Around the
shrine of this god, stand the baker, brewer, pastry-cook, confectioner,
distiller, weaver, and male and female tailors. Hard by are a constellation of
the softer sex prostrate before an Indian shrub, the ^^ves of which are in
great veneration. At no great distance, are a cloud of worshippers of Virginia
tobacco; they are divided into no less than four different sects. The first of
whom worships the tobacco in the neat leaf cut small, or well rolled together.
The second worship it, after it is well ground into flour. The third put it
through the fire to the dear sensation. And the fourth are of such a eatholic
disposition, that they worship the dearly beloved tobacco in all its forms. Of
this sect The LISTNER professes himself.

The belly is worshipped by many, as the principal god, and so profuse are they
in their offerings, that its altar is sometimes almost overturned, and the idol
greedy as it is, is unable to bear the fruits of their devotion. The sect of
gluttons, a very devout race, ransack both earth and sea to bring plenty of
offerings to the idol; and that of drunkards, in no less devotion, pour on the
wines in such profusion, that all the surrounding trenches are gorged to the
brim. This same idol differs exceedingly from most other objects of idolatrous
worship; for when it has swilled to excess in the drink offering, it invites
the brain to share in the feast, to which it presents every vapourish effluvia,
whilst it reserves for its own use only the parts excrementitous. Moreover,
this same belly is apt to resent the profusion of its worshippers, and sends
forth the bluest plagues, most chilling agues, burning, putrid, and malignant
fevers, with all manner of acute and chronical distempers amongst the
worshippers, and thus provides employment for gentlemen of the faculty: whose
business, positively, would be worse than that of a cobbler, but for the
religion of belly worshipping.

In the fourth county dwell the worshippers of gold and large possessions, some
of whom you shall find ^^ing prostrate, in the deepest devotion to a fine well
(...) house and garden; others worshipping a fortile estate and well stored
barns, a flock of fleecy sheep, or an herd of fartening bullocks. One man
adores the brace of nags which hurl him from place to place, whilst his friend
is prostrate before a splendid retinue. Moidores as well as English coin is a
splended idol, and attracts the attention of many, whilst some adore a coal
pit, or a mine of leaden ore.

Had I time, I would give you a more full account of the religious idolaters;
but as business is urgent, I shall only ^ouch upon some of their gods. The
greatest of which is his holiness the present pope, who dispenses blessing and
cursing, casseth down and exalts at his pleasure. This god who is exalted
above all that is called god, issues dispensations and pardons, for money and
price, contrary to the manner of the God of heaven. The one pardons and gives
salvation freely of grace, but the other sells his pardons as dear as he can.
Next to his holiness, on the right hand, stands the popish ^uno, or virgin
Mary, whose powerful command of the God of nature, is greatly adored by every
zealous papist. On the left hand stands a Jesus Christ of wood, whom the
papists also highly revere; for they are almost to distraction, fond of wooden
Deities. Some indeed have a Jesus Christ made of gold or silver, and others
more lowly, worship a paper Savior; but the most humble devotion is paid to
the gods which the baker makes. These are the most ravenous idolaters in the
whole world, for with the greatest eagerness, and devout veneration they eat
the object of their adoration. Thousands of these breaden gods are devoured
annually, and as soon as devoured they are ^^placed by others from the sacred
ovens. The people, worship, and service of the true Jesus of Nazareth they
abhor and persecute, with as much sury as ever their ancestors the Romish
pagans did. But if their own goldsmiths, carvers, or statuaries happen to
produce a handsome Jesus Christ, or a mother of God, the country will presently
wonder after it in the most profound adoration.


FAST. I have sometimes thought, brother, that the popish religion is the
religion of Molech inverted. That voracious idol was used to devour the
children of his worshippers; but here the greedy worshippers devour their god
after he is well baked in an oven.


INF. The ancient pagans were even foolish enough, in giving their children to
that greedy devil, Molech; and the papists are not much wiser in worshipping
the works of the artificer, or believing that they can eat their maker. Here
are likewise the greatest variety of venerable relics, such as St. Peter's
beard, the ear of St. Francis, the milk of the virgin, with a thousand
fooleries besides, all of which are in some sense deified.

Besides these already mentioned, there dwell in this province, all who worship
their ancestors, which renders the country very populous. I mean those who hold
the canons, confessions, and liturgies composed by their ancestors, to be
nearly equal to the scriptures in authenticity. Likewise those who are of this
or that persuasion, merely because it was the faith of their progenitors,
without giving themselves the trouble of searching the scripture to know the
truth of the doctrine. It Is also here that the worshippers of the sacerdotal
livery dwell. I mean those who venerate a man merely for the sake of his gown
and cassock, without enquiring whether his doctrine and conversation render him
venerable.

But I should tire your patience, was I to give you a minute description of my
vastly extended country, as well as lead you to imitate the sloth of the
children of men. I shall therefore beg leave here to desist. At the usual time
I will meet you, business calls me hence at present.


DIALOGUE XVII.
PRIVY to their appointment, I made business give way to curiosity, and I was
as punctual in my attendance as they were in theirs. At the time before agreed
to, they assembled, resumed their seats, and Fastosus thus began.

FAST. It is true, sir, your son Avaro, has greatly exceeded my expectations,
and proves himself to be an expert devil; he will, I think, do honor to the
name of Infidelis, and may greatly contribute to the flourishing state of the
kingdom of pride. I should be glad if Avaro might now a little enlarge upon the
hints he has already given, that we may further see the prosperity of our
general interest.


DISC. That will be very grateful to me, cousin Avaro, as your fordid and
griping influences, have the most happy effect upon the reign of contention.
How have I been delighted, when one of your slaves has dropped into the grave
leaving behind him vast possessions, by the discord I have sown amongst his
children and kinsfolks. Your slaves dare not think of dying and entering into
another world, therefore it sometimes happens, that after the muckworm has been
by every means, and every kind of rapine, scraping wealth together for many
years, he drops into eternity without leaving behind him any authentic
direction how his plunder is to be disposed of. This gives me a fair
opportunity of setting his relations together by the ears, about who shall get
most of the miser's effects to himself; and I have the happiness frequently, of
planting irreconcilable enmity in the heart of one brother and sister against
another, which you know is a comfortable sight to our infernal nobility.

Sometimes the griping miser, that enemy to himself and all mankind, is over
persuaded to make his will, though secretly hoping, he shall not die for a
great while yet to come; and then the case is very little altered: for when the
wretch goes to the place appointed for the covetous, his will is very
unsatisfactory to some of the relations; one has too much, and the other has
too little left him. (...) disagreeable altercation succeeds the funeral
obsequi^^, and division and everlasting disgust sums up the whole. Unless,
indeed, that relation who has two little bequeathed to him, should call in the
gentlemen of the law to decide the matter in some court of judicature, and who,
having fleeced both the fools as handsomely, as the nature of the thing would
admit of, refer them at last to an arbitration.

I assure you, consin, I scarcely ever see one of your industrious slaves, but
I flatter a hope of having some employment in his family on his demise, nor do
I know any other real use that the miser's ill gotten money is of to society,
besides sowing discord amongst friends and relations. The wretch meanly rob's
his own back and belly, as well as all he deals with, to answer purposes no
more valuable by his having. But I prevent you, cousin.


AVAR. I cannot easily depart from the tent of the scarlet lady, whose name is
mystic Babylon, without making farther honorable mention of her prudent
children. The wise disposal of purgatorial fire has been already exemplified,
and the dispensation and pardon market has been glanced at; but one way of
getting money besides these I shall now instance. I have laid my claim to the
popish clergy in general, but of them all, there are none who exceed the worthy
lords the inquisitors in veneration of my golden image. This religion of the
golden image was first invented by the clergy of Babylon, and I assure you to
this day the clergy of Babylon invariably follow it. But the inquisitors of all
others, are the most zealous devotees of this golden god, first set up by the
parsons of Babylon.

Never did an eagle look out for a dove, nor an hawk for a sparrow, with
greater vigilance than their lordships are wont to look out for a prey. If
within their jurisdiction there happens to be a stranger, whose circumstances
are prosperous, and who is likely to be a good bone for their reverences to
pick; it shall go hard but they will provoke him, by some of their emissaries,
to say something against the inquisitive ^rib^^al, which in some countries is
deemed the unpardonable sin. No sooner has the insinuating priest by indirect
means obtained matter of accusation, but he makes information in the holy
office, before the fathers, who on hearing the blessed report, are as much
delighted as the wolf when he has fanged a prey. The merchant is apprehended,
his estate confiscated; he is immured in the prison cells, till consumed either
by famine or vermin, otherwise he is tortured privately to death, by the hands
of their sanctified ruffians.

One instance of the many which I might produce, shall serve to exemplify the
equity of the inquisitors. When Syracuse was in its glory, there was one
Bellarius, a foreign merchant, who in the course of business, had amassed great
riches; and who, at the same time, was so circumspect in all his ways, that
even the eye of an emissary of the office, could find nothing, of which to
accuse him to the tribunal. Thus he lived in reputation and affluence for many
years, to the great impatience of the holy inquisitors, who could find no
plausable pretense, by which they might fang his substance with their rapacious
talons.

Bellarius had an only child, a lady about seventeen. Her person was the
perfection of symmetry, and her mind a copy of the purest virtue. By her they
found means to accomplish their purposes, and bring complicated ruin on the
unhappy parent. The family retired to peaceful repose, were one night alarmed
about one in the morning, first by the approach of a coach, and then by a smart
rapping at the gate. Bellarius from within asked, "Who is there?" Was answered,
the "holy Inquisition" down stairs he run, flew to the gates in obedience to
the dread tribunal, and opened to receive those ministers of darkness.
Understanding they were come for his daughter, in farther obedience to those
leaders of the church, he went himself up to her chamber brought her down,
trembling as she was, and delivered her into the hands of the horrid ravishers,
who carried her off to the seraglio in the office of Inquisition. Where, for
the present, we leave her, through fear of death seduced from her virtue by
those pretended patrons of religion, and return to the unhappy disconsolate
father.


IMP. Well, brother, I find then the priests of Rome are not so much addicted
to eunuchry as they pretend. It Is lawful, it seems, to ravish virgins, however
unlawful it may be to have a married wife. I have often heard of the seraglio
of princes, but not so often of the seraglio of priests, and those priests too,
who of all others are the most zealous wonderers after the seven headed beast.


AVAR. Distressed and comfortless Bellarius remained at home; forsook all
company, and conversed only with the various cogitations of his own foreboding
mind. At one time he conjectured that his hapless daughter, in some inadvertent
moment, might have blasphemed other the wooden virgin Mary or the great high
priest of Rome, or the holy inquisitors, in which case he gave her up for lost,
and doomed her to fall a sacrifice. Yet could he scarcely forgive the rigor of
that religion, which had in such a merciless manner ravished her from his fond
embrace.

It was not long after this an Armenian merchant, said to be newly arrived in
Syracuse, called on him, under pretense of buying a large assortment of goods.
Generous and unsuspecting Bellarius, bid him welcome to his house during his
stay; which he after some seemingly modest apologies thankfully accepted. The
pretended Armenian perceiving Bellarius to eat but little at supper, now and
then inadvertently to slip a sigh, took occasion to rally him in a friendly
manner, as if troubled with the hyp', advised him to cheer up and hope for
better times.

Bellarius having but little relish for a jest, seriously replied, "No, sir,
the hyp' is not my present disease, neither have my affairs in trade taken an
adverse turn; and yet there is one thing, which gives me great distress." The
friendly Armenian was now more importunate to know his grievance, that he might
at least sympathize with him in his affliction. Little suspecting that he was
conflicting with priestly subtilty, he thought he might safely lodge his
circumstances in the generous bosom of a merchant; he replied, sir, I suppose
you are a stranger in Syracuse; as such let me advise you, as you value your
life and liberty, to be careful of your words, and every part of your
deportment during your abode, for this is a place of danger. I have, sir, one
only daughter, the perfect image of her lovely mother, whom I had the misery to
bury but a few months ago. I know not by what temptation, but my poor girl has
said something dishonorable either of the lady of Loretto, his holiness the
pope, or their lordships the Inquisitors, for which she is imprisoned in the
holy office, and I suppose must answer it with her life.

Oh, sir, I hope not, said the Armenian, the lady's youth will interceed for
her, and after some gentle admonition, your daughter will be returned to the
house of her father.

Ah, sir! rejoined disconsolate Bellarius, I cannot but sear, that her youth
and beauty are the greatest enemies and accusers. These are qualities capable
of impressing the heart even of an inquisitor. If this is the case, my poor
daughter is already either dead or debauched. Or should it happen, that any
thing has been alleged against her religious conduct, there are instruments
enough in the Inquisition, and their lordships want not skill to use them;
instruments sufficient to make an helpless virgin confess that, which even
never entered her thoughts: so that at all events, her death or dishonor is
ensured. No, sir, it is not possible for me to hope for better, seeing the
least hint thrown out against the Inquisition, is condemned as unpardonable
blasphemy.

It was not long after this discourse, before the Armenian feigned a necessity
of going out; went straight to the Inquisition and made information, being a
jesuit disguised as a merchant, and that very night a coach was sent to conduct
Bellarius to the cells of their dreadful prison. Next day his effects were
seized by order of the holy fathers, who now rejoiced that at last they had
grasped the long wished for prey. Confined in an abominable cell, he was
greatly annoyed by vermin; and being diverse times examined by torture, he died
with grief for his daughter, who, as she could never freely yield to the
loathsome embrace of those murderers, in a few months tired their patience.
Then one of the sanctified ruffians, first murdered her, and then burned her to
ashes in the dry pan. It is amazing, gentlemen, to what lengths the lust of
money and women will carry men.


FAST. Indeed, cousin, I think your friends the inquisitors bid fai^ for
equalling the most subtle of our fraternity. Oh, what means of procuring wealth
have you taught their reverences of the Romish hierarchy? Selling of
dispensations and pardons, begging of money for masses, etc. etc. are
profitable articles, and turn to a good account. But if I remember right, you
told me a few days since, your vassals are divided into several companies, or
communities, and that people of all kingdoms, ranks, and professions, are at
this day worshippers of the god Avaro. I should be glad to hear something
farther about them.


AVAR. I did so, sir, and shall be ready farther to oblige you, if to give you
a brief view of our corporation which like all other towns corporate, consists
of diverse companies, will do it. The first of which is that of

The lawyers. A very wise set of gentlemen; who exceed the children of light in
the art of money-getting, as far as any of the inhabitants of our territories;
of course they are held in great estimation, as gentlemen of the first
intelligence. In our city of Avarice, there is no knowledge deemed of any
avail; no conduct accounted virtuous besides that of money getting. He is
always the wisest, best, and most virtuous man who best succeeds in the
lucrative art, whether in law, or in trade, or otherwise. There was a time you
know, when the law was as straight, as clear, as a beam of light, and needed no
expounding, so that every man was his own counselor. But ever since the kings
of England were kept prisoners under a guard, lest truth should become familiar
to the royal ear, the case has been quite altered; now it is so full of pleas
and demurrers, doubts and exceptions, etc. that it is a perfect labyrinth;
dangerous for an honest man to enter. For in the lawyers company it is a
standing rule, that, whether the plaintiff or defendent lose the cause, the
lawyers on both sides are sure to be considerable gainers. Indeed, it is very
seldom, but they manage the matter so, that all parties except themselves are
losers, and if he who gains the trial, finds himself in the end to be a loser,
how do you think it must fare with the wretch, against whom the verdict is
given? If an houest man has a mind to purchase an estate ever so fairly, and
pay for it ever so honestly, he will find it a difficult matter, so to secure
his title, but if any succeeding heir be bred to the law; or heiress be married
to a lawyer, he may run a risk of being jostled out of his property, by some
knavish quirk in law, without any allowance made either for the estate or its
improvements.

Indeed, sir, i^may be said of my faithful disciples, the lawyers, attorneys,
bailiffs, etc. that they pay as little regard to truth as the greatest of
ourselves. Right and wrong, equity and oppression, are no objects of their
regard, providing the case will yield good advantage, and bring large grist to
their mill; an instance of this, if you please, gentlemen, I shall give you.

Contumelius was a Yorkshire gentleman, of distinguished birth and ample
fortune, but somewhat akin to the mad Macedonian. His country-seat stood by the
side of a lane, through which neighboring farmers passed with their teams for
time immemorial. But so much passing and repassing, of the whistling clowns
following their waggous, at last proved very offensive to the worshipful
'Squire, so that he resolved to remove the intolerable nuisance by blocking up
the way. A gate was accordingly put up, and fastened with a padlock,
effectually to stop the clownish passengers from passing as before, and turn
them by a way considerably more distant.

As soon as the 'Squire's proceedings reached the ear of Mr. Loveright, a
neighboring farmer, he ordered his wagon to drive directly to the gate, and
finding it locked, took an axe, which he had brought with him for that purpose,
and to the great mortification of 'Squire Contumelius hewed it to pieces. His
worship in a rage posted to Mr. Deceitful, a very eminent lawyer in the
neighboring town, for his advice. The worthy lawyer, finding this a proper
occasion of serving his own interest, advised the 'Squire to send for a writ,
commence an auction against the farmer for his intolerable insolence. In a few
days the writ was served on Loveright, who immediately waited on lawyer
Deceitful, in order if possible to compromise the matter.

He no sooner entered the office, than Mr. Deceitful took him aside and thus
addressed him, "I am heartily sorry, my good Mr. Loveright, that I have been in
a manner obliged, by his worship Contumelius, to send for a writ against you.
But I assure you, sir, in my opinion your side of the question is by much the
safest, and might I advise you, it would be to stand a trial, and by no means
submit to a compromise. Knowing the farmer to be a man of substance and
resolution, continued he, there is no bearing with such an insolent treatment.
For my own part, Mr. Loveright, I would much rather you had been my client, on
the present occasion, than the giddy 'Squire, but he first applied to me and
insisted on my doing what I have done. If you please you may apply to my
brother Falsehood, who is skilful as any man, and as honest as any lawyer I
know. In the mean while, sir, you may depend on me as your real friend, ready
to serve you in every thing consistent with my reputation."

As soon as Loveright was departed, Mr. Deceitful took horse, and rode directly
to the 'Squire's house; told him the farmer had been with him, heartily
repented of his folly, and was very desirous of coming to terms of agreement.
But were the case mine, said he, I would listen to no terms of accommodation,
but punish his insolence to the utmost rigor of law. The low-life fellow,
having got forward in the world, has forgotten himself; and if suffered now to
escape with impunity, he will be the pest of the neighborhood. Thus the worthy
lawyer irritated both parties, till he had made sure of an assize hearing,
that, in the debate, he might likewise insure to himself a sum very
considerable. For he knew very well, that if ever a difference falls into the
infatiable maw of the court, it will never be disgorged till all costs of suit
are amply paid off; for it is impossible for my mercenary scribblers to give
any credit. Let them act justly or unjustly, they make sure of their fees; and
as the one party must necessarily lose, both counselor and attorney, take care
to father the miscarriage of the cause, on something which the client has done,
which he ought not; or omitted, which he ought to have done: and not
withstanding all their fraud and deceit, both of them come off good honest
lawyers. The

II. Company, and next in reputation to that of the lawyers, is the parsons
company, which is also very flourishing and reverend. That you may not mistake
my meaning; by parsons I intend all in general, of every denomination, who are
ministers merely for the sake of a living; more especially.

1. All who profess to my lord bishop, that they are moved by the Holy Ghost to
take upon them the office of a deacon, when in reality it is the hope of a
benefice, by which they are stimulated; and who afterward, in the course of
their pulpiteering, tell the people that it is enthusiasm in any person, to
expect to receive the Holy Ghost in these days.

2. All who, sustaining the sacerdotal character, lead men into sin, or harden
those who are insensible, either by conniving at the sins of their people, or
by being guilty of the like themselves. These gentlemen are pretty numerous.

3. All who act rigorously toward their parishioners, in regard to temporal
things, who evidently show more concern about tithes and offerings, than about
the everlasting welfare of their people.

4. All in holy orders who, through covetousness, idleness, or any other
unjustifiable cause, withold from their people, the stated ministration of
the word and ordinances. Set a mark upon them, for they are all my disciples.

5. Wherever you meet with a gentleman in holy orders, who is so far above the
bulk of his auditory, that he will not condescend to converse even with the
meanest, about the state of his soul, the work of the Spirit and way of
salvation, such are idol shepherds, unnatural pastors, and altogether devoted
to the god Avaro.


IMP. So then, cousin, I find you have parsons of more denominations than one;
they are not all engrossed by the established churches in England and on the
continent it seems. Yet I meet with many who with great warmth will vindicate
their own denomination by wholesale, and deem it little less than blasphemy, to
suppose that they embrace any thing erroneous. Yet none more ready to censure,
and condemn those who are of a different persuasion in religious things.


AVAR. The truth is, my parsons are scattered abroad, among all sects of
professors; for the time is not yet come, that any one sect can justly assert,
that none of their ministers have any other object in view but the glory of
God, and the good of mankind. Nor will the time commence, before that important
question, "who shall be the greatest;" is finally decided, which it is thought
will be a great while first, seeing it has already puzzled the schoolmen and
leaders of the church for sixteen centuries back. But to return to the parsons
company, wherever you meet with a clergyman who answers the description I have
given, you need not ask him whether he is a churchman or a dissenter. All you
have to do, is to put Belzebub's mark upon his forehead, and take assurance of
him, that at a certain time, he shall not fail to visit the nether regions, and
take his abode in the infernal palace.

In this very populous company, there is great diversity of ranks, even where
there is an equality of genius; for some having scarcely finished their
apprenticeship, are inducted into livings, and instantly commence rectors and
tithegatherers. Others, for want of friends, are obliged much against their
inclination to continue underlings all the length of a tedious life. I have
seen a handsome parson ere now, riding upon four or five steeples at once, and
having more in expectation; whilst his fellow student, could scarcely procure
brown bread and Welsh butter. And amongst all the pluralists in my
acquaintance, I know not of one that has got livings enough; but give, give, is
still their fervent prayer to my lord bishop, or some other patron who has a
benefice to bestow. Many indeed think they should be quite contented, if they
had but one more benefice added to what they now enjoy; but I can tell you,
could they come by another, there would still be another wanting. It is much,
now so many clergymen find themselves uneasy in the trammels, if they do not at
last take it into their heads to persuade the legislature, that a clergyman
cannot preach in three or four churches at one and the same time. And that it
is not perfectly consistent, either with Christianity or reason, that one
clergyman should have three or four livings, whilst another has none. Should it
come to this, my company must be terrible sufferers.


IMP. One would really think, if the cure of souls is as weighty a concern as
some people make it, the parsons would not be so fond of pluralities; of adding
living to living, and parish to parish.


AVAR. The cure of souls, forsooth! My parsons care not who take the souls. The
fleece, cousin, the fleece, attracts their attention. Give an avaricious parson
the fleece, and you make fairies of the souls of the parishioners if you will.
Many of them do very little of the priests office, besides collecting the
tithes and offerings; at which they are wonderfully dextrous. But as to
preaching, they have no notion of it, and less still of visiting the sick, were
they even in the jaws of death. I assure you, gentlemen, those idol shepherds
are of the greatest use to our government. The interest of hell could not
prosper as it does, were not we well befriended by many gentlemen in holy
orders.


FAST. Indeed, cousin, I have often thought, that without their assistance, we
should be ill put to it, to maintain our ground against the votaries of
Immanuel. What posting to and from heil is there amongst our fable brethren,
when but one faithful and zealous gospel minister arises in a nation? You may
remember, when Luther and Calvin brake the chain of the pope and devil, lifted
up the voice of the gospel trumpet, which resounded through the bowels of hell,
and made the pillars of our infernal kingdom totter, what hurly burley we all
were in? What deep consultations in the divan? What diligence in action with
our forces upon earth.


AVAR. True, sir, but times are much altered for the better; many a well paid
parson nowadays, is so obliging as to sing a lullaby to his people, when he
finds them snoring in the sleep of security, and will suffer no man to attempt
their awakening. He kindly tells them, "that they may sleep on now, and take
their rest, for the wolf is gone out of the country, and will not for a great
while return. Let no man disturb you with idle notions, for you may all go
asleep to heaven without ever knowing what conversion means."


INF. It is admirable what power these same gentlemen have gotten over reason
and religion; I have often thought, that if ever they were to read their bibles
with attention, they could not be off from seeing that they themselves are the
identical persons intended by the idle idol shepherds, and unfaithful watchmen,
against whom so many curses are denounced in scripture. The idle shepherds, you
know, are such who feed and adorn themselves with the spoils of the flock,
which is suffered to perish unwarned, and to die for lack of knowledge. The
idol shepherd is that lordly priest, that downy doctor, who keeps at an awful
distance from men of ordinary rank, and is too much of the gentleman to give
himself any concern about the souls of his parishioners.

Many of those idol shepherds I know, who possess some hundreds, ay, some of
them thousands per annum, who will not so much as ask one of their cure,
whether he intends to go to heaven or hell at death, or whether he serves God
or the devil; yet if a parishioner die, they will keep as penetrating a
look-out for their fees, as an eagle for his prey, and seize it with equal
eagerness. Moreover, for the sake of this same fee, they will own the deceased
for a brother, which privilege was always denied him whilst alive, unless he
should indeed have happened to be one of the fat of the flock, who was capable
of yielding a double fleece.


AVAR. It is the fleece, sir, which my disciples regard, and not the flock; how
have I been diverted sometimes, both at church and meeting house, to hear the
parson, with an air the most supercilious and contemptful, railing against the
most useful of God's ministers, as enthusiasts, fanatics, and methodists: ah!
said I to myself, what poor honest devils were those of old, who confessed Christ
and his disciples, and thus declared to the sons of Sceva, "Jesus we know, and
Paul we know, but who are you?"

Sometimes I hear them crying with vehemence against the divinity of Immanuel;
one making him some kind of a super-angelic being, and another asserting that
he is only a man like themselves. Then say I, what a pusillanimous spirit was
that same devil Legion, who, without receiving either tithe or offering,
confessed Jesus of Nazereth to be the only Son of God, to whom the scriptures
ascribe every divine honor. But these parsons are well paid for confessing
him, and yet deny him with the utmost insolence.

There is never a day but I hear some of this company charging the lie upon one
text or other of the bible. One tells his people there is no such thing as one
being chosen to salvation more than another, but that the love of God is equal
unto, and upon all men, whether Jew or Gentile, Turk or Pagan, Papist or
Protestant; nay, then I say, master parson, you are become a dissenter from
your own seventeenth article. And, to speak within compass, there are at least
a thousand pulpits in the church occupied by such dissenters.

Then I hear others railing against those who preach salvation by grace; and at
the same time assuring their people, that they must be saved by their own
holiness and good works. Very well, say I, then I have my desire, for upon
these terms they will never be saved at all. But still I am at a loss, how they
dare so barefacedly give the lie to Paul the apostle, who taught the church,
that "By grace they were saved, through faith, and that not of themselves, but
the gift of God." I hear many clergymen of the established church, in entering
upon the service, thus address the majesty of heaven, "Lord cleanse thou the
thoughts of our hearts, by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit;" and in less
than an hour after, telling their parishioners, that it is mere enthusiasm in
any man to expect in these days, to be at all influenced by the inspiration of
the Holy Spirit.

So glaring the contradictions, which sometimes they are guilty of, that I
tremble with fear, lest the people should be convinced of the truth; but these
are favorable times, gentlemen, very favorable; for the greatest part of the
people have something else to think of when they go to church, besides either
preaching or prayer.

When I hear the parson, whether churchman or dissenter, telling his people how
holy and pure the heart of man it by nature; how aptly formed for sentiments of
the most exalted piety, and for entertaining the love of God; I am wonderfully
at a lose to know, how he came by more extensive knowledge of mankind than
Jesus Christ, who expressly (...) that whatsoever defiles the man, proceeds
out of (...). Your influences, Fastosus, are of excellent use, in (...) where
they are; you take care to persuade each of them separately, that of all others
his own knowledge is the most refined; and hence it is, that Goodwin, Owen,
Chatnock, and all such authors, are considered as weak though well-meaning
divines.

It is very diverting (...) ^ear my parsons boasting of their superior
knowledge, even when by their ministrations it is plain, that they are
acquainted with almost any writings, better than those of inspiration; when
their auditories dwindle away to nothing, and the few people who abide by them
are destitute of all religion. Did they but know half as much as the most
illiterate devil of our fraternity, they would at least believe that there may
be a possibility of their mistaking the way, and that after all their
pretensions to superior knowledge, they may run some risk of a final
miscarriage. But as our good friends the Roman doctors, are wont to say,
"Ignorance is the mother of devotion:" so say I of my parsons, "Ignorance is
the spring of all their knowledge," and whilst my father Infidelis can keep
them ignorant, my uncle Fastosus can easily puff them up with a sense of the
clearness of their heads, and goodness of their hearts; so that I can do very
well with them, and retain them amongst our worshippers.

III. The next company in our corporation is that of the straining landlords, a
very noble and reputable company, indeed; notwithstanding, they are far from
being opulent. In the days of yore, when luxary was but little in vogue, the
frecholders were attended with fewer wants, and of course this company was less
flourishing; but since these happy days commenced, in which people of quality
are trained up in absolute idleness and dissipation; in which virtue is of no
account, and luxury, pride, and dissoluteness, are arrrived at their zenith;
the people of quality are amazingly poor, and are attended with an
undescribable train of necessities. What is very remarkable, their pride has
grown in a perfect proportion to their poverty, so that now it is an
established law amongst them, to look upon themselves as of a different blood
from the rest of mankind. Indeed you cannot affront a person of quality worse,
than by like^ing him to one of those, who are called vulgar creatures;
notwithstanding, by the way, it is those same vulgar creatures which enable
persons of rank and fashion to support the dignity of their station; and were
there no vulgar creatures, there would also be no ladies of quality.

This distinction which the quality pay to themselves, is of the utmost use in
my administration, as will appear from the following story.

I went one day to the house of Sir Fop Mortalis, a very famous gentleman in
the country, with a design to pay my devoirs to madam Mortalis, his lady; a
gentlewoman who abhors to have the least comparison made, betwixt her and any
person whatever of inferior rank. The chambermaid informed her mistress, that
good Mr. Prudence waited below, desiring to speak with her ladyship, if
convenient; the lady soon descended, and compliments passed on either side, she
conducted me into her parlour, where she and I had the following dialogue.


LADY. Good Mr. Prudence, you have been a very great stranger! It is now many
months since I saw you at our house; but I am glad to see you now, and I wish
in my heart Sir Fop Mortalis had been at home.


PRUDENCE. Urgent business, madam, demands my attendance so much elsewhere,
that I cannot so frequently as I could wish, pay my respects to Sir Fop and my
lady Mortalis. But now, madam, I am come, if possible to rectify a growing
mistake amongst mankind; and must tell your ladyship, that I am heartily sorry
to see the world arrived (...) such a pitch of ambition as it is now. Indeed,
my lady, it is become a very difficult matter, in a concourse of people, to
distinguish between the farmers and tradesmens wives, and ladies of birth and
fortune; nor can we more casily distinguish between their several children.
Why, madam, the farmers and tradesmens children are all masters and misses;
young gentlemen and ladies nowadays. I know not, for my part, what the world
will come to, if some measures are not speedily taken to prevent the
confounding of baseness with dignity.

When I was last at church, I was surprised to see, as I thought, miss
Mortalis, your daughter, there; well knowing that neither Sir Fop himself, nor
any of his family, go often to any place of public worship. Because you know,
my lady, few of you great folks love the tedious duties of religion.


LADY. Not we, indeed; give us the cards, or musical entertainments for our
money We hate their whining, doleful eant; let them choose religion, who have
taste for nothing more polite. We'll have none of it, I assure you, Mr.
Prudence.


PRUD. I know it, my lady, I know it, and am mightily pleased with your
determination. But as I was telling your ladyship, being at church, as soon as
service was over, I said to a man who sat in the pew with me, "I am surprised
to see Miss Mortalis at church, to day. Do you think, sir, that any body has
been daring enough to tell her that she really is a mortal?" To which the plain
countryman, in his own clownish way, replied, "Miss Mortalis at church, quoth-a
-- no, no, sir, you are quite mistaken, for Sir Fop's family are people of
quality, and therefore meddle none with religion. What should they do at
church, seeing they fear no hell, regard not God, and believe not in the devil;
as for heaven, Sir Fop is willing to leave that to the poor, and desires no
greater happiness for himself and his, than is implied in an earldom."


LADY. That is, indeed, what Sir Fop has long been soliciting, and it is
believed is now very near obtaining.


PRUD. But, said I to the fellow pray who is that young lady whom I took for
Miss Mortalis? Poh, lady quoth a -- why it is John Tillground's daughter, of the
Five Elms. Tillground's daughter! said I, you surprise me; she is as finely
dressed, as I have seen Miss Mortalis, when going to a ball. And pray, continued
I, who is yonder lady, with the French head-dress and furred cardinal? I
thought you had had no people of quality in this parish, besides Sir Fop's
family. No, sir, returned he, we have none who are such by birth, but we have
many who are quality by their dress. The lady, sir, that you enquire after is
Mrs. Watson, the landlady at the Three Tuns.

Well, madam, I followed them out of church, and was amazed to see the
plattings of hair, the tires of ruffles, and the labyrinthian furbeloes with
which the women were decorated. Indeed, my lady, if the world holds on but a
few years in its present career, we shall not be able to distinguish betwixt
the highest and the lowest rank^ of people.


LADY. To be sure, sir, the world is now at a sad pitch of pride and ambition,
for people of fashion can do nothing as to dress, gesture, manner of speech, or
living, but we are mimicked by those vulgar creatures.


PAUD. It must undoubtedly be considered as an insuf^erable insult upon people
of breeding, when they are thus taken off by the vulgar. But, madam, I have a
scheme to propose, which, if adopted, will ^ffectually correct their insolence,
and soon oblige John ^illground and Timothy Turf's daughters to lay aside their
furbeloes, ruf^^es, and tea-table, and betake themselves to their spinning
wheels.


LADY. What is it? I pray you, good Mr. Prudence, be so obliging; I beg you
would, sir?


PRUD: Indeed, madam, your farmers are all become gentlement of late; they talk
of fortunes for their children, and (...) the (...) as very little inferior to
the 'Squire himself; but let me tell you, madam, the fault is not so much in
the farmers, as in the landlords themselves, who let their farms upon terms by
far too low and easy There is this same John Tillground, and his neighbor
Timothy Turf, as I am infor^^^d, have both of them money lying at interest,
when my worthy and right honorable lord Noble, a gentleman of the first
quality, is obliged to pawn his plate for cash, to pay off the four thousand
pounds he lost the other night at cards; and whilst his gentle neighbor,
'Squire ^^zfolly, is obliged to fall his timber to stop the horrid gap, which
his malevolent stars opened at Newmarket-races, where the gamblers of rank and
quality occasionally try their fortune.

It Is insufferable, madam, that the farmer's circumstances should be easy,
whilst people of fashion know not how to keep off the dans from their doors.
What right has any body to any thing b^^des slavery, except people of quality?
Were not those vulgar creatures originally designed as your slaves, madam? and
yet for any thing I see, they will soon be on a level with you unless some
method, lucky enough to prevent it, is speedily devised.


LADY. Ah, sir, I fear it, indeed. If you do know of any suitable means to
prevent it, I beg, good Mr. Prudence, you will inform me?


PRUD. There is only one way that I know of, madam, and that is to raise their
rents to the uttermost. As every lease expires, it will be an easy matter for
Sir Fop, in the renewal of it, to advance the rent as high as he pleases. The
slaves dare not go away; and if they should, there will be others foolish
enough, to agree to any t^rms, rather than miss of a farm. This done, and all
your tenants settled upon the racked farms; if any one of them happens to rear
a handsome colt, let Sir Fop himself, or young master, fall in love with it,
demand it of its owner for so much, never exceeding half its value; he may
privately grumble, but dare not ^^fuse, for fear of offending his honor. By
these means, and others which occasion will suggest, you may make them all
humble enough


LADY. Most excellently spoken, good Mr. Prudence. Then Tillground's wife will
be obliged to sell her chinaware to procure rags for her brats; the daughter
must take to her wheel and wash-tub, and my son, master Thomas, will ride a
better horse than he now does. This scheme will certainly conquer the ambition
of the farmers; but what will it do for the tradesmen, good Mr. Prudence; they
will still continue an eyesore?


PRUD. Indeed, madam, the same scheme will produce very humbling effects, upon
tradesmen of every kind; though I dare not assert, that you will ever be able
perfectly to subject to your ambition and avarice, that honorable body of
merchants, whom you affectedly call cits. No, madam, I am afraid that nobility
itself must give place to the public spirit of the merchant; yet even them you
may greatly injure, and prevent their being of such essential service to their
country, as otherwise they might be. But as to inland trade, by racking your
tenants in the manner prescribed, you may absolutely destroy it. That you may
see the utility of my scheme, I shall a little explain it to your ladyship.

If the farmers are racked to the utmost, they will be obliged to sell the
produce of their lands at an exhorbitant price, otherwise it will be altogether
out of their power to pay the stipulated rent. And besides selling their crops,
etc. for an advanced price, they will be obliged to abridge the wages of all
their laborers, smiths, carpenters, etc.

By these means the farmer will find it very difficult to live, and of course
will rarely visit the mercer's and draper's shops; and as for his laborers and
workmen, they will find but little money to lay out in clothes; especially if
their children be numerous, as the demands of the back must always give place
to the louder calls of the belly. And as you know, my lady, sterility very
rarely ^^wells in the labourer's cuttage: it is unknown what misery you may
happily introduce amongst them, by the scheme proposed. The draper's goods,
will lie upon his hands, unless indeed he is pleased to give credit to the
poor; if the former, he will be sparing of his orders; and if the latter, we
shall soon have him a bankrupt, so that he will be effectually ruined.

You see, madam, that here we affect the manufacturer, equally with the farmer
and shopkeeper; for when the retail trade is ruined by the dearness of
provisions, the manafacturer will find little call for his goods; the issue of
which will be, the disbanding of many of his journeymen, and abridging the
wages of the rest. The disbanded journeymen being incapable of finding
employment, and not having learned the art of living like the camelion, on the
air, will be drove to thieving, by which means America will be peopled, and
Tyburn Chronicle rendered respectable.

As to the manufacturer himself, his capital being soon converted into
manufactured goods, he will be obliged to sell them under their value, that he
may keep up his credit with the merchant, and be able to carry on a little
trade, vainly hoping that times may alter for the better.


LADY. Indeed, sir, your scheme is very feasible, and yet there is one thing
that will put the manufacturer absolutely out of our power. I mean, sir, the
exportation of their manufacture. I don't know how it is, but these cits of
merchants can send goods any where, and they, sir, will support the
manufacturer.


PRUD. No, madam, I assure you, my scheme, if cordially adopted, and executed
with vigor, will put it absosolutely out of the merchant's power. There is
nothing can recommend the English manufacture at a foreign market, but the
price being inferior to that of other nations. Now, if an Englishman must pay
twice as dear for his provision in his own country, as a Frenchman does in his,
it is easy to see that either journeymen's wages must in England be double to
what they are in France, or the jour^^^men must starve; which few Englishmen
are fond of doing. The consequence of this is, the French manufacturer can send
his goods to a foreign market upon better terms than an Englishman, and of
course destroy all the foreign trade of the English nation. Thus, madam, I have
pointed out a method by which, you people of fashion, in order to support your
own grandeur, may suck the blood of all inferior ranks of people, and make the
British subjects absolutely slaves, even in a country which boasts its freedom.
Nay more, this is a method by which you may ruin the most flourishing nation in
the world.


LADY. Spoke like an angel, good Mr. Prudence. I protest, upon honor, I will
not sleep till I have consulted Sir Fop on the matter.


AVAR. I took my leave of her ladyship, who could not rest till she had
communicated the matter to her acquaintances, and they to their acquaintances,
and so they again to theirs, that it had very soon made the tour of Great
Britain and Ireland; an ordinance was instituted in the company of avaricious
landlords, that in every future lease, the farmers should be racked to the last
extremity. This ordinance has been universally complied with by the whole
company; so that there is reason to hope, in time, all the blessed consequences
proposed, will arise from it, as you may see to what an exhorbitant price all
manner of provisions is already arrived. What may not be expected from such
hopeful beginnings?


FAST. A noble company, indeed, and near akin to our destroying clan. And yet
many of them set up for patriots, even when they are drawing ruin upon the
nation, by their pride, luxury, and avarice.


DIALOGUE XVIII. CONTAINING Wholesome Instructions to the Ladies.
FASTOSUS. NO, Avaro; know assuredly that you are not more in esteem with the
Dutch than myself. It were strange indeed if I had no concern with Mynheer.


AVAR. Indeed, sir, to see Mynheer equipped in his holiday clothes, he makes
pretty near as awkward an appearance as a Laplander; and one would certainly
conclude, that he is a perfect stranger to courtly Fastosus. But all the world
knows, that Avaro is a very respectable personage in Holland.


FAST. I told you before, cousin, that you have an ugly way of encroaching upon
your neighbor's right. I do not like it, cousin, and will assert my dominion.
Do you think that Mynheer is not full as proud of his multiplicity of garments,
as an English hero of his scarlet and lace? Or, that he is no^ the best fellow
who can wear the greatest number of pairs of breeches? I assert, there may be
as much pride under a Dutchman's cap, as under a Scotch bonnet, or even under a
Frenchman's hat; notwithstanding there is a very great difference between the
first and the last. The first, you know, is a fixed ponderous substance, and the
last is mutable, as the weathercock on the top of St. Peter's, Yes. Avaro, I
may assert farther, that there may be as much pride under a red cap, as under
the coronet of a peer, or even under the mitre of an archbishop.


INF. That Avaro is an high esteem in the Netherlands, will not be denied; but
to suppose Fastosus excluded from any people whatever, is highly dishonouring;
therefore, my son, you must learn to be more cautions, and for the present to
make atonement for your error, proceed with your account of your corporation.


AVAR. If to retract an error, and endeavor in future to oblige, will procure
forgiveness, it shall be done. -- In order to which you will please to observe
that the

IV. Company of my corporation, is that of the letter-retailers, otherwise
called mercenary-scribblers, and false-publishers. The transcribers and
abridgers of other men's works, and especially those whose sole aim is to get
money by their writings, are free of this company, and on the livery.

To give you a proper idea of which, I shall read you a letter which I stole
the other night, from the chairman of a reading society in the country,
designed to be sent to the Reviewers, critical and monthly.

GENTLEMEN,
WE are, what country people call a reading society, into which we had formed
ourselves some years before the first Review made its public appearance. We had
not long taken in books, before we found several articles of our purchase to be
stolen from other authors; and but very few of our titular authors, had either
honor or honesty enough, to inform the public from what sources they compiled
their volumes. We would advise all writers to live upon their own proper
genius, deeming it pity that pilferers should be suf^ered in the republic of
letters. At the last meeting of our club, this question was put and canvassed,
"What can induce one writer to steal from another?"

To this important question, one replied one thing, and another said what he
could to confu^e it, as every member was willing to display his abilities; at
last, Dick Keen, a testy kind of youth, but of good sense, gave us the
following satisfactory answer.

"Very probably, said master Dick, some authors may steal from others for the
same reason which that celebrated fool of old had, who burnt himself and the
temple together, in order to perpetuate his name. There are authors, endued
with the same laudable ambition, who not being happy enough to have been born
free in the literary republic, are obliged (...) to dishonest measures, in
order to gratify their ambition. Their ge^i^ses (if it be lawful to speak of
their geniuses) being destitute of every prolific principle, and their fancies
fixed as the Py^encan (...) the Alps; they cannot possibly gain repute but on
the credit of their predecessors. Therefore, what frugal nature, and Gamaliel
has withheld, must be supplied by industrious freedom; and as the end proposed
must at all events be obtained, honor, truth, and honesty, smoke at once on
the altar of ambition. To ^^rk goes the writer, plunders every volume in his
own and (...) patron's library, at last compleats his scheme; and lo! we have
an entire new work, by the learned Mr. Dunce. And so it comes to pass, that we
the honest purchasers, pay ^^^ce or four times over for the same matter and,
perhaps in almost the same manner likewise.

There are others, who, as a just judgment on their former indolence and
extravagance, are now condemned to live upon their wit; which being dull and
tardy, somewhat akin to the brain of an ass, of itself can afford but a very
penurious table, and uncomfortable lodging. Bitten with hunger, the unhappy man
is obliged to steal where he can, and then to sell his ill-gotten collection to
the bookseller, in order to procure a good holiday dinner. The bookseller, I
believe, is pretty well convinced of the truth of my remarks, as he has paid
smart for his connection with literary thieves.

Of these two kinds of pil^erers, in my humble opinion, the latter is by far
the most excusable. He cannot work, he is ashamed to beg, therefore m^st either
steal or starve. What can he steal with more safety than the works of the
learned? In my opinion, there is no more danger in robbing a g^^^eman of his
literary honor, than for a stat^sman to rob his mother country: ^ew such
thieves are conducted by the county officers to Tyburn. O solemn tree, what
^^auds are committed against thee? Of how many necks, equi^ably thine, art thou
cheated annually."

'Twas now Bill Candor, a good natured youth, interrupted ^^m, thinking his
reflections somewhat severe. "Hold! Mr Keen, I think your reasoning is too
full of acrimony. If all transcripts, extracts and abridgments, were to be
suppressed, it would be a very great loss to the public; th^se men, therefore,
who take the trouble of such a service, deferve open acknowledgement, for
raising up valuable auth^rs from the vaults of oblivion instead of being lashed
with the rod of merciless satyr." To which Dick replied,

"That many ancient writings, are truly worthy of being introduced to public
view; I am so far from denying, that, I should deem it truly laudable for any
gentleman of capacity and ^^^sure, to draw forth the remains of antiquity from
the cells of obscurity, and should be one of the first to vote him the most
public thanks. But I would have it done in such a manner, as to come within the
reach of the middle class of people, amongst whom the b^^k of all sorts of
readers are found. Moreover, I would have all writings on religious subjects so
contrived, as to come within the reach of the poor, for who else give
themselves any troable about religion, or have any pleasure in serious
writings? If a commentary on the Bible must go beyond the extent of their
finances, it might as well be l^^ked up in Pool's Synop^is, where it was before
the commentary was written. Opulent tradesmen you know, are such ^aves to the
laws of getting, that they have no time to read and therefore may pr^dently
avoid p^rchasing. And people of fash^on are generally perfectly satisfied with
having such or such books in their libraries, without so much as looking
farther into them than the title papes. Surely, gentlemen, no man is to be
vindicated in making merchandise of his neighbor's genius."

Here he concluded, and we were soon convinced, that there was much weight in
his reasoning. We must beg leave to tell you, gentlemen, that when your
worships erected your tribunal, and every author was summoned to appear before
you, we flattered a hope, that all pilferers would have fled out of the
republic of letters. But, alas! we have been hitherto disappointed, and in
reality, they seem to be on the increase, so that a man can hardly claim
personal right to a single idea, how justly soever it may be his property.

We earnestly beg that you, gentlemen, will be obliging enough to publish your
aversion to this craft; to command all, who are destitute both of fortune and
genius, to reconcile themselves to their destiny, and show their submission to
the higher power, by learning some handicraft business, by which they may gain
an honest living. There are a thousand ways to live in the world, if that of an
author were to cease. For instance, there is carrying a musket, or beating a
drum by land, and furling the sails by sea, either of which are honorable
employments, when compared with that of book-stealing.

As we know not to whom we can apply, with any hope of success, but to
yourselves; we must farther beg, that you will not only detect the theft, when
you meet with it, but do as the worthy inhabitants of St. Giles's do on similar
occasions, that is, pursue the delinquent with a stop-thief, stopthief. Indeed,
gentlemen, it will not lessen you in the public esteem, should you commence
even literary thief catchers. Should it please you to comply with our request,
we doubt not but the streets which lead to places of public resort, will in a
few years be lined with many authors, having assumed the more honorable
employment of a beggar.

Thus the imposts would be taken off from the studious; real authors would
preserve their honor, no one daring to invade their right, for fear of
exposing themselves to public infamy. Perhaps that most villainous of all
practices may put a stop to; we mean the vending of clowdy commentaries on the
Bible; few people, we should think, would be fond of purchasing such books,
after they are informed that most of the materials are stolen. Effectually to
put a stop to this inquitous practice, we would recommend the publication of
the above named Synopsis in English, and then every reader may take what human
sense of the divine word he pleases.

We are gentlemen, Your most humble servants, A READING SOCIETY.



FAST. Indeed, cousin, I think the request of that society reasonable enough,
and ought to be granted; for as the world now goes, it is a difficult matter
for a man to know to whom he is obliged for any profitable hint he meets with
in the course of his reading. And flimsy as modern productions in general are,
there is now and then a profitable hint to be met with. But when any thing of a
recommendatory quality happens to emerge from the teem-press; the whole race of
catch-penny imitators, swarm about it, and gobble it up, then spue it out, as
if it were their own. However, cousin, it must be owned, there are some of your
mercenary scribblers who are much more honorable than others, and let the
public know, that what they write is not the fruit of their own genius, but is
borrowed from this or that respoctable author, under pretense of making it more
public, on account of its great excellency. They desire not to rob the author
of his honor: all they deem necessary, is a loan of his genius to supply the
defects of their own, and to help them a little forward in the world.

But of all writers, commend me to polemic divines. Oh! it would be a pleasure
to the devil himself, to see with what dexterity they put off their own anger,
under the name of zeal for God; just as the industrious tradesmen of Birmingham
do their manufacture for the coin of the nation. It Is amazing to think, how
pr^^estant ministers can lugg in the Almighty into both sides of their quarrel;
and how they would make the world believe, that their cause is the cause of
heaven, and that they have got authority to dispense the curses of the Most
High. Nothing can be more pleasing, than to see men of wisdom and religion,
vigorously contending for their own honor, and at the same time making the
public believe, they have nothing in view but the Redeemer's glory. And I
assure you it is not every divine, even of great parts, who takes time to
distinguish between the glory of God, and his own reputation.

Next to this, I am delighted to see men of learning and religion, bickering
each other about subjects, which the greatest of all the apostles would not
presume to pry into. But we have divines so expert, that they understand what
never was revealed; and so zealous, that they will oblige others to have the
same degree of intelligence with themselves, under pain of their implacable
displeasure; and yet they are the true ministers of the meek and loving
Savior. But a very few are to be met with who have humility enough to submit
to the simplicity of scripture. However, cousin, although I love to set forth
my own powerful influence, I would not willingly prevent your proceeding with
your story. Mean while, I want you to be m^^e ^^^^cit with regard to your
company of letter ve^^^^^^. Do you mean by them printers in general?


AVAR. No, gentlemen, I do not mean, neither all the booksellers nor printers.
Printing has been to mankind one of the greatest of all temporal blessings, and
will (...) much fear, be the total ruin of the kingdom of dar^^n^^^^^ (...) as
wherever the freedom of the press is suffered, it (...) reformation along with
it. But amongst those concerne^ (...) literary affairs, there are many
villainous people, who, when their trade runs low, take up with printing
corrupting novels, such as the Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure; blasphemous
plays, such as Sammy Foot's Minor; schismatic harangues, like the greater part
of political essays; vain disputes about things of trivial import, etc. all
such, and many such there be, we rank with the false publishers, because truth
and falthood are with them of equal value, and their choice is fixed by what
will serve a present turn. The patriotic alderman is a leading man in this
learned company. He has not learned so little by the gift of second sight,
which he has had from his cradle, as not to know, that more than truth is
indispensably necessary, to support some particular personal characters.
Besides, there are others, who will sell both soul and body to the father of
lies, in defense of some particular state; and others to ruin some public
character. The celebrated Mr. Maubert of Brussels is a great man in this way.

Free of this company, are another set of men, implacable enemies to honest
industry, who live altogether by their wit; appear in all shapes and
characters, and stick at nothing to get money. Although these people have
nothing but grimace to fell, (through a folly, formerly almost peculiar to the
metropolis, but now diffusing itself every where) they have for six months in
the year a very plentiful market; and many who would suffer the miserable to
perish unrelieved at their gates, will liberably contribute to support the
luxury and libertinism of the players. In the days of yore, the devil Proteous
was, but now David Garrick, Esquire is their foreman; a fast friend to our
government, and a ^aithful disciple of careful Avaro.


DIS. I think you must be mistaken now, cousin, for the end of all theatrical
entertainments, which I perceive you have in view, is the exposing of vice and
reformation of manners; consequently their design was originally religious.


AVAR. I allow, that in the darkness of paganism, the ancients had a religious
design, in exhibitions of the stage; but what of that? They had likewise a
religious design, in passing their children through the fire to the devil
Molech. I allow, farther, that in the days of monkish ignorance, those blinking
priests, made use of the stage to convey their instructions; but then it ought
to be observed, that the same fathers were equally pious, and devout in
persecuting the best of men. So then, cousin, the one is as much authorized by
ancient practice as the other. Indeed when you consider, that the stage is
peopled by extravagant, spend-thrift gentlemen, broken tradesmen, lazy
mechanics, who are always avowed enemies to moral integrity; they will appear
to be a very unpromising race of reformers.

Should you follow them from the stage to their lodgings, and trace their steps
through the lanes of private life, you would soon be convinced, that Sir John
Fielding's runners bid much more fair than they, for reforming the manners of
the people. And you know, the said runners have never as yet been considered as
the most respectable characters. Surely, it must be thought requisite in those
who set up for reformers of others, that in some tolerable deg^^e they should
moralize themselves.


DIS. I know it, cousin; and I thwarted you on purpose, to see how you could
justify your claim upon the gentry of the stage; and must confess you have done
it to my satisfaction. I am highly pleased with the entertainments of the
theater myself, and am greatly delighted to see gentlemen and ladies crowd to
them. Gentry who would worship God, in neither church nor meeting house, can be
devout enough to attend the theaters, in Covent Garden and the Hay-Market. It
is truly pleasing to see gentlemen and ladies, who cannot possibly find money
to pay off their tradesmen's bills, find plenty of cash to purchase playhouse
and pantheon tickets.


INF. As we came along, cousin Discordans, you mentioned some sport you lately
had with two female companions; pray what of them?


DISC. You must know, Leonora and Matilda have been intimate from their
infancy, and as such continued their friendship even to mature life; but when
both became wives and mothers, I taught them to behave more inconsistently than
they did when they were children. Matilda being quite fatigued with domestic
concerns, an attention to which her mind is not very happily turned, resolved
one day to spend the afternoon with her friend Leonora. When she went, she
found her exceedingly deprest and hysterical, by no means in a talkative
humor; a circumstance which frequently happens to the ladies of middle rank,
over since luxury and idleness became so prevalent amongst them.

Matilda, not being sufficiently skilled in physiognomy, to read the sentiments
of the heart, b^ the position of the features of the countenance, was led into
mistake, which proved fatal to their friendship She discovered, or thought she
discovered an unsual and unexpected shyness run through every part of Leonora's
conduct, which discovery proved no slight mortification to her own sensibility.
Said she to herself, "Well Leonora, I perceive notwithstanding all your farmal
civility, that my company is not the object of your present desire, I wish I
had been aware of it in time! Then I assure you, my presence should not have
drawn a cloud over that settled countenance of yours. But, indeed, madam, let
my company be over so disagreeable to you, yours I assure you is now ^ery
little more pleasant to me."

Whilst she was meditating some plausible pretext for withdrawing, the tea was
unhappily brought in, which precluded her remo^al for a little while longer.
Thus constrained by decency to stay, her glowing resentment of the supposed
slight forbid her to taste a morse^ of the toast, or to drink above two dishes
of tea. Having finished, she pretended she must retire on some urgent business,
which had just occurred to her mind; (for ladies will lie to serve a turn) and
after a dry compliment or two she went off, fully resolved never to return.

As she went along the streets, her wounded heart boiled with a thousand
cogitations, how or when she had offended Leonora. "What have I done or said
that should have given her umbrage. I know of nothing: and therefore I care not
for her anger. If people will be so odd in their temper, they must even come to
themselves at their leisure. And so your servant, Leonora."


INF. That was a visit more innocent, than many I have known, for I hear
nothing of slander, or defamation of absent characters carried on in it, which
very rarely happens to be neglected in female visits.


DISC. True, sir, but the matter did not end here. Poor Matilda, being unable
to bear the conceived slight, made free to call on Letitia on her way home,
that she might give a little vent to her turbulent passions. Letitia, being as
destitute of innate ideas as she is of fidelity, readily listened to the
plaintive account, how Matilda had been served; without hesitation approved her
departure, kindly fanned the flame of resentment, and at last advised her to
let Leonora come to herself when she should find it convenient.

Matilda had not been long gone, before Letitia, who burned with impatience to
have a little Tittle-tattle, went to Leonora, and set mischief abroach with her
also. She told her all the former had said of her, and happily gave it such a
turn, as to render it very offensive, notwithstanding she kept strictly to the
letter of truth. Some people are remarkably happy in talents of this kind; by
their manner of representation, they can turn things quite from their natural
appearance, as I may perhaps show you in some future conserence. Leonora could
not but think herself very ill used, and resolved, weakly as she was, that she
would be a slave to no body's temper.

When Matilda and Leonora met next time, being prepossest with mutual disgust,
their compliments were dry and starched; and secretly blamed the indifference
of the other. By this time I furnished each of them with a telescope, by which
they might thoroughly examine each others conduct, and so reciprocally strict is
their (...) watch, that nothing can escape them. Thus from the smallest
beginning, founded too in misunderstanding, I raised perpetual disgust and
enmity. Absurd, and ridiculous as this is, I could point you out a thousand
differences, sprung from incidents equally frivolous and unimportant. Indeed,
if freedom and submission keep at a distance I can blow up a flame of
contention the most violent, from the smallest matters imaginable. And I thank
my stars, Mess^ Freedom and Submission, are in no great esteem with mankind.
But wherever they come they destroy my feeds, and ^^^ectually extinguish my
flames, for they are irresistible peace-ma^ters.


FAST. It is I, even I, my son, who have brought those gentlemen into
disrepute. I persuade people, it is beneath them to submit to their equals, how
much soever they have been in the wrong. I have ere now persuaded one man to do
all he could to ruin the reputation of his neighbor, in order to establish his
own, when he found it in a tottering condition, and that too amongst those who
take themselves to be more righteous than others.


DIS. I have great pleasure sometimes in making parents become the instraments
of their children's ruin; or as some people say, to kill them with kindness. I
make it my business to prejudice almost every parent, so far in favor of his
children, that every one considers his own as the most witty and active; or to
use the words of a good woman, concerning her son of two years old, (the most
manly of any child in the neighborhood,) even as the crow conceives her own to
be fairer than all the children of the feathered people.

I shall trouble you but with one instance out of the millions I might produce.
Little master Jacky, was one of those extraordinary children, whose almost
every action (...) common way, the wonder and admiration (...) parents. Jacky
must not be chid, when (...), or seratched his nurse; but must have his (...)
humor; it was even pleasing to see his (...) dar^ed into his parents faces; so
you may be (...) the child must not be suffered to cry upon any account, (...)
always be indulged in whatever he wanted. Thus (...) child, in whom, however,
none besides his parents could see any thing out of the common way,
notwithstanding every visitor was plagued with the history of his wonderful
seats, upon which his parents dwelt with rap(...), I say* Jacky found himself
master of the whole family; he acted accordingly, and took his own way in every
particular.

By these means his tempers gained strength, so that they become habitual, not
to be broken by ordinary means.

When he got a few more years over his head, still gro^ing in his humor, the
poor parents began to see and lament the errors of their former conduct. Too
late, master Jacky being now (...) br^eches, and grown a great boy, will not
(...) back that dominion they were pleased to put (...), when but in
petticoats. He thinks it very hard he should not choose for himself now be is
ten, as well as when he was but three years old; rightly judging, that he was
not more wise then than he is now, and if they thought him fit to be all their
masters then, he is sure that by this time he is much more sit to govern.

Apprehensive now of the ruin of his son, the father exhibits exhortations,
injunctions, reproofs, and threatenings with great severity. In vain, for not
being bended whilst (...) and maleable, master's tempers are not now (...) be
(...) of their native channel. As in former times I (...) the parents, in
prejudice of their darling, it was now (...) to ply him also in his turn. I
furnished him with a pair (...), and directed him in the use of them; and now
(...) began to reason upon his father's conduct.

"What a change is this come to my father? Once he was something like
good-natured, but now he is the most self-willed and rigorous man in the world.
Surely no reasonable person would impose such laws upon his children as he does
on me; laws, such as nobody of any spirit would submit to. I was formerly his
pretty lad, his good boy, and every thing I did was right; times are strangely
changed, for now I can do nothing to please him, I could have had what I would
and gone where I pleased; but now I am perplexed with warm exhortations, which
I hear unreasonably frequent; and can go no where, without his leave, as if I
had not more sense now than when I was little. His reproofs are too harsh; I
hear of nothing but my stubbornness and wickedness; of his and my mother's
sorrow; and of breaking their hearts on my account. I should break none of
their hearts, I assure them, if they would let me alone.

"Cannot my father and mother grieve for themselves, and not teaze me about
their trouble? I am no worse than my neighbors, though by their account I
might be the wickedest wretch that ever lived. It is not enough that I must go
to church on holidays, but we must have lectures on divinity at home; and for
me, I am roundly told, that if I go on as I do, I must certainly perish. Yes, I
must even be damned and go to hell. Old people are surely very conceited; I
warrant me they think they are so very good, they are sure to go to heaven. It
is a brave thing to have a good opinion of one's self, which surely must be
their case, or they would never plague me thus with their repeated lectures.
Well, for my own part, I am not so vain, and yet I think I am in no greater
danger than they are. When they were young, I dare ^^y they loved pleasure as
well as me, but now they get old and cannot relish it themselves, they would
absurdly restrain me from it. Reasonable parents ought not to form their
commands upon what they now are, but what they were when of my age. But I am
determined to submit to no such government, I will even take my pleasure whilst
I can have it, and let them grieve on if they choose."

Thus, gentlemen, I persuade many to lay up future afflictions for themselves,
in the early ruin of their children, by over indulgence. I say early ruin, for
if little master is not taught to submit to government whilst in petricoa^s, it
is much if he ever learns submission after he is in br^^ches, he who always had
his own way when but an infant, will take it very ill to be restrained when he
rises toward manhood Vi^i. Lock on Education.
Yet some, yea, many parents, will let their children do as they please whilst
but little, and increase on their strictness as they advance in years, so that
they become mutual afflictions to each other. In manhood, you know, children
should be used by their parents, as friends and confidents, instead of being
kept at an awful distance. Yet those very parents, who have laid the foundation
of their son's ruin, by early indulgence in his infancy, very often complete it
by unseasonable strictness over him when he is verging toward man's estate.
You know, parents should always act, so as that their company shall never be
burdensome to their children. But I shall become moralist if I go on thus.


IMP. Many such youths as master Jacky fall into my hands; if once they can by
any means be brought to despise reproof, I reckon myself quite sure of them;
and when they come, I commonly employ them in my deepest mines:


INF. It is always a hopeful sign when the heart is hardened against reproof.
If a young one can be brought to despise the commands, reproofs, and advice of
his parents; he bids fair for being one of the devil's companions for ever;
and, indeed, nothing but the grace of God can prevent it. It is very agreeable
to us, to see how happily successful our influences are over mankind,
especially in Britain. There, many parents bring up their children, just as if
they designed them purposely for the devil. I have great hopes of the next
generation, gentlemen.


DISC. I make myself very merry with the ladies in another way, which also
turns eventually to everlasting separation. I join a little knot of them
together so closely for a time, that they cannot be separated, nor bear to be
asunder for a day together. I prejudice them so strongly for a while in each
others favor, that they show a manifest slight to those who are not happy
enough to be admitted into their society. Family necessity, and every domestic
duty, must give place to their firm attachment to one another. When they get
together for a little chit chat, they are as happy as the birds in May; not
only examine every absent character, within the circle of their acquaintance,
and report to each other all the evil they know of their own sex: but each
dwells severally upon the excellencies or failings of her husband; who is at
one time the best of men, at another time the worst, just as her ladyship
happens to be in a good or bad humor with him. Thus they go on, till every one
is fully acquainted with the family affairs of the rest, and thus they bring
themselves into the power of one another. This is the zenith of that happiness
to which I aim to bring them; for even the devil will give present happiness in
order to introduce future pain and sorrow; and assure you I am too much ^^kin
to my worthy grandfather, to (...) that felicity to go long uninterrupted.

First, I sow a spirit of jealousy amongst them; says Chloe^ "Delia seems more
attached to Phillis than to myself or Lucia; Portia is never happy but when her
and Arabella are together; and so round the whole club the spirit of jealousy
happily operates, and gathers strength by every day's duration.

It is not to be thought that a whole society, who can cordially join in
picking holes, according to the old proverb, in their neighbor's clothes, can
long refrain from doing as much for one another. Now they begin to meet two and
two, according to their various attachments, and those who happen to meet
together, regale themselves with a very pleasant conversation, about the faults
and weaknesses of those who are absent, and thus round the whole society they
serve one another. By and by it is whispered what Chlee said at such a place
about Phillis; what Lucia said of Arabella, etc. till I blow them all up in a
pleasing flame of resentment; and every one says the worst she knows of her
neighbor, which commonly is a great deal. Out come personal faults along with
family affairs, and an hundred etceteras, and those very ladies sit down, just
as the devil would have them, in implacable hatred to each other.


INF. I pray what do you smile at, Avaro?


AVAR. I was thinking on an encounter I had with the devil Lunatio, whom I
accidentally met last night, with his hair standing upright, and his eyes
flaming with madness.


FAST. And pray where had the mad brained devil been? What account could he
give of himself?


AVAR He was quite snappish with me, and run on in his discourse as if he had
been very angry. There, said he, is my father Infidelis, there is uncle
Fastosus, they reign uncontroled over the greatest part of mankind; they are
carest, even adored, by the most respectable characters in both church and
state. You, yourself, grovelling as you are, reign an absolute monarch in the
will and affections of many eminent personages; but I am hackneyed by the
basest, and when I have done, am denied the honor of my labors, and people
are taught to believe that I reign only over the bedlams and other mad-houses
of the world. Whereas I could make it appear to all the infernal divan, that
there are people who go about at large, and are deemed in their perfect senses,
more mad than any in bedlam.

Well then, said I, brother flend, stop, and give me a sober account of your
proceedings, and I assure you I shall give you all due acknowledgment.


LUN. I have, replied he abruptly, a greateral of business among statesmen, to
drive people to their levees, which they dearly love to have crowded, and which
never could be without my assistance; for who would attend the levee of my lord
Superbo, or of his grace the duke Parkland, unless he first turned fool? Would
any man feed on the promise of a courtier, if he were not mad? The dinner of
the Camelion is as weighty as the promise of the greatest statesmen, were it
even confirmed by a smile of the countenance and a grasp of the hand; for it
all means no more, than "I am glad to see you thicken my levee," There is never
a levee day but I am obliged to bestir myself to drive the fools together.

If the premier, or the head man of any department, finds himself on the
decline, and that he shall, without some good assistance, be obliged to resign;
i. e. be turned out of his place. I am beseeched to procure some verbose,
intrepid scribbler, to cry up his abilities and proceedings, as much superior
to those of all his predecessors, for time immemorial. But a man must first be
reduced to a state of lunacy before he will venture on a work so difficult, and
which is (...) be but very ill rewarded. In the first place, he is likely to
have truth and fact to overturn, before the end can be obtained, and these you
know are stubborn and obstinate. In the second place, if he is happy enough to
succeed, and sets down his patron firmly in his chair again, he is soon made to
understand that his service has done him little or no good; he is thanked for
his good intention, but is given to know, that things would have been just as
they are, if no defense at all had been made. If his patron is turned out, the
scribbler is blamed for having omitted something which might have been of
service, instead of being rewarded for what he has done. So that at all events
he must come off loser, and therefore none but a madman will venture on the
undertaking.

The lawyers also, would but for my influences be obliged to drive teams, or
follow ploughs; for who but madmen would ever find them employment? But in
consequence of their firm attachment to our government, I persuade some to
expose themselves by slowness of payment of their just debts, to the fangs of
the lawyers; others to quarrel about trifles, and refer the matter to them for
decision. Sometimes I advise a father to leave his daughter under the
guardianship of an attorney, or an uncle to leave his estate to his minor
nephew, under the care and inspection of a counselor, either of which is
likely to be a lucrative job to the gentlemen of the law. You know very well,
continued he, that none but madmen will ever refer their differences to the
decision of those gentlemen, whilst their are three honest men to be met with
in the nation; nor will any man in his right mind ever leave an attorney
executor to his will.

There are abundance of people who live above their revenues, and others still
who have abundance, but dare not make use of it, dare scarcely allow themselves
the common necessaries of life, for fear of future poverty. I have known a lady
of sixty, possessed of two or three thousand pounds per annum, actually afraid of
dying for want. Those gentry are all under my dominion; besides a very great
share of my influence rests on many others, who are grievously oppressed with
troubles which never happen; some are so remarkably ingenious, as to apprehend
difficulties for themselves and offspring, for a great many years to come, as
if the evil of the day were not sufficient of itself.

Stop, Lunatio, said I, there you touch me sensibly, I will not thus give up my
careful subjects. True, replied he, but you and I may play into one another's
hands. And although I allow them to be yours, it is easy to see abundance of
madness in their disposition and conduct. What wisdom, I pray you, is there in
any man's burdening himself to day, with what may or may not happen a
twelvemonth hence? Less still in pretending to foresee what may happen in
future; seeing all future events are locked up in the council of the eternal
mind.

From the thinking and careful people, we may descend to the young and
frolicsome, who, eager to pry into the cabinet councils of destiny, are duped
by daring pretenders to foothsaying and palmistry. As if a designing gipsy, or
any other deceiver, could unriddle futurity by the lineature of the hand. There
ought to be places provided in Bedlam for all the curious, who cannot be
satisfied with knowing the contents of today.

Wisdom will always wish futurity to lie concealed, till occurring events
disclose the mysterious page; and moral goodness will never wish to intrude
upon the secrets of the Almighty; but rest perfectly satisfied with what is
revealed.

I would also have a place provided either in Bedlam, or St. Luke's, for all
who, upon sustaining loss by thieves or otherwise, have recourse to pretended
astrologers, and reputed conjurers. Every body besides fools knows that the
stars are dumb, and cannot speak, or that their prophets do not understand the
language of the luminaries. Besides it has a frantic look to suppose that
honest Jupiter and old crabbed Saturn, with their lucid brethren, have nothing
else to do besides standing centry on this man's horses, that woman's clothes,
the other girl's box, or the farmer's orchard. Indeed, if the stars have any
other business to attend, besides watching peoples movables, they may happen
to be busy when certain robberies are committed, and therefore cannot give such
clear accounts of matters, as their petitioners might wish for; and I think
none but madmen would spend their money upon such uncertainty.

You are all alike, for laying claim to my subjects, so that I cannot have the
honor of my operations. There is my uncle Fastosus, who will suffer nobody so
much as to speak to him, unless he happens to be in the humor. He lays claim
to the discontented, whom I could prove by a thousand arguments to be my own
disciples. Discontent gives an emphasis to every trouble and aggravates every
pain. Would a wise man then^ cordially cherish any principle, which is sure to
be the bane of his own happiness if cherished? To Bedlam, I say, with all the
fretful and discontented. -- Make haste, provide cells in St. Luke's, for all
who are uneasy about their countenance, shape and complexion. A wise man will
not be ashamed of external deformity, any more than he will be proud of his
comely proportion. And yet Lunatio can have little honor ascribed to him.

There are people of property who sink their rents, fall their timber, mortgage
their estates, in giving grand entertainments to hungry visitants and
hangers-on, after the example of Timon of Athens, in order to be thought
generous and great. Not once considering, that the nearest way to esteem is
still to preserve the golden cord in the hand of the owner. Let all be once
spent, the insatiable hangers-on who crowd the plenteous table, will drop off
like leaves in autumn, and if the wretch retains the loving regard of Argus his
dog, he must expect no more. Away with the fool to bediam. He ought to go no
longer without shackles.

Parents there are, so doatingly fond of their children, that they strip
themselves of heir possessions, in order to make them respectable in the world,
long enough before their own lives are at a period; leaving their future
support to the good nature and mercy of the dear boy or girl, who it is thought
are so well disposed, as to be incapable of ingratitude to those who gave them
being. But let the dear boy or girl once get the parents estate into their
power, and they will give them occasion enough to lament their folly, when
every shilling received, shall come with a very intelligible frown. The
language of which to the parent is, "I wish you were once in your grave." Such
parents ought to be provided for at the public expense, and kept in some place
of confinement like other lunaties.

Other parents, to avoid falling into that error, which they foresee may be
productive of great personal inconvenience; with an equal degree of madness
flee into the opposite extreme. They can find in their hearts to part with
nothing whilst they live; they will find some plausible pretext or other, for
which they will retain the sole possession of their goods and chattels; rather
than give a suitable measure of parental assistance, will suffer the young
people to begin the world, under all possible disadvantages. Send such parents
to Newgate, I say, for they are worse than mad.

You do me injustice again, Avaro, in claiming the sole power to yourself, over
parents, who will oppress their servants, over reach their neighbors, grind
the faces of the poor, and sell their souls to the devil, in order to procure
fortunes for their children. This is so far from answering the end proposed, in
gaining the love and esteem of the young people, that it has quite a contrary
tendency. The greater the estate, the more impatient will the heir apparent be,
to be put into quiet possession for himself. The more there is dependant upon
the death of a parent, the more eager will children be to have him out of the
way. So eager have some been, that they have been obliged to use violence, in
order to get the cumbersome old man out of the world. Deliver them up to me,
Avaro, for they are all the children of madness. And yet Lunatio is deemed a
foolish devil, and a son of idleness.

You are very prone to ascribe to chance or accident, and other such chimerical
gentry, works, the honor of which is due only to myself. Ay, you are apt to
conclude that there is even no madness in religion. Pride and covetousness may
prevail ever so, but you never think of madness. What less than madness is it
to worship a wooden Savior, or a Jesus Christ of man's making? To adore a god
that has been baked in an oven; or to pretend to eat the deity? I could open
such a field before you, as would make you wonder at the aboundings of
religious madness.

Go with me to the chambers of the sick, and see the works of madness there
performed. The lady having over eaten herself at dinner, finding her stomach
uneasy, took a glass of brandy to help digestion, after that another, etc. till
she is now very ill upon it. The physician is sent for, and after feeling her
pulse, asks her a pertinent question or two, as, Do you feel an uneasiness at
your stomach, madam? Does your head ach, madam? Have you a thirst upon you,
madam? You were taken ill after dinner, were you, madam?" He prescribes a
gentie purgative draught or two, to assist nature to throw off her load, after
having thus learned the cause of her disorder. Now there is an instance of a
threefold madness for you. In the first place, although the food was rich and
delicious, it was madness to eat, after nature said it was enough. Secondly, it
was madness to pour such a quantity of strong liquor, into a stomach already
glutted. And thirdly, it was madness to send for a physician, seeing she would
be well enough by tomorrow noon, by which time nature unassisted might have
struggled from beneath its burden. Shall I never have due honor paid to my
operations?

This other woman before you, is indeed in a dangerous fever; but she will have
no assistance. It is only a deep cold she has caught, and she hopes to get
better in a day or two, with care and keeping warm. By and by, when the
symptoms of death are actually upon her, the physician must be sent for in all
haste. -- And when the sever alone is more than nature can sustain, she must
have the additional torment of swallowing medicines, even without a possibility
of their being of the least service. Is there no madness in this case? Is it
not madness to trifle with a disease in its beginning, the only time perhaps in
which medicine can afford relief? Is it not equally madness to torment the
sick, and and throw money away upon the doctor, when the disease is evidently
beyond a remedy? And yet you would exclude me from having any share in the
government of mankind.

No, Lunatio, returned I, we do not exclude you. We should even be glad to have
a full account of your operations in some of our friendly meetings.


LUN. I could give you such an account as would surprise you all, might the
honors due to my operations be properly acknowledged. But I cannot stay now,
having urgent business in the west end of a certain metropolis.

Pray, cousin, may a brother fiend be acquainted with it? said I: he replied,
you know, that almost the one half of the nation is in a starving condition,
and are as it were on the tip-toe of rebellion. Yet in a very great strait how
to act. They think it hard to famish amidst plenty; to die of hunger whilst the
barns are full of corn, and the pastures are well filled with cattle; whilst
their governors can afford to spend thousands at a horse-race, or in an
evening's play. On the other hand, they think it hard to be shot at, by those
who are murderers by profession; or to be hung up at Tyburn for seeking to
procure bread for their families.

In this dilemma, the poor wretches are raising their voices to government,
beseeching their lawgivers to spare so much time from their own pleasure and
amusement, as to take their wretched case into serious consideration, that they
may not die by artificial famine. What I aim at is, to persuade those in power
to treat their complaints with neglect, and themselves as clamorous uneasy, and
turbulent people. Instead of redressing their grievances, to threaten them with
the strict execution of the laws against rioters. If I am happy enough to gain
this point, as I think I shall, we shall soon see the spirit of madness raving
all over the nation, and even the wise will become fools.

Oppression you know will make even a wise man mad. Therefore, when their
oppressions can no longer be borne, there will go forth a spirit of
insurrection among the people; and that shall be followed by a spirit of
murder, till all the riots are sufficiently quelled, and the leading insurgents
punished by death or transportation. Then will follow a spirit of emigration,
and every one almost will wish himself to have been transported at the expense
of government. At this very time, there are not less than five hundred thousand
families who are kept in their native country by nothing but the want of means
to get cleverly out of it. Neighboring nations will give all possible
encouragement to the poor to settle with them; every opportunity will be taken
to cross the Atlantic, till the nation referred to shall become almost, if not
quite depopulated.

Now, the madness of the scheme lies here. The true riches of a nation are its
inhabitants, and the grandeur of the great depends wholly on the numbers of
those in inferior stations. In proportion therefore to the oppressions of the
poor, will the nation decrease in its strength. Every emigration from the
mother country, will either increase the number of colonists, or strengthen the
hands of natural enemies; of course the neglect of the present complaints will
eventually be the entire ruin of the great men themselves, and the translation
of the empire to another, and very distant seat. Yet after all, perhaps it will
be alleged, that Lunatio has no influence. But I shall raise myself an
immortal name, upon my own foundation. I deign no more converse with a
grovelling spirit -- adieu.


INF. This same Lunatio is a spirit active enough, and we give him due respect;
but he is like all his disciples, fixed in his own views, and there is no
giving him proper ideas of things. I should be glad, Fastosus, to hear more
fully what you were saying last night concerning the Sadducees, it might be
informing to these younger devils.


FAST. You know, sir, they were a set of deists among the Jews, who, like the
modern deists, did not believe that there are any angels good or bad, or shall
be any resurrection from the dead. I did not only persuade the scribes,
pharisees, and doctors of the law, to lay aside judgment, mercy and the love of
God, in order to establish their own traditions: but wrought upon the Sadducees
to prefer their own reasoning to the plainest declarations of the word of
revelation. I assured them, that the well informed author of the book of Job,
was under a delusion, when he said by the Holy Ghost, "I know that my Redeemer
lives, and that I shall stand with him at the latter day upon the earth, and
although after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in the flesh I shall see
God." I persuaded them also, that the prophet Isaiah was under the like
mistake, when he foretold, that death shall be swallowed up in victory: as also
Daniel who asserted, "that many, who then slept in the dust shall awake, some
to everlasting life, and some to everlasting dishonor." These, together with
the testimonies of all the prophets, I persuaded them to reject, merely because
they could not comprehend them, nor account for it how the dead should rise. --
This you know is the very reason why modern deists are pleased, under the same
influence, to deny the whole system of revealed truth.


DISC. I have often feasted my mind on the pleasing prospect of that amazement
and surprise, which shall overtake those infidels, when the avenues of
immortality shall open before them; and the terrors of an incarnate, a despised
God and Savior, shall overwhelm them in the floods of horrid despair. Their
pretended virtue, their philosophic fortitude, their boasted reason will fail
them, when they see, to their everlasting confusion, that he who despises the
Son, despises also the Father who sent him.


FAST. The deist is my faithful, deluded disciple. Wherever you meet with a
man of deistical principles, you will easily discern my image at large on his
forehead, and my mark on his right hand: Nothing but pride can induce a man, to
prefer his own reason to the dictates of sacred Revelation.

Fastosus here stopped, and seeming in a terrible agitation, thus addressed his
brethren. Let us flee my friends -- Let us flee -- for yonder comes Michael the
archangel, and with him a numerous train, with whom we are not able to contend.
They instantly took wing, shot through the yielding air, and I saw them no
more. Nor am I certain if I shall ever have an opportunity of listening to
their friendly conferences again; but if I should, as is not impossible, the
public may expect to hear what passes among them, so far as may come to the
knowledge of a sincere friend to mankind.


THE LISTENER.

FINIS.
BOOKS, PRINTED AND SOLD BY STEWART and COCHRAN, No. 34, SOUTH SECOND-STREET,
PHILADELPHIA.
BOSTON's Fourfold State, Family Instructor, Christ's Famous Titles, and a
Believer's Golden Chain, with a Cabinet of Jewels -- by William Dyer, Psalms of
David, with Henry's Notes, Monroe's Religious Letters, Craghead on the
Sacrament, Toplady on Predestination, Fisher's Catechism, Edwards on
Redemption, Doddrige's Rise and Progress of Religion, Clarke's Martyrology,
Dickinson on the Five Points, Burns's Poems, Methodist Hymn Books, Rudiman's
Rudiments of the Latin Tongue, Anderson's Sermon on the Sin and Danger of
countenancing Erroneous Teachers, History of Joseph Andrews, Solomon's Temple
Spiritualized, Hervey's Meditations among the Tombs, History of the Duchess of
C --, History of C^cilia, History of Robinson Crusoe, Russel's Seven Sermons,
Bibles, Testaments, Spelling-Books, Primers, etc. etc. etc.

